AN APOLOGY FOR THE Nonconformists Ministry: CONTAINING I. The REASONS of their
PREACHING. II. An Answer to the Accusations urged as Reasons for the Silencing
of about 2000, by Bishop Morley, Bishop Gunings Chaplain, Dr. Saywell, Mr.
Durel, the nameless Ecclesiastical Politician and Debate-maker, the
Counterminer, H. Fowlis, Dr. Good, and many others. III. Reasons proving it the
duty and interest of the Bishops and Conformists to endeavor earnestly their
Restoration.


With a POSTSCRIPT upon Oral Debates with Mr. H. Dodwell, against his Reasons
for their Silence. And a Scheme of INTERESTS.

Written in 1668, and 1669, for the most of it, and now Published as an
Addition to the Defense against Dr. Stillingfleet, and as an Account to the
Silencers of the Reasons of our Practice.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, Preach the
Word: Be instant, in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine.

London, Printed for T. Parkhurst and D. Newman; at the Bible and three Crowns
in Cheapside, and at the Kings Arms in the Poultry. 1681.

To the Right Reverend Dr. Compton, Lord Bishop of London, Dr. Barlow, Lord
Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Crofts, Lord Bishop of Hereford, Dr. Rainbow, Lord
Bishop of Carlisle, Dr. Thomas, Lord Bishop of St. David's, Dr. Lloyd, Lord
Bishop of Peterborough, and as many more as are of their Moderation, and love
of our Common Peace and Concord.
Right Reverend Fathers, and Honorable Lords!
YOU are not the men that resisted and frustrated our earnest endeavors and
hopes of Concord at his Majesty's return 1660, and 1661, nor made the Act of
Uniformity, or the rest by which we suffer; nor have you been the makers of any
Engines to wrack and tear in pieces the Church and Kingdom, at such a time,
when they groaned, and begged, and hoped for healing. I therefore direct this
Apology to you, and all others of your moderation, in some hope, though evil
men and deceivers grow worse and worse. You are reputed among us
Nonconformists, not only true to the Protestant Cause, but lovers of good men,
and no lovers of cruel silencings, violence or blood: Though I know but few of
you, I have reason to believe this fame; and some of you have publicly
declared your moderation to the world. If then the ancient Christians might
present their Apologies in hope, to Heathen Emperors, may I not do so much more
to Christian Bishops, to moderate Bishops, and lovers of peace? If you are
wiser and better than we, you are as much more merciful and peaceable than we;
and as much more against all hindering the Gospel, and weakening or dividing
the Churches of Christ, by unjust silencing, restraining, or persecuting any
faithful Ministers or Christians; and you are more sensible than we, with what
deep sense men will shortly hear [In as much as you did it to one of the least
of these my brethren, you did it to me]. You have then more of the wisdom from
above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, etc. Jam. 3. 17. and you
have a deeper Impress of that holy LOVE by which all Christ's disciples must be
known.

Interest is supposed to Rule the World: And the grand design of Satan is to
set up some fleshly, sinful interest in Rulers, and Teachers, and People, which
is contrary to the Laws and interest of Christ; and then he has made a Virtual
War! Carnal Interest will not yield, and Christ will not yield, nor change his
Laws! Carnal interest will expound them for it self, and so secretly and
powerfully byas the judgment, that even Learned men, when they warp and err,
shall not perceive it, but verily think that it is all for God. We are commonly
supposed to be against your interest, and that this will make us continue
unreconciled, to the gratifying of them that have no low game to play by the
contrived means of our divisions. If your chosen Interest be the furthering of
holiness, and everlasting happiness, by sound and serious preaching of Christ's
Gospel, worshipping God that is a Spirit in spirit and truth, and yet with all
reverent decency and order, and living according to the Laws* of our Universal
Head, in soberness, righteousness, godliness, and in love and peace with one
another, God forbid that we should be against your interest. And this is your
interest indeed: He that is most for it, we account the best and wisest man.
And if your Dignity, Wealth and Honor be your Interest, subordinate to the
greater (as it is highest in the ungodly), I beseech you think not we are more
even against that, than we are indeed: I had rather be ruled, than rule (but
God must be first obeyed): God knows I envy not your dignity or wealth! I have
proved in the end of this book, that our Restoration is greatly for your
interest; and that none have done more against you than those of your own tribe
that have had the greatest hand in our silencing and suffering. Give me but a
sober understanding man to deal with, and I undertake to show him, that by a
mere Reforming of the Parish-Churches, so far as your selves confess to be
desirable and just (with such a limited Toleration of peaceable sound
Christians, as Christian Reason must acknowledge necessary), We may be brought
yet to an happy Concord, and a better Reformation than England yet ever saw,
without doing the least wrong or hurt to the Diocesans.

It is usually said that England had more respect to the principles of
Augustine in Doctrine, and of Melancthon and Bucer in the points of
Reformation, than of Calvin, Luther, or any other: And as to Cranmer, Ridley,
Cox, and the other Reforming Bishops, I verily believe it. I know no Divines
whose judgment I more consent to than Bucers and Melancthons: O that all our
Clergy would read and weigh what Bucer says copiously and vehemently for
Parish-Discipline, and pure Communion, de Regno Dei, de Animarum Cura, in
censura Liturg. specially de Confirmatione; and what he says of Pastoral
Government, Ordination and Order, and of imposing such Ceremonies as ours (It
was written in England, and for England): And that they would read what
Melancthon says in his Epistles of the Pestilent design of the Papists, that
would lay the validity of our Ministry and Sacraments on an uninterrupted
succession of Canonical, Episcopal Ordination, that they may make the judgment
of their Councils more effectual than of Christ and his Spirit in the
Scriptures; and what he says against these cheats.

And verily we have little worldly interest to draw us to be enemies to yours!
And I still profess, that in all my experience, those called Nonconformists,
did heartily love, honor, praise and hear a Bishop or Conformist that preached
and lived seriously, spiritually, and in Christian Love, such as through Gods
mercy we have had many; yea if he preached and lived better than
Nonconformists, they loved and honored him more (though with some weak partial
persons it was otherwise). If then we have any Interest opposite to yours, it
is not Riches, it is not Power; we wished no more than to be Pastors to the
Volunteers of a Parish Church; And what more do the Independents wish, than
that persons have the same liberty to choose to whom the Pastoral care of their
Souls shall be entrusted, as they have to choose Physicians or Schoolmasters,
and Tutors for their Children, and Wives or Servants, Husbands or Masters in
the family, living under Laws of sobriety and peace? And if you think that our
cross interest is the praise of a few that follow us in a reproached, suffering
state, you think we have a very low mind and game? Why then do we so much
desire to be out of this state, and to take up with reformed Parish-interest?
And why does not a far stronger worldly interest more prevail with us? But such
accusations are answered in this book.

As for that party of men among us, Archbishops, Bishops and Doctors, that have
made it their office and interest to set up as for Christ, 1. A Catholic
Church, formed by a vicarious Universal Government, viz. A General Council, or
a feigned Universal College of Bishops; 2. And the Patriarchal power, which
was in the Roman Empire; 3. And the Pope as the President, or Principium
unitatis Catholicae; 4. And the same Pope as our Western-Patriarch; and the six
or eight first General Councels as the Laws or Rule of Government; and so would
bring us under a foreign Jurisdiction, and turn the orders of a Catholiok
Empire into those of the Catholic Church through the World. 6. And that
pretend that the Papists Churches have an uninterrupted valid succession, and
therefore are true Churches; and that the Protestant Churches, that have no
uninterrupted, Canonical, Episcopal succession, are no true Churches, nor have
valid Sacraments, or any ordinary title to salvation; I say, as for this party
of men (whose Writings and Names I need not tell you of), we profess that we
have no hope that ever they will be reconciled to us; because it will not stand
with their desired reconciliation (described by themselves) with a more
powerful and numerous party which they prefer before us: And though as much as
in us lies, we must live peaceably with all men, we can never receive their
unpeaceable principles and terms. And it much more alienateth us against the
Church of Rome, to find, that the nearer any are to them, the more they are for
uncharitableness and cruelty, and trust not to the Church-Keys, but to the
Sword, as if blood, banishment, or destroying conscionable Christians that are
not of their minds, were the strength of their Religion and Church; and still
cry, Strike home, and execute the Laws: Abate nothing: Tolerate none of them:
Let them make their task, and have no straw: Away with them, as pestilent
fellows and movers of seditions, just contrary to the Christian Nature, and
Interest, and Law: And if he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in
him, who dwells in them that dwell in wrath, and imitate Cain, and bear thorns
and thistles, and devour the flocks which they should gather and feed, and show
that they love their brethren by destroying them.

Right Reverend Fathers and Lords! we have far better thoughts and hopes of
you, and though I have begged in vain these Twenty years for Peace and Concord
of others of your Order, I address my self to you, beseeching you patiently to
read this Apology; and pardon the earnestness of it, for it is for a weighty
cause: It was most written 1668, or 1669, before most of you were Bishops: Dr.
Stillingfleet has newly told us, that [ If we will but allow that by virtue of
the Rule, Phil. 3. Men are bound to do all things lawful for preserving the
peace of the Church, we have no further difference about this matter], page
176. We have still allowed it; we have solemnly protested it: Were it lawful to
us to conform and cease our Ministry which we were vowed to, we would do it. I
beg of you as on my knees, for your own sakes, for Englands, for the Churches,
for Christ's, that you will agree with us on these terms: I ask nothing of you
for my self: I need nothing that you can give me: My time of service is near an
end: But England will be England, and Souls and the Churches peace will be
precious, and the Cause will be the same, when all the present Nonconformists
are dead: And Bishops must dye as well as we: Our Lord delayeth not his coming
to encourage any to smite their fellowservants. If it be not a Lawful thing for
the peace of the Church to forbear the dividing Impositions and Prosecutions (I
need not name them), then let us all suffer still: But if it be, do not only
privately wish, but zealously, as Lovers of the Church endeavor, and that with
speed, and all your might, for Peace to abate what may lawfully be abated: It
is not in our power to procure Union: For sin and self-condemning will not do
it. How much is in yours, the Lord cause you to know and practice. I rest,

Your Servant, R. B.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE SILENCED MINISTERS, Especially for their not ceasing to
Preach Christ's Gospel.
Being the Third Part of their Plea for Peace.
Humbly directed to those of the Lord Bishops, and to the rest of the
Conformable Clergy, of their mind, who have procured our Silence and
Sufferings, or the continuance thereof.
Most Reverend, and Right Reverend Lords and Fathers, and Reverend Brethren,
HAVING once tried in vain (though by the favor of His Majesty's Gracious
Encouragement and Commission) what speaking might do; and since that tried, as
much in vain, what silence in this kind will do; I have resolved once more,
before the expiring of my gasping hopes, to resist despair, and to try whether
so many years experience has opened your ears and hearts, to the Reasons and
humble Requests of those, who not so much for their Sufferings, as for the
Souls of men, do daily eat the bread of sorrow; At least, before I resign this
Skeleton to the dust, to leave one more testimony of my zeal for Unity and
Peace, and make one more attempt for the Gospel and the Church of Christ, that
I may not appear before my Judge, in the guilt of negligence, cowardice or
unprofitableness: Not to be your Accuser, nor a Justifier of any of the
weaknesses or miscarriages of the present Nonconformists, nor yet of those of
former times; but humbly to re-mind you of the things that concern the interest
of Christ, the people, and your selves.

When it pleased the most Gracious Sovereign of the World, to restore his
Majesty, by the concurrence of the desires of his Subjects, and the wonderful
dissolution of that Army and Government which resisted his returns; as we knew
that our divisions had been our sin and ruin, and our enemies strength, and
that our Concord now would be our duty and our hope, and our enemies terror;
so we thought that the season had happily favored our just desires. We had all
one undoubted Sovereign to unite in: We had all seen and felt the folly and
calamity of Dissentions: We had found that principles and practices of
jealousy, violence and division had let out our blood, and made havoc of our
wealth, and separated us from our King, and one another, and brought us all
into confusions: We had newly found, that our sudden unanimity and concord had
restored the King* and those that suffered for and with him: We knew that
almost all the people of the Land were so weary of contention and its effects,
that they were melted into an aptness for the mould of unity, and never were
more inclined to Concord, even upon any tolerable terms. We knew also that we
had a King, who was newly restored by the very first recovery of his peoples
unity; and who was even then famous for a loving and a gracious nature,
inclined to moderation, quietness and peace: And we had newly seen the many
published Declarations of the Nobility and Gentry of the Land, who had suffered
most in His Majesty's cause, protesting against all future animosities and
revenge.

The attempts which we made for the Churches healing upon these encouragements,
did quickly meet with gracious acceptance, and yet greater encouragement from
the King: And we had no reason to think, that among all the rest, the Clergy
should be averse to such a work, or yet should spoil it at such a season for
want of skill; because we had on both sides been deep in those experiences that
should instruct us, and many not the least and last, either in the former sin,
or present interest; and our calling and understanding in such things, were
supposed such, as should make us Leaders to all the people, in any just
attempts for Concord.

When we had humbly craved of his Majesty, that such persons of both sides as
he should appoint, might bring in Proposals, containing such Approaches, and
Abatements, and Accommodations, as each part could yield unto, without sin
against God, and against their consciences; and his Majesty had more than
granted our requests, even expressing his Gracious resolution to draw you on to
such Concessions; we did accordingly give notice to the London-Ministers, that
our Concord might be the more extensive, to meet at Sion-Colledge, and give in
their sense of the necessary means to so good an end. Bishop Reynolds and
Bishop Worth, and some others that Conform, concurred with us in our Proposals:
We never spoke a word against a Liturgy, nor set-forms of Prayer, nor against
the festival Commemorations of the Saints, nor many other things, which many
had formerly excepted against; but only desired some emendations of the
Liturgy, and that some other forms of Prayer might be added to the several
offices, with a Liberty of using this or that. And for the Government of the
Church (which was accounted the matter of greatest difference), we never made
one offer for Presbytery (That is, the Government of the Church by Classes and
Presbyteries constituted of Lay and Clergy-Elders), nor did we ever speak a
word for Lay Elders: Not that we presumed to Censure those Churches that used
them: but as many, or most of our selves were never for them; so we knew that
no forms in which the Churches were known so much to differ, could be the
proper terms of Concord: We never made any Proposals against Episcopacy, no not
against the Lordships of the Bishops, nor against the greatness of their
Revenues, nor their places in Parliament; nor made we any offer of any other
way of Discipline, but the frame which by Archbishop Usher had been presented
to the late King, called, The Reduction of Episcopacy, etc. In which he thought
that he had hit upon the ancient Primitive Government, by Bishops, with their
Clergy-Presbyters as their College. Not that we approved all the forementioned
things which we passed by, but that we knew we must yield for the Churches
peace, as far as we could do without committing sin our selves.

When we presented to His Majesty these our Proposals and Requests, and
expected to meet with the like Concessions and Approaches of our Brethren (not
yet made Bishops), we met with his Majesty's Gracious acceptance, but our
expectations failed of all the rest; having never received any such thing from
that day unto this. But we shortly after received a sharp Answer to our
Proposals; to which when a Reply was drawn up, we purposely cast it by, lest
turning the work of Pacification into a dispute, should frustrate it by
exasperating altercations.

But when we that should have been the forwardest to Peace, could do no more to
an Agreement among our selves, his Majesty was pleased to do more, and
published his Gracious Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs; In which,
though he granted us not Archbishop Ushers Model of Episcopacy, nor all that we
desired, yet granted he so much as made us thankfully rejoice, in hope to have
seen the Churches unity and peace: Because we thought the terms were such, as
to which we could without any guilt of sin, or check of conscience, have laid
out our selves, in persuading all our Brethren to conform. And accordingly the
London-Ministers did presently draw a Thanksgiving to his Majesty (yea, the
Commons House of Parliament themselves did thank him). There was nothing now
remaining for the confirmation of our hopes, but the intended Alterations of
the Liturgy, and the Confirmation of his Majesty's Gracious Concessions. When
we had a Commission from his Majesty to attempt the first, we hoped to do it by
mutual compliances in gentle and amicable Conference: But it was resolved to
us, that we being the Plaintiffs, must bring in a draught of all the
Alterations of the Liturgy which we desired, and also of those Additional forms
which we had proposed as an expedient for Concord. Upon this some of our
Brethren would have insisted on a refusal, believing that it would but spin out
time, and end in nothing which would attain that Concord which was our end: But
others persuading them rather to do as was imposed on us, than to go no
further; because at the worst, our case would in writing be less liable to
mis-reports, than if we had only spoken for our selves, perhaps under checks,
in temptations and restraints (For we had heard many wish, that the Conference
at Hampton Court, in King James his time, had been by writing). Hereupon we
ventured on the imposed task: We brought in writing some exceptions against
some passages in the Liturgy. To this we afterward received an Answer. To which
we offered to you a Reply, and with it the Additions to the Liturgy which we
desired. And foreseeing the danger of the confusions and sins, which since have
followed our Divisions, we did so far supererogate, as to present to you a long
and earnest Petition for Unity and Peace: And we agreed with you (as foreseeing
the inconveniences of men's uncertain and venturous reports) that nothing should
be charged on either part as their assertions, which was not by them given in
in writing. After this we received not one line of Answer from you, either to
our Reply, or to our Additions; wondering above all, that (when it had been
said so usually by others, that we could agree to find fault with the old, but
could never agree of any other in its stead) we should never hear (from men,
supposed not unwilling) one charge against the Matter, Phrase or Method, to
this day! Our last three days being spent in hopeless disputation, I have
nothing to say to (because of our forementioned agreement) but this; That when
it had fallen to my lot to speak much, and consequently to displease much, I
was since charged in Print with the unsoundness of some what there delivered,
about commanding things evil by accident; which I never publicly answered to
this day, lest I should seem to blow the fire, which all good men desire should
be quenched: But the very words of the Dispute it self were printed, (being not
half a sheet of Paper) than which I thought there needed no more, to satisfy
any living man of the truth, that would but use sound eyes and reason. And
since that case is opened in a Discourse of Scandal in the second Plea for
Peace.

I have recited this much principally to mind you of these few things: 1. That
we were not the last in seeking Reconciliation, Unity and Peace. 2. That we are
the more excusable if we are not changed in our judgment, because you never
Answered our three last Writings given in. (We have since indeed seen two
Volumes, which are against two particular passages: The one by a nameless
Author, who would have no Prayers in the Pulpit, but the Liturgy, or imposed
forms: but most of the Conformists practice the contrary to this day, and
therefore we need not write to confute him. The other, to prove that Lent
should be kept, not only on a Civil, but Religious account, and the antiquity
thereof; of which Dr. More in his Mystery of Iniquity, Bishop Tailor, and other
Conformists, have spoken so well, that we need to say nothing, especially in a
case which we take to be of no great moment to us, while each man has the
liberty of his secret thoughts, and may observe it on what account he please.
But had it been of moment, we had told the Author that he lost his labor in
proving the antiquity of one, or three, or few days fast, when the question was
only of the antiquity of the forty days (of which Daille has given a full
account.)

3. That our displeasing-importunity to have prevented the silencing of so many
Ministers, was not without cause; and that we spoke not falsely when we so ost
foretold you, on how many of the Clergy and Laity the storm would fall, and
that it would not assuage, but much increase the divisions which all good men
lamented.

4. That we never yet had opportunity to give you or the world our Reasons
against the New Conformity, it being only the Old before the New was made,
which we were then allowed to debate. So that as the Presbyterians on one side,
may say that their cause was never yet publicly pleaded (by us); so may those
on the other side, who could have yielded to the old Conformity, but cannot to
the new.

Since that time instead of Abatements and Approaches for Accommodation and
concord, Conformity is made very much more difficult to us than it was before;
which we speak not to accuse you, much less the makers of the Law; but to
lament the unhappiness of this distracted and distressed Land, and partly to
excuse our selves. Several men have several interests and apprehensions of
things; and the judgments which God will have executed upon a sinful people
must come to pass, though he will not be the author of any of the sin of them
that execute them.

The Conformity of the Laity is made an hundredfold more difficult by the
Corporation* Oath and Declaration, and by the Vestry Act, etc. (yet have we
lately read the writings with pity and admiration, who blush not to tell the
world that the Laity or People are not put upon the renouncing of the Covenant.
But thus it will be where Love and Unity are oppugned and destroyed by those
that praise them.

The Conformity of the Clergy is made much more difficult than before: 1. By
the new Subscription. 2. By the new Declaration. 3. By Reordination. 4. By the
new additions to the Liturgy, especially the Doctrine of the Salvation of
Baptized Infants, without distinguishing of them that are Baptized, jure vel
injuria, with right or without. And the old Conformity is yet too hard for us,
in the Subscription, and in the Oath of obedience to the Diocesans, and in
other points. All which again we speak not to reflect on our Superiors, whose
Honor we desire to maintain; but to make known our case, and the reasons of
our practice.

Now these seventeen years we have patiently waited on Gods Providence, in
silence as to the pleading of our cause; so that I know not that ever there was
so much as one Petition either for us, or by us, offered to the Parliament. And
when a multitude of Books have been written against us, of such a nature and
tendency as I will not denominate or describe (it is the policy of some to do
things so bad, that no sufferer or dissenter can so much as name them without
the imputation of railing or reviling, by the use of such abominable words. But
the day is near that will set all strait) it has moved me many time to pity,
to read such Books as I have seen written for Conformity, to think how easy it
was to answer them, and pro captu lectoris, what lamentable reasonings go for
current with some men? We have been silent whilst Volume after Volume has
been published against us; some disputing, and some reproaching: and if any
impatient Nonconformists have been moved to dispute the Cause, it has been
mostly such of the weaker sort, who have done it without their brethrens
knowledge, and have done the Cause more wrong than right. (And who can expect
that so many hundreds should be so many years silenced, accused, and writ
against in such a manner, and that none of them should be so weak and impatient
as to speak for himself according to his ability; and they that at such a time
had not wisdom enough to hold their tongues, could not be expected to have
wisdom enough to speak.)

For my own part I must profess, that the principal reason that caused my
silence, as to such disputes was the fear of injuring the Church. For as I have
heard that old Mr. Dod was wont to thank God that no more conformed for the
sake of truth; and to thank God that so many conformed for the sake of the
Gospel which they preached: So it was my judgment, that it was not my duty
without a special call, to persuade any man to Nonconformity, when it was but
in the issue to persuade him to be silenced, and to deprive the Church of his
public labors. Therefore did I never (to my remembrance) endeavor to make
any one man a Nonconformist that did not come or send to me for resolution in
the case. And some such also I put off, as far as conscionably I could. Though
I may never persuade a man to that which I judge to be sin, yet I am not always
bound to dissuade him from it. If I saw a man about to tell a lie, or take a
false oath, to save the life of the King from an enemy or traitor, I do not
think that it is my duty to hinder him. Affirmatives bind not ad semper. I
thank God, not that so many laudable Ministers conform, but that they preach
the Gospel, and keep up so much of the interest of the Church and Religion in
the Land. I have met with some women and hot-brained lads, of another mind,
that said, Let them put upon us the veriest ignorant sots and drunkards, we
shall be the more easily justified for not going to their Churches. But I ever
reproved this, as the language of the Serpent, who insinuating into the
injudicious, would increase the sin and misery of the world. For my own part I
heard all Ministers where I lived, who were but tolerable in the Sacred
Office. I came to the beginning of the Churches Prayers, when I could, and
staid to the end. I took not my self for a constrained unwilling hearer of
them; but the more any external imperfection made my devotion difficult, the
more I thought it my duty to labor, to stir up my affections, lest I should as
the hypocrite, draw near to God with my lips without my heart. I remember what
was said of Old Mr. Fenne, the famous Coventry* Nonconformist, that he would
say, Amen, loudly to every one of the Common Prayers, except that for the
Bishops, by which he thought he sufficiently expressed his dissent. I know how
unable the old Separatists were to answer the many Arguments of the famous
Arthur Hildersham, John Paget, William Bradshaw, Brightman, John Ball, and
other old Nonconformists, for the lawfulness of Communicating with our
Parish-Churches in the Sacraments, and the Liturgy. I was exceedingly moved
against Separation (truly so called) by considering, 1. How contrary it is to
the principle of Christian love. 2. And how directly and certainly pernicious
to the interest and cause of Christ, and of his Church, and of the souls of
men, and how powerful a means it is to kill that little love that is left in
the world. 3. And how plainly it proceeds from the same spirit that
persecution does. For though their expressions be various, their minds and
principles are much the same; which is to vilify our Brethren, and represent
them as odious and intolerable, and overlook that of Christ which is amiable
in them. In which when they have agreed, as Children of the same Father, they
differ in their way of serving him. One says, He is such and such, therefore
away with him, silence him, imprison him, banish him: The other says, He is
such and such a one, therefore away with him, have no communion with him. He
that eats not, Romans 14. will say, Away with him because he eats: And he
that eats will say, Away with him because he eats not. Both agree in
murdering love, and accounting their brother unlovely and intolerable. 4. And
I was greatly moved in thinking of the state of most of the Churches in the
world; if I traveled in Abassia, Armenia, Russia, or among the Greek Churches,
I durst not deny to hold communion with them. When I go to God in prayer, I
dare not go in a separate capacity, but as a member of the Universal Church,
nor would I part with my share in the Commonprayers of all the Churches, for
all the world; but am joined with them in spirit, while I am corporally absent,
owning all their holy prayers, though none of their faults or failings in them,
(having many in all my own prayers to God, which I must be further from
justifying than other men's.) And having perused all the foreign and ancient
Liturgies extant in the Bibliotheva Patrum, I doubt not but our own is
incomparably better than any that is there.

But I will not conceal it from you, that I am not such a Separatist neither,
as to communicate with Parish-Churches only. If only the Law have turned any
Pastors out of the Parishes, and the people and they still hold their relation
and communion (not to say now whether they do well or ill), I will no more
separate from them than from you. I communicate with you in Liturgy and
Sacrament, but neither as with a Sect or Faction, nor as the whole Church; but
only as a part of the Church Universal, and so are they. I will hear you, and I
will hear them when I have a just occasion. I will communicate with you, and I
will communicate with them, as I perceive a call. If each side run away from
the other, I will run from neither, though I will sin with neither, and must go
from them that drive me away.

But I tell all that ask my mind, that I am not so indifferent as to the
Ministers whom I must join with, as I am to the forms and modes of Worship: Not
that I call their actions Nullities, or say that the Sacraments are invalid
which they administer. (For their usurpation cannot rob the innocent of their
right.) But yet I will not be guilty of countenancing and encouraging any
soul-murderer in so great a sin.

Three sorts of Teachers I renounce Communion with (as Ministers.) 1. Those
that through intolerable ignorance and insufficiency, do want those abilities
which are necessary to the essence of the Ministry. 2. Those Heretics who
preach against any essential article of Religion. 3. Those wicked ones who
openly bend their application (not against different Sects and adversaries, for
that is common to all the factious and peevish, but) against the serious
practice of Godliness, Temperance, Love or Justice; and that labor to make
these odious to their hearers, though their Doctrine be sound, from which they
raise these malignant applications. These are the men that I will not
communicate with.

I confess when I read in Sulpitius Severus the History of St. Martins resolved
Separation from Ithacius, Idacius, and the Synods of Bishops of those times,
and the confirmation of him by Visions, and the antiquity and credibility of
that History (if of almost any ancient Church History in the main), and the
stupendous miracles which he is said to work, it a little staggered me, till I
considered, 1. That Scripture only is our rule: And, 2. That it was not from
the Episcopal Order that he separated (for he was one himself) nor from any
particular Bishops that were innocent, nor yet from the Churches of the people
in their Communion and Worship; but only from a prevailing company and Synod of
the Bishops that were guilty of cruelty, and of bringing reproach upon the
serious practisers of Godliness in those times.

And as for the many Volumes which have been written against my self, I thought
it not necessary to confute them, nor seasonable to stand upon a Personal
Vindication, when I knew it would exasperate the accusers (to be accounted
injurious and false) and would increase the breach.

Yea, when it was judged against me, that my presence would be injurious to the
people that I had long preached to, and that my absence would more conduce to
their Conformity, and that they were none of my Charge, I so far denied my self
and them, as that I never since came near them; nor, unless very rarely, sent
them one line: Though I thought if I had been allowed so much, it might have
better answered the ends of those that were most for my removal. Yet did I not
take this for any perfidious forsaking them, when upon many accounts I believed
it to be for their good, and I sent them all the Books which I wrote.

If any think that I should not say so much of my self, in an Apology for
others, I answer, 1. It is because that men will needs have it so whether I
will or not. I say not a word to them; and yet what a multitude of Volumes have
these seven years and more been tossing my Name as a football of reproach about
the land? And when the cause is pleaded, they presently let fly at the persons,
and say what you can, it is there that they will stick; and till they are
answered there, they think they are unanswered. 2. And because I am best
acquainted with my self, and can speak with more certainty of my own case and
reasons, than of any others. 3 But chiefly because as our late Tilenus has
styled me, Purus putus Puritanus, so the late Episcopal Indignation published
me the Antesignanus of the Presbyterians. I deserve not so much honor. But
hence the world and posterity may know, that whereas but a few years ago, a
Puritan was one that was against Bishops and Ceremonies, and Liturgy, and a
Presbyterian was one that was for Lay Elders, and the power of Classes composed
partly of such, not only for concord, but as Governors of all the particular
Churches; now in England, a Puritan is one that is no more against, and as much
for Archbishops, Bishops, Liturgy and Ceremonies, as in my Books I have long
published my self to be. And a Puritan as a Puritan is no worse a person than I
am, (whose life and writings have had the happiness to have some share in their
commendations*) And a Presbyterian now is one that is against Lay Elders, and
in his judgment against the Regimental power of Classes and Synods as over the
Pastors of the particular Churches, and only for their consultation and their
use to concord; and one that is, as aforesaid, for Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
as far as in my dispute for Church Government I have declared my self to be. It
is of some use to know the mutability of the world, and what a purus putus
Puritanus, and a Presbyterian now is.

But having thus far related the History of our true endeavors for peace; it
must be my next task to Apologize for our supposed unpeaceableness. And I
cannot better know what is the matter of offense, than by knowing what is
charged on my self. He that was one of the first restrained from Preaching, and
has been laid in the Goal as I have been, will be supposed to be one of the
most guilty. And therefore I may hope that they that have escaped better, have
deserved less; and that my own defense will be also theirs. And I owe the
offended an account of the practice by which I have so much offended them.

When the Act of Uniformity was not yet made or talked of, I All this was
written 1669.
went to the now Archbishop of Canterbury, then Bishop of London, (even whilst
the Kings Declaration gave us liberty), and I desired his License to preach in
his Diocese, which he was pleased to grant me, upon my Voluntary subscription
to the Doctrine of the Church, and those terms of peaceableness which he
accepted. When the said Act of Uniformity was in fieri, I ceased that seeming
Lecture which I had, before 1st of May 1662. When that Act came out, it forbad
all to hold any Benefice, Cure, Lecture, etc. who had possession of any
Ecclesiastical* Promotion the 1st of May 1662, and did not subscribe and
declare as required of them in that Act, and also forbad the reception of any
into such Promotion or Cure for the future* that should not so subscribe and
declare. Neither of these being my case, (for I was out of all before May 1st
1662, and I sought no new Cure or Benefice), the Law did no more require me to
subscribe and declare, than it did the Bishops, or any conformable man that for
so long had Cure, Promotion, or stated employment. So that I was no
Nonconformist in the sense of the Law, because I conformed as far as the Act
required me to conform. And that Act not forbidding occasional Sermons to any
but those that were not Licensed, my License enabled me to Preach occasionally
(as many that had no places did), yet because I knew that the Bishop might
revoke my License at his pleasure, and that if I so far used it, being reputed
a Nonconformist, it would give offense to my superiors, I never since made use
of it to this day, nor ever Preached a public Sermon. And though the Act
forbad* me not public Catechizing, or the Administration of the Sacraments, I
never did either, to avoid offense. And when about three years after, the
Oxford Act came forth for the restraining Nonconformists from coming within
five miles of a Corporation, or of any place where they had been Teachers, or
kept a Conventicle, I found that I was not concerned in that Act, because by
Law I was no Nonconformist, to whom the Act by the very title and matter was
limited. So that being neither a Nonconformist by Law, nor my License to preach
occasionally ever nulled, nor yet concerned in this Oxford Act, which imposes
the new Oath, I supposed my peace not endangered by the Law* (which the Lawyers
whom I consulted also did conclude) Yet did I forbear to come within five miles
of a Corporation, except on the rode, to avoid offense. All this while I lived
in a place where sew desired me to preach; they being poor and worldly people,
that minded most their labors and necessities. So that I contented my self to
instruct my family, with three or four more that sometimes desired to be
present. But the chief reason why I did no more was, because (as none called me
to it, so) I was engaged in certain writings, ( A Body of Practical Divinity,
the Reasons of the Christian Religion, and others), which I thought of greater
use to the Church than Preaching to any there would be, and therefore would do
nothing which might hinder or interrupt them. But when first the lamentable
Plague had awakened those that were left alive to look more seriously toward
Eternity, and then the lamentable Fire had consumed so much of the Wealth and
Glory of the Land (of which we were the sad spectators); and when these
awakenings, and the consequent necessities of the City, had caused many
Ministers to resolve to preach the Gospel to the survivers, what ever they
underwent; the poor people of the Parish (of Acton) where I lived, came
crowding into my House while I taught my Family; and since once they began,
they would not cease. And verily I had neither a heart to shut the doors
against them, nor wit enough to justify it, if I had done it. I never invited
one; and when they came I knew no reason to forbid them. They were not
Sectaries, nor Seditious, but poor people that needed to be taught the
Principles of Religion. There was not two or three in all the Parish that I
knew of that did separate from the public Assembly, yea or the Liturgy. They
went with me into the Church, which was before my door. I Preached not at the
time of public Exercise. I thought this course did tend to union, and not to
division. I freely taught them the evil of Separation and Sedition. And whereas
the multitude of hearers was an offense, I was glad that such a multitude did
relish, or could bear such Doctrine. The last Sermon I preached to them was on
Mat. 5. Blessed are the meek, etc. whence (after Dr. Hammond) I showed them how
much meekness and patience conduces even to peace on earth, and what sedition,
rebellion, passion and intemperance does against it. They say, there were some
witnesses present that after did accuse me, that I know not; but that week by a
Warrant I was brought before two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, and
offered the Oxford Oath, and sent to the Goal, as by the Mittimus was
expressed, for Preaching in my House, which they called a Conventicle, and for
not taking the Oath. The persons, manner, circumstances, nor my deliverance by
the Honorable and Righteous Judges (the Glory of his Majesty's Government,
subordinate to himself), I have no mind nor cause now to meddle with; having
said as much as is needful to open the true nature of our supposed crimes.

And now you see that it is Preaching that is so much of our offense, (and
coming within five miles of a Corporation, etc.) I shall here fix, and tell
you, 1. What is really our judgment in the case, whether such prohibited
Ministers may preach. 2. What are our Reasons. 3. What Reasons you have to be
for our Preaching rather than against it. 4. How vain the common arguments
against it are. And, 5. I shall venture to shut up the Premises, with an humble
Petition to you, once more for the Church and the souls of men, and for the
interest of unity, love and peace.

1. WE do hold that the Sacred Office of the Ministry consists in an
obligation to do the work, and authority to warrant us therein. And that both
these are essential to the office.

2. That God does not call men now immediately as the Prophets and Apostles
were; but giving them necessary qualifications, does commit it to the Ministry
of men, first to discern and judge of those qualifications, and then by a solemn
Investiture to put them in possession of the office; which is called
Ordination, and is ordinarily necessary for order sake.

3. That yet the office it self is of Gods own institution; and from that
Institution the Authority and Obligation resulteth directly to the persons
lawfully ordained. So that God only gives the office or power, though not
without the act of man to fit the person to receive it, and then Ministerially
by Investiture to deliver possession. It is not without man, but it is not of
or from man, as the possessor of the power given, but only as a servant to give
possession in the name of Christ. Even as men first chose (by the preparation
and direction of Gods Providence) the line or family that should reign: But God
only gives the King his power. Or as the members of a Corporation may choose
their Mayor, and the Steward or Recorder may solemnly give him possession; but
his power it self is immediately from the Charter of the King.

4. That though we be not called as the Apostles, yet when we are called, we
are bound to fidelity as well as they were.

5. That it is not an office to be taken*up on trial, and for a limited time,
(as servants are bound to their masters by the year); but as Marriage, it is
for life (unless God shall disable us), and as we say for better and for worse;
and not to be laid by at pleasure. And therefore those Schoolmen that interpret
the Indelible character of the Relation* seem not to differ from us at all.

6. That though Ordination be not, as the two Sacraments of the Covenant of
Grace, and necessary to Salvation, nor generally to all the people; yet may it
not unfitly be called, the Sacrament of Orders, or of our Ministerial Covenant
with Christ, as a Soldiers Oath and Engagement was Sacramentum Militare.

7. That Kings and other Magistrates are not by Ordination to give this office,
nor by Degradation to take it away.

8. But that Ministers are under the Government of the King, as well as
Physicians, or any other subjects. And that he may use the sword to force them
to the due performance of their office, and to hinder them from abusing it, to
the mischief of the Church.

9. That this power is for the ends of the Ministry, which is for edification
and the public good. And therefore that the end it self is not put into the
power of man (whether the Church shall be edified and happy, or not) nor yet
the office of the Ministry it self (whether there shall be a Ministry or not)
Nor the necessary work of that office, (whether the Ministry when necessary
shall be exercised or not.)

10. We believe that those that ordain a Minister, cannot degrade him at their
pleasure. As he that may baptize a child cannot unbaptize him again at
pleasure; nor he that marries persons unmarry them.

11. Much less can every Bishop degrade at pleasure those whom other men
ordained. Else every Minister might be degraded while there are so many
disagreeing and angry Bishops in the world.

12. If the Magistrate forbid us to preach the Gospel, either our Preaching is
necessary or unnecessary, and this is either notorious or doubtful. If our
Preaching be notoriously unnecessary, we will obey him and forbear. If it be a
doubtful case to us, we will use all the means which God has appointed us to
know the certain truth. And if yet it be doubtful, and our minds in suspense,
we will stand to the judgment of the Magistrate and forbear. But if our
Ministry be notoriously and undoubtedly necessary to the just ends, which is
the edification of men's souls, we will obey God in Preaching as far as we are
able, and humbly and patiently bear what is laid upon us by our Rulers.

13. But in this case we will not intrude into the public Temple, much less
lay any claim to the Tithes or public maintenance, for these are all at the
Kings disposal.

14. Nor do we take our selves bound by Christ to one place, or one time or
manner of teaching, or to speak always to a great Assembly. But all these are
circumstances which we must fit to the end and success of our work. And must
take that course, and with that variation which tends to the Churches good.
Christ, that bid his Apostles when they were persecuted in one City, fly to
another, allows us to be where we may serve him best. If forbearing all
Preaching for some days or weeks, would tend to the Churches good, (as by
procuring us liberty afterward, etc.) it is lawful to forbear. If Preaching
often to a few be more for the Churches good than to preach but once or twice
to many, we may then lawfully choose the smaller number. So that in such
circumstances, that may be one man's duty which is another sin.

15. We take it to be our duty in all such Preaching to take heed of any thing
that tends to the division of the peoples minds, or to the hinderance of the
lawful public Ministry, or to their just discouragement. But contrarily to
concur and live with such Ministers ( If possible, and as much as in us lies,
Romans 12. 18.) in peace and mutual love; and to do all that we can to promote
their reputation with the people; and to work all unjust prejudice and
partiality out of their minds. And not only to draw them to a due attendance in
the public Assemblies, but also as far as reason will allow us, to prefer
still the public Ministers labors, honor, and interest in the people, before
our own; and to reprove all censorious whispers and obloquy which we shall hear
against them behind their backs.

16. And as for maintenance, we expect not any; unless any Minister be so poor,
as for food and raiment, and the necessities of life, to live upon the alms of
others, (which is the case of very many.) In which case we hold it our duty not
at all to be chargeable to censorious murmuring dissenters, but only to the
willing; and that if God shall humble us to the begging of our bread, we should
not be so proud as to disdain it, or to murmur at his Providence, nor yet so
selfish as to forsake and change our calling, because we have no better
maintenance. But rather be thankful that we are kept from the temptations of
grandeur and fullness, by which we see so many ruined, and so great a part of
the Clergy throughout the Christian world to be blinded and drowned in those
ways of idleness, sensuality, cruelty and contention, which prove the division,
the defilement and the dishonor of the Church. For as we believe a life to
come, and that the preferring of the pleasures of this world before it, is the
thing that keeps men from Heaven, and is the common cause of men's damnation;
so we believe that no condition does so much tempt men into this damning love
of the world, as that wherein the world is made most pleasing and most lovely
to them. And he that abounds in it with wealth and honor is liker of the two
to overlove it, than he that meets with labor, poverty and reproach. Yet
will we not as begging Friars, renounce Propriety, nor cast away any talent
which our Master gives us to improve; nor yet be so impudent as to be
unnecessarily burdensome, or lose our liberty by making our selves beholding
and dependent; but we take it to be our part to labor faithfully in our work,
and leave it to God what provisions he will allow us. And those of us that want
not, but have to spare, to contribute to the relief of them that want. And we
may be the more patient while we remember in how much purity the Primitive
Churches were kept in their poverty and low estate; as also the Churches of the
poor Waldenses, and those in Piedmont to this day; and the [ Hodie venenum,
etc.] the corruptions, divisions and calamities that have followed the worldly
exaltation of the Clergy both in East and West. Therefore we humbly submit to
his gracious Providence, that thus saves us from the love of the world, so
inconsistent with the love of God, 1 John 2. 15

17. We take it also to be our duty, the greater our restraints and sufferings
are, the more to take heed lest any dishonor or murmuring at our Rulers,
should thence arise and be cherished in our hearers minds; which though it be
not absolutely in our power to cure, we must do our best. It is a humane thing
to pity the sufferers. And if our Doctrine and our lives do make the people
think well of us, they are so much the readier to think ill of those by whom we
suffer. Which those well perceive who have the sight that their interest made
it necessary to make us odious by voluminous reproaches. But that is not the
way with any but strangers. For when those that know us, know that we are
slandered, it does but increase their dislike of the reproachers. And they can
read our lives as easily as the revilers books. The only way to change their
opinion of us were, for us to change our Doctrine and our lives, and to preach
ill, and live ill. But that is a way that we must not take, to gratify any
that would build their ends and honor on our contempt. But yet the honor of
our Rulers must be more precious to us than our own. For it is more necessary
to the common good. And therefore we take it for our duty, not to blazon and
aggravate our sufferings too much in the hearing of the people; much less to
accuse our Rulers of them; but to take to our selves the blame of all, as far
as is true; and to confess (which is the truth) that it is for our own and the
peoples sins; we should have labored harder while it was day, as foreseeing
the night when none can work, Joh. 9. And the people should not have forfeited
their food by fullness and neglect. And alas! how many sins of theirs and ours
have had a hand in this calamity? We take it to be our duty, if we hear any
speak a dishonouring word against the Powers which God has set over us, to
reprove them, and better instruct them in their duty, and to warn them that
they make not any of their love or pity to us, an occasion of their sin. And to
remember them how much the common good and all our peace is beholden to
Magistracy, notwithstanding the sufferings of particular men.

18. And we take it also for our duty, to pray for the King, and all in
Authority, not with dishonouring intimations, but in such a manner as beseems
us to speak even to God (in the hearing of men) of his own Officers; and not
that their favor may make us rich and great, but only that we may live a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 12. And this not
seldom nor formally, but daily and earnestly. And we take it for our duty to
preach against schism, sedition and rebellion, and all principles which tend to
breed or feed them; and to use our opportunities and interest in the people, to
promote their loyalty and the public peace.

19. Also we judge it our duty to preach those plain and necessary things which
the salvation of men does most depend on, and the people generally have most
need to hear; that is, the opening to them their Baptismal Covenant, and the
Articles of the Creed, the Lords-Prayer, the Decalogue and the Gospel-precepts;
or more briefly the Doctrine of faith in Christ, and repentance toward God,
and of the love of God and man; to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
world, as looking and hoping for a better, Tit. 2. 12. And not to fill the
peoples heads with needless controversies, or vain jangling, or contending
about words which edify not, but subvert the hearers; much less to perplex
them with talking of the unrevealed Counsels of God; nor yet to corrupt their
minds by talking against our Superiors, or against dissenters behind their
backs, or by aggravating the faults of other men's manner of worshipping God, or
breeding in them distaste of the public Worship; or talking against Bishops,
or Ceremonies, or Liturgy; nor by representing any sort of Christians who
differ from us in points not fundamental, as odious to the hearers; whether
Lutherans, Caelvinists, Arminians, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, yea or
Anabaptists; no, nor to injure the Papists themselves, by making our
differences seem greater than indeed they are. Our office is to preach up love,
and not to preach it down and mortify it, which all those do, whatever they
pretend, that attempt to represent their brethren as odious, and to hide or
deny, or extenuate that in them which is good and amiable.

20. Lastly, we must profess therefore, that though we take not our selves
bound to prefer our Preaching before other men's, nor to tie our selves just to
numbers and circumstances of time and place, nor to draw a party from the
lawful public Ministers to our selves, nor to preach at all where there is not
a real and notorious need; yet do we take our selves bound on pain of Gods
displeasure, and of damnation, to exercise our Ministerial office as we are
able in a pious, peaceable and loyal manner, as poor assistants to those
faithful Ministers that have public allowance and encouragement,
notwithstanding any present prohibitions or unwillingness of those that are
against it. And if this profession shall teach any to conclude that therefore
bonds, imprisonment or banishment must restrain us, the will of the Lord be
done; we are ready not only to be bound but to die, for preaching the Gospel of
him that died for us, and seeking to save men from a sorer death. And we ought
not to account our lives as dear to us, so that we may finish our course with
joy, and the Ministry committed to us by the Lord, Act. 20. 24. But we ought to
suffer without resisting or reviling; which we may the easier do, while we
suffer not as evil doers, but for preaching the Gospel of Salvation, and
teaching men to seek the happiness to come, and to forsake their lusts, and to
love and obey their God and Savior.

As we are the more unwilling that the Church should be burdened with
unnecessary Ceremonies, because if they be used with understanding, the people
must be taught their sense and use; which we scarce have leisure for, or
pleasure in, while they are ignorant of so many greater things, and are so very
dull of hearing; so it is not a little of our peace, that if we suffer, we be
not found Preaching about Ceremonies or shadows, but Preaching that Gospel,
which at our Ordination we solemnly promised to preach.

And now having told you truly our Principles, I shall next tell you the
reasons why we cannot forbear our Ministerial work, till bonds or disability
constrain us to forbear it.

II. AND here we shall not form Syllogisms in such an Apology, as if we were
speaking to captious men; but nakedly open our reasons as to those that are as
much concerned in the matter as we; and should be as willing to know the truth.

1. We take it to be Sacriledg, and that of the highest nature, except Apostasy
it self, to alienate our selves from the work to which we are consecrated and
devoted. By how much the nearer any consecrated person or thing is to God, and
by how much the more useful to his ends (his glory in the good of souls) by so
much the greater sacriledg it is to alienate that which is so consecrated.
(With you we know that we need not dispute either the name of a Sacrament of
Orders (for we stick not upon names) nor the obligation.) You know the usual
Exposition of the Answer in the Church-Catechism, to the Question, [ How many
Sacraments, etc]* A. Two only, as generally necessary to Salvation. We differ
not from you in our sense of this. Your Canons enquire after all such as
alienate themselves from the Ministry to which they were ordained, and turn to
any other calling. We dislike not that Canon. But we wish our observance of it
might be thought but a pardonable fault.

It has possessed me often with admiration to see the blinding power of
Partiality in some men, that can see the evil of Sacriledg in them that
alienate Church lands, and Goods, and Houses, and Utensils, and can see no evil
in the alienation of consecrated persons? What are the Cups, and Fonts, and
Tables for, (do they praise the glorious mystery of Redemption?) Are they not
his Utensils who is set apart to attend the Altar, and to commemorate the
sacrifice of the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world? What are
the Houses for, but for the convenient habitation of the Pastors? What are the
Lands and Tithes for, but for their maintenance while they do the work of God?
What are the Temples for, but to be the convenient places of their and the
peoples worshipping of God? Is it a crime to steal the feathers, and none to
steal the goose? Is it a crime to rent your clothes, and is it none to rend
your flesh? Or to steal a tile, or pick a lock, and not to burn the house? Is
he saulty that robs your child of his hat, or book, or victuals? and is he
innocent that kills him, or that robs you of your child? We must be speak all
Cainuites here, who like leeches thirst for blood, that they distort not these
words, as speaking all this of the Law makers, or any of our Rulers.

We meddle with no men's duties and faults here but our own. We leave all others
to look to themselves, as they must shortly answer for themselves. We only say,
that if we should alienate our selves from that Sacred office to which we are
consecrated and devoted, it would be odious and accursed Sacriledg in us. And
if really it prove to be our own doing, that we are thus alienated, it will be
no light or little fault. And if God have forced the world to observe that even
Impropriators, much more gross sacrilegious persons are usually ruined before
the fourth generation, what might we expect if we should do much worse.

I have read and heard their words of late, who would make the late Westminster
Assembly favorers of Sacriledg, forsooth because the Annotations (not put out
by the Assembly) speak not against Sacriledg (which they do expressly speak
against); especially on those Texts in the New Testaments, on which Dr. Featly
an Episcopal Divine its said was the Author of them. O the candor and
impartiality of this age? For my part, I was none of the Assembly (being then
too young and too unworthy): But Mr. Vines's judgment and mine against the
alienation of Church lands in those times as sacrilegious, I published in our
Letters in the end of my Confession, how displeasing soever it was to them that
then bore sway. But all is one for that. It is for the interest of some men to
say what they have said, and as they have said it. O that they better
understood their own interest!

If it be said, that while we refuse conformity, we alienate our selves,
whilst we would avoid it, in that we give Rulers cause to do it; that is to be
spoken to by it self anon.

And if it be said that our forbearing the work of our Ministry is not
sacriledg, when we do it in obedience to our Rulers, that also is to be
answered afterward.

If there be no Law extant which can disoblige us from our undertaken office
and work, then if we forbear we are sacrilegious Villains, and liable to the
curse and doom of the unprofitable servant that hid his talent, Mat. 25.
Forgive us if we had rather venture on the clamor of many Volumes and tongues,
and on your sharpest censures, and on a prison, than venture on that dreadful
doom.

2. We cannot be ignorant of the necessities of the people; which answers all
that is said against us. I say we cannot be ignorant of them, if we would. We
can talk with those learned men that are ignorant of it; with some that think
the groslyest ignorant, and senseless, and mindless of the life to come, to be
better than we, if they will but be for Bishops, Liturgy and Ceremonies; and
that think little more Religion than to hurt no body, belongs to the Laity or
common people. And with some that have been bred up only at the University, and
never knew the ignorance of the vulgar. And with some that have lived among
them, and know them not, because they never conversed with them otherwise, than
in the Pulpit, or at a Feast, or a common meeting. But their ignorance will not
make us ignorant. The Intellect is often informed necessarily per modum naturae.
Though I thank God that our information has been voluntary. It was our
practice while we were suffered to do our office, to Catechize all the Families
of our Parishes (that did not refuse it), Family by Family, and to try the
knowledge of them all, and to discern what they thought of the Essentials of
Christianity, and of the things that Christ has made necessary to Salvation.
By which we found that multitudes that come all their lifetime to Church, and
bear up the reputation of discreet intelligent persons, are utterly ignorant of
many Articles of the faith, while they speak the words; so ignorant, that it is
hard for Scholars to believe it, that have not tried it. And we have found that
multitudes of them will be brought to learn over all the words of the Catechism
that never consider or understand the sense, much less the power and practice
of what their tongues recite; but like Parrots rest in the utterance of the
words. Either this much will bring them to Salvation, or it will not. If it
will Christianity, must be a needless thing, or else consist but in a spell or
charm of empty words; and the Papists Latin* devotions are as good. If it will
not, then our Parishes have a necessity of further teaching. If you say, that [
This is not true], it may serve your turn, but it will not serve ours; no more
than if you told us that most of our Parishes speak not English. It is not in
our power to deny belief to our senses, and the experience of our daily
conversation, if we were never so much reviled for our judgment.

But if you say, that the Parish Ministers are sufficient to remedy this
calamity, as far as it can be remedied: I answer you, The necessity of our
labors is notoriously evident in all these following respects. 1. In respect
of the multitude that need our help. 2. In regard of the obstinacy of their
ignorance, unbelief and sensuality. 3. In regard of the paucity of the public
Ministers. 4. In regard of the real insufficiency, weakness and badness of too
great a number of them. And, 5. In regard of abundance of peoples prejudice
against them.

1. How many thousands are in some Parishes in London, in Stepney, in
Cripplegate, in Sepulchers, in St. Martins, St. Clement Danes, Giles in the
fields, Andrews Holborn, and many others, is ordinarily observed. Abundance of
Corporations (from whence the Ministers are excluded) have very many thousands
in a Parish. And if there be four thousand (to say nothing of them that have
above forty thousand) it is an excellent people if three parts in four be not
grossly ignorant of some Essentials of the Christian Religion, and multitudes
grossly vicious and ungodly in their lives. When I came first to Kiderminster
1640, the Town was ready to stone me as I went along the streets, for preaching
the Church-Doctrine of Original Sin in Infants, whom they called Innocents;
till I asked them publicly, Whether they thought their Children were saved
without Christ, and why they were baptized? Which they could not answer. When I
came to Catechize and confer with them personally, after many years Preaching,
many that constantly attended on Teaching, thought that Christ was Man on
Earth, and is God in Heaven, but made a God only for his Goodness upon Earth,
and not God from Eternity, nor Man now he is in Heaven. And the whole mystery
of Redemption is little known to the most among us.

2. And their sensuality is as hardly cured as their ignorance. How common are
the sins of Sodom throughout all the Land? Ezekiel. 16. 49. Pride and fullness of
bread, and abundance of idleness, and not considering the poor! Your selves
believe, that schism, sedition and disloyalty are too common; swearers and
cursers, and railers, and drunkards, accuse themselves in the open streets, and
to all that talk with them in daily converse. To say nothing of Athiests,
Infidels, Heretics, Schismatics, which sure need help, what a multitude are
they that never set their hearts on Heaven, nor seek first Gods Kingdom and its
Righteousness nor labor for the meat which never perishes, Col. 3. 11. Mat. 6
20, 21, 33. Joh. 6. 27. But their god is their belly, they glory in their
shame, and mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 18. How many mind not the things of
the Spirit, but of the flesh, and live and walk according to the flesh, and do
but complement with God, and make Religion a Ceremony or a matter on the by,
and take Heaven but for a lesser evil than Hell, and for a reserve, when they
can keep this world no longer. Either you know that the evidences are notorious
that there are thousands among us in this sad condition, or you do not. If you
do, you grant what we now assert. If you do not, you are such strangers in
England, that you are neither fit to condemn us, nor to be judges at all of the
peoples case.

And Oh how hard a matter is it to cure one of all these miserable souls! As
for the Ignorant, many of them are unwilling to learn, if you take them not at
the best advantages; and those few that are willing, must have long and
laborious teaching before they will come to any competent knowledge. If you have
but tried the ignorant servants of your own Families, how hard and long a task
it is to bring them to know the needful things, you may easily judge how hard it
is for a Minister to teach them, that has them not in his house, and scarce
knows how to meet them any where but in the Church, where they have learnt to
hear as if they heard not.

And when they have a little dark confused knowledge, alas what is this to the
light that Christ has sent into the world, in which the children of light
should walk, and which is needful to the work of light which they must do. What
is this to that abounding in wisdom and knowledge, to which the Scripture does
exhort men, and by which they must resist temptations discharge their duties,
and honor Christ and Piety in the world? Is it not Christ's charge, Mat. 28.
20. that when men are made disciples, they must be taught all things else that
he has commanded. And is it not smattering ignorant half-wited Christians
which your selves much complain of, and which make most of the trouble in the
world? And did you ever consider what a work it is to bring many thousands or
hundreds of those in a Parish, unto solid understanding?

And when men have knowledge, how hard is it still to make a due impression on
their hearts, and bring them really (which every tongue must confess is
necessary) to love God above all, and our neighbors as our selves! O! words
soon spoken! O difficult work, above the skill and strength of the wisest
Minister to accomplish! How hard to cure a drunkard, a fornicator, a swearer, a
railer, of his most beastly or unprofitable sin! much more to cure the Infidel,
the ambitious, the proud, the worldling! But O how hard to get up men's hearts
to a Heavenly frame, and to bring them daily to live after the Spirit, and to
live by faith and not by sight; and to set their affections on the things
above; and in hope and love to long and wait for the coming of the Lord!

Sirs, Either you take these things for necessary, or you do not; if you do
not, you deny Christianity; and our Controversy lies lower; first, Whether
there be a life to come, and the Gospel be true, (and how quiet and happy would
England be, if we were but all heartily agreed in that much!) But if you do,
then there remains no more controversy, whether our Ministerial helps be
needful?

3. And what is one Minister in a Parish for the doing of all this work? yea,
or his poor Curate, if he have one (as few have) for his help? By that time he
has read all the Common-Service twice a day, and Preached twice (or once if
you had rather), and has baptized all the Children, and visited all the Sick,
and buried all the Dead, and married all that are to be Married, and performed
the common Civilities necessary to friends and neighbors, and taken care for
food and raiment, and all the necessaries of his house or life, and instructed
and governed aright his family; and if he have Children, taken sufficient care
of their education; what time, what strength, what spirits are left, for most
of all the work forementioned? It irketh me to think that I should have need to
repeat these things, and to tell seeing men with so many words, that there is a
Sun in the firmament; or feeling men, that it is cold, when frost and snow do
cover the earth!

4. And we must say that which we are most unwilling to say, even when you
constrain us; Alas how many Parishes are there in his Majesty's three Kingdoms,
where the youth, the ignorance, the rawness, the dullness, the carelessness, the
idleness, the want of Ministerial utterance in the Teachers, does persuade all
the hearers that they have need of more and better help? The hearers, I say,
that should best know their own necessities, do commonly believe it, if you
deny it. The Sons of the Church do groan out often in my hearing, [Alas what
dry and pitiful work is this! we are afraid all the people will be driven into
Conventicles.] Ichabod, or the five Groans of the Church has long since told
you somewhat of this; But the most of England, especially Wales and Ireland,
need no Syllogisms to prove it. For my own part, I hear and encourage any that
is tolerable; and I speak the best, and conceal the rest, when I speak to the
auditors. But truth is truth, and our modesty will not satisfy the hungry, nor
save the miserable souls of men. Is it enough to the instructing of the grossly
ignorant, and the changing of an earthly mind to a heavenly, and to pull down
the strong holds of sin, for a young raw man to read or say a few good words
(perhaps least pertinent to the peoples needs) in a tone like a Schoolboy
saying his lesson? Or to talk against Presbyterians to the poor people, that
never knew what Presbytery was, and know not what Faith, Repentance,
Justification, or Sanctification are? To deny these things, is but to deceive
them that are already deceived; but England will no more believe the denial,
than him that would deny that the Snow is white.

And to talk, as one in Latin lately, what learned Pastors the Church of
England has, is an impertinency to fill up paper. If there be some such (which
none deny) and if most of the Parishes in and near London have men so tolerable
that we much rejoice in it, does it follow that it is an error or schism to be
acquainted with the rest of the Kingdoms, or to believe our ears, and the sad
experience of too great a number in the land? It is a fine world when it is
become a controversy, Whether that which so many thousands in three Kingdoms
hear and see be true?

We write none of this to reproach the Ministry; we would hide their nakedness
if we could. We like not the Glocester-Coblers writings, nor the Centuries. We
only show you that the reasons are invalid which are fetched from the
sufficiency of the present Ministry, to prove it our duty not to preach.

5. And if it were but the peoples prejudice against them, it proves their
necessity. I will purposely say nothing, whether the common charge of scandal
be true or false, because I will not meddle with that cause. But be it as it
will, if the people once think hardly of them, or of their Preaching, it is not
like to do them much good.

I know the common answer is, [ Who is that long of, but of themselves and
you?] To which I say, 1. Suppose it be long of themselves, must their souls be
therefore cruelly forsaken? I have wondered to hear and read such reasoning so
often from some Pastors of the Church, that should be the Fathers of the flock!
It is long of themselves, say they! And what then! It is long of our selves
that we are all sinners! and must we therefore have no Savior, no Sanctifier,
no Ministry, no remedy! All the sins that you Preach against are long of the
sinners themselves! Will you therefore think you are discharged from Preaching?

But you will say, That it is their wilfulness. Ans. If there were no will, there
were no sin. There is too much wilfulness in all the sin that you commit your
selves; must you therefore be forsaken! But O how much better would it beseem
an humble tender conscienced Ministry to suspect themselves, and say, Is there
no cause of this distaste in us! If it were partial heretics only that
disliked us for opinion sake, it were no wonder; but when the common people of
our Parishes, think our Preaching cold and dry, and our Sermons like a boys
Oration, and our lives too little heavenly and holy, what cause have we to fear
lest it be too true! or so much at least as will make us guilty of their
distaste! Surely it more nearly concerns you all to see that you be clear
your selves, and to judge your selves before God judge you, than to fall so
heavily on the people. When you have been as angry as you will, men will be
men, and ears will be ears; and as words will not satisfy a hungry stomach, so
chiding the poor people, and telling them that the fault is theirs, will not
illuminate, quicken, humble and comfort them, nor either do that for them which
they want, or make them that are indeed alive to believe that it is done when
it is not.

Suppose your own children surfeit by their own fault, and lose their appetite;
will you deny them one sort of food which they can eat, because it is long of
themselves, that they have lost their appetite to another. Will you say, Eat
this or famish, it is long of your selves? Shall the Physician deny his Patient
that Physic which his stomach can take, because it was long of himself that he
can take no other? Is this a method fit for Parents, Nurses, or Physicians, to
think that it is not their duty to help those that are made diseased or
necessitous by themselves? I beseech you think what else your Ministry is for,
and why have you your honor and your maintenance, but to serve under Christ,
for the saving of those that would destroy themselves? What enemy have you so
much need your selves to resist, and to be saved from, as from your selves? Oh
that you better knew it! And from whom else would you save the people? Men and
Devils cannot hurt them, if they be but saved from themselves.

When I hear a cold and sleepy Preacher, or hear Gods work done so ignorantly
and slovenly, as I would not have my boy to say his lesson, I yet confess, [It
is long of my self if this Sermon raise not my heart to Heaven. For his very
Text, or one of the Scripture-sentences which he cited, should have been enough
to do it; because it mentions God and Eternity, the least thought of which
should raise my soul.] But alas my heart is cold, and dull, and drowsy. This
is my disease, or else what need I come to Church for cure? I knew I was
faulty; but I hear you, in hope that my faults should be cured. And if you do
that which is unsuitable to your hearers faults and maladies, you are faulty
Physicians, for no better curing faulty Patients. To tell a man in a fever, or
a dropsy, if bread and drink will not cure you, it is long of your own
disease, is the answer of such Physicians as are like them in whose hands many
thousand souls in the world lie gasping at this day.

If you shall say, That God does not tie his grace to the ability of the
Pastor: I answer, such words are fitter to make ones head and heart to ache,
than to put the answerer to any difficulty. Use such arguments about plowing
and sowing, about eating and drinking; and when you are to choose a Tutor or
Schoolmaster for your Children; or when you are sick and seek to a Physician:
say, God does not tie his help and blessing to a wise Tutor any more than to an
ignorant one; nor to an able Physician any more than to a foolish Emperick. Or
if you will fly to the distinction of spiritual gifts and common, remember that
God is no more tied to means for the one than for the other; and quoad media
habitus infusi se habent ad modum acquisitorum. At least, set not your greatest
Scholars nor sharpest wits to convince a Sectary, or a Papist; for Illumination
is a spiritual Grace, and God can work on a Papist or Schismatic, as well by
an ignorant Reader. But sure the opinions of these times are not so much for
miraculous operations of Omnipotency, nor so much for the vanity of moral
suasion and instruction, that we should need to say much in this case, if you
could but turn it to a Doctrinal-controversie, where their Interest is not
against it. God can work convictions and conversion by the unlikeliest means.
But he usually works according to the aptitude of the means he uses. And
sure I am, that it is our duty (both teachers and hearers) to choose the best;
and to study and preach even as we would do, if all lay on our skill and
diligence; but to know that when Paul has planted, and Apollo watered, it is
God still that must give the increase. But he will not give so much to Judas as
to Paul and Apollo.

But the second charge is, that it is long of us that any of the present
Ministers are distasted. Ans. And is this true? 1. Is it because we hear them.
2. Or is it because we persuade the people to hear them (if they are but
tolerable men?) 3. Or is it because we sometime repeat their Sermons, and
speak honorably of them. 4. Or is it because we rebuke those that vilify
them? 5. Or is it because that we so preach and live as that the people
perceive a difference. There you must pardon us; we cannot cure that opinion as
some would have us. We dare not preach worse, or live worse, (as I said before)
for fear of making others worse thought of. 6. But why is it not as much long
of your selves as of us? Why do the people make such a difference between
conformable Preachers as they do? Why do they honor and crowd after one, and
slight another? Is this long of us too? If men were not blinded by partiality,
they might quickly see the cause. While nature teaches men to love themselves,
and use their reason for their souls, and men can discern (as they say) chalk
from cheese, it is not reviling the people as giddy and humoursome, for
perceiving what does most edify their souls, that will serve the turn to make
them value an ignorant, idle, empty fellow, equal to a convincing, laborious,
holy Pastor (whether he conform or not.)

And verily I would have none plead too eagerly for the reputation of the
ignorant, dull or negligent, that would not be taken for such a one himself,
lest the hearers suspect, Ne cauda vulves iste careat, that they vilify but
what they want. Licinius that was so much against learning, was utterly void of
learning himself.

And if once men could bring it to this (as they never will) to persuade the
people to overlook all men's personal worth and parts, and arguings and
persuasions, and only to have an equal respect to all, as all are Ministers, it
were the certain way to bring them to contemn you all, and to have a respect
for none. For though we confess that the Office must be reverenced as well as
the gifts; yet when once you trust only to the reverence of your bare Office,
without your gifts, you will be served as the giftless ignorant Priests were by
Luther, Melancthon, and others that overtopt them, and made them all the common
scorn.

Mark, (if experience signify any thing at all with you) whether the Gospel
has not risen and fallen in its successes in all ages and Countries, as the
wisdom, skill, and utterance and holiness of the Preachers of it did rise or
fall.

My Lord Verulam has truly minded us (in his Considerations) that our Calling
is not like a Kings, which consists more in authority than abilities, but a
function to be exercised by personal abilities, though not without Divine
authority, like a Licensed Physicians or Lawyers. And would you devise a more
effectual way to make, all Physicians the scorn of the world, than if you could
deprive them of their skill, and make them all empty ignorant men; or to make
all Lawyers the common scorn, than to set up only such as can scarce speak
sense or reason, for the people to laugh at, or the Stages to make Plays on.
Again I tell you, that men will be men, and reason will be reason, when those
that would set up an Image instead of humanity and reason, have done their
worst.

In a word, when it is possible for us to believe that neither England or
Wales, neither populous Cities, nor ignorant Countries, do need any more help
than the present Parish Ministers either do or can afford them, we promise to
give over Preaching the Gospel in this Land.

But one great Objection I had almost forgotten: Obj. This may be something for
your conference with them family by family; but what is it for your preaching
unto Congregations? If the public Ministers Preaching will not do it, why
should yours?

Answ. 1. It is our judgment that where no more public Preaching is wanting,
it is the best way for the Noconformists to attend the public Ministry, and
themselves only to go from house to house, to Catechize, exhort and help them,
as they are able and have opportunity. But it is but seldom that the peorer
sort of people have any leisure except on the Lords day, and Holy Days, (so
urgent are their necessities and labors) And it is but one or two houses in a
week that one man can go to in such a manner; and so the most may be dead and
out of hearing before we have such opportunities to speak to them. 2. And they
that may not come into Cities and Corporations, nor within five miles of any
place where ever they Preached, shall leave the populous places where public
Ministers have most need of private help, without any such assistance at all.
3. And is not both better than one? To speak to many when they can have time to
hear, and to speak also to single persons when we can? 4. It is not one of very
many that can come to Church in many Parishes in London if they would. The
Churches will not hold the tenth person in the Parish; and how few Churches
near 1669.
are standing? and must all the rest be quite forsaken. 5. And we say that is
good that does good. Two may do more than one. He may profit by one that will
not by another. 6. Do you believe that any (alas, must I say any) Conformists
are weak, raw, dull and slothful Preachers, very unlike to work much on men's
souls, or do you not? If you do not, we despair of giving you convincing
evidence of any thing in the world. But if you do, why is there not need of the
help of such as have more skill for such a work? and whom the people think do
most profit them, their practice will yet further show you if you will but
leave them to themselves.

III. OUr next Reason is fetched from the very plain expressions of the
Scriptures; which I shall first recite, and then show you their strength for
us, and answer the common evasions of them that would disoblige us, and
gratify our sloth.

And, 1. Take notice of those that describe the Office, and its duration, Mat.
5. 13, 14, 15, 16. Ye are the salt of the earth, etc. Ye are the light of the
world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a
candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick, and it gives light to
all that are in the house. Let your light so shine, etc. That this is spoken of
Ministers, see Dr. Hammond and others commonly on the Text. And ordinary
Ministers are Lights of Christ's setting up, as well as extraordinary.

Therefore his Promise extends further than to Apostles, and therefore so
does his commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them,
etc. teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and
lo I am with you always to the end of the world.

And, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. it is ordinary Pastors as well as
extraordinary, that are the gift of Christ, for that work which is to be done
unto the end, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, etc.

It is true we be not called as Apostles were; but several modes of Vocation,
make not several Originals of power. We are under the same Master, and have our
Office from Christ, and hold it under him as well as they, and have his command
as well as his gifts to exercise it to the end. Therefore if Apostles must obey
him by constancy, so must we.

As Apostles are separated to the Gospel of God, so are we by our consecration,
Romans 1. 1. and therefore are commanded to give up our selves wholly to this
work, and to continue in Doctrine, that we may save our selves and them that
hear us, 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16.

It is not only Apostles (who yet call themselves fellow Presbyters, 1 Pet. 5.
1.) that are Stewards of the mysteries of God, and must be so accounted of, and
therefore must be faithful to the trust that Christ their Master places in
them, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. For ordinary Pastors are so called, Tit. 1. 7. And surely
it is not only Apostles that are meant, Mat. 24. 45, 46, 48. Who then is a
faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his household to
give them meat in due season. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he
comes shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler
over all his goods. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord
delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat
and drink with the drunken, etc. Here observe, 1. That those have a Charge and
Law immediately from Christ's mouth, who are his Ministers or Stewards to feed
his flock, and not Apostles only. 2. That they are the Rulers of his house, and
Judges of the season of feeding his household. 3. That they must be found so
doing at the coming of Christ, (who lives till then.) 4. That this is that
coming, when he will make the faithful Rulers over all his goods. 5. That
smiting fellow servants, and glutting the flesh with fullness, are the marks of
wicked Ministers that Christ will damn.

2. Those Texts also must be considered, that plainly plead for the necessity
of Preaching when forbidden by Magistrates, Act. 4. 19. and 5. 28. Whether it
be better to obey God or men, judge ye. Ordinary as well as extraordinary
Ministers are entrusted with the Word and Sacraments, and commanded by Christ
himself in his Law, to constancy and faithfulness. And ordinary Ministers as
well as Apostles must obey God rather than men. The Sanhedrin had not the face
to deny it, as Dr. Hammond notes, and therefore the Apostles lest it to their
Consciences to judge.

1 Cor. 9. 14, 16. Necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto me if I preach not
the Gospel. To talk now of impertinent disparities, is but the shift of those
that have very gross wits to work upon, that will be abused by any thing. Paul
spoke this of himself; but was it of himself only as extraordinarily called? If
you so put off all that is spoken to and of Apostles, you will lose your
strongest argument for Episcopacy, which is fetched from the Apostles power. And
you will cast by most Texts that all Ministers and Christians are obliged by,
to a great part of their duty. Is there a necessity laid on ordinary Pastors
also, or not? If you say not, speak out that you may be understood. If yea,
then woe be to them also if they preach not the Gospel, though Rulers be against
it, as they were against the Preaching of Paul. Necessity was laid on Paul by a
voice from heaven, and necessity is laid on us by the word of God in Scripture,
when Ordination has consecrated us to the office; and woe to them that feel not
the obligation of Necessity.

Act. 4. 29. And now, Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant to thy servants
that with all boldness they may speak thy word. Men's threatenings will not
dispense with us as to the duty of Preaching boldly.

Obj. Men did not give the Apostles their power, and therefore men could not
take it away.

Ans. 1. Men give not any Pastors their office or power, but only: 1. Design
the person that shall receive it from Christ (as is aforesaid.) 2. And
Ministerially invest them with it, as a servant delivers possession by a Key,
or twig, or turf, who yet is none of the Giver of the Right as from himself. 3.
And Magistrates give Liberty of Exercise; and so they might do to the Apostles.

2. Men gave the office to other Ministers in those times in the same improper
sense as they may be said to give it now. Almost all the Princes and Rulers in
the world where the Gospel came, were against the Preaching of it; and many of
them forbad the Preachers. And yet the universal consent of all the Churches,
and chief Martyrs has still been, that their Prohibitions would not warrant
the Pastors to give over Preaching.

And hear the Holy Ghost also in this case, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at
his appearing and his Kingdom, (O dreadful charge!) preach the word; be instant
in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and
doctrine. Sure the Spirit of God foresaw what would be said against Preaching
in our times; was not Timothy ordained by man? Did he not preach against the
Rulers will? and yet must he do it, in season and out of season, on so severe a
charge! O Lord forgive all our omissions, and negligence, which has been
occasioned by the will of man, against the will and interest of Christ!

So, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickens
all things* and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession, that thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. What Commandment? why the Laws for
the Ministry before laid down. But what if the Rulers be against it? That was
undoubtedly expected; and yet you see the terrible charge, till the appearing
of Christ.

Therefore as one that was to be judged as an offender for his Ministry at the
Bar of man, he exhorts him, 2 Timothy 1. 8. Be not thou ashamed of the testimony
of our Lord, and of me his prisoner, but be thou partaker of the afflictions of
the Gospel* Ver. 11, 12, 13. Whereunto I am appointed a Preacher, and an
Apostle, and a Teacher of the Gentiles* for the which cause I also suffer these
things: Nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, etc.
Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me, etc. That good
thing which was committed to thee, keep, etc. How keep? not secretly only as a
Christian, but openly as a Preacher, though thou suffer for it as I do.

So must Titus, Chap. 2. 15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
authority. And such another charge have the Elders or Bishops from the Apostle
Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.

Qu. But is this also the case of those that succeeded them?

Ans. Yes, they ordained others into the same office, under the same Law of
constancy and fidelity, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things that thou have heard of me
among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able
to teach others also. Though still the Rulers were against it. And 2 Timothy 2.
24, 25. The servant of the Lord must be apt to teach. And what an example of
Preaching publicly and from house to house, night and day, does Paul give to
all the Ephesian Elders, Act. 20. even when Rulers were against it?

And again, I say, the practice and martyrdom of many, and the writings of
others do assure us that this was the judgment of Clemens Romanus, Ignatius,
Polycarp, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, and generally of all
the ancient Church, who were called as we are by men, and yet Preached to the
death against the will of the Magistrate.

And as Paul himself desires prayers for him, that utterance may be given him,
that he might open his mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel,
for which he was an Ambassador in bonds, that therein he might speak boldly as
he ought to speak, Ephesians. 6. 19, 20. So he often commends his fellow laborers
that accordingly served with him in the Gospel, though they were no Apostles,
Phil. 2. 22. and 4. 3. Romans 16, etc. And as he spoke not as a man-pleaser, 1
These. 2. 4. Gal. 1. 7, 8. and as Christ would have his word preached as on the
house top, Mat. 10. 7, 8. so this is done as a duty of fidelity in Ministers as
such; and therefore Christ adjoineth with this charge such words as these that
show the Rulers Prohibition, Verse. 16, 17, etc. 28. Behold I send you forth as
sheep in the midst of wolves, be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as
doves: but beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the Councils, and
they will scourge you in their Synagogues; and ye shall be brought before
Governors and Kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the
Gentiles, etc. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name sake, etc. But when
they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another. The disciple is not
above his master, etc. Fear them not therefore, etc. Fear them not which kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him, etc. These
are the next words to the command, What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye
in the light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye on the housetop.

Luke 9. 62. No man having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit
for the Kingdom of God. Both Christians as such, and Ministers as such, must
absolutely give up themselves to Christ, and not look back for fear of man,
whatever it cost them to proceed.

3. Mat. 9. 38. Luke 10. 2. Christ commands, Pray the Lord of the harvest to
send forth laborers into his harvest; viz. because the harvest is great, and
the laborers few. And this is every Christians daily prayer, when we say, Thy
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in Heaven. If it be our duty
daily to pray God to proportion the number of Laborers to the greatness and
necessity of the work; and that his Kingdom, and the obedience of his will, may
be by his appointed means promoted on earth, then it is our duty to do as we
pray, and not play the hypocrites with God, as St. James his reproved
hypocrites did as to the relieving of the poor; that said, Go and be clothed
and warmed, but gave them neither clothes nor food. For a called Minister to
pray, Lord send out more Preachers, and such as will promote thy Kingdom, and
persuade the world to do thy will; while he forbeareth to Preach himself,
because that man forbids him unwarrantably, this is as very a mocking of
God, as it would be by the rich and covetous to pray, Lord send some to relieve
the poor, when he gives them nothing of his abundance.

4. The Reasons of all these Commands for constant Preaching, are moral and
perpetual; for the work of the Ministry is to open men's eyes, and turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive remission of sins, and inheritance among the sanctified, etc. Act. 26.
17, 18. But this work for these ends belongs to us to this day; and therefore
these Reasons intimate that the like constancy is our duty as was theirs.

But before I proceed to our further Reasons, it will here be expected that I
say somewhat more to the grand Objection, viz.

These that you talk of were Infidel or Heathen Rulers; and will you compare
our with them? Or does it follow that Christian Rulers may not silence
Ministers, because they might not?

Answ. 1. No, far be it from me to compare our Governors with such: We
thankfully acknowledge it to be the Glory of England, that it has a King and
Magistracy that owneth Christianity; yea more, that when the whole world has
but three Protestant Kings (that I know of) we have not only one of the three,
but the chiefest; who keeps Religion in greater purity than the rest. But
that which I have all this while been proving is but this, That where and when
the Gospel is necessary to be preached, true Ministers of Christ may not
lawfully forbear, because the Rulers do forbid them, though they be not
Apostles, but called by the way of man.

2. A Christian Magistrate does no more Ordain and Degrade than other Rulers;
but he is the Governor of the Ministers, to keep them from neglecting or
abusing their Callings; and he may drive those out of his Dominions that will
not otherwise be kept from subverting faith or godliness, or that are proved
truly to do more hurt than good in the Land. And therefore if the King restrain
or banish those that are truly the plagues and destroyers of the Land, or of
Religion, or Loyalty, he shall never be blamed for it by us. Or if ever it be
the question only, Whether this man or that man be fittest to have his
countenance and maintenance, and to be by him allowed to preach, when only one
of the two is needful, we shall never speak against him for choosing according
to his judgment, as long as mere heretics, impious, or intollerably unable
ones are not chosen. But if many hundred worthy Ministers shall be forbidden to
Preach at a time and in a Land where many hundred thousand souls do woefully cry
out for help, as lying in damnable ignorance and sensuality, and ungodliness,
in this case we say, that no Rulers may forbid such Preaching.

3. The Objectors seem to intimate dangerous Doctrine, that if a King should
not be a Christian, or of the right Religion, he lost his power over the
Church, which is false, however maintained by the Papists. The Heathen and
Infidel Rulers had the Government of all their Subjects, Christians and
Apostles as well as others. They wanted aptitude to do it well, and therefore
some of them persecuted; But they wanted not Authority; a King loses not his
Authority, when ever he loses his aptitude to use it rightly. Christian Kings
only can rule the Church well, but others also are its authorized Rulers; and
there is no external coactive power at all but in the Kings or Magistrates, be
they Christian or Infidel.

4. Christ himself did not set up a Kingdom of this world, or worldly, nor
exempt himself from the Government of the Rulers. Nor did his Apostles exempt
themselves or the Church. Paul, Romans 13, etc. and Peter, call on all Christians
to honor the King, and to be subject to the higher powers for conscience sake.
Mark then in this how little our case does differ from the Apostles, when they
were forbidden to preach, not by Usurpers only, but by lawful Rulers, to whom
they professed conscientious subjection; and yet must obey God rather than
those very Rulers.

5. Christian Rulers are the Churches nursing Fathers; and have more obligation
than others to build it up, but no more power to pull it down. They have all
their power as Paul had his, For edification and not for destruction. It was
never referred to them to judge (as I have before said) whether there shall be a
Church, or a Christ, or a Ministry, or whether souls* shall be saved or damned;
or the Gospel Preached where it is necessary to Salvation, or not? But only by
whom, and in what order, which best furthereth men's Salvation, it shall be
Preached.

If a Magistrate as a Magistrate may not forbid necessary Preaching, much less
may a Christian Magistrate as Christian, who is more obliged to promote it.
This therefore alters not the case.

6. The Sanhedrin, and Herod, and other Jewish Rulers, had such real Authority
as Christ did not disown; of the same nature with Jehoshaphats and Hezekiahs.
If therefore these were not to be obeyed when they forbad necessary Preaching,
then lawful Rulers in that case are not to be obeyed.

7. The Arrian Emperors had lawful Power of coactive Government over the
Church; and yet the Orthodox Bishops never thought it their duty to cease
Preaching in Conscience of obeying their commands. (Though they were forced often
to quit their present Stations.) Let not any Cainite here say that I compare
our Rulers to Arrians. For I only argue, that if an Arrian Emperor had true
Authority, and yet when he thus abused it, was not to be obeyed by forbearing
to Preach; the same must be said of others that have authority, in case of the
like Prohibitions.

8. Christ settled Pastors over his Churches 300 years before there were any
Christian Princes or States. By which he showed, that though Princes are the
true Rulers of Pastors, yet Pastors are more necessary to the Being of the
Church, and to Salvation of the people, than Princes are; and that Pastors hold
not their office from Princes, nor at their will, (unless you think they had no
true power till Constantines reign.)

9. Magistrates may not hinder a sufficient number from entering into the
Ministry, (else the meaning of Christ must be, Pray the Lord of the harvest to
persuade Kings and Rulers to give leave to men to become laborers.) Therefore
they may not hinder a sufficient number from laboring when they are entered.

10. Magistrates cannot dispense with absolute lawful Vows to God (at least
about necessary duty.) This all Protestant Divines maintain in their Writings
against the Papists, who plead for the Popes power to dispense with Vows.) But
our entrance into the Ministry had the nature of an absolute lawful Vow, (and
was done by the Magistrates encouragement.) For in it we did solemnly devote
our selves to the Sacred office and work.

11. Magistrates are Christ's Officers and Servants, and have no power but from
him, and for him, (as the Justice and Constable are under the King.) Therefore
they have no power against him* Therefore they have no power to forbid the
necessary Preaching of the Gospel, (and where it is not necessary, we confess
their power.)

12. If the Magistrate might degrade Ministers, or absolutely forbid their
work, then it would follow, that one Prince has the Government of all other
Princes Dominions, or else that all Princes on earth must agree to the
degrading of a Minister. For it is fully proved by Divines of all parties,
except some of the Independents, that Ministers at their Ordination are (as
Christians at their Baptism) entered into a Relation to the Universal Church,
and not only to one particular Church. And therefore he that is removed from
one Church or Kingdom, is not removed from the Ministerial office, which
continues as toward an indefinite object. Yea, we are first in order of
nature related to the unconverted world, as we have capacity: Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them, will be Christ's Law to the end of the world And if
they cannot degrade, they cannot take away the power of exercising the office
statedly; but only suspend it for a time, or limit the exercise, or regulate it
by their governing power, on just occasions; and governing an office is not
nullifying or destroying it.

Obj But if the Magistrate may suspend them, and deny them liberty in his
dominions, then it is he, and not every Minister* that is to judge who deserves
such restraint.

1. If you speak of public judgment (which is the public decision of a
controverted cause) no doubt it is only the Magistrate that is Judge, in foro
civili: No Pastor may enter into the Judgment* seat, and judge his own cause.
But if you speak of a private judgment of discerning, every man's reason is the
discerner of his own duty; for he cannot do it without discerning it.

2. The Magistrate is to judge publicly, but not as he list, as left to his own
will; but as an officer of Christ under the regulation of his Laws, (as our
Judges are regulated by the Kings Laws.) The King may judge between an Infidel
and a Christian, whether Christ be the Son of God; but not indifferently as he
please; but only in the affirmative. He may judge if it become a public
Controversy, whether God shall be worshipped? whether he may be blasphemed?
whether there be a life to come? whether the Scripture be Gods word? and so,
whether there shall be a Ministry? whether Ministers shall preach in his
Dominions? or so many as is necessary to men's Salvation? But he is bound before
hand to judge only one way, and has no power to judge on the other side at all.
Else he might judge that men shall not be saved? and that Christ shall have no
Ministers or Church; and consequently be no Christ.

3. Yet if Rulers do judge amiss in any such cases, they are not by force of
arms to be resisted, though they are not to be obeyed.

Obj. By this pretense of a private judgment of discerning, you will set up two
Sovereigns, or make every man's conscience his King; and so the King having lost
his power over conscience* a zealous conscience will be the unruliest beast in
the world.

Answ. 1. In good sadness would you have men have a judgment of private
discerning, or not? If you would, all this concerns you as well as us. If
not, then no man must discern that it is his duty to obey the King rather than
an Usurper, or rather than to rebel against him. Such excellent assistance
would brutish principles give to Government! then men must not discern whether
to preach or be silent? or what to preach on? Nor whether to be drunk or sober?
chaste or unchaste? To think and speak well or ill? whether God should be
honored or blasphemed? or what Religion we should be of, Christians or
Infidels? Then only the King must be a man, and his subjects bruits, that must
use no reason; and so the King be made a herdsman to govern beasts instead of
men. And then what Counselors, Judges and Justices shall he have? and O then
what excellent Preaching shall the people hear! Absolute obedience is due only
unto God.

2. And as to what you say of Conscience, to bind conscience, that is, science,
is an improper expression; but as to that which is commonly meant by it, it is
one thing to bind a man's soul to make conscience of his duty, and another thing
to bind his soul to go against the conscience of his duty. Binding conscience
is an ambiguous word. We flatly affirm as well as you, That the Kings Laws do
bind the mind or soul (or Conscience if you will so call it) to a conscionable
performance of all his lawful commands; for nothing but cords and irons bind
the body without the soul; and he that obliges not the soul, obliges not the
man; and he that obliges not, rules not. As God binds by a primary
obligation as God, so Kings bind the mind by a secondary obligation, by the
power which they derive from God as men. I say, not only that God binds us in
conscience to obey the King, but that the Kings derived power enableth him to
oblige the soul in subordination to God; which is no more than to say that he
may make Laws and rule by them. But whether this shall be called a binding of
conscience, is only lis de nomine.

Conscience is sometime taken as largely as conscire; and so we are conscious
of our duty to the King. But in Theology it is usually taken more strictly, for
a man's judgment of himself as he stands related to the judgment of God. And so
when the very definition appropriateth Conscience to our relation to God, it
cannot so be subject to man.

3. Conscience is no King, no Competitor with the King, no Ruler of any man at
all (in a true proper sense.) It is but only a discerner of our duty, and not a
maker of it; a knower and applier of the Law, and not a Lawgiver. And is it
not fine reasoning to say, If a man must be the discerner of his duty to God
and the King, he can be no good subject?

4. And Conscience discerning duty to God, is it that is here to be orderly
distinguished from Conscience discerning duty to man? God and man are our
Governors; if we are not agreed which of them is the greater, stay a while,
and we shall be agreed. Conscience is but a discerner of our respective duty to
each of them; (or taken strictly and Theologically, of our duty to God only) so
that this is the question, Whether when a man is conscious of his duty to God,
he may omit it, because that man forbids it? Or when a man is conscious what
God forbids, he may do it if man command it? so that for man to bind
Conscience (if you will speak ineptly) to duty, is one thing; and for man to
bind us to go against conscience is another thing. For that is all one as to
bind us to do that which, as far as we can discern, is against Gods Law; and so
the issue of all is whether conscience of Gods command, or conscience of man's
command, is to be preferred? And this being the plain English of the case, is
it not a blessed time and land think you, when confident raw confused wits
shall by such questions as, Whether the King or Conscience be supreme, deceive
and mislead poor people in a maze, and confound them as to all Religion; when
an ordinary wit that had been but preserved by Humility and Catholicism, (or
freedom from faction) might easily have distinguished, and set them in the open
light?

13. It went for current in the Catholic Church, not only for the first 300
years, but long after there were Christian Emperors, that the people were to
choose their Pastors. Cyprians Epistle that earnestly pleads for the peoples
power and duty in this kind, and charge the guilt upon them if they forsake
not seducing and schismatical Pastors, is well known. The common practice of
the Churches also is known as well. And long after there were Christian
Emperors, though some Dignitaries, as Patriarchs, and a few great Bishops,
were obtruded on the people by the Emperors choice, when they could not agree
among themselves, yet the people constantly kept their former custom and
privilege, and chose all the ordinary Bishops and Pastors in conjunction with
the Presbyters. The Bishops sometimes chose alone who should be a Minister in
general (as the College of Physicians licenseth general Physicians.) But who
should be their own Pastors, was always, or usually at the peoples choice (with
the Ordainers), as every man chooses his own Physician.) See Blondels copious
Testimony de jure plebis in regimine Ecclesiastico, adjoined to Grotius his
Excellent Treatise, de Imperio sumar, potestat, circa sacra.

Now this being so, the old Christians never believed that the Emperor could
justly so frustrate their choices, as to make it unlawful by his prohibition,
for their Pastors to preach to them, when their Preaching was necessary to the
Churches good; nor that the Emperors were the only Judges of the necessity;
and that God and nature had given no power to themselves, to know what is
necessary, good and helpful, or unnecessary, bad or hurtful to themselves.

Obj. The sheep choose not their own shepherds, nor children their own
Schoolmasters.

Ans. 1. This is, as some call it, Phrase-divinity. Similitudes prove nothing
beyond the point of likeness. Sheep have not reason, and children have it not
in maturity and full use. 2. Are we grown better and wiser now than the
Churches all were for 600 years? or for the first 300 either? Why do men
pretend so much to antiquity, and cry out against novelty, who when interest
bids them do more than others, despise the judgment and example of the
Primitive ancient Church, as a ragged, fordid, infant-thing? 3. Man's nature
has laid the foundation of this order. It is not possible for the people to be
edified by Ministers, or worship God in their communion acceptably, against
their own wills. And therefore as their consent is of absolute necessity to
their benefit and salvation, so it is the more necessary to the just calling of
him that must profit them. For they are the likelier to consent to his Doctrine
and rule, when they have first consented to his relation; and so e contra, they
are the likelier to reject the guidance of him that was forced on them against
their wills.

Obj. But what divisions and heresies shall we have if all the people shall
choose their Pastors? and then they may bring in Heretics whether the
Magistrates will or not.

Ans. 1. Their choice is a matter of mutable convenience, but their consent is
a matter of necessity.

2. I say not that they alone must choose them or consent. Two or three Negative
wills, sine quibus non, in a case of great concernment, is safer than one
alone. Writings or treasures belonging to three parties kept in a chest, of
which every party has a lock and key, are safer than under a single lock. The
Ordainers have a negative voice, and so have the people, as to the relation of
the Pastors to themselves. And so has the Magistrate (under Gods Laws),
whether that man shall live or preach in his dominions.

3. And God in wisdom is pleased to lay all men's salvation or damnation more
upon themselves, and their own choice, than on the Kings; because it is
themselves that must have the everlasting joy or sorrow. And therefore so he
has done by all the actions and means that stand nearest to their own
Salvation.

4. And when we say the Ordainers and people conjunctly should choose their
Pastors, we still say that when they are chosen, they are under the Government
of the King.

5. Apply all your Objections to the case of a Physician to his Patients; it is
meet that all Physicians be under the Government of the King, and that he by
Laws restrain them from the abuse of their callings. And it is meet that the
College that can best judge, be the discerners who shall be a Licensed
Physician? But when all is done, it is not meet that any one be forced on the
sick without their own consent? And why? 1. Because their consent is necessary
to the use of the remedies. 2. Because it is themselves that are most concerned
in the event. 3. Because every man knows much of his own condition, which the
King does not know. Yet here you may as handsomely exclaim, What? shall every
woman, every boy, every sottish rustic and tradesman, have liberty to put his
life into the hands of women or foolish Empericks? what murdering of men by
medicine shall we then have? and what diminution of the Kings subjects. Ans.
But, 1. this is your error which confounds all, that you think the matters of
imperfect man in an imperfect world, can be done without any imperfection or
inconvenience; and then that you look only with one eye on your own side, and
cannot or will not see the far greater inconveniences on the other side; but
will cure an inconvenience with a mischief, and subvert the end and substance
to preserve your particular way of Order. What would follow on the other side,
if all men must have Physicians forced on them? Those empty fellows that could
make most friends, should be the seekers and finders of the place, (especially
if Physicians were made Lords, and had the honor and maintenance that Bishops
have.) And next, the people must be taught by these formalists, that it is not
for them to judge themselves what is good or bad for them, nor when to take
Physic, nor how much. And next they must be told, that it being an office of
Government as well as of skill, they must put their lives into his hand who
ever he be, that is the Physician of the place, and not go to others, as abler
men. O what work would these Orderers make!

If you here except against the aptness of the similitude, I will only ask you
now, 1. Whether the King is not as truly the Governor of his subjects as to
their lives, as he is as to their Salvation? Do not his subjects bodies and
lives belong to his care? 2. Is not every man as much concerned for his own
soul, more than the King is, or any other, as he is for his health or life?
Will not the Salvation or damnation be his own? 3. Is not every man's free*will
as much and more to be exercised for his salvation as for his health? You may
drench him by force as a horse for his health, (and therefore there is more
pretense for cogent Laws): But so you cannot for his soul. These things are
plain to them that are willing to see; but not to them whose interest will not
give them leave, but like the Ephesian Craftsmen, must cry up Diana, and cry
down Paul, to save their Trades. And yet I still maintain that the King is to
afford his Subjects all help in his power, for their souls as well as for their
bodies.

IV. OUR Fourth main Reason why we dare not cease our Ministry, is, Because we
shall sin against Nature it self, even the great and radical Law of Love, and
shall be guilty of murdering men's souls. And because Magistrates cannot
dispense with the great and necessary Laws of Nature, we put them all into one
for brevity.

1. If we were Lay men, yet charity would naturally oblige us, to do our best
to save men's souls, in a way that does not greater hurt* Deny this, and you
deny the master-points of natural obligation, and are unfit to dispute about
things indifferent. And the judgment of the ancient Church, (as the case of
Origin and other Teachers and Catechists at Alexandria, as well as that of
Frumentius and Edesius do witness) is flat against you* and so is the common
judgment of Divines, both Protestants and Papists, who use to cite these
instances to prove that in some case Laymen may be public Teachers. But if
they might not in Churches (lest they seem usurpers) yet in other places they
may do it, when necessity requires it, and so they exceed not their abilities
in their undertakings.

2. But being once consecrated as Ministers to Christ, we are now under a
double Law of diligence; the Law of Nature, and the positive Law of the
Ministry; (as a Father sins against the Law of Nature and Love, and against
the positive Laws of his Relation, if he famish his Children.)

And here we must take into consideration, 1. That a soul is more precious than
a body, and a man's salvation or damnation is a thousand times more than his
life or death. 2. That yet the murder of men's natural life is a sin so great,
that no man has power to allow us in or justify. 3. That Love and the
expressions of it are so very great duties, that it is called, The fulfilling
of the Law; and according to it the process and doom of men's final judgment is
described in Mat. 25. It is for not feeding, not clothing, not visiting, etc.
that men perish; and not feeding and saving souls is worse. 4. That murder of
body or soul may be committed by Privative means, as truly as by Positive. He
that provideth not for his own, and his family, has denied the faith, and is
worse than an Infidel. The Father that famisheth his Children, murdereth them,
as well as he that cuts their throats. And if Ezekiel ( Chap. 18. 33.) etc. had
so strict a charge of the people as Gods watchman, that their blood should be
required at his hands if he were silent; though we are no Prophets, we are
called by the ordinary way (as the Priests then were) to as real a charge. So
that their damnation may be charged on us if we be silent, whoever forbids us,
when our Preaching is necessary. And when in our thoughts we compare the
peoples lying for ever in Hell, with our lying in prison for a little time, or
lying under displeasure or reproach, O how vastly different is the case! If you
your selves believe not such a state of impenitent souls hereafter, and that
convincing and converting teaching, is needful to prevent it, give over your
callings, and lay not claim to Tyths, and Glebes, and Lands, and Lordships, for
a needless work. But if you do believe it, judge then of our case as men that do
believe it. Suppose those damned souls were now crying out against us, Why did
you not teach us, and call upon us, and warn us, that we might not have come to
this place of torment? and we should answer them. The Magistrates forbad us.
would this answer seem wise and honest to your selves, if you did but see the
things you hear of?

Obj. But the Magistrate may choose the objects of your charity, and also he may
regulate it: And so the Law forbids you to relieve the wandering poor;
Charity in general is necessary; but what way it shall be used in, whether high
ways, or Bridges, or building* Churches, etc. the Magistrate may determine.

Ans. There are more things go for indifferent with some men, than Ceremonies.
Charity in general without any determinate object or way of expression, is
nothing. It is but a Logical name. And as for the objects, some are to our
charity of standing necessity, and so are some expressions of it; and some
other acts of charity are about mutable circumstances to be governed by men;
that is, the Universal Laws of the Universal Sovereign, have predetermined of
some, and not left them as mutable to the Laws of men. It is not in our
judgment an indifferent thing, nor alterable by the will of Princes, whether
Parents shall nourish their Children, or whether Children shall supply their
Parents wants if able? Nor whether we shall give food to him that is dying
through famine? Nor whether we shall seek to save men's lives from fire or
water, or other dangers? Otherwise all the charge against the damned at the day
of Judgment, described Mat. 25. might be answered in a word, and Christ's mouth
be stopped, by saying, Rulers forbad us to feed thee, to clothe thee, to visit
thee in thy members. He that may not command me to murder the innocent by
action, may not command me to do it by omission or privation; except in case
that the public good or safety, or the lives of many will be hazarded by my
saving the life of one. It is not to us a thing indifferent whether a man or
many thousand men, be saved or damned. Nor is it in man's power to warrant us to
forbear that means that is really necessary to men's Salvation, according to
Gods ordinary way of working.

2. We fully grant that the Magistrate may regulate acts of Charity, that is,
he may govern us in them for the better promoting of their ends. But he may not
hinder them on that pretense, or destroy the end. I will obey the Law that
forbids me to relieve a wandering beggar, if really he be not in danger of
death for want of food; but if he be ready to die at my door, I will disobey
the Law, except in case that the saving of that one man's life would destroy
many, or hinder a greater good. If the Law make one in every Parish an Overseer
of the poor, and forbid all other relief but by that Overseer; and either
through the number of the poor, or his own disability or negligence, he
relieveth not one of twenty, or at least so poorly, that twenty, or ten, or two
to one are in danger of famishing, I will disobey that Law, and relieve them as
far as I am able, though I go to Goal for it, and be voluminously railed at as
a Schismatic or Rebel.

Yea more, if the poor be idiots, foolish, proud and surly, and will rather
famish than beg relief of their Overseer, I will take my self as guilty of
their death, if I relieve them not when I am able; and if I think their folly
to be my excuse, I shall be deceived.

And here I cannot but confess my dissent from the Ecclesiastical Politician in
the case of Scandal, Page 230, 231. I do not believe that the Schools
distinction of Scandal into datum and acceptum, is apparently false and
impertinent, and is the main thing that has perplexed all discourses of this
Article: Much less that all the obligations of scandal proceed purely from that
extraordinary height of charity and tenderness, of good nature, etc. Nor yet
that if it proceed from humor, or pride, or wilfulness, or any other vicious
principle, then is the man to be treated as a peevish and stubborn person; and
no man is bound to part with his own freedom, because his neighbor is froward
and humourous, etc. I perceive by many such passages as these, that we differ
in Doctrinals as well as in Ceremony, from some that are for our suffering; yea
that indeed we are not of the same Religion: For love is the life of our
Religion. And our love is not not so limited and narrow a kind of love, nor so
feeble and impotent as this here described; much less do we number it with
things indifferent, or that are left to our liberty, or with those that some
call either works of Supererogation, or of Evangelical perfection, as answering
to counsels and not to commands. We are not ashamed of our judgment in this
point, whoever shall account it heresy or error, we hold that it is our duty
to love our neighbors as our selves; and that this is not an act of
extraordinary charity (unless as the malice of uncharitable men does eventually
make and denominate it extraordinary.) But that it is essential to all true
saving love, and common to every true member of Christ that shall be saved. We
believe that this love must be extended to the proud and peevish, and unto our
very enemies; and therefore we pray (more conformably to the Liturgy than such
Conformists) that God will forgive our enemies, persecutors and slanderers, and
turn their hearts. Accordingly it is part of our Religion, that we are obliged
to do good to the proud and peevish, as well as others; yea unto all men to the
utmost of our power; except those who by Law are taken out of our care, by
being destined to death for their crimes, whose bodies we may not endeavor to
save, but their souls are as much under our necessary duty as others; we hold
that even a Traitor, Murderer or Felon, going to the Gallows, must be so far
loved, pitied and helped, that we must do much more than forbear a thing
indifferent to save their souls. For we long ago received Paul's opinion, that
we should rather choose never to eat flesh while we lived, than to hinder their
Salvation for whom Christ died. We believe very confidently, that if a proud or
peevish man were cutting his own throat, or hanging or drowning himself, that
by an ordinary obligation common to men, we are bound in charity to do our best
to save his life, to cut the rope, to pull him out of the water, though we lost
for it the liberty of a lawful game, or feast, or rest, yea, though it must
cost us dear. And we believe that if we do not this, we do not only fail of an
extraordinary height of charity, but that we are murderers; and that we do not
only cross the tenderness of good nature, but common humanity; we cannot deny
but we take him for a beast, and worse than an Infidel, that will not only
famish his family, but stand by and let them cut their own throats, if he can
but say, they are stubborn, proud and peevish, or drunk; or that will see his
neighbors drown or hang themselves, if they do it in pride, or peevishness, or
stubbornness, rather than he will forsake his liberty in a thing indifferent.
And therefore it is contrary to our Religion to sell a soul (much more many
thousands) for a Ceremony. We take the sixth Commandment to mean, Thou shall
not murder the good or the bad, the patient or the peevish by commission or by
omission. And as much as Souls are more worth than Bodies, and everlasting life
than temporal, so much the greater sin do we take it for, to be the murderers
of Souls by omission, than of Bodies. And that it will be an insufficient
excuse for omissive soul-murdering, to say, He was peevish, and I should have
parted with my freedom. Could we once think that doing no harm is all our
necessary Religion, and that doing good is only the work of an extraordinary
height of charity, then we could be in this of another mind (and could think a
stone or tree more Religious than a mortal Saint.) But we have not so learnt to
be Religious.

2. And indeed we think that this opinion would almost excuse the whole world
from works of charity to any, at least except Idiots and Infants. For (to
confess all our cross opinions freely) we deny not but that we hold the
Doctrine of Original sin as inherent in all the seed of Adam; and we must have
pardon in our Nonconformity for Conformity so far to the Scriptures and the
Articles and Doctrine of the Church of England, and of the Universal Church.
And therefore we hold that the whole nature of man is corrupted from the womb
with some vicious Principle; yea more than so, with the particular Principles
of pride, humor, and stubbornness, and peevishness. And therefore that
according to this rule, which we dissent from, all the world should be suffered
to be hanged and damned for ever, rather than a Conformist should lose a game
at Chess, or a cup of Sack, or abate a Ceremony. Because if it proceed from
humor, pride or peevishness, or any other vicious principle -- no man is bound
to part with his own freedom, because his neighbor is froward and humourous.

And we hold, that there are few men, or none, that have lived so innocently,
but that (if Original sin were denied) they have by practice contracted some
vicious principles, even of pride, and humor, and frowardness. And we hold
that it was to cure such viciated souls, and such principles, that Christ came
into the world, and that he made the Gospel, and instituted the Ministry; and
that we are workers under Christ in this work; and that this seeking and saving
of that which is lost, even of the proud and froward, and humor some, and
peevish, is the very employment of our office. And that none of these are that
blasphemy of the Holy Ghost that makes sin unpardonable and uncurable. And
that though dogged hearing us, and swinish contempt of the Gospel it self, may
excuse us from further importunity with some, and allow us to shake off the
dust off our feet against them; yet so will not every vicious principle, nor
the frowardness and humor here described. Nor yet will a particular humor or
peevishness allow us to neglect the souls of them, that in the main have
received the Gospel of Salvation. I confess we are of the number of them that
mourn for the reproach of those pitified Churches, where the Pastors are of
these opinions, and think that if all the Children of Christ's family be but
peevish and froward, the Nurses may let them all sin and be damned, and not
part with any of their freedoms to cure them, or to save them. Were I also of
this opinion, I should not stick to make merchandise of souls, and to sell an
hundred for a Benefice, and twenty thousand for a Bishopric, nor to give over
Preaching to prevent my suffering, were fouls so contemptible, and of so little
value.

And consequently we think that the School-distinction of Scandal given and
taken, is not so false and impertinent as is here said. The sense of the
distinction is, that the fault is sometimes in the giver, and sometimes only in
the taker. Scandal being a snare, a trap, a stumbling block, or a temptation to
sin; we think there are several sorts of scandal: First, Scandal given is by
actions otherwise sinful (for its no wonder if one sin be a temptation to
another) or by actions sinful only in this. And that scandal is, 1. When the
action otherwise lawful is purposely intended as a snare or temptation. 2. When
it is not so intended but has a strong natural tendency in it self to tempt,
and being unnecessary, is the effect of great inadvertency, carelessness,
rashness, and want of love to others souls. But scandal taken and not given,
(that is, not culpably given) is, when it is either from a necessary duty of
ours, or from a thing so harmless as that there is no probability that it
should be a temptation to any but those that go out of their way to seek for
matter of temptation to themselves, by an extraordinary perverseness. We think
it no false distinguishing to say, that it is one thing to lay a trap or dig a
pit purposely for men to fall in; and another thing rashly and carelessly to dig
a pit and cover it, to catch wild beasts in, in the common highway, or very
near it; and another thing to dig a pit quite out of all ordinary passage of
men, where yet a drunkard, or one that will seek a pit to leap into, may
possibly find it. Scandalum datum is that which charity and prudence bind men
carefully to prevent; and Scandalum acceptum is that which arises not from any
omission of the duty of him from whom it is taken. But more of this anon. We
have told you our Religion, but we are not now disputing against yours. If the
naming of such opinions be confutation enough, the owners have confuted them
themselves. If it be not, let them pass. Our work at present is only Apology,
(though we are tainted too with the disputing disease.) And so much for our
Reasons for Preaching Christ's Gospel against men's will. The sum of all is this,
It is an indispensible duty lying on us as men and Ministers, by the obligation
of Gods Law of Charity, and as Ministers, also by the obligation of our own
Vows or self-dedication at our Ordination, to do our best in the exercise of
all our talents, Humane, Christian, and Ministerial, to seek to save the
peoples souls, and so to preach, or teach, and exhort them in the manner which
most conduces thereto, when and where our teaching is truly and evidently
necessary. But now in the Kings Dominions our teaching is to these ends truly
and evidently necessary, therefore it is our duty so to teach.

III. BEcause many of your contrary Reasonings are already answered before, I
will here annex the rest, that they may not have the disadvantage of too great
a distance.

1. Obj. Your own preciseness and censoriousness makes the common people seem
mostly ignorant and profane to you; and then you pretend a necessity of your
Preaching, when you do but feign it, by setting your selves more above your
neighbors than there is cause.

Ans. 1. I confess that many of the Separatists are truly guilty of what you
here object. For when they have Unchurched whole Parishes of men whom they know
not, nor ever heard speak for themselves, we that have come after them have
found abundance of the people much better than they imagined. But one error or
extreme will not justify another: Remember that we are not now talking of men's
qualifications for visible Communion in the Church, but of their necessity of
being taught. And we censure none beyond such cogent evidence as is not in our
power now to be ignorant of. I beseech you deal openly with us, and answer us
these few Questions, and all the matter will be ended.

1. If men do not know who Christ is, or what he came into the world for, nor
what he has done for us, nor what the Holy Ghost is, nor what he is to do for
us, nor what a Savior or a Sanctifier is, nor what is the plain sense of most
Articles of the Creed, or Petitions in the Lords-prayer, have such men need of
Teaching to save their souls, or not?

2. If men follow the world eagerly all the week, and talk of it on the Lords
day, and love not to hear any talk of another world, or how they must be
pardoned and saved; but swear, and curse, and rail, and many of them are
drunkards, gluttons, or fornicators; and if they never teach their children or
families, or pray with them any more than Infidels, and show no Religion but
going to Church, or perhaps sometimes say the Lords-prayer and the Creed
without understanding; and if we advise them to prepare for death, and the life
to come, and tell them the need of a Savior, a Sanctifier, and of faith,
repentance, and a holy life, they tell us, that they will trust God with their
souls, and not trouble their heads with things so high; they shall speed as
well as their neighbors. Have these men's souls any need of teaching?

3. If any of the people so much love their drunkenness and fornication, and
other gross sins, that they hate the Minister that seriously, though gently,
reproves them, and like Cain would see their brothers blood if he offer God a
more acceptable sacrifice than themselves, or slander and hate the most
conformable Minister that is but strict and seriously Religious, and is talking
against them on all occasins; have these men's souls any need of exhortation, or
not?

4. If many of the people be weak in judgment that mean well, and have only a
glimmering confused knowledge of most of the greatest matters of Religion; and
though we hope well of their sincerity, they have abundance of mistakes and sad
miscarriages in their lives, and are inclined to most of the real errors which
the Debate maker recites, and in danger of being carried into any opinions,
which are offered by men who by nearness or plausibility of persuasion, come to
them with any great advantage, yea and are like to be troublers of the Church,
have these men need to be taught or not? Let us but be once agreed, that the
true belief, consent and performance of our Baptismal Covenant is necessary
ordinarily to men's salvation, and that without faith it is impossible to please
God; and that except a man be regenerate of the Spirit as well as of water, and
except he be converted and become as a little child, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and that he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of
his; and that they that are in the flesh cannot please God, because the carnal
mind is enmity against him; and that without holiness none shall see the Lord;
and that if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; and how can
they hear without a Preacher, etc. Agree but to this, or any of this, and sure
our case is fair for a good issue. Mark 16. 16. Heb. 11. 6. Joh. 3. 3, 5, 6.
Mat. 18. 3. Romans 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 13. Heb. 12. 14. 1 Cor. 4. 3. Romans 10, etc.

5. And for the matter of fact, may a man that has conversed among such people
all his lifetime, and been familiar with them daily, and that can hardly get a
servant into his own house that is much better, or hardly in a years time get a
servant to understand his Baptism, or a quarter of his Creed; or a Minister
that has made it his work every week to discourse about these matters with all
the families in his Parish, may such a man believe his own ears and eyes, or
may be not? If not, he is capable of being a Papist, and believing
Transubstantiation: If yea, the business is determined so far as his
acquaintance reaches.

6. And if the same man live in many Counties, and travel over most of the
land, and find most places, as far as he can perceive, to be worse than the
Parish which he had thus tried? and if all the painful Pastors that he talks
with, that ever tried it, and all the most judicious Christians of all
Countries, tell him that their experience is the same; yea, if the great
Divines of the Church have long made the same complaints in their Printed
Sermons, may any of all these be believed or not?

7. If at this day the Divines that are angry with us for Preaching, do make
almost as sad complaints even of the people that we Preach to our selves, or of
the Puritans or Nonconformists: and if the most grave and reverend of the
Conformable Divines do now in their Sermons to the people, describe them as
aforesaid, and much worse; yet may we not believe that they have need of
teaching?

If all this, and all that is said be nothing with you, we have nothing to say.
But if it be, we are agreed, or at least you yield the cause to us, that know
these things.

A man of fourscore years old in the Town where I was Teacher, being asked what
God the Father was, said, He was a good man in Heaven. And being asked what God
the Son was? said, He was the Sun, and pointed to the Sun that shined. And
being asked what the Holy Ghost was? said, the Moon. A wise and worthy
neighbour-Minister told me, That the oldest man that ever he knew, judged about
sixscore (having fled thither in his youth from another Country for some
crimes, and the old men of the Parish never knew him but an old grey-headed
man) being in sound understanding before his death, and being asked by this
Minister, Whither he thought to go when he died? answered, To the Churchyard I
believe they will carry me. And when he was asked what he thought would become
of his soul? he answered to this purpose, as not knowing whether he had any
soul or not; but if he had, whether it would go to the Moon, or what would
become of it, it was not for him to know.

The Parish from which I was sent to Goal, (for exhorting them, and not
swearing) can witness, that they have heard their ancient grave and reverend
Pastor, and a Dean, etc. tell them in the Pulpit, That he thought they were all
Heathens, and there was no Religion amongst them, and despairing of Catechizing
them, (because some came not two or three days) gave it over many years ago. To
say nothing whether some were well Excommunicated for not Communicating with
such a Church of Heathens, I only ask, Whether such a people had no need of
teaching?

Obj. We grant that all have need enough of Teaching: But what can your
teaching do more than other men's? You think so highly of your selves, as if men
cannot be saved unless they be taught by you? Do not we teach them the saving
truth?

Answ. 1. This is sufficiently answered before: The best Schoolmaster in
England that has a thousand, four thousand, ten thousand Scholars, will have
need of help; will you say thus in any other case? Why may not one Physician or
Apothecary in a City, one Soldier in an Army, one Seaman in a Ship, one
Magistrate in London, etc. serve turn as well as many? Many may do more than
one alone; and it is not men's anger that will hide the disparity of grace or
abilities, by which one man is fitter than another.

2. Judge but by your own experience: Do you not see that the people are yet
ignorant and uncured? Has your Ministry done that which makes the help of
others needless, yea or no? If it have not, why should you hate assistance, or
think that help will do no good? If a Physician have tried his best remedies,
and yet his Patient is visibly uncured, he will sure be willing that another
shall try also, and do his best, rather than leave his Patient desperate.

3. But if you are but willing to know the truth, you may be presently thus
convinced, that it is not as Nonconformists at all that we are followed or
valued by those that I am now speaking of, or that we expect success with. In
one of those Parishes where we complain of raw and lifeless Preaching, let but
a clear, convincing, able Teacher come and Preach, and let not the common
people know whether he be Conformable or not, and you shall see that they make
as great a difference as I am talking of* Let him be a Conformable man also,
and let them know it, except those partial persons that I am not now speaking
of, the common hearers will applaud him above the Parson of the Parish that is
cold and dry. This differencing of Preaching among your selves shows, why it
is that the common people do so willingly, where they have liberty, hear the
Nonconformists. Alas, they have no prejudice against you antecedently, nor no
such mind for Nonconformity as to be partial for them, (for they know not well
what it is); why is it in London that the Congregations are so crowded, where
Bishop Wilkins, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Tillotson, Mr. Wells, Dr. Outram, Dr.
Gifford, Dr. Horton, and such other Conformists Preach? The soul of man will
have a rational gust, and will not think all that they hear to be equally
convincing, clear, effectual and good, when men have done all that they can
against it.

3. Obj. We confess the peoples necessity, and that there is a difference of
Teaching: But your Teaching will not supply this necessity; yea, it does more
harm than good.

1. Some of you preach sedition and faction. 2. And others of you disaffect the
people toward the Parish Ministers. It is you that have put all the scruples
into their heads, and then you pretend that their weakness and partiality does
necessitate your Preaching. How came it into their heads to think ill of
Bishops, and to scruple Ceremonies, and Corporation-Oaths, but by you? 3. And
when you have done, you rather cherish all this, than plainly seek to cure them
of it. Go preach for Conformity, and you may have liberty.

Ans. Whether all this be true or not (being matter of fact) and because it
has been published of my self by name, and because they judge of the rest of
the Puritans and Presbyterians (as they will needs call them) by me, I take it
to be my duty as for my self and others, to answer this more Historically than
otherwise I should think convenient.

1. Is it justice to charge men with seditious Preaching that never were
accused or convict of any such Doctrine before any competent Judge? If any man
preach sedition, heresy or schism, convict him, and let him suffer for it. The
Law is open, and the Judges are not partial for Nonconformists. And you may
have more witnesses against us by how much the more publicly we are allowed to
Preach.

2. Do you think that men cannot differ from your opinions, unless we put it
into their heads? I know not how to consute you but by experience: 1. I must
needs assure you, that upon my experience above thirty years, the people are
much proner to Separation, and to think very hardly of the Liturgy and
Ceremonies, than the Ministers be. Insomuch that it has been my wonder many a
year to observe it, that when we have but awakened the Consciences of ignorant
and sensual persons to repentance, shortly, e're we are aware, they fall on
scrupling Ceremonies, and disliking the Liturgy, when we know of none that put
them on it. But the openest cause that ever I could observe (if you can bear
public Historical truth) is this: As soon as they repent of an ungodly worldly
life, and begin to have serious thoughts of another world, they are apt in
their ignorance to judge of things by persons; and when they are convinced of a
great difference between a life of faith and of sense, and between the sober,
righteous, godly, and the intemperate, unrighteous and ungodly, they presently
mark what way these several people go in the matters of Worship which are past
their own understandings. And when they have seen in most places the deboist
and vicious people to be great haters of strictness, and so of Puritans, and of
Religious Exercises in any way but by forms, and see them so much for Bishops
and Common Prayer, and then see some severities exercised against those that
have lived most strictly, they presently suspect that Bishops are the
suppressors of the most Religious, and the encouragers of those that need
reformation, and that Forms and Ceremonies are but the means to quiet the
ungodly in their want of the truth and life of Godliness, and to make them
think themselves religious. These are the ways of the peoples receiving
prejudice against you, as far as ever I could discern, which I write not in
approbation, But Historically. And I ever found that those Bishops and Pastors
that most encouraged serious Godliness, such as Bishop Hall, Potter, Davenant,
Morton, etc. were reverenced by the people. And the names of Jewel, Abbot,
Grindal, Parry, Babington, Pilkington, and many more such, are still venerable
among the Puritans, as you call them.

But I cannot speak so certainly of any ones case as my own: I will give you
the true Narrative of my Education, and leave it to you to judge, what put the
Principles of Nonconformity into my head. I was never bred up under any
Nonconformable Minister; from the age of six till ten, I had four
Schoolmasters, Curates of the place successively, that read Common Prayer; two
never Preached, the other two seldom; but the two more learned drank themselves
into beggary and left us. I came then to live at the habitation of my
ancestors. There I fonnd one Sir William Rogers about fourscore, Parson of two
places twenty miles distant, that never Preaehed (they told me) in all his
life; when his sight failed, he said the Common Prayer by rote; and he that
read all the Scriptures was a poor day-labourer of the place; and the next year
when he gave over, a Tailor read it. After him a pretended Minister, Grandchild
to the Parson, took the whole Cure, but never Preached once. The Son of the old
Parson also was there sometimes a Minister, that is a Reader, and a famous
debauched Stageplayer. At this time a Son of the next Neighbor turned
Minister, and exceeded them so far that he undertook to Preach, and had a
Benefice a great way off, whence after many years scandal he fled upon a
discovery that one of the forementioned had forged his Orders. The next Curate
(that did all that there was done) and my Schoolmaster, was another Neighbors
Son, who being set to be a Lawyers Clerk drunk himself into such necessity that
he was fain to turn Curate. When ever he came in drunk, we knew it by our
smarts, being sure to be whipped. He never Preached in my time there but once,
which was the terriblest Sermon that ever I heard, to hear a man drunk in the
Pulpit (or else he had not ventured to Preach) to talk a deal of stark nonsense
upon so terrible a Text, as Mat. 25. Come ye blessed and go ye cursed. Our next
Parson was no Nonconformist neither. And then I was taken into the tuition of a
grave and eminent man, of high esteem among great men, who expected verily to
have been a Bishop. He loved me well; but so far frustrated my expectation,
that in almost two years time he neither read to me, nor instructed me one
hour, but discoursed usually of the unlearned factious Puritans. In his study
(which was all my help) I remember not one Greek Book but the Testament, nor
one Father but Austin de Civitate Dei, nor any of the Councils but ordinary
English and Neoterick Divines; and he studied little all the year but Bishop
Andrews Sermons. Hitherto I had no Nonconformists Principles. And if you
suspect my own Father, it is enough to say, that he only read the Scriptures in
his house, and scarcely any other Book, and I never heard any prayer (out of
the Pulpit) but a form till I was about seventeen years of age. But because my
Father would not drink and swear with them, and restrained us from the
dancing-place on the Lord's Day that we might read the Scriptures that while,
and sometimes would speak of God and Scriptures, and the life to come, he was
by the drunkards and rabble of the place reviled by the names of Precisian and
Puritan, as bitterly as any Nonconformist now, though he never scrupled any
point of Conformity, nor spoke against it. And hearing all the drunkards revile
that which I knew to be good, as Puritanism, I liked that name no whit the
worse. But lest you think that the experience of such Priests did disaffect me,
I shall add, that though there was another such an old Reader that never
Preached in the same Parish at another Church, and very many Parishes round
about us had the like, yet three neighbour-Ministers, venerable for age, (dying
two above eighty years a piece, and the third near it) and very worthy godly
Conformists, who were my most profitable acquaintance, did keep me from the
principles of Nonconformity. Of whom (though they had all much rather have been
rid of it, and so were before they died) one was a learned great disputer for
Conformity, and was my chief Tutor, and did so engage me in reading Dr.
Burgess, Mr. Sprint, Bishop Downham for Episcopacy, Mr. Hooker, etc. that I was
not at all in doubt of the matter; and with this satisfaction I was Ordained
and did subscribe. But I had never read any thing on the other side, nor ever
read the Book of Ordination, nor exactly weighed what I subscribed to: But
being satisfied that Episcopacy was the only Government, and that Ceremonies
and Liturgy were lawful, I thought I was not bound to seek after objections and
difficulties, and to fill my head with scruples, but to go on quietly as I
begun. But when I came into another County, I met with diverse private poor men
that were very zealous Nonconformists, against whom I was so forward a
Disputer, that the first Controversy that ever I wrote on, was against a
Minister of one of theirs, which condemned Kneeling at the Sacrament, which I
confuted so as to silence the opponents. (Mr. Paybody having fully satisfied me
in that.) But yet they brought me to resolve to read the writings of both sides
impartially, especially Dr. Ames his Fresh Suit; so that setting upon the
Controversy again with my most serious studies, I settled in the judgment which
I never since changed, about Liturgy and Ceremonies, expressed after in my 5
Disput. of Church Government; but still I was absolutely for Episcopacy as it
is with us, till 1640. when the new Canons came out with the etc. Oath, and
that was the very thing that occasioned such Nonconformity as I am guilty of at
this day. For when my mind was before quiet, in the way that I was in, (being
at Bridgnorth, where six Parishes were under an Ordinary and Court of their
own, exempt from the Bishops Jurisdiction, so that I never used Cross or
Surplice, having liberty to forbear them), when I saw that I must swear, the
reverence of an Oath excited me to an exacter scrutiny. I thought, as in
subscribing I wrote but my opinion, which did not provoke me to so strict a
search, so when I must swear, That the Government by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, etc. was that which ought to be, and that I would never consent to
change it; Without so much as excepting, If the King himself would have a
change; it was time for me well to understand what I did. For I supposed that
he that feared not an Oath, feared not God; and that he that would venture on
perjury, would stick at no sin in the world as sin, and was unfit for humane
converse. Whereupon we appointed a meeting of the Ministers about it; and Mr.
Cartwright (afterward of York) disputing for the Oath, did not satisfy me,
but I resolved now to hear what both sides said, before I would bind my self by
an Oath for all my life ensuing. Whereupon I got Gersom Bucer de Regimine
Eccles. and Altar Damascen. and Paul Bains Diocesans Trial, and Parker de
Polit. Eccles. and others. And on the other side Saravia, and Bilson, and
Andrews, besides Hooker and Downham before mentioned. And the effect of my most
impartial study was, that there is an Episcopacy of venerable antiquity, and
desirable in the Church, if not of Divine Institution; but so far unlike the
present frame of the English Hierarchy, that they are neither the same, nor yet
consistent; as I expressed my thoughts in the foresaid Disputes.

And thus I have told you who put these scruples into my head. Had you not
driven me to swear, I had never been like to have so scrupled. And I am
confident if men were not driven so much to subscribe and swear as they are at
this day, and their Consciences thus awakened to search, and scrupulosity, but
the Agenda of Religion might be only Agenda, and the doing of them might serve
the turn, you would have had much fewer scruplers and Nonconformists.

But you will ask, How came those Laymen to scruples, whom I before mentioned, if
not from Ministers? I must still answer you Historically. There were but two
Nonconformists in all those Countries then. One was one Mr. Atkins, my
neighbor, who would never talk either for it or against it, but almost always
talk so seriously of Heaven, and a Heavenly life that you could scarce get him
to talk much of any thing else. The other was that most excellent Disputant
John Ball; to whom some of the men that I speak of went purposely to be
strengthened by him against some arguments used by the Conformists. And he
perceiving their humor to be set toward faction and Ceremonious disputes, did
so School them, and rebuke their factious humor, that they would never come at
him more. And I my self still perceived in some of the younger hotter sort, so
much inclination to censoriousness, and siding and self conceit, that I almost
still opposed them when we met, and set my self to repress their confidence,
and to bring them to better thoughts of the Conformists. And so much to that
part of your charge, that it is we that put these scruples into their heads,
when I confess, I think, It is you.

But you chide us because we persuade them not to conformity?

Ans. Either you mean so much of Conformity as we can conscionably yield to our
selves, or that which we judge our selves to be unlawful. The later no sober man
can expect from us till our own judgments are changed. And verily it must be
reasoning that has more cogent evidence than yet you have showed us, that must
do that (though for confidence and contempt of dissenters we desire no more in
you) We are men as well as you, and we study as hard as you, and though you
deny it, we think as impartially. And which side has more to byas them, is not
hard to judge. You think we are biased by men's applause. But I pray you forget
not (for here it concerns you esse memores) what a few contemptible people
you think it is whose applause does byas us? And that it is not the richer or
greater sort, or the greater number as you think. And remember, if we were
hypocrites, how poor and dry a reward we should have in such men's estimation.
And that poverty and reproach, and jealousies, and voluminous defamations, and
Prisons, are put with these poor men's estimation into the Scales to byas us.
And whether any man in England believe, that Bishoprics and Lordships, Honor
and Wealth, with the reverence of so great and so many as you suppose do
reverence you, are not a stronger byas to sway an hypocrite to betray his
Conscience, than ours is? Alas, that obloquy should live upon such airy food,
and uncharitableness glory of so thin a cloak!

But if it be separation and things that we judge unlawfully, that we should
unteach the people to do you service, or to serve the Church, I will not say as
they that tell you, that it is somewhat hard usage to persuade us by poverty,
and prisons, and silencing, to lose our friends to gratify them that thus
abuse us; and to take pains to exchange kindness for cruelty, and to strive
hard to leap out of the ashes into the fire. But I will tell the truth to the
world and you; we do what you desire of us, or reasonably can desire. I
constantly Preached till the Goal restrained me, against Separation, and much
more against sedition and rebellion. We do it openly and plainly. I am the man
that am reproached in Print for want of this. And the same hand so far
justified me, as before the Kings Majesty, and Lords, and before the Right
Reverend Bishops, to say of me and my Disputes of Church Government, about the
Ceremonies, etc. No man has written better of these things. And can we speak
louder than by the Press? Or can they prove that we preach not as we write! O
wonderful! that ever the world can degenerate to so much unrighteousness as to
condemn men upon such defamations as these! Besides that Book, many a year
before and since, I have still written to the same purpose: I have Preached to
the same purpose. But thinking it more seasonable in private Conference, I have
an hundred, and an hundred times more pleaded for the like in private. And my
Disputes before mentioned are accused by many offended persons, as having made
a hundred Ministers at least conformable. And had they not been written in the
very height of Usurpation before the Kings return, I should have been taken for
the vilest temporizer. This is our course; and yet if wrath and partiality, and
ill will, do but dream that we do infect the people, and cherish them in
Separation, and do not contradict but flatter them in their extremes, against
our own judgments, the world must ring of all these dreams, and they think it
fit that we be used as if all were certain truth. We have need to bless our
selves against dreaming neighbors, if we must be estimated, and used, and
described to the world, according to their dreams.

Nay, I will tell the world here the certain truth of our success and usage. I
preach, I write, and I frequently and openly talk against Separation, and for
the lawfulness of joining with the Church in the use of the Liturgy, and to
rebuke men's extremes and censures of the Episcopal Clergy, and for an impartial
love of all true Christians. I sharply reprove the weak reasonings of those
that are otherwise minded; and by this I occasion the true Sectarians every
where to speak against me; and yet even these Sectaries wish me well, and would
do me no harm; and the generality of my hearers bear all this well, and seem to
be of the same mind. And yet when I am loved by those that I plead against, I
am reviled and abused by those that I plead for. Yea more, I must profess it
before the world, that I plead your cause as far as conscionably I can, and its
you that hinder me, and none like you. You would have us do your work with the
people, and you would not let us do it. You use us, as I saw a man lately do by
a Colt, who tied him fast to a great tree, and lashed him most cruelly to make
him draw. You make our work difficult if not impossible, and then think us
worthy of your smarting wrath, for not performing it. Were it not for two
things, we could do much to reconcile the people to you. 1. If you would not
impose those Oaths, Subscriptions, and such like burdens, which we are our
selves unable without fraud and falsehood to defend. 2. If you would not silence
their faithful Teachers, but would encourage Godliness and good men
impartially, and would exercise LOVE as openly and largely as you exercise
WRATH.

But we must tell the world and you, that we are unable, utterly unable to
justify the Corporation-Oath and Declaration, and to bring the people to like
those Bishops whom they think are the chief cause of depriving of them of their
long tried painful faithful Pastors, and setting over them such as in too many
places are set. When our people are in Goals for meeting as they have done
these twenty, yea thirty or forty years, only to repeat their Teachers Sermon,
and pray and sing a Psalm together between the public Exercises on the
Lord's Day (where they have reverently attended.) It is a hard task that you put
on them to like you, but a harder that you put on us, that we must Preach them
to it, even when we must not Preach at all. That we must go to the Gaols to
them, or after they come out, to their houses to teach them to like the Bishops
and their Impositions! They will tell us, We love them with a love of
Benevolence, as we must our enemies; we wish them no harm, but the greatest
good; but we cannot love them as such complacentially, nor think approvingly of
their ways. Whether you do well or ill in promoting their sufferings, I am not
now judging; I only tell you that it is the greatest hinderance to our
reconciling them to you, and your ways, that you could easily have devised. I
never saw that wooing speed well, that said, Love me, or I will send thee to
Gaol. When I was a child I never thought any correction more unreasonable than
whipping children to make them give over crying, when whipping was an
unresistible means to make them cry, if they had not cried before.

While I am Voluminously reproached for not reproving the spirit of Separation
or Nonconformty, (as before limited) when I did it last, I was sent to Prison;
and when I would do it by Preaching, I have not leave. And if your meaning be,
Speak when we have shut thy mouth; and teach men to like us when they suffer
our wrath, you increase our task when you have taken away our straw.

I conclude therefore with repeating it: you will not suffer us to serve you as
we can, but are our greatest hinderers while you blame us.

And lastly, as to their scrupling the Corporation, Declaration and Oath, I can
speak best for my self. The Bailiff, Justice, and all the twelve Capital
Burgesses (besides inferior Burgesses) did refuse it, and were every one
displaced, save one (now dead) that had been a Soldier in the Kings Army (what
men were put in their stead, I am not now to tell you.) And they were so far*
from being persuaded to this by me (at almost an hundred miles distance) that I
never once spoke to them, nor wrote to them one Letter or word about it. And it
being no part of the old Conformity, how could this be put into their heads by
me? especially when they know that I had kept the Covenant from ever being put
upon that Town and Country.

4 Obj But the issue shows how little good your Teaching does! where are any
more against Bishops and Conformity than your hearers? You make men hypocrites,
and teach them to prate phrases, and cut faces, and rail at carnal reason, and
this goes for Godliness, when they are worse than you found them. And how have
you cured all that ignorance of the people which you lament? If it be cured,
that argument for the necessity of your Preaching is gone? If they are not
cured, how can you yet think to cure them? therefore their necessity is no plea
for your Preaching.

Ans. 1. Thus indeed the Quakers were wont to revile us in the open streets,
and tell us our Preaching did no good; and they would point at a gaudy Coat, or
any thing that they accounted pride or vanity, and cry out, See, this is the
fruit of your Ministry. But through the great mercy of God, our success has
been such, that constrains us thankfully to acknowledge his unspeakable mercy
that ever called us to so blessed a work, though we had been sooner fed with
the bread and water of affliction; And that under Usurpation it self, even
while we wrote and preached against it, we had so many years liberty before we
were silenced.

2. A Town and Church is not a being of the same materials from time to time,
but like a river which consists of transient matter. Abundance are dead and got
safe to Heaven, that we at first instructed, who are yet our comforts, being
saved from this untoward generation, and from this present evil world. And
those that were children when I was last with that people, and taught them, are
now men. And what need all these may have of teaching as well as their Parents
had, I know not. But I am sure where I come, that ignorance does prevail.

3. Knowledge is gotten by slow degrees, especially by the poor and vulgar. The
School that has been taught many years successfully, may have need of teaching
still. The best are too ignorant, and the want of knowledge will appear in the
wants of virtue, and obedience and good life.

4. You force us to answer this also Historically: But the best is we have
witnesses enough upon the place. I will first speak of that success which you
your selves desire, and then of that which we desired, and which some contemn.

1. This week I spoke with a very learned, worthy, silenced Minister, who
dwells in a great Market Town in the West, who tells me, of a multitude
there that have been formerly otherwise minded, there is scarce two or three
that now go not with him to the public Parish-Worship.

When I was in Kiderminster I could have been more confident of the ruling of
that people in equal ways; but since I came away, my silencing has so
disaffected them to the Bishops, more than I then left them, that multitudes
will not communicate in the Sacrament in public: I cannot come at them, nor I
do not write to them, lest I offend those that think I do but seduce them. But
those that call on me, say, We cannot embody our selves in Church Communion
with such persecutors. Especially since several of them have lain in the Goal;
but before, they had no such argument to plead. Yet do I usually satisfy those
that speak to me here in their travels. But that is but a few. But yet I hear
not of four men and women in the Town that do not come to the public Assembly.

I have told you, at Acton where I lived last, I knew not of three persons of
all my hearers of that Parish that did not come to the public Assembly, and
join in the use of the Liturgy. So much for that part of our success.

2. But I will not deny to you that we define not Godliness by Conformity to
Diocesans, or Ceremonies, and therefore have another kind of success which we
first and more endeavor, which is to teach them the meaning of their Baptismal
Covenant, and the Creed, Lords-prayer, and Ten Commandments; and to teach them
to believe aright in Christ* and to love God above all, and their neighbor as
themselves, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in the world, and to
have their hearts and conversations in Heaven, and by the spirit to mortify
the lusts and deeds of the flesh. And if we can get them well to digest and
practice thus much, we think we have not lost our labor; though they are not
yet acute enough, to cut by so small a thread as some more subtle wits, nor to
cleave a hair, nor to decide all Controversies about Diocesans and ceremonies.
And seeing neither of these are in our Creed, we hold them no articles of our
Faith, and therefore not necessary to our hearers Salvation.

And as to our success in this, the men themselves, and those that know them,
and see their lives, are the fittest Judges. I meddle not with other men: I
must say of my own hearers with humble thankfulness to God, that when I came to
Kiderminster it was noted publicly for one of the rudest Towns in the County;
and when I left them it was much otherwise. And to those that may say, It is
but in prating phrases, and cutting faces, and thinking themselves better than
others: I answer, 1. They were not Academicks, much less Doctors; they spoke
not artificially according to the rules of Rhetoric or Logic. They could not
dispute well of the fixed Stars or Planets, the Vortices or Spheres, the
Elements or Atoms, etc. And they are in their garb and speech as poor men are,
both plain, and some of them rustical. And when they talk of Religion, some of
them are not free from some such unaccurate expressions, and uncogent arguings
as in the Schools would make them ridiculous. And they pray not all in words so
accurate (especially the youngest) as I could wish I could do my self. But some
of them understand the Body of Divinity, and the Doctrinal Controversies too,
which I have written on, and pray in so good order and expression, as I meet
not now with one Parish-Minister of ten or twenty that excels them. Indeed
those of them that fear God, do take themselves to be better and happier now
than they were when they feared him not, or than drunkards, worldlings, and
malicious enemies of Godliness are. And though they abhor the Pharisees
hypocritical thanks, they think that unthankfulness to God for his grace is no
virtue, nor thankfulness a vice or thing indifferent. They are eminent for
humility; so far from a proud and preaching vein, (when it was the temptation
and disorder of the time) that I could never get one man of them to try his
parts by one private Exercise that way; some from Oxford that admired them
would have drawn some of them toward the Ministry; which made me wish them to
a trial, but never could procure it. I never knew of one man that preached or
expounded Scripture to others (unless in conference about the sense of a Text)
in all the time that I was there. Though I am not one that condemn all that in
their families do otherwise. They were not then noted for censorious to
dissenters (unless two or three particular persons.) They addicted themselves
to no parties, sidings, or factions in Religion. They that you call Puritans,
and our followers, were neither Episcopal, Presbyterians, or Independents; but
for plain Christianity and Godliness as such, and for the unity of all sober
Christians, and to do their own duty, in that especially which all these
parties did consent in. When I was removed from them, and they heard a stranger
in the Pulpit crying out against them as Presbyterians, and a generation of
vipers, etc. I hear they looked somewhat strangely at such strange kind of
Preaching; what! the man meant to pretend to know their judgments better than
they knew their own! When I never knew two whose judgments were for the
Presbyterian Government in all the Town and Parish. They were in all this so
unanimous and concordant, that when division shattered some other Parishes,
there was not that I heard of one Anabaptist, one Quaker, nor of any different
party at all among them, save that two ot three in the War fell off from
Christianity and all Religion, and became as a pillar of Salt unto all the
rest. When I called them to my house to be Catechized and instructed, there
were very few families refused. And there were not, that I could hear of in the
heart of the Town, above one or two families in a street*side that did not call
on God, and daily worship him. The Lord's Day they spent in public Worship, and
in repeating for memory what they heard, and in Praying and singing Psalms of
praise. They lived in quietness, and had no Lawsuits nor known contentions.
None of them lived in wealth or worldly honors, none in idleness, few or none
in begging, but in daily painful labor in their Callings, by which they lived
from hand to mouth. Those few that were common drunkards in the Town (three or
four that custom had made as beasts) were yet convinced that their neighbors
were better and happier than they.

As to their cutting faces, I can say nothing to you, but that their tone was
as decent as most Preachers I now hear, and their countenance as sober and well
composed. But God most regards the composure of the heart. But all that
seems serious is to some men matter of scorn; and one lately tells you,
That if you stop the Nonconformists mouths, no wonder if they speak through the
nose. And men will have more care to wash their faces, and compose their
countenances in public, than if you drive them into corners.

And for their prating-phrases, they are ambitious but of two excellencies of
speech, the one is to speak their minds in that matter which may have the
fullest signification, both of the matter spoken, and of the speakers
affections about the matter; (for the use of speech is to express them both),
the other is for ornament, and that is to speak in Scripture Phrase, not abused
(any further than weakness causes all the weak to do, even public Preachers
as well as others), but as well understood as they are able. And they that
scorn at Scripture Phrase, should not conform to the Book of Ordination or
Articles, where the Scripture sufficiency and perfection is confessed. If the
phrase of the Scripture it self is not odious, neither is the sober use of it,
where it is not perverted. But to such general charges, we can give no answer,
but nexa caput sequitur; name the particular persons and words, and prove your
accusation, and caluminate not the rest against whom no such proof is brought.

5 Obj. But what excellent Preaching or Labors have you to boast of more than
others, that your Preaching must be thought so necessary? What did you when you
did preach, but cast out Catechizing, the Lords-prayer, the Creed, and the
Communion in the Sacrament out of the Church, and bring the people to be almost
Heathens; and cast out all true Discipline and Government, and substituted
Presbyterian Examinations before the Sacrament, and rigor and tyranny which the
people would not endure? and is this so necessary a thing?

Ans. These things indeed we read and hear from you very often; but another
Judge must pass the final sentence. You make us pity the poor world in regard of
the uncertainty of History. You put us upon the recital of our practice which
will sound like the boasting of a fool. But if blessed Paul was put upon that
which he calls, Speaking like a fool; though they were not the words of
folly, we must not murmur if we have the like inconvenience put upon us.

1. If the successes before described be nothing worth in your esteem, yet
labor must be continued still; and we must in meekness instruct those that
oppose, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of
the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. And I suppose few Parish Priests of my
acquaintance will either judge themselves and their labors useless, or give
them over, if the maintenance fail not of success; else how many empty Temples
should we have? But you shall not so easily tempt us into utter unthankfulness
for so great a mercy as our success beyond our expectation was.

I remember Dr. Ames tells his Father in Law Dr. Burgess, in his Fresh Suit,
that Bishop Morton himself did silence old Mr. Midsley of Rutsdale in
Lancashire after God had blessed his Ministry with the Conversion of many
thousand souls (and his Son after him he silenced also.) Whether you will think
that this which he calls conversion, being but from Popery, ignorance,
sensuality and profaneness, be to be valued, or whether you will deny the
public matter of fact, I know not; but for my part I was glad to hear that he
was not silenced till many thousands had been converted by him. And O what
abundance of success this way had the Ministry of Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Nichols,
Mr. Dod, Mr. Thomas Hooker, Mr. John Rogers of Dedham, Mr. Herring, Mr. Barlow,
and abundance more of the old Nonconformists? And what understanding excellent
persons were Dr. Ames, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. John Ball, Mr. John Paget, old John
Fox, Mr. Paul Bain, Mr. Parker, etc. To say nothing of Mr. Perkins, Dr.
Humphrey, Dr. John Reynolds, etc. who were more Nonconformists than I and those
of my judgment are. Doubtless they were as like to know how to Preach, without
either prating phrases, or ignorant, unlearned, dry unedifying Sermons, tending
to bring Christianity into contempt, as most (at least) of the Parish Priests
that I use to hear in any place where ever I come.

2. And as to our own Preaching, I confess we have little cause to boast of it.
For my own part God knows I have seldom come out of the Pulpit without some
grief and self-accusation, that I should stand there to speak as a Minister of
Christ about so great a matter as the everlasting Salvation of the peoples
souls, and that to men that are almost dying, and must shortly be all in an
unchangeable state, where there is no more time of preparation for their final
doom, and yet that I should speak with no more wisdom, life and servency. That
I do not every time importune the hearers with the greatest seriousness that my
soul can reach unto, and with tears beseech the impenitent to consider, and
with earnestness awaken stupid souls, at least to some regard of their
Salvation, (though I were never so much derided for all this with all the
reproaches that blinded malicious wit can invent) The Lord knows that if it
had not been for the undeniable necessities of the world, which has not enough
that are fitter than my self, (though very unworthy) I had never entered into
the Sacred Ministry; and after I was entered I had soon repented of it. We have
upon our selves so penitent a sense of our own neglects, that hinders us from
flying in the face of those that silence us. We use not to others (whatever we
now say to your selves) to talk of your faults herein so much as of our own.
And we daily beg of God to pardon us, that we speak no more wisely and
importunately in so great a case when we had time. And that we did not watch
more diligently over the peoples souls, and teach them publicly, and from
house to house day and night, in season and out of season, even with tears. And
we daily pray that those that come in our places may be better than we have
been, and may take warning by us, to be more studious and laborious.

But yet seeing you have left us no other answer, I shall Historically tell you
the truth of our course, and leave it to the judgment (not of you, for you are
partial, and some deride us, and some believe us not; nor yet of our People,
for they know it, and therefore believe not the reproachers; but) of all
indifferent sober men.

I remember when Mr. Thomas Wadsworth Minister at Newington-Buts was put out,
the Parishioners came to me with a Petition to the King for some pity to their
souls in his Restoration, and would have had me to have directed them how to
get it delivered. I told them it was a thing not to be attempted, being
contrary to the course of the present Laws, and so it never was delivered (that
I know of.) But when I read it, I saw the difference between man and man. They
therein expressed that he had been a prudent, constant, painful Preacher to
them, that he was of a most blameless exemplary life; that he spent all that he
had in charitable works; that he visited, and instructed, and Catechized every
family, house by house, that he hired a Minister to assist him in such private
Catechizing and instructing; that he bought Bibles to give all the poor of the
Parish that could not buy them; with much more of the like. And he was not
succesless, nor is not since his silencing to this day. It would be endless to
multiply such instances of the now silenced Ministers in this Land.

But because I am Purus putus Puritanus, as its said, and you will have it so
that I must be named more than others, as one by whom the world may know the
rest, even with an Ex uno omnes, to use some of your own expressions; I shall
tell you what was my course, and how far I am guilty of the matter of these
accusations.

1. My body being exceeding weak, I Preached but twice a week, once on the
Lord's Day, and once on the Market Day.

2. The Doctrine which I Preached being visible in above seventy Books, and my
Religion described so fully in my Reasons of the Christian Religion, my
Confession, and many other Treatises, I need not now repeat; nor plead for it
to the world, that it is not heresy, nor Phrase-divinity (as they now speak.)
And whether non sense, other men that have sense must judge.

3. I had one or two Assistants with me (who besides two sequestered Ministers
and my self) were maintained out of the maintenance of the Vicaridg (and at
last an augmentation for a Chapel.) One of these Preached one part of the day
with me, and the other twice at a Chapel near.

4. We never baptized a child without the profession of the Creed, (so that we
did not cast out that); and we seldom prayed any day without concluding with
the Lords-prayer. And the Sacrament we administered often. Indeed we kneeled not
in the reception, because we had liberty to do as we thought fittest. But I
openly told them that I judged kneeling not unlawful, nor would refuse any that
did kneel on that account. But many came not, because the rest kneeled not, and
they might not have it on a distinct day by themselves (which tended to
division), but most because they were told of the (after mentioned) Discipline
that would be used toward them.

5. At first we Catechized in the Church, where the Creed, Lordsprayer and
Decalogue were daily repeated. Afterward we took a more effectual course; all
the families in the Town came to my house, and my Assistants went to their
houses in the Parish (it being almost twenty miles about.) Mondays and Tuesdays
half the day we constantly spent in this work, taking about fourteen families a
week between two of us. We first heard them repeat the words of the Catechism,
or at least of the Creed, Lords-prayer and Decalogue. Next we tried how they
understood some part of them. Then we a little with tenderness and modesty
enquired of their consent, their resolution, and their thoughts of, and
preparations for another world; and if any were ashamed to open their
ignorance, we urged them not any further, but turned our speech to instruction
and exhortation. And the superiors and ancients we examined not before their
servants or children, but put those Questions, and used those Exhortations to
their servants and children in their hearing which we desired them themselves
to receive. And we still concluded with the most urgent exhortations for
preparation for death and judgment that we were able; and when it was meet,
engaging the ignorant, negligent and sensual, to sober promises of another
course. And thus we usually spent about an hour with a family, in which I spent
my self as much as in a Sermon at least. And through Gods mercy we seldom
parted with them, without some signs of their present repentance, and purposes
of amendment for the time to come. But our method being punctually described in
the end of my Reformed Pastor, I shall say no more of it.

6. My Assistant in the Town Mr. Sergeant, was a man of so great prudence,
piety, meekness, peaceableness, self-denial, and blamelesness of life, that I
never to my remembrance saw him in anger, nor ever heard an offensive word from
his mouth, nor ever saw or heard of an offensive (much less a scandalous)
action done by him in all the years that he was there. I never heard him grudg
at any labor, (when he traveled as aforesaid to all the houses of the Parish,
and Preached usually twice each Lord's Day, at three miles distance one from the
other.) Nor did I ever hear man or woman blame him for any word or deed; nor
ever heard him ask what money he should have, but took it as it came. And was
indeed as a willing and loving servant unto all, and was beloved by all;
(though we had many more affectionate taking Preachers.)

7. I gave to every family in Town and Parish (being beside a great Borough
about twenty Villages) a Catechism, and some of my lesser Books, and of every
Book I wrote usually as many as my Purse could well afford. And to every Family
a Bible, which either for want of money, or of willingness to buy, had none,
where any one in the house could read.

8. After the Lecture at evening, as many as had leisure and will, assembled at
my Lodgings, where one of them repeated the Sermon; and any one that would did
by word or writing, put in such doubts about the things delivered, the solution
of which would tend to their further satisfaction, which I then answered. And
if they had any other cases of Conscience, they offered them to me in writing
(that I might see whether they were fit for public mention), and then we sung
a Psalm, and I or one of them did pray.

9. All the Ministers of the County whose names are Printed in our Book of
Concord, did agree (seeing the Rulers that then were did leave all Discipline
to the Churches will, and constrained none; and seeing we were divided about
Church Government, to the great damage of the Church), That we would all
practice so much of the spiritual discipline as all three parties, Episcopal,
Presbyterian and Independents were agreed in, (which we thought enough for our
union and reformation) and leave the rest without the compass of our agreement;
that so the Episcopal party might not say, that we break the Laws, or shut them
out; nor the rest say, that our narrow principles excluded them from our
Communion.

10. Accordingly once a mouth I had a meeting to hear and admonish them that
after more private reproof, had refused repentance for heinous and notable
offenses; where were present three Justices of the Peace (as at their monthly
meeting, to do that which belonged to the Magistrate, and see that we did not
usurp their power) and above twenty of the Seniors of the Town and Parish, (not
as Lay Elders or Officers to vote, but as those of the people that had best
leisure and advantage to see that we did the Church no wrong) and two or three
Pastors, and three or four elected Deacons. Where our chief trouble was with
drunkards, exhorting them to repentance, and praying with them, and to keep
peace among the neighbors, and maintain their unity.

11. The next day of every month, the Neighbour-ministers met at the Lecture,
and afterward at an Ordinary in an honest neighbors private house; where if
any of our Parishes obstinately refused repentance for drunkenness or such open
heinous sin, he was gently admonished and exhorted before all the Ministers.
But our usual work was a Disputation on some useful point in Divinity, to
exercise and edify the younger sort, where were usually present about twenty,
and among them some of the most learned, sober, Episcopal Divines that were in
these parts, who were constant or frequent helpers of us, Mr. Thomas Good, Mr.
Mar. Johnson, etc.

12. Those open great offenders who before these Ministers also refused to
profess Repentance, I did three Lords-days as gently and affectionately as I
could, admonish publicly before all the Church, and after that some days
publicly prayed for their Repentance; which if they refused not, they there
consest their sin, and desired the Churches prayers for their pardon and
reformation. But if they still refused, I declared them unfit for the Communion
of the Church, according to the Laws of Christ, and required the Church to
avoid their Communion; and we used no other Excommunication. But this
discipline we used on none but those that consented to it before, and not over
any that would rather forsake our Communion than submit to it, lest they should
think I did them wrong.

13. The people of the place also did, for ought I know, as much as I, for the
promoting of their neighbors good: 1. By their unity and concord. 2. By their
humility and blameless lives. 3. They met in the houses of many of those that
were ablest to help them; on Saturday*nights, to call to mind the last
Lords-days Exhortations, and on the Lords-days twice to repeat the Sermons
preached that day, and sing a Psalm, and pray together, and no more.

The Reasons of these meetings I refer (not to the enemies of all things that
favor of diligence for a man's soul, but) to all that know what a soul is
worth, and what is due from the Creature to his Creator, and what is necessary
to the information of an ignorant man.

1. Many families had no one that could read; and such were also the most
ignorant; so that they could not do any thing in a holy use of the Lord's Day
but what they did at Church, unless they took their neighbors help. And time
on any day is precious, and not to be cast away in vain.

2. These persons, and many more, could remember but little of a Sermon by once
hearing; yea twice was too little with the most. And we preach not only to be
heard and admired, but to edify souls; and how great a discouragement is it to
a faithful Minister, to bestow his time and labor in preparing and speaking
that which so nearly concerns his auditors, and to cast it as seed by the
highway side, and to have it all die in the hearing, and carried no further
than the Church-doors. If I taught a School of boys, or sent my servant but on
certain businesses for my self, I should not be willing that all my words
should go no further. And old ignorant men do hardlier learn than boys; and
heavenly Doctrine is more hardly remembered than common business in the world.

3. If the Lord's Day had been but a time of leave to use such helps, and not of
duty, we should take it for a great mercy to have leave to spend that time in
seeking God, and life everlasting, which else would be lost, or spent in
trifles.

4. Our people were generally poor laborers, that could spare so little time
for such things on the weekdays (but what they did in their Shops at their
work) that it must be now, or not at all.

5. Common charity and many Scripture-precepts oblige all good Christians to
help to edify and save their neighbors by all just and lawful means.

6. We found by great experience, that it greatly increased knowledge and
obedience, and piety in the people.

7. And so far was it from causing sects or heresies, or contempt of Ministers,
or private men's Preaching, that it was the chief of all means that ever I found
successful against these exorbitancies; so that when those Pastors that cried
down such meetings as Conventicles, and restrained the people from meeting to
repeat or pray, did thereby occasion them to go further in their undertakings
than they ought. I still found that to let them do what belonged to them as
private men, was the means to keep them from that which belonged only to the
Ministers; and needful meetings in their houses in due subordination to the
Pastors and Church Assemblies, was the best way to keep them from schismatical
meetings, which were in opposition to the Pastors and Church Assemblies. Yea,
that to drive them hard on to their proper duty in their families, and for
their ignorant neighbors, was the best way to convince them, that they had
neither ability nor leisure for more, which belonged not to them. In a word, it
was a principal cause that we had no sects nor divisions among us.

And now if any man come with his exceptions against such meetings as dangerous
to the Church or State, I only answer him, 1. Try it as much as we have done,
before you condemn you know not what. 2. Will you do nothing to help the people
to Heaven, but that which is liable to no abuse, or inconvenience? Then Christ
and the Gospel, and Scripture, and much more Reason it self must be renounced,
which are all more abused than such private meetings. 3. See that you be not
more afraid of sects, than of men's apparent ungodliness and damnation. 4. And
see that it be not your own want of skill and diligence, that makes you oppose
that means which you cannot guide and manage.

Obj. But this was not the common case of the Nonconformists: what do you tell
us a long story of your doings, when it was otherwise throughout the land.

Ans. 1. You know that there were then many Sectaries in the land, and you may
as well impute to us your own misdoings as theirs. We justify not the
Sectaries in their principles or practices.

2. What was the Doctrine and practice of Presbyterian and Independents, the
writings which they all agreed to, will partly tell you. In the Confession of
Faith you see what Doctrine they agreed to Preach. In the Catechisms they show
you that the Creed, Lords-Prayer and Decalogue, were not only to be learned by
the people, but the sense and use also of them all. And is this casting them
out of the Church? And in the Directory they advise to the use of the very
words of the Lords prayer in the Churches.

3. That I was not singular in this course, you may soon learn if you will but
enquire what was done at Bewdeley, Stourbridg, and other places round about me.
Nay when our two Agreements, one for Catechizing and personal Conference from
house to house, and the other for common concord in Discipline, were subscribed
by so many of all that County, and some adjoining, whose names are visible
there in print, you may imagine they endeavored to do what they subscribed to
do.

4. Nor was it that County only; you may see in their Printed Agreements that
the Ministers of Westmorland, and other Counties agreed much on the same
courses. And Essex, Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, and many others, had begun the same
work, from which the return of Diocesans has released them.

And remember that the charge of casting out all Discipline; and of
Presbyterian examinations and severities, are hardly reconcilable; nor yet the
not administering the Sacrament, and the examining of the people before the
Sacrament. But for our Countries, we used not such examinations; because our
foresaid ordinary Catechizing and conference, and also our requiring a public
profession of the Christian faith and life, at the transition of the youth out
of their state of Infant-membership into that of the adult, (described by me in
my Treatise of Confirmation) did better answer their necessities.

6 Obj. But all this while you lived in Sequestrations upon other men's estates,
and eat other men's bread, of which you never made restitution; and how then can
you think your merits are such as may plead for your readmission: and in
particular, Mr. Durel and many others have told the world and your self, that
as a reward for your military service you had a good Benefice, out of which
another only for his fidelity was cast out; with what conscience this was done,
see you to it.

Ans. Reader, seeing it is the pleasure of Mr. Durel, and so many more to call
out the man, and cull out the matter with which the world must be thus
troubled, I entreat thee to pardon my personal narratives, for which were it
not that they lay the interest of so many of my Brethren, of my writings and
office upon it, I could not pardon my self.

1. Let the world then know that these Ministers whom we succeeded were cast
out by the Secular power that bore sway, and not by those that succeeded them.
If you know of one Minister of a hundred that was the agent in that work, let
that one, and not the innocent hear of it.

2. That the people of each Parish, or some of them, were the accusers,
witnesses, and sollicitors of the cause; who begged for deliverance, and a
better Ministry, as if it concerned the benefit of their souls.

3. That it was somewhat an excusable error in the Ministers that succeeded
them, to think that if the Parliament or any Usurpers, did turn out the former
Ministers of any place, the people should not therefore be left as Heathens,
and all Gods Worship be forsaken, and the doors shut up as in the Venetian and
other Interdicts by the Pope, and this for ten or twelve years together, yea
almost twenty; and that if the Parliament had cast out the overseers of the
poor, or the nurses of your children, it is hard that all they that after
relieved them, and saved their lives, must be accused as so greatly injurious;
and that it is hard that when the love of souls does make them unweariedly spend
themselves for the peoples good, that this should be one of their unpardonable
crimes! How different are men's judgments of vice and virtue? and they did think
also that really before God and man the Salary was for the work. And if they
had a lawful calling to the work of the place, they thought they had so to the
Salary. They thought that if a Pilot of a Ship were on pretense of
insufficiency and utter ignorance cast out by usurpers of the power, that all
Shipping must not therefore stand still, nor all men be proclaimed sinners that
take the place and maintenance. I justify not their reasons; but I may tell
you my opinion, that being young men (mostly) in the Universities, that had
little or nothing of their own, they could not well otherwise have got bread
and clothing, much less Books, Fire, House-room, etc. nor long have Preached
without bread and clothing. And I knew few of them that when they were cast
out, were able to refund or restore that which bought them bread and fire, and
clothing; unless you would sell them as slaves to work it out.

And to speak truth, many of them thought it a good work, yea very good, to
cast out those (how many such there were I meddle not now), that were utterly
unable for the work of that office, or grossly (and long-uncurable) vicious.

But I am called by Mr. Durel to speak for my self.

And, 1. Mr. Durel did you ever know either me or the man you speak of that was
cast out, or ever hear or see the articles against him? If not, fie man, what
doing is this for a French Divine of so much learning, and a Preacher of the
Word of Truth!

But because you talk to the world of things that you never knew, let your
patience bear while I trouble you and the Readers with the story which you
extort.

When the Long Parliament sat 1640, and showed a forwardness to reform the
Clergy, the people of all Countries fled to them with Petitions, that thought
they greatly needed better Pastors; and too many in dislike of Altars, and
Rails, and Lord's Day dancing, which they judged hardly of. And among others
many people of Kiderminster drew up Articles against their Vicar, under three
general Heads, Insufficiency, and Negligence, Scandal and Innovation. (True or
false I am not now telling you), With these their Agents go to London, and the
Vicar after them, where seeing how matters went, he got the people by the
mediation of Sir Henry Herbert to yield to this agreement, That they should
choose a Lecturer to preach to them, and leave the Vicar in his place and
Vicaridg to read Common Prayer, (not forbidding him to preach when he would, so
he hindered not the Lecturer.) For which he bound himself in a Bond of 500l. to
pay the said Lecturer Threescore pounds a year. After this agreement, the
Bailiff and Improp^iator, and others of the people, sent to me to Bridgrorth
where I lived, to invite me to accept this Lecture. At last I came and Preached
there twice every Lord's Day, and a Thursday-Lecture every fort-night, besides
Funeral-Sermons, etc. for about a year and half; in all which time I never
heard or knew that the Vicar Preached above twice, (though indeed before and
since he Preached once a Quarter, or at least once in half a year; (I am not
now concerned to tell you how.) Being driven away at the end of a year and half
by the Wars, I came again by the peoples importunity, when the War was ended,
(about four years after.) For all that time I never asked the Vicar for a
farthing according to his Bond, though I was forced away. But before I came
back to them (without any concurrence of mine) they had again Articled against
the Vicar as before, ( That he was utterly insufficient; that when he did
preach once a Quarter, his own Wife (though fully conformable) would not hear
him; and a great deal of such stuff; to which certain Witnesses, (well
accounted of for veracity by the people) took their Oaths: Whereupon the Vicar
was sequestered by the Committee, and the Vicaridg put into the hand of several
of the neighbors to receive the profits, and pay it to one to officiate the
cure. After this the people importune me to take it: I absolutely denied it.
They followed me at Coventry, and elsewhere, with importunity; and I still
refused it. Only I told them that by an augmentation which I procured, making
my 60l. a hundred, and a House, I would come to be only their Lecturer as
before. When they could not move me, they consented. And lest any
misinterpretation should be after made of it, (or any Mr. Durel have a pretense
of accusation), I got all the Magistrates and chief of the whole Town together,
and in the Town Hall openly, they subscribed an agreement with me to pay me
100l* per Ann. as their Lecturer, and that no part of this should accrue from
the Vicaridg. Which writing I think I have yet to show. After this they chose
an Assistant to do the rest of the work; and the Sequestrators gathered the
Tithes, and never gave any account to me of it, nor had I any title to them;
till at last some one put it into the peoples heads that some other would get
in and take the place: Whereupon to keep out others they went privately and got
the Committee to give them an Order to put me in the sequestered Vicaridg, which
they kept privately to themselves for their own Indemnity. And I never once saw
it, till just the day that the Kings Majesty now reigning went into Worcester,
and the Town was full of Soldiers of both sides; one of them came and brought
me the Order, and entreated me to keep it as my own. I told him I would not
take it, nor keep it as my own, but they might leave it in the house for safety
for their indemnity. And these men thus used my name only for their security;
And when I knew it, and asked them whether any of the money they gave me came
out of the Tithes, they told me that the 60, which was my due by bond before,
and an Augmentation granted by the Parliament to a Chapel, was more than I
had. And they used my name in letting their Tithes; which when I knew what they
had done, I consented to for their Indemnity. And this was my taking the
Sequestration.

And as for the riches of it, and the reward of my military service, the last
is a putid falsehood: and the case of the former is this: I was offered in my
native Country a Parsonage accounted worth 500l. per Ann. and my choice of
others not much worse. I never had any thought of taking them, but of returning
to my former work. The Agreement was made by the Vicar himself; and the
Articles against him first that moved him to it, could not be for his fidelity
about the War; for they were long before the King and Parliament disagreed, and
a year and half before the Wars. When I returned, instead of the 100l. which
they agreed to pay me and an house, I had usually but 90l. and sometimes 80l.
and a few rooms in the top of another man's house. And I never asked them for
more. The Vicaridg they told me they used to let at Sevenscore or Eightscore
pound almost, (now worth more); of this my Assistant was to have threescore or
more, but seldom had near so much; 6l. per. Ann. went to the King and chief
Lord, (as they then spoke.) The Fifths the Vicar had; and they told me they
gave him more, about 40l per Ann. 10l. a year an old conformable Curate at a
Chapel had; and Taxes, and the poor, etc. had something. This 80 or 90l which
I had, was far from defraying my necessary charges. I kept no family but one
servant. I spent as little on my self as most men of my calling. When I had
kept usually one boy or more at the University, and paid for Bibles, and other
Books, and teaching some poor peoples children to read, with other necessary
helps to the poor, and particularly my poor Relations, my Stipend was spent
before my charges were defrayed. And for the Vicaridg-house (which was large
and private) I know not what is within the doors. From the first day of its
Sequestration till my coming away, which was about fourteen years, I never set
my foot within the doors, much less disturbed the Vicar in his possession, even
when Cromwell published a Declaration for the removal of all sequestered
Ministers from the Parsonage or Vicaridg-houses, and two miles from the place;
but I contented my self with the rooms aforesaid. And so much for Mr. Durels
better information against the time of his next invective against a stranger,
and of a case unknown.

But he further signifies to the world how hardly I parted with it at the last.

And such usage is very useful to believers, that they may know what to expect,
even from some great Pastors of the Church in this present evil world.
Therefore Reader, seeing such men will have it so, if I weary thee with one
more of my own stories, forgive it as a necessary trouble. The truth is this.

When General Monk came up to London, I came away from the place I was at
before the Sequestration revolved to the Vicar: When the King was restored, and
his Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs was published, the Lord Chancellor
moved me to accept a Bishopric (of which more anon); which when I refused, (in
a manner not displeasing to him), I told him that if he had any kindness for
me, I should accept of my continuance with my ancient flock, as a satisfying
expression of it, sobeit he would give the old Vicar a better place, that is,
some Prebendship which required no Preaching, or some sine Cura, (for I durst
motion him to no other.) To which my Lord Chancellor expressed readiness and
resolution. Sir Ralph Clare was used by him (who lives in the place) to treat
about it with the Vicar; but it was so ordered that the Vicar refused unless he
had another place: no place could be found* My Lord Chancellor would not put
such a man (pardon his censure), into a Prebendship, lest it should dishonor
the Church. I told him that in a Pastoral Cure it would be much worse. At last
my L. Chancellor wrote a Letter with his own hand to Sir Ralph Clare,
expostulating with him that it was not done, and telling him that it was his
Majesty's Desire; and speaking more of my desert and his Majesty's favor than
I will recite; and promising that his own Steward should pay yearly to the
Vicar the full value of the Vicaridg if he would resign it to me. And he gave
me the Letter unsealed, and I took a copy of it. But the Vicar was not to take
this for security. At length that I might satisfy my conscience and people to
the utmost that I did not forsake them, I moved the Lord Chancellor that I
might be but the old Vicars Curate, and preach under him as such, for any thing
or nothing. And at last this also was refused, and Sir Ralph Clare plainly told
me, that I was the fittest man in England for the place if I would conform, and
the unfittest of all others if I would not, because of my interest in the
people. (And at the parting I thank him, he sent me a purse of money, which I
returned him as it came.) And so long a time was spent in attendance of my Lord
Chancellor before this business came to an end, that I suppose it is all the
occasion of Mr. Durels conclusion, how hardly I let go a good Benefice so ill
gotten. So that Reader, to accept of a poor Curateship for nothing, under an
old Reading Vicar, when I might have had a Bishopric easily at the same time;
and to be denied even that after all these expectations and attendance, is a
heinous crime in a poor silenced Minister of Christ in our age, and worthy to
be published to the world, and left on record to posterity as a brand of a
mercenary man, by one that has at least more Promotions than one. And thus
goes the History of this age.

And for Restitution, the Vicar himself is so well satisfied of my dealing with
him, that he gave the Sequestrators or Trustees, (who indeed did meddle with
his Tithes (and I verily believe more to their loss than gain) a full discharge
of all matters that he could call his due to that day. And my Lectureship,
which he was by his Bond to allow me in without impediment, and to pay me 60l.
per Ann. I never once claimed, (though I thought by forbidding me to Preach, he
had forfeited his Bond) which was to others, not to me.)

And now if their own Rule hold, ex uno disce omnes, you see how the Ministers
of England are to be judged of.

7 Obj. You think we should grant you leave to Preach; but what leave did you
give us when you were in power? Then such requests could not be heard.

Ans. Whom do you speak this of? Of all the silenced Ministers, or some? of
most, or few?

1. We were never at all in any other power, than to Preach the Gospel, and
administer the Sacraments to the people of one Parish, and to guide them by
Gods Word. For my own part, it has in all changes been my lot to be among them
of the unpleasing or the afflicted side. What the Parliament would have done,
if Cromwell had not garbelled them, I know not. But when the Presbyterians
seemed uppermost, I was looked on as a dissenter. When that which they call the
Rump was uppermost, I was de jure by their Order sequestered, though not de
facto, and greatly under their displeasure. And with the Army I was out much
more. Cromwell was not for me, because I was not for him. When was it then that
we were in Power? A power of Ordination no Minister in the County that ever I
heard of, claimed or used. None of us did Impose our hands in an Ordination.
When the Commissioners for trying Ministers cast upon me some of their work, I
disclaimed it, till the angry importunity of many Episcopal Divines, that were
referred to my Examination, and would else have lost their augmentations or
places, prevailed with me to keep them in. A great part of the Episcopal
Ministers in our Country (and in all that I knew) were never removed. And those
that were, might have had other places; and I knew not that any were by any of
Cromwells Orders forbidden to Preach or use the Common Prayer in private
houses, till toward the later part of his Usurpation; which yet I never knew
any execute within the reach of my (then) acquaintance. For my own part, by the
approbation aforesaid, and Certitificates, I kept many in their Benefices,
(even the Vicars own Curate that in 1640 was cast out before I was called to
the place.) And I published in Print in my own name and my Brethrens, our
detestation of the casting out of any competent worthy Minister for his
judgment for Episcopacy and Conformity, much more for being in arms against the
Parliament, or Preaching against them. And I published it as our earnest
request, that all men that were utterly ignorant, Heretical and scandalous, or
of vicious debauched lives, might be cast out, without respect to other
opinions, or Civil causes; and that all the rest might unite their labors, and
be encouraged. This is yet in Print. And I met with few of my acquaintance in
the Ministry that were not of the same mind.

And I had some more trial as to practice, when Cromwell forbad (as even now I
said) the sequestered Ministers to live within two miles of their old Benefice,
and commanded t^em to quit the houses, our Vicar was never disturbed, nor I
never came within the house. I never forbad him to preach.

And at a Chapel we had another conformable Minister that read Common Prayer,
and said somewhat like a Sermon often, one Mr. Turner, infamous for ignorance,
drunkenness, railing, and living by unlawful marryings, and making his Ministry
a scorn. This Curate I connived at many a year, till his death. I provided a
Preacher at first once a day, and afterward twice, to be resident on the
place. I allowed Mr. Turner his Stipend, but entreated him not to meddle with
the Ministry. For besides his vicious life, I examined him, and could not
perceive that he understood scarce any Article of the Faith; nor had the
fortieth part of the knowledge or ability of many of the Wevers, or some of the
Plowmen of the Parish. Musculus his Common-places Englished was all the Books
that I could perceive he had, and that he Preached out of. But he would
continue to read Common Prayer, and did, though he might have had his Stipend
as much without it. Judge by this whether we were over-forward to silence the
Sons of the Church, or cast them out.

3. But what reason or conscience is it, that if you can say Cromwell, or the
Parliament, or Rump cast out such Ministers, that therefore we that had no hand
in it, must be silenced? Or if you can name forty Ministers in England (as I
cannot) that consented unto this, that therefore eighteen hundred that never
consented should be forbidden to Preach? Yea, those that declared themselves to
be against it?

4. And you know that even the Usurpers allowed the Wives of the sequestered
Ministers the fifth part. For my part I never asked you so much.

5. And either the unjust silencing of Ministers by the Usurpers, was well
done, or ill done? If ill done, it should be your warning to take heed of
sinning as they did; for sure their practices seem not so right and lovely to
you, as to be worthy of imitation. They Beheaded Mr. Love, and Imprisoned many
London Ministers, and others, for the Kings sake; and you think not, sure, that
you must therefore do so too?

8 Obj. But we are not to distinguish of Nonconformists, when Conformity is
necessary to the order of the Church. If a few honest men suffer among a
company of Schismatics, Presbyterians, Independents, Rebels, they must take
it patiently, and not blame their Rulers, but themselves that choose so bad
companions. The greater part of you deserve it.

Ans. We are not blaming our Governors, but our selves, not for our
Nonconformity, but for serving God no more diligently when we had time. But, 1.
can you not distinguish, and yet be just? what not the innocent from the
guilty? nor friends from foes? This is not the first confusion and evil that
want of distinguishing has caused in the world.

2. If your, I say, your Conformity be more necessary than all our Preaching
and Ministry, and will help more souls to Heaven, go on with it, and let it
prosper. But be sure that you are not mistaken.

3. Are Presbyterians so intolerable a sort of people? Or will the bare
opinion, that singular Churches have all Church Power of Christ's institution
among themselves, while they submit to the Civil Government, prove men
otherwise sober, to be unsufferable? You know Dr. Hammord and other Episcopal
Divines do assert an Independency of Diocesan Churches (which he says de facto
in Scripture-times had no Presbyters but one Bishop and his few Deacons.) And
you know Dr. Stillingfleet (of whose judgment Bishop Reinolds and many
Conformists have professed themselves to be) maintains that no one form of
Church Government is of Divine Right and Institution. And if so, then the
Independents and Presbyterians refuse none that is of Divine Institution.

4. But are you sure that you mistake not, to the injury of the sufferers? I
can tell the world and you, that I knew but one Presbyterian Minister in all
Worcestershire; and that one was not of our Association; nor any one
Independent associated with us, (though there were three worthy Ministers in
the County so esteemed) there was not one of the Associated Ministry that was
so much as reputed Presbyterian or Independent (but Episcopal, some were, that
now conform); much less Anabaptists, or of any other Sect; but held the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and loved a Christian as a Christian, and
were for the uniting of all the Churches that are sound in the faith, and in
the things necessary to Church Communion, even upon the ancient Primitive terms.

And when I think of the Association of Westmorland, Wilsthire, Dorcetshire,
and other Countries, I have reason by their Articles to think they were of the
same mind.

And must such abundance be silenced for the opinions of a few, whom they never
signified any consent to?

9 Obj. If you are suffered to Preach, you will but confirm the people in their
Nonconformity and dislike of the Government: For though you say nothing of it,
they will become a faction for the sake of your opinions: and what confusion
will it cause, to have one party of the Church for one Preacher, and another
for another; yea, as you would have it, for one to cross the baptized child,
and another not; or for one to wear a Surplice, and another a Gown?

Ans. 1. There is nothing in this imperfect life that shall attain perfection;
nor can any public good be done without any inconveniences. But, O cure not
an inconvenience with a mischief! Kill not a fly that sits on your brothers
forehead, with a Beetle or a Butchers axe. It Is strange that wise men can be so
partial or narrow-sighted, as to look so intensly after their own desires or
interests, as to spy out possibilities of inconvenience, and never see the loss
of souls, and great calamities that attend the other way.

2. And indeed are you conscious of no frailties in your selves, which are as
great an inconvenience to the souls of men, and the successes of the Gospel,
and honor of the Church, as different practisings of the Cross or Surplice?
Are you humble men, and teachers of humility? Do you know your selves, and
teach the people to know themselves? Are you penitent men, and Preachers of
Repentance? and yet have never found any thing more injurious to the souls of
men, or the ends of your office in all your Preaching, praying and
ministration, than the not using of a Cross or Surplice? Forgive me if I ask
you, whether you dare appear before God with no better a Repentance? and what a
Pharisee could say more than, I thank thee, God, that I am not so bad as this
Puritan, that will not subscribe, or use the Cross or Surplice? But I suppose
you will confess that you have much worse Ministerial failings; and if so,
should you not be impartial, and say, Veniam petimusque damusque vicissim? I
verily thought when I entered into the Ministry, that not one of all my School
masters, the tippling Readers beforementioned, were more useful to the Church
than an Amesius, a Hildersham, etc.

3. But I beseech you let not conceit affright you; or at least let not so many
pay so dear for your causeless fears: It is in your power more than in ours, to
prevent all the feared inconveniences of our Preaching. It is most certain,
that needless Impositions are the great cause of factions and divisions in the
Church. We heretofore instanced to you:

1. There is no Imposition what gesture to sing a Psalm in, or to hear Gods
Word; and about these I never heard of a contention. But about the
Sacrament-gesture, and bowing rather at the Name of JESUS, than of Christ, or
God; there is Imposition, and there is Contention.

2. There is far more difference between your Cathedral Worship, and your
common Parish-Worship, than between the users and not users of a Cross and
Surplice: And yet it causes no such Factions. 1. If you say that it is because
they differ not in Judgment, but in Practice. I answer, 1. That Is more than you
know. I believe you would have some more Nonconformists, if you everywhere
imposed the Cathedral-Worship. And 2. we shall be known to differ in Judgment,
whether we preach or worship with you or not.

3. And some of you (as Dr. Heylin, and the Answerer of a parcel of our Reply
to you) are against the use of any prayers in the Pulpit, but the Liturgy; and
some against praying there before Sermon, but only for bidding prayer, as they
call it. And most of you practice otherwise, and yet it makes no division.

4. Nay, when bowing toward the Altar was recommended in the Canon of 1640, it
was not Imposed, but men desired not to judge one another about it. And why
might not Crossing be under the like liberty?

5. And even in Doctrinals (which are more than Ceremonies) you know what a
notorious difference there is among your selves? Some called Arminians, and
preaching for it: some that think, and preach against it: some preach for
Original sin, and Bishop Tailor writes against it; and yet you can bear with
one another. Yea, how many new Doctrines has Mr. Thorndike published, and yet
his Ministry is tolerable?

6. Yea, even about the matters of State, you know what Mr. Thorndike has said
against the Oath of Supremacy, as necessary to be altered, for the Papists
sake: And yet what Faction has this caused?

7. Yea, you should consider, that it is one of the greatest policies of Rome,
for the preservation of their Peace and Unity, and the power of their
Hierarchy, that the Pope allows such diversities of Religious Houses, Orders,
Rules and Ceremonies, that all humors are thereby fitted* and every man that
has a mind of an odd and stricter way, may find a time or society for his
turn. And will not the long experience of so great a Church, do something to
convince you of your mistake?

4. But what confusion will it be for a man to forbear a Surplice every day,
when many of your own forbear it most days, and wear it but seldom, and this
without confusion? And what if a child be uncrossed, when the Parents so desire
it, or done by another when they desire it? What confusion is this? Why may not
a little measure of brotherly love serve, to procure mutual patience in that
which is no injury to any, as well as in the bowing toward the Altar, where
you think it may serve turn without uniformity?

5. But that which I would chiefly have you mind is, that your own way will
cross your ends and interest much more than this which we propose to you. It is
long since you told me your thoughts (some of you), that if the Ministers were
taken from them, the people would conform, and be reduced: And since I told
you, I was assured you were mistaken; and that the casting out of the
Ministers, would be a very great increase of the peoples disaffection to you,
and consequently of divisions. You have since had seventeen years trial,
whether this be true or not! Alas, that England must suffer so much, while the
Bishops are learning how to rule, and do their office, yea learning that which
weaker persons easily perceive? Alas! that so many thousand Souls must pay so
dear, for a few men's experience? I know you say that it is, because the Laws
are not strictly executed: But I suppose you know how many Ministers (such as
the world is not worthy of) have layen long in the Jayls, in Devonshire, in
Somersetshire, in Dorsetshire, in Worcestershire, and in many other Counties;
and also how many of the Laity have suffered their three months Imprisonment,
and some much more: and how little all this has served your turn; and how much
further you would carry on your severity, I know not: But I know you are not
like to cause either Love or Unanimity by this way. Will no experience teach
you such easy and obvious things? Do you not see, that there are many more of
the common people disaffected to your Ministry and way, than were when the
Ministers were first silenced and cast out? Yea, they that lost no Ministers of
their own, are yet changed by the common experience of the Land. You will not
endure us to tell you truly, what a Ministry you have cast out, and what a
Ministry in too many places are in their stead. But the people will know it,
whether you will or not. To tell men beyond Sea in Latin, as Mr. Durel does, of
our badness, and of the excellency of your present Ministry, will not persuade
the people of England, not to believe their ears and eyes. I love to instance
where I dwell and see, because of certainty. This Market Town of Barnet, ten
miles from London, was so extremely addicted to your way, and so impatient of
the Directory and the Ministry now cast out, that one who was their Minister in
the times of Usurpation, told me he was fain to leave them; and prosessed to
me, that he was really afraid, lest they would have put him into the Grave, and
buried him alive, for burying a Corpse without the Common Prayer, according to
the Directory. And now the case is so much altered, that (though the Town
consist so much of Inns and Alehouses, which are very seldom Nonconformists) a
private Meeting, near the Church, is crowded like as the Churches were, and the
Church is almost empty.

6. And I will make bold to tell you, that if you should banish or imprison all
the Ministers, and if you should force the people to forbear to conform to you,
as forced Conformity against their wills is but hypocrisy, and does but paint
your Churches with the Ornament of men's company, and profits not their Souls;
so you do thereby but prepare instruments to undermine your selves. For forced
unwilling Conformists will turn against you, as soon as they have opportunity:
And if you imprison men in your Churches, they will be still seeking to get
out. Were not almost all the Westminster-Assembly Espiscopal conformable men,
when they came thither? And did not almost all the people of the Land Conform
before the Wars? And yet you know that they did you never the more service, nor
the less displeasure.

I must profess it was my unhappiness to have so bad acquaintance, that before
the unhappy Wars, I knew not one Conformable Divine, to my best remembrance,
who was of a Religious blameless life, and seemed seriously to believe, and
seek the life to come, and to prefer Heaven before Earth, who did not Conform
only upon Mr. Sprint's argument of Necessity, and had not rather have been
excused; and would not profess, that they had far rather that this Conformity
were not imposed; and that they did it (as Paul submitted to some Jewish
Ceremonies) merely that they might not be kept from Preaching; And so they held
Conformity to be lawful: And therefore with the Assembly, when they might be
free, they chose it rather. And is this the happiest Unity that you might
attain?

10 Obj. Your pretended Piety is but Pharisaical hypocrisy: you are the
successors of the Pharisees, whom Christ spoke hardlier of, than of Publicans
and Harlots: And the vicious and debauched are more tolerable than you, whose
Religious and zealous Villainies are of greater danger to the public safety;
and whose Piety is but pride, in counting your selves Holier, and better than
your Neighbors, and saying, I thank thee, God, that I am not as other men, nor
as this Publican.

Ans. 1. It is a shrewd suspicion that their Cause is not good, who are put to
uphold it by accusing their adversaries of heartsins, as Hypocrisy is, which
are quite out of the sight of men. Either you mean that it is Hypocrisy
latent, or Hypocrisy detected by a wicked life. If the former, I confess you
have us at an advantage; For as you pretend to be as Gods in knowing the heart;
so we who confess our selves but men, have no way of defense against
heart-accusations, but denial, and calling for your proof: And our Denial were
not enough, if you knew the heart indeed. Our judgment is, that Hypocrisy is a
most hateful sin; and (as I have declared my opinion at large, in a Discourse
called The Formal Hypocrite) we think that all men (except the professed
Atheists and Infidels, who have multiplied since the Ministers were silenced)
among us in England, are either Saints or Hypocrites; For all that profess true
Christianity, according to their Baptismal-Covenant, do profess Sanctity: And
therefore we suppose, that the more any man's life is contrary to his
profession, the more notorious Hypocrite he is. For the difference lies not in
the Materials of our Profession: For we profess nothing as our Religion, but
Christianity: If any go further, we renounce their profession. And all of you
that stand to your Baptism, profess Christianity, the same Christianity as we.
The question therefore is, Whose lives do most contradict their profession? I
doubt not but you will confess (for you cannot deny it), that a proud,
domineering, worldly, covetous, drunken, gluttonous, malicious, persecuting
Christian, is an Hypocrite. If you prove any among us guilty of these, you were
best name the men, unless you think that Nonconformity to Oaths and
Subscriptions, make all that are endued with it, eat and drink too much. As for
these other zealous Villainies which you charge upon us, they are to be spoken
of by themselves. We are content, that if the Nonconformists lives do
contradict their Christian profession more than the Conformists
(proportionably) that you write in Capital Letters, the name [ Hypocrite] upon
every ones back and breast, that the people may know them as they go along the
streets; and may gratify the Politician, by hating them more for their
hypocrisy, than they admired them for their pretended Saint ship.

But, if you will hear a person whom you so much dislike, I will tell you how
this may be best discovered. Do not persuade our Rulers any more to make Laws
to eject men for not taking those Oaths, Subscriptions, etc. for then men will
think (whether you will or not) that you had no greater fault to prove them
Hypocrites by: But get them to make a Law, that all Rebels, Traitors, swearers,
drunkards, fornicators, gluttons, covetous persons, pluralists, non-residents,
soul murdering idle Teachers shall be cast out, whether they subscribe and
declare, or not: And then those that are flagitious will be the sufferers; and
if it fall upon the present Nonconformists, let them bear it, and spare not.
Again we entreat you to get us such Laws against all Vice, except those that
are made vices by the wills and interests of differing Factions, and execute
them as severely as you will. And then if we be proved criminal, name the Vices
which you think proves men Hypocrites, and it will sound better to accuse them
of these, than of hypocrisy; or at least to prove their hypocrisy by those,
than by presumptions, and general unproved accusations. Let him have his
portion with Hypocrites; who by living most contrary to the Christian
profession, does most convincingly prove himself an Hypocrite.

I confess, since I have still observed from my youth, that the most vicious
enemies of godliness have used to call those Hypocrites, who do but seem to be
no Hypocrites, that is, to be serious in the Christian profession, and
seriously to mind, and mention, and seek the life to come; I have been
constrained when I heard a man called an Hypocrite, and no more (especially by
a vicious man, or an adversary), to suspect that there is some more than
ordinary excellency in that person: For I must suppose it is some great good
which he is thought to make a cloak for evil: If long praying had not been
good, it had not been a fit pretense for oppression in the Pharisees. If
praying and alms-deeds had not been good, it would have disgraced the
Hypocrites, Matthew. 6. to have made ostentation of them. When you call us
Hypocrites, and dissembled Saints, you tell the world, that we have the
profession, and outward appearance of good: And whether we corrupt it by a
deceitful heart, remains to be proved, as well as asserted. Mr. Robert Bolton
was no Nonconformist (as to the old Conformity) who notes it to be the use of
the world, to charge the soundest Christians with Hypocrisy, because then they
talk of the secrets of the heart, which we cannot open for our own vindication.

2. As for self*estimation, our judgment is, that Pride is one of the worst of
sins, and Pride of Wisdom and Godliness is one of the worst sorts of Pride: and
there are too many guilty of it in the world, and we would fain have leave to
Preach against it: In the mean time we spare not by Writing and Conference, and
such Preaching as we use, to do against it what we can. And we shall heartily
thank you for any true help, to detect and mortify it more in our selves. But
remembering from my childhood, that the sots and drunkards of the Town and
Country, where I lived, were used to speak the very same words with this
Objection, against all serious godly Christians, how conformable soever; I
presume to ask you these few Questions.

Q. 1. Are the Conformists more Godly or Holy, than all the ignorant, drunken,
unchaste, voluptuous, carnal rabble, or are they not? Q. 2. If not, why do they
take it for a wrong to hear of much less? If they are (as I doubt not but very
many are), do they so esteem themselves, or not? If not, why should they be
angry with others for thinking of them, as they think of themselves? If yea, Q.
3. May they not take it for a greater mercy than all the riches of the World?
If all are none of Christ's, that have not his spirit, may not they give God
thanks for it that have received it? Romans 8. 9. Q. 4. And do you never give God
thanks for his grace of Sanctification your selves? Q. 5. If you do, how shall
a man know that you are not as very Hypocrites in so doing, as the
Nonconformists? When they and you thank God for the same mercy, how shall we
know but by the fruits, which of you is sincere? Q. 6. Do you know that there
are any, or many among us, that live after the flesh, an ungodly, sensual,
worldly life? If not, you are strangers to the Land which you inhabit? If yea,
Q 7. Do you think all these are in a good and safe condition? If yea, give over
Preaching against them: If not, do not better men differ from them? Q. 8. And
must not our light so shine before men (though not for their applause), that
they may see our good works, and glorify God? Matthew. 5. 16.

4. And seeing we are accounted the Pharisees, Come on, and let us recite the
Pharisees Character, and see who is likest him?

1. The Pharisees were the chiefest members of the Sanhedrim, and Rulers of the
Church, and so are not we, Act. 5. 34. Mat. 12. 14. and 23. 2. and 27. 62. John
7. 32 48.

2. The Pharisees were against the Scripture-sufficiency, for the customs and
traditions of their ancestors, Mat. 15. 2.

3. They imposed these Traditions as Laws on others, and accused the Christians
for not observing them, Mat. 15. 2.

4. They preferred these Tradition before the practice of some Moral duties,
Mat. 15. 9. 5. 6.

5. They were so much for Ceremony, that they were precise and strict in the
observance of their Ceremonies, Mat. 23. 5. 23. 25, etc. and for them neglected
mercy and says, Mat. 23. 23.

6. They were covetous, and sought after Riches, even by oppression, Mat. 23.
14.

7. They were proud and Lordly, and strove for preferment, the highest places,
and the highest titles, Mat. 23. 6, 7, etc.

8. They wore a different sort of garments, which was openly to signify their
special holiness, Mat. 23. 5.

9. They were very zealous to make men Proselytes, and conformable to all their
Ceremonies, Mat. 23. 15.

10. They foolishly and preposterously preferred small matters before great, v.
16, 17, etc.

11. They labored to silence Christ and the Preachers of his Gospel, and
forbad them with threatenings to Preach any more, Mat. 23. 13. Act. 4. 18, etc.

12. They persecuted Christ and his Apostles, and sought first to entrap them
in their speech, and then to bring them into sufferings, Luke 6. 7, etc. If you
know any that ever silenced or persecuted any faithful Minister, he is none of
the men that I am speaking for.

13. They pretended Law for all their cruelties, John 15. 7. and accused them
as breakers of the Law, Luke 6. 2. and 4. 3.

14. They urged Christ to decide State-Controversies about Caesar's right, which
he warily avoided, knowing they did but seek matter of accusation, Mat. 22. 17.
Mark 12. 14.

15. Yet did they accuse him as an enemy to Caesar, and as guilty of
disloyalty, even to his crucifixion, Luke 23. 2. John 19. 12. And were not
contented to take away his life, unless they put on him the infamy of Treason.

16. They would not understand the meaning of the Law of Love, or I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13.

17. They were stricter for Tything, and such Levitical Rights, than for the
spiritual worshipping of God, Mat. 23. 23.

18. Their Righteousness was more in outside Religious pomp and bodily
exercise, than in the inward part, and moral practice, Mat. 23 24, etc.

19. They pretended great veneration for the dead Saints, and built them
Monuments for an honorable memorial, while they imitated those that murdered
them, and persecuted the living Saints that imitated them, Mat. 23. 26, 27, etc.

20. They had their set-days of formal fasting twice a week, turning even
extraordinary duties and all, into form and ceremony, Luke 18. 2. And were
inquisitive after them that conformed not herein, Mat. 9. 14. Mark 2. 18.

21. They counted it the folly and ignorance of the Law, in the common people,
whom they took for cursed, to be such admirers of the preaching of Christ, John
7. 49.

22. They used long prayers, as a cloak for their oppression. Query, Whether
they were a Liturgy or not? If yea, so let it pass in their Character. If not,
then it is scarce like that there was any other Liturgy than the Scriptures in
those times: else it is most like that the Pharisees would have used it.

For, 23. they went up into the Temple to pray, and sometime in other public
places (as Bishop Hall notably describes the Hypocrite in his Characters, that
he kneeling down behind a Pillar in the great Church, muttereth over certain
words, praying to that God whom he all the week at home forgets and
disobeyeth; and rising up, commends the devotion of our ancestors: He boweth
at the name of Jesus, and swears by the name of God, etc. (This is the sense,
for being separated from books I pretend not to recite verbatim): So did these
Pharisees make ostentation of their prayers in the Temple; but we read not of
their family or secret prayers, which Christ enjoineth to his Disciples, that
they may differ from the Pharisees, Mat. 6.

24 They insulted over the followers of Christ as an accursed ignorant vulgar
sort, when they were blind themselves, and knew not the Spirituality of
Doctrine or Worship, Mat. 23. 26.

25. They were loose Expositors of the Law of God, and extended it not to those
Internals, and necessary strictness which was the proper sense, but made it
forbid no more than those notable external evils which themselves and their
vulgar followers could spare, Mat. 5.

26. And with the forbearance of these outward sins, and the performance of
their Ceremonies, they so contented themselves, and quieted their Consciences,
that they wanted the true and spiritual Righteousness, absolutely necessary to
Salvation, Mat. 5. 20.

27. They were the very leaders of all the malignant party that hated Christ
and his Disciples, and more zealous against them than the very Heathen Roman
Governors, who sometime saved the Preachers from the Pharisees rage.

28. They were so malignant that they envied the very good works, and healing
miracles which Christ did, and repined and fretted that God should so much
honor Christians, Joh. 11. 47.

29. They were so malignant that no course of the Servants of God could please
them, or escape their obloquy. But John that lived austerely, they reproached
as a melancholy Demoniack, or a crackt-brain'd man; and Christ that used a
freer converse, they accused as not strict enough for them.

30. They were so malignant that they could not endure to have God acknowledged
the owner and approver of Christianity, but would rather have the people take
Christ for a deceiver, or his works to be done by the Devil himself, than that
God should be known to be the author of them, as his attestation and seal to
the Truth of Christ, Mat. 12. 24.

31. Being a Generation that never had done complaining of those that conformed
not to their Ceremonies and outside Rites, and yet void of true Sanctification,
Christ pronounced them a Plant that his Father had not planted, that were e're
long to be extirpated, Mat. 15. 13. 12. 2. and 12. 2, 14.

32. They formally preached much good, as sitting in Moses Chair, and having a
holy Law to speak of, but their own lives were covetous, proud, persecuting,
and contrary to the Law, and to their own Doctrine; and yet their very Doctrine
had much corruption, Mat. 16. 1, 6, 11. and 21. 45. and 23. 2. Luke 16. 14.

33. Yet were these Pharisees of a much sounder judgment than the Atheistical
Sadduces, and therefore thought highly of themselves; and some few among them
had a secret favor unto Christ, as far as their reputation and the fear of
their party would permit, Luke 7. 36. Joh. 3. 1, 2. Act. 5. 34. and 23. 6, 7,
8, 9.

In all this I have but recited the Scripture Characters of the Pharisees, not
daring to speak a word of the application; for I much doubt whether you will
not think that I have drawn your picture, by the bare recitation of the Text;
so much did I wonder at one of the last Sermons which I heard in public (but
just such as I have often heard forty-five years ago) which was spent in likening
the Puritan to the Pharisee; how the speaker avoided blushing, and remembering
what the hearers would think when they should read the History of the Pharisees
in the Bible; and whether they perceived what injury they did themselves, who
used to call the people to such observations. For my part I would counsel them
never to name the Pharisees more, left the hearers apply it otherwise than they
imagine. At least never more to go about to make men think that the Puritan (who
is so contrary to him) is like the Pharisee; for men never speed worse than by
such monstrous undertakings. But yet it may be some of them believe themselves.
For he that will needs make his own Creed, may make his own Faith; but if they
make as large Creeds for others, and call them to subscribe them, and to swear
to them, when they cannot make them a Faith proportionable, they will but
multiply Nonconformists. And so much to your angry censure, which leaves us
room for no more argumentative a defense.

11 Obj. If you do scruple Conformity, why do you gather private meetings, and
separate from the Church, and hold your meetings at the time of our public
Worship? and encourage the people in their Separations? For whatever you say
of your self, you cannot but know that it is so in London, and in many other
places?

Ans. 1. I told you not my own practice alone, but many others; and when I have
told you our Principles, you will the better know how to judge of our different
practices.

The Nonconformists hold, 1. That we are members of the Catholic Church, in
order of nature, before we are of any particular Church. For Baptism, as such,
does enter us into the former. And that no man must ever separate from this
Church upon any pretense whatsoever.

2. That our Communion with this Catholic Church is our concord in the
performance of that Baptismal Covenant which uniteth us.

3. That our conjunction with this or that particular Church, is a matter left
to humane prudence, and to be changed according to the interest of our own
souls, and the public good; and that God binds me not to one Church more
than to another, by any Law, except that general Law which directs us what
choice to make of matters undetermined.

4. That the Magistrate is the Governor of these Churches as to their external
ordering, which supposes the Pastors to be Governors governed by him; (as
Schoolmasters, Philosophers, Pilots, Architects, etc.) and that the Pastors are
essential to the Church, (in a Political sense, as we now take it) as a
Schoolmaster is to a School; but so is not the Magistrate.

5. That the ordinary instituted way of the Pastors call to a particular
Church, is by the Direction of the Ordaining Pastors, and by the Election or
Consent of the Congregation. And that as the Churches had true Pastors without
and against the Magistrates consent, so may it have still; seeing then and now
the Magistrate had Power of Governing Churches already made, by exterior order,
rather than of making or unmaking Churches. And therefore that a Pastor may
still be a true Pastor, when he is prohibited to Preach.

6. That the Magistrate has the power of things circa sacra, that is, of
Temples, Tithes, maintenance, etc. so that he divest not the Pastor of his
intrinsic power, proper to his office, (as to choose his subject, method,
words, etc.) And therefore that no Minister may seize upon the said Temples,
Tithes, etc. against the Magistrates will.

7. That ubi Episcopus, ibi Ecclesia, as Cyprian faith, where the true Pastor
is, there is the Church, because the Pastor is an Essential, and the Governing
part. And as this was true in Cyprian's time, so it is now.

8. That if Usurping Pastors, though by the Magistrates consent, do take
possession of the Temples and public maintenance, (and Legal Right as well as
possession) this is not enough to make those men true Pastors over that people,
without their consent, and to nullify the relation of their former-lawful
Pastors.

9. That it is not impossible or rare for the Usurper to have the foresaid
advantages, and the true Pastors to be put to meet in privater places; and so
thought Dr. VVild, Dr. Guning, Dr. Hide, etc. in the time of our Civil
Usurpations. And even under lawful Governors it was so judged by the Churches
in the case of Athanasius, Basil, and multitudes of Bishops then cast out.

10. That abundance of the Ministers now cast out, were once the lawful Pastors
of the flocks.

11. That when the true Pastor is thrust out of the Temples, and Usurpers have
that place, he is rather the Separatist that follows the Usurper in that more
public place, than he that adhereth in private to the lawful Pastor; as Dr.
VVild and the rest aforementioned then thought.

12. That therefore in those places where the Relation of prohibited Ministers
to the people is truly dissolved, they are the faulty dividers that adhere to
them. But where it is not dissolved, but the public Teachers were never their
true Pastors, there those may be the Schismatics that forsake their lawful
Pastors, though under that restraint.

13. That where the Pastors that have the Temples, and those that are shut out,
are both true Pastors, caeteris paribus, it is as good a proof that they are
Separatists and Schismatics who join not with them in other places, as that
they are so for not coming to the Temples; that is, neither of the inferences
is good.

14. Every man is not a Separatist, that is not present with others in public
worship. I separate not from all foreign Churches, nor from all the Parish
Churches in London save one, though I be present but with one. But he that
censureth a true Church to be no Church, and so separateth from it as none; and
he that accounts any Church injuriously, to be so corrupted as that it is
unlawful to hold communion with it, both these are guilty of culpable
Schismatical separation, but in very different degrees.

15. A man's absence from you will not alone prove him a Separatist, unless he
be absent upon separating Principles.

16. He that keeps not local communion with a particular Church, and yet
honors them as a Church that may be communicated with, and holds communion
of Faith and Love, and Obedience with them, cannot be a Separatist from them
simply, but only extrinsically secundum quid; and that is to be tried and
judged of as aforesaid.

17. If therefore they will admit you to communicate with them in their way,
and will not communicate with you in your way; it shows that it is something
in your way and not directly in your selves, from which they separate.

18. And no man ought to commit one sin for the communion of any Church.

19. I may have more mental communion with a Church, which I dare not outwardly
join with, because they impose some one unlawful word or action, than with a
more corrupted Church, with which I hold more external communion, because they
put me not to approve their errors.

20. When there are several Churches near, caeteris paribus, a free man should
join himself with the Purest, and to the most edifying Ministry ordinarily.

21. Yet in times of suspicion and division, it is fit to show our judgment by
our practice, and to join sometimes with some less pure Churches, that put no
sin upon us to show that we withdraw not from them on separating principles.

22. When a Minister is not lawfully separated from his flock, but another is
obtruded without a just call upon his people, yet if he see that the voluntary
relinquishing of his relation, is most for the peoples good, that they may
accept another that has more secular advantages to profit them, and guide them
in peace, he is finis gratia in prudence bound to do it.

23. All people in England therefore are not in the same condition, but to some
it may be a fault which to others is a duty. Were I in a place where the
Minister is faithful and worthy to be owned, I would draw all the people to
attend his Ministry, and would help him at other seasons as I were able, in
unity and love. But if I lived where the public Minister were intolerable, I
would do otherwise.

24. The case of London much differs from most other places in the Land; as
very many of them think that their relation to their ancient flocks is not yet
dissolved; so necessity puts them out of the track of formal Parish-order.

1. In the great Plague almost all the Parish-ministers deserted them; and
those that then stuck to the people, found such success by the help of that
awakening judgment, that they durst not since forsake them, nor will easily be
forsaken by them.

2. There being so many score Churches burnt down, and the Inhabitants not
gone, and the conformable Ministers not officiating but in the standing
Temples, there is no reason that the people should therefore turn Atheists, and
give over worshipping God.

3. Many Parishes being so great, that the twentieth person cannot come to the
Temples, and many of the Preachers voices so low that half cannot hear them who
might get in, there is no reason that all the rest must therefore be cast off
and left as the Indians, without the means that God has appointed for men's
Salvation.

4. And why then should not their Assemblies take the fittest time of the day
as well as yours? All men know that (especially in the short Winter-days) there
is little convenient time left for the work of a Lord's Day, besides the time of
your morning and evenings Liturgy, and other Offices.

5. And when you have as many as can hear you, O why should you be angry that
the rest (or rather some few of them) are hearing others, that Preach as
profitably as you? Nay I beseech you before God judge, try and judge what is the
cause that when many parts perhaps of your absent Parishioners are at no
Church, but some in Ale houses, Taverns, or Gaming-houses, and some idle at
home, that yet the few that are worshipping God with an able faithful Minister
are more exclaimed on, and written against, and angerly accused, than all the
rest.

Obj. But many of the Parish-churches are half empty?

Ans. 1. It is not so with the rest; and therefore you may see that the
difference between your own Preachers is the cause. Unedifying Teachers will
not have so many voluntary intelligent hearers as others.

2. As I said, half the Church-full cannot hear many of your Preachers.

3. When the Parishioners know beforehand that the Temple will not hold a
quarter of the people, they are never certain of room, as not knowing when
others will exclude them; and therefore they seek another place where they may
be certain. For he that brings his family to Church every day upon such
uncertainty, is every day uncertain whether he shall spend the day as the
Lordsday, or have any public communion with the Church. And they are apter to
be sensible of this calamity themselves, than the Objectors are.

6. And I must add also, that as London is the most populous place, so it has
the greatest number of true Separatists and Sectaries; and the sounder part are
not responsible for their actions.

12 Obj. But with what conscience do you come into Cities, Corporations, or
within five miles of them, or of your former Preachingplaces? Does God bid you
preach just here? And how do your scruples engage you thus to break the Laws?

Ans. Even with such a Conscience as we Preach in England, when the Scripture
names not England to us. Did not the ancient Christians also disobey a lawful
power, when they settled their Churches in Cities, even when they were forbidden
both City and Country? and if Christ say, When they persecute you in one city,
fly to another; and you bid us, fly from all, and fly to none. Has not a
Nonconformists Conscience something of the command of Christ to countenance his
practice? But our true Reasons are the same as are forementioned for our
Preaching. If necessity be upon us to Preach because of the peoples necessity
to hear, then where their necessity is greatest, there our obligation is
greatest. But in populous Cities and Towns, when the ablest conformable
Minister is insufficient for a quarter of the Parish, the peoples necessities
are greatest. Ergo,

If it be lawful for us to desert and betray to Satan the souls of all the
Cities and Corporations in England, and within five miles of them, and of all
the places where we have Preached, why will it not be lawful to do so by the
rest? Where the carcass is, the eagles will be gathered together; and where
the work and Vineyard is, the labourer must be.

And all good men love the public good, and therefore will choose those places
for their labor ( caeteris paribus) which the public good does most depend on.

Especially if the people of their ancient charge live there, and they think
that their relation to them is not dissolved.

And I must profess, that few of the passages of this generation do more
astonish me with dread and wonder, than to think that City-Pastors who have so
vast a charge, and so much more need of help than the Country, yea men of
reputed learning, sobriety and piety, should ever be desirous to take this
burden wholly on themselves, and should be the forwardest to drive away
assistants, yea and make it a sin to preach to those souls, that they know they
cannot preach to themselves! Yea, that the same men that one year have much ado
to satisfy their own consciences to conform, and think they speed well, if
with Conformity they can but keep up some reputation of honesty, yet the next
year make so great a progress, as to question his honesty, that will not
sacrilegiously renounce his Ministry, and are the forwardest to put down all
Preaching save their own! Do the Pastors themselves no better know the Parish
bounds, and the peoples wants, or the worth of souls? What then can we expect
from others?

Obj. But it is not your help, but your hindering us that we are against. Do
you help us by drawing the people from us to your selves?

Ans. I cannot tell whether we help you or not, till I know what is your help.
If your work be not to get followers and applause, but to bring men to
Christian knowledge, faith, love, obedience, and patience, then all the
Ministers that I plead for are you helpers; those that are not, silence them,
and spare not. But if your work be to preach up your selves, and your successes
be reckoned by your applause, I cannot tell whether we help you or not. For
though we seek to increase your reputation with the people, yet it is not as
you are self-seekers, but as in charity we hope you preach more for Christ, and
men's Salvation, than for your selves.

13 Obj. But what you before denied of the Magistrate, you cannot deny of the
Church: The Church calls you, and gives you your power: Therefore it may
take it from you: And so Mr. Rathband confesses, and the old Nonconformists
practiced.

Ans. 1. The [ Church] is an ambiguous word. If you mean the Bishops, all those
whom you call to be re-ordained, deny that ever the Bishops gave them their
power.

2. And it was One Bishop who ordained each of the rest, or two at most, who
are both dead, and cannot take away what they gave.

3. I have answered this before, and more largely in my Dispute of Ordination:
Men give us not our Power at all, as from themselves; but as Servants of Christ
invest them solemnly to whom he gives it. And a servant cannot dispossess him
whom by his Masters Orders he has invested.

4. You give us our Baptism and Matrimony, as truly as our Ministry: And yet
you cannot take them from us.

5. But indeed, if the Church, that is, the People, refuse us, we cannot teach
and edify them against their wills.

6. And if one Bishop silence us, he does it but as exercising Government in
his Diocese; and it follows not, that we are silenced in all others.

7. And they that dissent from our Diocesan frame of Prelacy, do not much
reverence their Governing Spiritual Power: And if the Kings prohibition bind
them not against their Conscience of Gods obligations to be silent, much less
will yours.

8. No Bishops have silenced us by Spiritual Government that we know of, but
only as Barons by the Secular Laws, to which they gave their Votes (which yet
all did not): How then are we obliged by their Power of the Keys to be silent?
For my part I have one or two of their Licenses never re-called or nulled.

9. If a Bishop should silence him under pretense of Government and Order, whom
God obliges to preach, as much as I have before proved that we are obliged, it
were ipso facto null as to our Consciences, as being against the Laws of God.

10. He that is silenced in every Bishops Diocese, is not yet thereby degraded,
but is still a Minister, to the world at least for their conversion; For those
without (the Infidels and Heathens) are of no Bishops Diocese; And it is a
question, whether those among us that openly renounce the Prelacy, and declare
themselves to be none of their Church, are yet indeed members of their Church
whether they will or not? We believe not, that a Law of the Land does make any
man a Churchmember without his own consent. If you think otherwise, why
distinguish you the Sons of the Church from others? If all the people of London
be not the Sons, or members of your Church, the rest are not under your
Pastoral Spiritual Government: And as for your Secular Power, enough is said of
that before. And I think no man will say that the extent of your Diocese to
many hundred Parishes, is a Divine Institution, obliging all men's consciences
to obey you, that shall come within that circuit of ground: you will ascribe
this extent of your power to the King and Laws; of which more in due place.

And as to the old Nonconformists, they forbore the Temples and public
maintenance, and so do we: And I am sure they used to preach in private, as
well as we; yea and in the Churches when they thought it brought no great
inconvenience by offense. Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Nichols, and abundance more, did
preach in public after they were forbidden and silenced, till execution
hindered them as well as Law. And Mr. Nichols, Mr. Langley, Mr. Bromskill, and
many more, when they were driven from one place, would preach where they found
opportunity in another. And Mr. Herring was wont privately to preach in
Shrewsbury, as his most credible friends and hearers told me. And indeed the
far greatest part of the Nonconformists, that ever I knew, had public liberty,
in some small peculiar, for most of their time, if not by connivence in greater
places: So had Mr. Knewstubs, Ash, Slater, Root, Ball, Barnet, Gilpin, and many
more.

And yet we as well as Mr. Rathband will submit to a suspension, or prohibition
of authority, when it is but an act of Order and Government of just authority,
and not a notorious subversion of the thing Ordered, or the End, and Gods Laws
and men's necessities oblige us not to the contrary. The Papists hold that a
Father may not keep his Son from taking Orders. If the Bishops were our Fathers
then, they could not hinder us from the faithful exercise of what we have
undertaken.

14 Obj. The Reason why you are against Bishops is, because you cannot be
Bishops your selves: And why was it that you so long demurred on the matter,
before you refused them, when some had such offers? Did it not show that you
had a mind of them?

Ans. The first half of this charge was given in the Pulpit to my face, when no
Minister or Nonconformist else was present: The other is the Debate-makers (in
sense). And seeing I am personally concerned in the matter, my answer must be
historical accordingly.

Will not all sober bystanders think that we have very hard measure, and have
to do with a strange generation? When they shall know that Bishoprics were
offered us without seeking directly or indirectly, and refused with as much
modesty as we could use; and after all are denied not only the place of the
poorest Curates, but even all liberty to Preach for nothing, to the rudest,
poorest Inhabitants of the Land; and yet after all this, to be told that we are
against Bishops, because we could not be Bishops our selves? O happy
Christians, that must be finally judged by a more righteous Judge!

If you say that you mean it of those that never had such offers, why should
you not rather judge of them by us that were tried, than boldly judge that of
them which they were never tried in, and of which it is impossible for you to
have knowledge?

But the later objector tells us whom he speaks of. To whom I must say,
There were but five or six Nonconformists of all England, that ever I heard of,
that had any Church-Dignities offered them since his Majesty's Restoration: And
of these but three that had Bishoprics offered them, which were Dr. Edward
Reignolds, Mr. Calamy, and my self: And of these three, I refused it the next
day, or next save one, after the first offer of it by the Lord Chancellor (for
private overtures by inferiors before, I answered with as much refusal as was
fit to such uncertain offerers): Dr. Reignolds in a very short time accepted:
Only Mr. Calamy delayed: And if Dr. Bates and Dr. Manton, who were offered
Deanries (as they said, for I am certain of no offer but my own), did delay
their refusal, it was on the same account. And the true Reason of Mr. Calamies
delay (which few men knew better than my self), was because perhaps he would
have accepted a Bishopric as altered by the Kings Declaration about
Ecclesiastical affairs, and to be used according to that Declaration, but not
according to the ancient Laws and Customs of the Land and Church, though of
this much he was unresolved. Therefore he being uncertain whether the Kings
Declaration would stand, or pass into a Law, he delayed to see the certainty:
And when he saw that the Declaration was dead, and Prelacy was what it was
before, he refused it.

And Dr. Reignolds professed (to me) to accept it but on the terms of that
Declaration.

Now I would put two questions to the Justice of the Debater: 1. Whether he do
well to mention our refusing of Bishoprics at all, which we our selves so
studiously silence? There is now no Refuser living but my self: And I must
profess, that to this day I have been so careful to silence it, that I do not
believe there are many men, if any alive, that ever heard me mention it, unless
in answer to some one that asked me about it, or in confutation of some such
aspersions as these. And my reason was, because I apprehend it to favor of
Ingratitude, and disingenous carriage to my Rulers: If they shall offer me
preferment, and I should boast how I refused it, it would seem a casting it in
their faces with unthankfulness and contempt. And no man can say that ever I
was so unworthy; and few have ever heard me mention it. And yet we cannot be
quiet, for accusers; but if we say nothing, such men will.

Q. 2. Whether candor or justice would without any distinction persuade the
world, that we had a mind of preferments, and therefore so long delayed;
whereof only three men that had the offer of Bishops, one refused in a day or
two, and the other presently accepted; And the one that delayed, with the two
about Deaneries, were known to do it, that they might know first whether the
Kings Declaration would pass into a Law, or be cast by?

And if you proceed to intimate, that we refused but for fear of losing our
party. I know no man's heart but my own; and I will help you by some evidence to
know it in this matter. 1. Upon the offers by inferior agents that first were
made to me, my neighbor Ministers in Worcestershire having some knowledge of
it, concurred in a Letter to me, neither persuading nor dissuading me, but
thinking me the fittest judge; assured me, that if I accepted it, they should be
so far from censuring me for it, as rather to believe that it would be for
good, etc. 2. When I refused it, being wary what men might after say, I did it
in writing, in a Letter to the Lord Chanceller, giving him those Reasons that
did content him, viz. If the Kings Declaration were established; though I wished
a perfecter frame of Discipline than it recites, yet I was so glad of that
much, that I took it to be my duty to promote our Concord with all my power,
upon that foundation: And I knew that if I were no Bishop my self, I could far
more effectually persuade men to Conformity, than if I were. And this was the
reason I gave of my refusal. But if the Kings Declaration should not be
ratified (as I verily did believe it would not), I knew if I took a Bishopric,
I must quickly leave it. And then it was better refuse it at the first. And
this being our case, methinks I might refer the judgment of it even to the
Censurer himself (whose civility to my self through the rest of his Debate, I
do acknowledge).

15 Obj. If the King must change or relax his Laws as often as men will be
scrupulous or discontented, there will be no setledness, consistency or order.
Your tender Consciences are but tender heads: And soft-headed people must be
Rulers of us all, if we must change as often as their weakness will desire it.

Ans. You cannot think that when you talk at this rate, the readers and hearers
can be all so simple, as not to understand, that your words only signify that
you stand on the higher ground, and not that you have the better cause: For, 1.
you were not only importuned before these Laws were made, to have done your
part, for a more universal Concord, but you were also Commissioned by the King
under his Broad Seal, to consult for the making such alterations in the
Liturgy, as were necessary to satisfy tender Consciences: When instead of so
doing, you have made the burden heavier than before. And is this a fit plea for
men, that before the new Laws and Impositions, had so much power and
opportunity to have prevented the matter of our grievance, and were so long
importuned to it in vain, to talk afterward of the inconvenience of changing or
relaxing Laws.

2. Have the Nonconformists so often changed their cause, that you should be
put to talk of so frequent change of Laws? Do you not tell them that their
arguments and exceptions are but the same that have been answered to their
predecessors long ago? If their cause be the same, one alteration since the
first Imposition of Conformity would have served their turn. If after the
troubles or differences at Frank ford they had been brought to an agreement by
mutual accesses and concessions, what need any more as to the Nonconformists to
this day?

3. Who were the Changers when you put your new clauses into the Liturgy (as
the doctrine of Baptized Infants salvation, without distinguishing of them that
were baptized Rightfully, or without right, etc.) If all the new Oaths,
Subscriptions and Declarations be imposed by your advice, surely it was you
that were in that the Changers. Changes then will do well, and be laudable when
they serve your ends, but they are dangerous when they are against your minds.
What changes does Thorndike plead for?

4. When the New Canons and Oath were made 1640, and when Rails and Altars were
set up, and bowing toward the Altar recommended, there was no danger in these
changes: But if an Oath or Subscription of seven years age be abated, how
dangerous would such changes be!

5. The Kings Majesty, when he published his Declaration about Ecclesiastical
affairs, did not take those changes there made to be so dangerous: Nor did the
Commons in Parliament, who gave him thanks for that Declaration. We may know
then by that much, whence the noise of danger comes.

6. If a needless Subscription or a Ceremony have burdened so many and
considerable Subjects an hundred years and more; and if the calamitous attempts
of change, that have been made unlawfully in the Land, have been occasioned by
men's differences about those things, and if they are still the burden of so
many as are now against Conformity: Let impartial persons then be judges,
whether the removing of those troublesome unnecessary burdens, were not the
likest means imaginable to prevent any more ill attempts of change?

7. Is there any thing in the world, that you think unlawful? No doubt there
is. Suppose that one thing were by a Law imposed on you: would you think that a
change of that Law would be a dangerous thing? and would you exclaim against it
as now you do?

What if King Charles I. his Concessions in his restraint in the Isle of Wight,
had past into a Law (as they had if the Parliament had not suddenly been
broken), and that Episcopacy had received as great a change as was then
intended in those Concessions? Would you have taken the rescinding of all these
Laws for a dangerous change?

16 Obj. It is obedience that beseems tender consciences: Disobedience is as
the sin of witchcraft; And would you have any countenance you in so great a
sin? If Subjects must have the Laws changed, instead of obeying them, they will
be Rulers, and not Subjects. Why are you not more tender of offending and
disobeying your Governors?

Ans. 1. Are not you and we agreed that God is the chief Ruler, and to be first
obeyed, and no man against him, but only under him? In this sure we do not
differ. To disobey God, is as the sin of witchcraft, and obedience to him is
better than sacrifice: And when it is only our obedience to God that makes us
disobey any Governors, judge whether we were not more chargeable with
disobedience, if we obeyed men, and disobeyed God. We have no reason to cast
our selves under all your reproach, and so much suffering, but only to avoid
disobedience to God: And when our costliest obedience, must go for odious
disobedience; and if we disobey God to please men, it would go for obeeience;
what remedy, but to wait for a more righteous judgment, where obedience and
disobedience will be better known.

2. Again I ask, Is there any Oath that you dare not take? any thing that you
dare not subscribe to and declare? any thing that in Gods worship you durst not
use? Suppose that one thing were imposed on you? would you Conform to it or
not? If you were but put to subscribe all to the truth of Dr. Hammonds opinion,
that there were no Presbyters, but Bishops in the Scripture-times, and that no
Church then was bigger than one Bishop with his Deacons did efficiate with,
would not some part of you scruple subscribing to it? If any one thing or word
which you judge unlawful to be done or subscribed, were put on you by a Law,
would not you then be the Nonconformists? And were it not as easy then to
declaim against your Disobedience and Nonconformity, as it is now for you to do
it against ours? Might not Volumes as plausibly be written to show the mischief
of Subjects disobedience, and quarrelling with the Laws, and being judges of
what is unlawful? And might not you be as largely characterized as a stubborn
unquiet people, as we are by you now? So that all this still does only tell us,
that you are got up in the highest seat, from whence you have advantage to look
down with scorn upon those that are more fearful of sinning than your selves.

3. We are so tender of disobeying our Rulers, that we will do any thing to
obey and please them, except disobeying God, and damning our own or others
Souls: And if you must have us yet go further, you must excuse us; we had
rather go to your prison under all your obloquy. Your furnace is not so hot as
Gods.

17 Obj. The only reason (say most of them) why they forsook their Ministry
was, that they durst not abjure the Covenant: Dispense with them for this, and
they are Conformists. But if that be the only thing they scruple, then why are
they not Conformists in all other particulars, against which they pretended no
such exceptions? And what does renouncing the Covenant concern the people,
etc? Thus the Ecclesiastical Politician, Page 242, 243.

Ans. 1. Is this flaming-hot Disputer so much better acquainted with us, than
we are with our selves and one another? Has he talked with the most of us? or
have the most ever said or written, that it is only the Covenant that we stick
at? I must profess, of all the Nonconformists that ever I knew or spoke with, I
never knew any one of this mind, which he says [ the most of them say] they
are of. Nay I never heard of any one Nonconformist of that mind. And if the
world and posterity must be told so confidently, that most say and hold that,
which I that am supposed so much on their side, did never know nor hear of any
one man that said or held, you may judge what a history posterity is like to
have of this age; and also with whom we have to do, and upon what terms. I
confess I know one that has suffered the loss of all these many years, and
been denied so much as leave to teach School, that is for Episcopacy, Liturgy
and Ceremonies as lawful, and never took the Covenant, nor was ever for it, nor
for the Parliaments War, but against both, that yet cannot disoblige every one
that ever did take the Covenant, so far as is required to Conformity, nor
cannot subscribe or declare Assent and Consent to every word in the three Books
so to be consented to. But such a one as sticks at the Covenant only, I never
knew nor heard of.

3. But if the accusers of the Brethren do believe themselves, they tell the
world the little charity that is among them; who had rather so many Ministers
were silenced, (to say nothing of their bodily sufferings), and so many
thousand souls want their Ministry, than abjuring the Covenant should be
dispensed with, when a fuller security for loyalty and peace is offered.

4. It is either the Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independent Nonconformists
(for all these sorts there be at least) that he means, by most of them, or
most as mixed: 1. The Episcopal Nonconformists are not for the Covenant, but
stick most at consenting and swearing to the English Hierarchy and Discipline,
and Church State, as it differs from the old Episcopacy described in
Archbishop Ushers Reduction. 2. The Presbyterians surely have told the world by
Books enough, that they are Nonconformists in more things than abjuring the
Covenant. And in good sadness, does not England know that (call them what you
will) the Divines commissioned by the King did give their reasons against more?
3 And the Independents are so far from being to be numbered with his [ most of
them] that I know not if you would free them from the rest of Conformity,
whether the leaders would not yield in this. For when Scotland was invaded, and
Mr. Love Beheaded, it was pleaded that the Covenant was as an Almanac out of
date. And Mr. Eaton has written a Book to prove, that the Covenant, and the
Oath of Allegiance bind not.

5. But as for [ abjuring] I never heard that it was required of the Ministers;
and how can that possibly be their only Nonconformity, which never was imposed
on them.

6. But what he and others mean to pretend that the Laity are unconcerned in
the renouncing of the Covenant, when it is known by Printed Laws, and by
practice, that all the Cities and Corporations in England, as to the Governing
or trusted part, are constituted by the Renunciation of the Covenant, and also
all the Vestries; as the Corporation Act, and the Vestry Act declare, is but
more matter of wonder to men, that have not been used to such things! So many
new Printed Laws, and the visible state of all the Cities and Corporations in
England are not evidence enough on a Nonconformists part, to decide a
controversy of fact. But if they shall say that they meant that the Laity are
not on such terms forbidden to come to Church: I answer, if we also had learned
the trick of speaking, writing, and swearing in universal terms (or
equipollent), and meaning not universally, but particularly, as many do, we
could say, or subscribe, or swear as far as you desire us.

18 Obj. If you be tolerated, why not all others as well as you? And so the
Quakers and the Papists may come in. And it is well if the Presbyterians do not
thus let in Popery.

Ans. 1. What if the Law imposed one word on you which you could not conform
to, and you differed from the Church in nothing else? what answer would you
give to such an Objection as this, which equally excludes Chillingworth and
Knot? Would you not say that a difference should be made? O how hardly can men
understand that are unwilling to know! How easy a case were this to the
willing!

Mr. John Rogers of Dedham, Mr. John Ball, and sometime Mr. Dod, and Mr.
Hildersham, had liberty to preach without conforming; and did it infer the
necessity of such a Toleration as you talk of?

2. I pray you take heed of bringing Conformity more into contempt than yet it
is, by seeming to judge it such a thing as men will not yield to without
constraint and punishment. Take off the penalty of subscribing, declaring,
crossing, etc. and all that are willing will use them without force. And if
most must be forced, it intimates that they do not like or love them. What good
does subscribing a sentence which he believes not, do either to the soul of
the liar himself, or to the Church?

3. If so large a Toleration as you talk of be so dangerous, and the
Presbyterians are like to occasion it for their liberty, why will you not
prevent so great a danger at so cheap a rate, as it might be prevented at? Are
you indeed against a Toleration of Heresy and Popery, and yet would you rather
venture on the danger of it, than abate to Protestants a needless ceremony or
subscription?

4. I cannot tell whether you are indeed such strangers to the thoughts and
talk of the people of England concerning your selves as you seem to be. If you
are, I will not now tell you what they say of you. But they rejoice that they
have a King so far from Popery, that he has by a Law made it a heinous crime
for any to vent any suspicions of his constancy (which through so many
temptations he has approved.)

And indeed it were a crime that deserved no small punishment, as imputing that
to our Sovereign which is scarce to be thought of a rational man; even to give
up most of his power and Kingdom to a foreign Usurper after his power is shaken
off, and that without any cause. Princes that ever got loose from the Roman
yoke, do not use to come under it again; at least, except as King John resigned
his Crown, constrained by mere necessity. But Godfrey Goodman a Papist was the
last Bishop of Gloucester; and I must profess that if I were a Papist and
studied to help them to a Toleration, I would by writings, and by all my
interest, endeavor to bring as many more of you as I could into a necessity of
seeking Liberty or Toleration, that when the party that needed and sought it
were considerable, and the cry for it were great, we might look for our part
among the rest, and say, why not we as well as others?

And yet I would have the Papists and all conscientious persons used like men,
and not with any cruelty or inhumanity.

19 Obj. There was indeed a necessity of much Preaching, before the world was
converted to Christianity: but there is no such necessity now when we are all
Christians.

Ans. This is fully answered before. Do you think the bare name of a Christian
and his Baptism, will save those thousands that know not what Christianity is?
or those that live in enmity, contempt or neglect of the Laws of Christ? Is a
wicked Christian that sins against the greatest means, and his own Covenant,
vow, and profession, a happier man than the poor Infidels that never heard the
Gospel? If not, these have need of teaching here at home, as well as men in
foreign parts. But I will add no more to my former answer.

20 Obj. But why do you not go preach among the Indians, or in other lands
where there is more need, if liberty of Preaching be all that you desire?

Ans. 1. Some are sickly and weak, and some aged, unable to travel. 2. Some
have families which they are obliged to, and must not desert, and cannot carry
with them. If you say, they should have kept themselves without: I answer, they
were born in a land where good men were suffered to serve God quietly, and
therefore they thought they might fix themselves therein. But if they could
have foreseen that they should have been forbidden to Preach at home, I believe
that many would not only have forborne Marriage, but also have set themselves to
learn some foreign languages that they might have been able to Preach abroad.
But, 3. our great impediment is, that we have not the vulgar tongue of any
other Country, and therefore cannot preach to any of the vulgar there; and if
we could in a long time learn the Tartarian or Indian tongue, etc. a half
learnt broken tongue does but make the speaker ridiculous to the vulgar. (To
say nothing of our want of maintenance to sustain us thither, and there) For my
own part, had I strength and any vulgar tongue, which I might use in Preaching
in other lands, I think I should have left England long ago, and not been an
eyesore to you so long.

21 Object. Have not the Friendly Debate, and the Politician fully and
unanswerably opened the folly and villainy of your Religion? and can you yet for
shame desire leave to preach and propagate such a Religion as that?

Ans. Because so great prejudice is taken against us from those Books, I
intended in the end to have given a full answer to all that concerns us; not
in their mode, but in my own, that is in certain Propositions containing our
judgment and our reasons about those matters, which I leave out now to avoid
length, having written Books enough to declare what my Religion is, and so have
others. And therefore now only say this in general concerning the Authors, and
their dealing with us.

1. As to the men, I judge them to be of more than ordinary parts, as to
Ratiocination and expression; and had they with humility, patience and
impartiality taken but a dozen or twenty years more time to have furnished
their minds according to their capacity, before they had permitted themselves
with so great considence to say what they have said, I believe they would have
been as excellent persons as most ages have produced. But they have put off the
habit of little children too soon.

2. I imagine by their writings, that they have been unhappy in their converse
and acquaintance; and that they have had more to do with Sectaries, and weak
women and boys, and the weaker sort of serious Christians among those called
Puritans, than with the sober understanding sort; and so judge of the party by
such as they have been acquainted with. For most of the weak expressions and
passages which they fill their Books with, I have heard from some Sectaries, or
true Fanatics, and from some weak women and ignorant persons, but never from
the grave and sober sort of Nonconformists. Nor have I used to converse with
many of the Laity, that talk at so low a rate, as they feigned them to talk.

3. I doubt also that their converse has been more at the Universities, and
with Scholars, and with the richer and well-bred sort of persons, besides those
Sectaries, than with Plowmen and other of the lower rank; and therefore that
they are strangers to the condition of the vulgar, which faithful Country
Ministers know, whose work has been to Catechize them, and personally instruct
them.

4. They cannot but know that most of those things which they blame in the
people, which are real weaknesses and faults, we tell them of as loud as they
do, and as plainly as they, though not so wrathfully or flamingly as they. Mr.
Pool's Vox calmentis has told the si'enced Ministers even in Latin in the
hearing of the world, of more of their faults, then both these Authors could
remember; and not only in my Directions for weak Christians, but in diverse
other Books, I have dealt as plainly with the people.

5. Saving therefore the Debaters civility to my self; I must ask him, whether
it savoured of common equity and justice, to make the Nonconformist in the
general, the author or owner of all those weaknesses, follies, impudences;
falsehoods, etc. which he could fasten only on Sectaries, or on the ignoranter
sort. And especially when scarcely ever Books were written by any man as
against Nonconformists that so little touch upon Nonconformity it self, or any
of the points in difference? Is Gersom Bucer, or Altar Damascenum, or Amesius
Fresh Suit, or any other of the Nonconformists writings answered there, except
a late Nehushtan, that few men own, and he thought he could more easily say
somewhat to?

6. If he say that he told us that he spoke it not of all: I answer, what if he
had put the word [ Christians] instead of the word [ Nonconformist] and said
that Christians hold all those sottish and impudent opinions, but yet said, It
is not all Christians, had this been justice to Christianity? and yet it is
true; for if Nonconformists be Christians, then Christians hold what they hold.
He that hears such a word [Christians, or Protestants, or Nonconformists have
a foolish Religion], does suppose it to be locutio formalis, and that the
meaning is, [As Christians, or as Protestants, or as Nonconformists, their
Religion is foolish.] And for the Author to say when he has done, [I meant
not, All Christians, All Protestants, All Nonconformists] is to say, I speak
not of them as such* What then? Why, as Antinomians, or as ignorant unlearned
people. But why then did you not charge your fooleries only on Antinomians,
Sectaries, and ignorant people, and make them as such only the actors in your
scene? and not as Christians, Protestants, etc. I know the name Christians is
more venerable than Protestant, or Nonconformist. But the injustice is as
palpable in the one as in the other. And the cause or the principle is bad that
can engage men in such unrighteousness, and make them so strange to themselves
as not to see it, yea to proceed impenitently in it, even when Righteousness is
one of the things which they write for, as neglected by them whom they
endeavor to disgrace. It is an ill cause that produces such effects, though a
quick and hasty wit can write another Volume to defend it; till love it self
shall sit in judgment, and condemn all the issues of uncharitable wrath.

The cause of Nonconformity as of old, and as owned now by us, was punctually
expressed to you in our many Papers given in when we vainly attempted unity;
and the new Conformity is known by the Acts which are lately made. And what is
the matter of the Debaters Dialogues to any of this? Does any Act of Parliament
forbid men to say, I am well through mercy. Or is there any Nonconformity in
that speech (or any unfitness either.) And so of abundance of such other
passages.

6. And is it for the interest of Justice, honesty, and charity, to persuade
the world that the Nonconformists Religion is foolish, senseless and
unpeaceable, when they profess to own no Religion at all, but naked
Christianity? Is Christianity so vile a thing? And indeed is not your Religion
the same with ours? I thought we had not been of different Religions, but only
of different opinions about Discipline and modes of worship in the same
Religion. But you know your selves better than we do. But if really you are of
another Religion from us, why were there never any attempts to reconcile us in
Doctrinals, when the work of reconciliation was (vainly) on foot? Why did you
never charge us with errors in Doctrine? Nay why did Dr. Cornelius Burgess his
Reasons for Reformation in Doctrine, Discipline, etc. so much offend, as you
may see even in the Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, where he
takes it ill that some pretend that we differ in Doctrinals. But now the
Religion of one must be wise, and the other foolish. The King there declares
our unity in Religion, after his trial of both sides. And this Author makes
our Religions as different as light and darkness, that is, as wisdom and folly.

Our Religion as to its containing Rule, is the holy Canonical Scripture. Is
that foolish and seditious? we profess to have no more. The Explication of the
Nonconformists sense of it, you have much in the Assemblies Catechisms and
Confession? Why wrote you not to prove them to be another Religion? Our Books
also are abroad, Mr. Hildershams, Greenhams, Hierons, Dods, Amesius, Bains,
Bradshaws, Cartwrights, Mr. Gataker, Mr. Vines, Mr. Anth. Burgess, Mr. Shaws,
Mr. Hows, Mr. Allens, and an hundred more. What false Religion do they contain?
I have told you my Religion often enough, especially in my Reasons for the
Christian Religion, and in my Confession. And if it be not false and foolish,
then it is not the Nonconformists as such, that is so; for a quatenus ad omne
you may justly argue.

Yea the Author is pleased to favor me with some Vindication, and to blame
others for opposing me; and is not that enough to prove that such opinions as
he disliketh, are no part of Nonconformity, as now in Controversy.

But he will give me occasion to tell him, how much I differ from his mind and
ways; when as there are near thirty or forty Books written against me, in whole
or in part (by men of several Sects and parties) and yet I fall out with none
of them all; nor charge them with such foolish Religions, unless they be
downright Apostates or Heretics. Nor would I silence any one of them that is a
sincere Preacher of the Christian Faith. My provocations its like have been
more than this Authors ever were. But must I forgive enemies, and not friends?
Do we contend for our selves, or for Truth, and love, and unity, and peace? It
is some honor from those adversaries both to me, and to my brethren, that I am
called their Antisignanus, who have written such abundance of Books against me?
For it seems that we forgive and love each other. If you say that it is because
we now agree in Nonconformity: I answer, 1. It was so before. 2. And you
suppose us as little agreed in that; and indeed many censure me more for
differing from them there, than in all the rest.

7. And is it not as valid arguing, to say, Mr. Hildersham, Dr. Reignolds,
Amesius, Bradshaw, Burgess, etc. have written soundly and learnedly; Ergo, the
Religion of the Nonconformists is wise and sound; as to say, Mr. Bridge one of
the five Dissenters from the Presbyterians has some harsh expressions, and Mr.
T. W. has some little sententious jingles (such as Conformists most abound
with), Ergo, the Nonconformists Religion is foolish.

8. But it may be you will say, that the Nonconformists must be judged of, not
by an odd person as your self is, but by the major part? Ans. 1. It never goes
right among Divines, when they judge Causes by persons, contrary to signed
avowed professions. Do they print and publish their professed Religion to the
World? and will you measure and denominate the Religion of the Nonconformists*
by two or three men's Writings (against which also you have no more to say)? 2.
And why did you not prove that it is the major part (or one of an hundred) that
are guilty of the real weaknesses which you mention (for all that you find
fault with, are not weaknesses)? Are the two or three that you named, the major
part of Eighteen hundred? What of all this have you to charge on those
forenamed? or on Mr. John Ball, Mr. John Paget, Mr. Langley, etc. or on Dr.
Twisse, Dr. Arrowsmith, and the rest of that Assembly? or on Dr. Tuckney, Dr.
Langley, Dr. Staunton, Dr. Seaman, Dr. Manton, Dr. Bates, Mr. Bull, Mr.
Wadsworth, Dr. Annesly, and abundance more about the City, or on the generality
of the silenced Ministers in all the Counties of the Land?

9. But do you consider how heinously you dishonor the Conformists, by the
disparity of the charge which you lay on the Nonconformists, and which they
have laid on you? I am not justifying either of your accusations: But if I were
a stranger in England, and had seen the Chairman of the Committee of
Parliament publish his Century of Conformists accused on witness, of so many
Crimes (especially drunkenness, and negligence, and insufficiency in so many),
and had seen the like charges before the Committees of the several Counties
attested on Oath, and had heard both your Icabods Groans, and the Gloucester
Cobblers History of the present Ministry: And then had read the most learned and
sharp of the Nonconformists adversaries, charging them with heart-hypocrisie,
with disobedience to those Laws for Oaths and Ceremonies which they think are
contrary to the Laws of God, and with cutting faces, and prating phrases, and
incongruous expressions in praying and preaching to the vulgar, etc. I should
suspect that their cases were not alike.

10. Is it a thing possible that a Divine in England should not know, that
there are in all Countries such Readers, and young, raw, ignorant Conformable
Preachers (O that they were but here and there one), that in understanding, in
method, in phrase, and all Ministerial abilities, may learn seven years and
seven, before they are like to reach the measure of W. B. and T. W. whom he
reproves? And could he forget that it is as just and solid reasoning to say,
This multitude of Conformists frequently speak nonsense confusedly, etc. Ergo,
the Conformists have such a Religion: as to say, W. B. and T* W. did not
express this or that congruously: Ergo, the Nonconformists Religion is such.

22 Obj. You overthrow all principles of Government, while you say that the
Magistrate may not command things evil by accident; And while you allow
doubting or scrupling persons to disobey authority, as often as they are but
pleased to question their Commands; whereas if you are uncertain whether the
matter be lawful, you are bound to obey; because you are certain that
Governors must be obeyed, and being uncertain that the thing is evil, the
certain part must prevail against the uncertain.

Ans. We have long been silent at such accusations, supposing by this time they
would have been ashamed of themselves: Had we read such Moral Divinity, as some
would teach us, in Father Banny, Escobar, or other such Jesuits, we had been
like to have found it in the Collection of their Morals, which the Jansenists
published.

1. I never read or heard man yet say, that the Magistrate may not command any
thing evil by accident: But I have said my self, that His Commands of things
evil by accident may be sinful; that is, that it is not all things that are
evil by accident that he may command. But because some men will not understand
till they are constrained against their wills; I shall elsewhere open the truth
about this so plainly, as that they shall hardly avoid the understanding of it,
but by refusing to read it: And I will show them what it is to maintain, that
men may command any thing that is evil by accident only.

2. And the other accusation is the forgery of passionate enmity also; we
believe that a man is not to obey authority at all times, whenever he doubts
of the matter commanded, or in every case of doubting: But we never thought
that all doubtings will excuse his obedience. We use to speak more distinctly,
and leave them to confusion, that either cannot distinguish, or must have
troubled waters to fish in, for matter of calumniation. Of this also I shall
elsewhere give you a satisfactory account of our judgment* Done since in my 2d
Plea for Peace.

23 Obj. But the grand accusation against us by Dr. Heylin in his life of A. B.
Laud, and elsewhere, is for Calvinism, or Puritanism in Doctrine, against that
which is commonly called Arminianism; which he makes the matter of our great
contentions and calamities: And many other say as he: And Mr. Thorndike
carries it yet much higher, accusing us not only of the Doctrine of imputed
Righteousness, but others in which we have departed from the Church of Rome.
See his Just Weights and Measures, and his Greater Volume.

Ans. 1. By this it further appears, how unjustly and partially we are used,
and how unnecessary they themselves hold Unity in Doctine it self to be, in
matters which some account so great to the liberty of Preaching the Gospel. For
in all the Arminian Controversies, the Conformists differ among themselves as
much as we do from any of them, if not more. Nothing more common now in our
Pulpits, than for one man to preach up Freewill, and another to preach it down
(and neither of them know what Free will is); and for one to preach for
absolute Election, perseverance of all Saints, etc. and another to preach the
contrary, and show the tendency of these opinions to all wickedness. And yet
all these men are suffered to preach, because they all subscribe the same
doctrine, though they neither believe nor preach the same: The Articles of the
Church of England are subscribed by them all: They Assent and Consent to all
the Doctrine of the Church. And indeed, is it because the Articles are not
intelligible? or have they contrary meanings to fit the use of every
subscriber? Are they hot to one, and cold to another? Or rather, do many of the
Subscribers take heed of Tenderness of Conscience, because it is but tenderness
of Head, and is more sensible of hurt and smart than a feared Conscience is, or
is a word and thing that is grown into disgrace and scorn in our times?

For my own part, I doubt not but the Compilers of the Articles and Liturgy
were in these things of Augustines judgment, who was for absolute Election, but
for no other Reprobation but non-election, and the decree of damnation and
desertion only upon foresight of sin. But as to the differences themselves, it
would grieve a man of any understanding to read such a History as Dr. Heylins
Life of the Archbishop, which intimates to the world, that such points as
these were the occasion of all the contrivances against each other, and of the
enmities and calamities which these Kingdoms have undergone! When As the things
are such as never bred any such dissension in the first ages of the Church, nor
would do among us, if we had their piety and simplicity.

I long ago began a Treatise (which the agitations of my Troublers (...)y Gods
mer(...)y, since the(...)riting of this have publi(...)head it, called
(...)atholick The(...)ogy.
have interrupted) to reconcile the Arminians and Anti-Arminians in these
matters, in which I should easily have manifested, how unfit such Subjects were
to be so fiercely and implacably contended about. And because I know not
whether ever I shall live to re*assume it (being tossed about, and having
neither health nor liberty for any settled habitation), I must give the
judicious a few hints of the Media of Conciliation which I would have used.

1. I would have distinguished and reduced the Controversies unto three sorts:
First those that are only de nomine, and seem to the unskilful to be de rebus,
which are more than most imagine: And these an explication would have ended.
Secondly, Those that are about things unrevealed, and unknown to mortals; which
are some that are hotliest contended about: And these all must grant are to be
cast aside. Thirdly, those that are real differences, fit for our disputes:
which I should prove, 1. to be very few. 2 Far from the foundation, and of no
such moment as ignorant, self-conceited, furious disputers would make the world
believe they are. 3. And that they are of so great difficulty, that all sober
Christians should easily bear with one another about them.

2. I would show the necessity of beginning our Controversies about the
temporary Effects, and not about the eternal Decrees, because as the first do
more concern us; so they are natiora, more within our knowledge: And then the
questions about the Decrees, will more easily be decided.

3. I would open distinctly the Covenant of Grace made universally with
mankind, 1. Before Christ. 1. With Adam* 2. With Noe. And 2. after Christ's
Incarnation: and distinguish it from the narrower particular Covenant with
Abraham and the Israelites. And I would open the nature of the Universal pardon
and Gift of life, which God has made through Christ in the Gospel, to mankind,
upon the Conditions which are to be punctually explained; which Conditional
Justificaton or Pardon is acknowledged by all.

4. I would open the nature and extent of that common operative Grace of the
Holy Ghost, which is given to those that are yet unsanctified; And I would
prove from the case of Adam, that there has been such a thing as Grace
sufficient, or necessary to the effect, which through man's fault was not
effectual; and which without any more helps, man could and ought to have made
effectual, or to have acted by. And then I would prove that ad aliquid, there
is still such a thing as Grace necessary or sufficient, (that is, without which
men cannot, and by which they can, use certain means which God has made the
duty of all mankind to use, which have a tendency to their recovery): And that
certainly no part of the world is left under the first Covenant of innocence,
(though under the precept or duty of it) but are under a Law or Covenant of
Grace, as that Law by which they are governed and judged (though all Consent
not); And therefore that all are under such obligations, to use such means for
their recovery as are vouchsafed and appointed them; and are condemnable if
they use them not; and need not fear using them (faithfully) in vain.

5. I would open the nature of Liberty and Free Will, and above all make plain
the distinction between the Essential, Natural Liberty, and the mutable Moral
Liberty; and show that man's will is a self-determining faculty, supposing the
necessary objects, and intellectual apprehension; and that it is part of Gods
Image on it, so to be Dominam suorum actuum; and that every man has this
natural liberty of willing, not willing or nilling (which Mr. Le Blank has
most judiciously opened in his late Theses); But no man has more of the Moral
liberty, which is a freedom from a vicious disposition, than he has (either
special or common) Grace.

6. I should show how the want of the Natural liberty is a full justification
for omission or action; and that the want of Moral liberty, being nothing else
but want of Dispositive willingness, or of a right will, is the very matter of
guilt, and aggravateth all actual and omissive sin.

7. I should open the nature of [ Power], and show what goes to make [ Power]
in a proper sense: And whether God may be said to give sufficient Grace to
believe, when he gives proper Power to believe? And that Grace sufficient ad
agere, est efficax ad posse: And what Austin meant by Posse Credere est omnium;
Credere vero fidelium. Especially I should distinguish of Natural and Moral
Power, and show that no man wants the former, which is the faculty it self;
And I should show, that Moral Power sometime signifies strength, which not
only can perform an act, but do it easily; and so it is nothing but special
Grace, or the Holy disposition and liveliness of the Soul, by which it has
such a degree of power to things spiritual: But sometimes Moral Power
signifies no more, but that the Natural Power is not so far destitute of Moral
helps, and disposition to the action, but that it may be properly said to be a
Power Morally, with that measure of Moral helps it has; and that it is not a
thing impossible properly, for the effect to be produced without any more
grace. And I would show how far this extends. But above all, that confused
Disputers are never in one sentence to be suffered to cheat their Readers or
Hearers, with [ Can] and [ Cannot] with [ Power and Impotency] unexplained, but
still forced to show what sort of Power or Impotency they mean. Every one has
the Natural Power of Repenting and believing, which is not plenarily and
properly called a Power to that which from any other Cause remains simply and
naturally impossible; nor is it a Moral Power to that which remains Morally
impossible: Every man has a Moral Power so far as he has Grace, and that is
in all men to be better than they are, and omit more evil, and to do more good;
but only the faithful have Moral Power in the more excellent degree.

8. I should show that the disputes about the manner of Gods operation or
influx on the soul, whether Physical, or Moral, are usually managed to more
deception than instruction: And that no mortal man can tell just how God
works on the Soul.

9. I should show what acts God does in his three distinct Relations, as Owner,
Ruler and Benefactor: And how equally he deals as Ruler, both in his Laws and
Judgment, avoiding all respect of persons: But how far as Owner and Benefactor
he is free, and makes an Inequality in the distribution of his Mercies, and
gives more to some than to others, without respect to Merit.

10 And that accordingly, 1. he gives the Gospel to one Nation, rather than to
another; and to one person, rather than to another, without any different
demerit of theirs. 2. And also gives such Grace to some as shall infallibly
convert them, with an absolute will to accomplish the effect, when that person
no more deserves it, than some that never have it.

11. But yet that no man is shut out of a state of Grace, but for or by his
wilful refusal or neglect of it; nor any man denied any necessary Grace, but
for the neglect or abuse of some sufficient antecedent grace: And though God
give grace without and against desert, he never denies it to any without
desert; and that more than the desert of Original sin (not now interupting our
discourse with the Case of Infants).

12. That when common Grace has brought one man much nearer the Kingdom of
God, than another, the same degree of further Divine operation and help, which
would be uneffectual to make a distant and unprepared man a believer, may make
him a believer that is nearer and more prepared.

13. All effectual grace proceeds from an effectual will of God to work it.

14. The great question therefore, Whether none are converted but by special
effectual grace? or any also by that which in its own nature is merely
sufficient, and made effectual by man's will? is captious, and partly past the
reach of man: It being certain, 1. That Grace is the chief agent in all that
believe; 2. That the will and mind of man is the immediate actor in believing,
3. That whoever believes has such grace as comes from an absolute, certain,
fixed will of God, that it shall attain the effect. 4. And that in what degrees
of influx God works on one that is converted, more or less than on another,
is no enquiry for any man that knows what he talks of? Nor can we well tell
when one man's will death do its part better than another, by the same degree of
Grace.

15. I should show when Free Will and Necessity are consistent, or inconsistent.

16. And also how God has his will, as much when man has greatest freedom, as
if he had none; and that man has as much freedom under the will and decrees of
God, as if they were none; Nay without them as a cause he could have no freedom.

17. I should show that the Calvinists (that run not with some few into
extremity) do acknowledge as much common Grace to all men, as the Arminians do;
For they confess the universal, conditional promise or Covenant; and they say,
that all men that hear the Gospel have pardon and sanctification, and salvation
brought to their own wills; and that if they refuse it not, they they shall
have it, and that they have the posse credere: And the difference is, that the
Arminian thinks that none ordinarily have any more than this, with such
persuasions as make it possible antecedently; but the Calvinists think the
elect have more, that is, that Grace makes them actually willing; which is
certain: But how Grace and the will concur, is as uncertain as aforesaid.

18. All creatures are Passive or Receptive as to Gods efficiency, or influx on
them; And so is man's soul; And therefore it is true that it is merely Passive
not only in receiving the first gracious influx of God, but in all the influxes
which it is under in every action of our lives: But it is a truly vital, active
soul or power, which is thus passive first; and therefore is ever the next
agent in all its Acts of believing, etc. and never merely passive; for that
were a contradiction. Nor can it be proved that the soul is merely recipient or
passive as to the true habits of Grace, but only as to that Influx which
exciteth us to act, and by that act (done by God and the Soul) the habit is
produced; which yet is called Infused, because it is caused by a special
Influx; what ever more than this is possible, no more can be proved de facto.

19. Our differences about Universal Redemption, and of the Decrees, depend on
those about Operations, and are easily reconciled with them. Christ died for
all men, so far as to procure them all the Grace that he gives them. And he
gives all men the Universal Grace fore described; the Conditional pardon, etc.
therefore so far he died for them. But of this I have written a peculiar
Treatise (not yet published.)

20. The Doctrine of Gods antecedent and consequent will must be better
explained, as being but his governing will, so called from Legislation and
Judgment, which are the antecedent and consequent parts of Government.

21. So must Gods will de naturalibus and moralibus, and his Legislative
antecedent will be well opened, and the uselesness and confusion of the
distinction of signi and been placiti manifested.

22. I would prove that God has no Decree or will of mere Negatives, as not to
give grace, faith, glory, not to save, etc. and therefore has no Decree to
permit, because permitting is but nothindering, which is nothing. By which one
sort of Reprobation (as now called) will be disproved.

23. That Reprobation to positive damnation, is only upon foreseen, and not
decreed impenitency or unbelief.

24. That Election and Reprobation therefore go not pari passu, but as Austin
and Prosper taught, the one is a positive absolute Will or Decree of God, the
other only upon foresight.

26. Predetermination by Physical premotion to evil materially, and as
necessary to all actions natural and free, is to be left to the Dominicans, and
not owned by any that know the consequences.

27. The numbering and ordering of Decrees secundum ordinem intentionis and
executionis is to be discussed, and the vanity of men's fictions here about made
known.

28. The nature of futurition, and the falsehood of founding it necessarily in
an eternal cause, is to be opened.

29. The foolish disputes of the manner of Gods knowing future contingents, are
(by clear reason) to be cast out of the Church and Schools.

30. In a word, a convenient explication will manifest that the difference in
all these Controversies really is next to none, except in the point of
Perseverance; and that in that point those that hold with Augustine and
Prosper, that not all the truly justified, and sanctified do persevere, but all
the Elect; and those that hold that all the justified and sanctified are Elect,
and do persevere; have great reason to number this difference among those
Schooldisputes which should break no charity nor communion among Christians.
But of Perseverance I have long ago published my thoughts in a peculiar
Treatise.

I have said thus much to show the world not only that we ought not to be
silenced or oppressed as an odious sort of people, for those Doctrines which
some abhor (when we subscribe to the same Articles of the Churches Doctrine as
they do); but also that it is a mixture of that ignorance and pride which is
the disease and calamity of Churchmen as well as of the world, which has
caused most of the heats on both sides, and the Cruelties in Holland, or in
England, thence proceeding about these Controversies. And that when men have
more Understanding or Humility, these differences will but little disturb the
Church.

And again I say, that those Church snuffers who put out the lights, should
have remembered our moderation in this point, that whereas Parliaments have
complained so long and zealously against Arminianism, and when Bishops have
been so hot about it against each other, (as Heylin will tell you of Abbot and
Laud, etc.) and when yet the Conformists preach against one another about it,
yet did we never speak a word to the King or them of any such matter. Because
if all men will subscribe the same wholesome Doctrine of the Articles, we cannot
hinder any from dissembling, and destroying what they do subscribe.

Obj. 24. Agreement with the Church of Rome is more desirable on the terms
described by Dr. Heylin in A. B. Lauds life, and you would make it impossible?

Ans. We are for a just concord with all Christians; but true Popery we cannot
agree with; and as to Papists they are but a part (a third or fourth part says
your Primate Bishop Bramhall) of the Catholic Church. We must unite with the
whole Church, or else we are Schismatics. To embody in the faction of the
Papists is as Schismatical, as to do it with a smaller faction. And if you will
unite with all Christians, I still say, you must unite on Vinc. Lirinensis
terms, on that which all Christians are agreed in, that indeed deserve the name
of Christians.

Now if you establish your concord on the Scripture, and on universal terms,
all Christians in the world will confess that your Religion, yea all your
Religion is certain truth, and that it has also all things universally
necessary to Salvation; and this is a fair degree of unity, though they say
that yet you want their Traditions. And then you can tell a Papist quickly,
where your Religion was before Luther, Even where ever the Scripture was
received. And you do not wilfully and resolvedly cut off your selves from
Communion with all the Protestant Churches, who do not hold the Traditions and
Decrees of Rome. But you are united with all the Christians in the world in
Christianity, and so far as they have any union among themselves. And then all
those that will needs go further, do run the hazard of their own additions. We
will live in peace with them, if they will live in peace with us. But if the
Papists be such men, that they will hold no communion with any that hold not
all their Religion, that is, all the Decrees of their Councils, than neither
Abassines, Armenians, Greeks, nor Protestants can be received into their
Communion. And do you think it desirable to comply and embody with them in such
a schism and factious combination against all the rest of the Churches of God?
If you will deal like Christians, Catholics and wise men, let us first be as
moderate as may be in our Doctrinals, and not pretend that we are further
disagreed with Papists or any other Christians than indeed we are. I am one of
those who believe that in many Doctrines, quarrelsome ignorant men have made
differences where there are none; and have made those that be seem, wider than
they are; cut off these superfluities and spare not; and then reduce your terms
of Union and Communion to the Primitive simplicity of Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline; and if any will have more, let it be a matter of liberty and not of
necessity; or if they will not be limited as we are, let them take their scope.
Or if you your selves will needs have more, yet hold it with liberty, as matter
of convenience, and not of necessity to the union or communion of the Church.
If you will take this course, we shall deny Papists no love, no peace, no
communion with us on our terms (which they justify for the truth of them) in
our Churches. And if they will fly from us, and refuse our Communion, or will
put unlawful terms on us, and drive us from them, we shall have no accusation
for this by our consciences, or any wise man. He is the Schismatic that makes
communion impossible by his Additions or Impositions, or runs away from those
that will not receive all his Supernumeraries. Usurpation is the peace breaker
in the Church of God. Christ's sheep know his voice and follow him; but they
will not be so obedient to an unknown voice. Why cannot a man be content to be
a Lord Bishop, and to have many hundred or thousand pound a year, for promoting
the preaching and practice of Christianity, and for punishing Heretics,
rebels, drunkards, sensualists, etc. and serve God himself with what garb, or
forms, or ceremonies he please, as well as to have the same wealth and honor,
to prosecute much wiser and better men than himself, with a burning zeal, for
not swearing obedience to him, or for not subscribing that his Books are
faultless, or for not wearing a Surplice, or signing Children with the
transient Image of the Cross.

But we must suppose that we cannot make Papists to be Protestants; If they
will not turn Protestants, and we will not turn Papists, the contrivance or
supposition of a turn, or half-turn, is but a vain imagination, not the way to
unity and peace. We must take them as they are, and they must take us as we
are, and we must take all the Christian Churches as they are, in our design for
concord, if we will do any good in it. The question is not how, or how far we
shall change one another minds, or be changed, but how we shall maintain so
much love and peace as is due to one another in the capacity that we are in;
and how far we shall endure the different opinions and practices of another to
such an end. And such a Conciliator with Rome I would be my self, and magnify
the design as much as Heylin does, and be as zealous in it as Grotius, Laud or
Forbes were in theirs. For it is but the service of Love and Peace, and that is
certainly the service of God. I would treat with any Papists on such a design.
If peevish or suspious Protestants should try out on me, and defame me for such
a design, (as some have done) I would no more regard it than the crying of a
child. If Christian Princes would make such a Treaty their business by their
Ambassadors, that Love and Liberty might be regulated by the just rules of
Equality, and not be pretended only by a faction for their own ends, even by
them that will seek Liberty but will not give it, I would bless God for such
Princes, and for so good a work. And I would be (and am) ready to manifest to
all wise impartial men, whose Religion is Love and not Malice under the name of
Zeal, that in many Doctrines that we are by some supposed to differ in
Fundamentals, ignorance has feigned the difference to be doubly greater than
it is. And I think many of Forbes and Spalato's Arguments (in his very Learned
Books de Republ. Eccles.) to be worthy the serious study of every Learned man.
I know Luther took the Doctrine of uncertainty of Salvation alone, to be cause
enough of our unreconcileableness with Rome; and yet I know as well, that it is
not one godly person of many, yea very many of them that are farthest from the
Papists, who do say that they are certain of their own Salvation. I know that
many excellent Protestants have made it the sense of that article of the Creed,
I believe that my own sins are pardoned, and say that this Proposition, My sins
are pardoned, is de fide Divina And yet I know that in propriety and strictness
of speech (which should be used in Controversies) it is not true. I know that
many of the School-mens assertions are commonly rejected as erroneous, because
they are not commonly understood. I know that Luther makes the Doctrine of
Justification to be Articulus stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae; and yet I know
that Ludovicus le Blank of Sedan in his Theses has greatly narrowed the
difference, and understands it much better than Luther seems to have done.
Which I may say also of Bucer, Conradus Bergius, (In Praxi Cathol.) Ludov.
Crocius, and many other such Conciliators. And that Luther on the Galatians is
so acceptable to the Antinomians, that I conceive diverse passages in it have
need of as candid an (...) as the Doctrine of Scotus, and many Papists on that
point. I am my self a Christian, and that is my Religion; and I own the name
Protestant for no greater reason than because it is the Protestant Religion to
be mere Christians, and to protest against the Roman Superadditions, and
depravations of it. And so to be a Protestant, and to be a mere Christian
adhering to Scripture sufficiency as the test and terms of Union and Communion,
are all one. Yea, if any one doubted of the Canonicalness of the Canticles,
Esther, or some one or few Books, and acknowledge the main body of the
Scriptures and the ancient articles of faith I would not cast such a one from
my Communion. And these terms or none (I have foretold it you often) must heal
the Church if ever it be healed.

And till the Papists will see the equity of these terms, it is our great
advantage that the certain truth of all our Religion is so fully acknowledged.

But, 2. as long as we let others alone with their additions, why may they not
live in peace with us, and let us alone without them? All men are united in the
Essentials of Humanity, though they are not all of one complexion, stature or
degree of strength. And if any be so peevish that he will associate with none
that are not of his own complexion, the separation is the effect of his folly,
which may possibly be cured; and till it be cured, both the fault and the
suffering is his own. If a Law were made that none shall live in the Kings
Dominions but men of a Sanguine complexion, and of a strait and comely person,
and of such a proportion of tallness and of strength, and of flaxen hair, this
Law would necessitate a separation and diminution of the Kings subjects from
generation to generation. But if the Law be that all English men that will live
after the rules of Reason, Honesty, and Society, shall have the privileges of
subjects, if an hundred thousand had got a conceit that they may not lawfully
be of the same Kingdom with any but men of their own complexion and stature as
aforesaid, this is a cureable folly; and the Lawmakers may say, we have done
our parts for universal society, and it is not we that make it impossible, or
hinder it, and men in time may come to reason. We refuse not them, but they
refuse us. If you make things necessary, and of common agreement to be your
terms of Union, Greeks, Abassines, Armenians Romans, may take their own way,
and every one without injury enjoy his own (be it wisdom or folly) upon these
terms. But if you unite upon any other terms, you make Laws for schism, even
for the exclusion of all that are not of your mind. For Hales his Doctrine is
true in the judgment of all men save the guilty, that the Imposer of
unnecessary doubtful things is the Schismatic, or cause of all the schism. So
that there is no true union to be expected with Rome or any others, but on the
terms of primitive simplicity, or which all true Christians are agreed in. And
they are no good terms which induce the authors through the force of interest,
to say that none in the world are good Christians, that are not of their cut
and strain, and wear not their livery, and lace not their coats in the Imposers
mode.

4 And as long as we take nothing from the men of various modes and fashions,
by unity in the Essentials of Humanity and Christianity, to imagine that it is
the way to union to force all Dissenters to their modes, is but to renounce
union, and to gratify a distant party so far as to make them laugh at us as
fools, and hope ere long to get us at their mercy, and thereby to lose,
disoblige and destroy those that are nearer to us, and would indeed be our
friends and strength; and to become enemies to our own families, rather than to
displease the people of France by not wearing their fashions.

5. And if you had attained a seeming union with the Papists, you are not sure
it will hold seven year. For their Religion still thriveth, and thereby
changes, and is yet far short of its maturity in all likelihood. For General
Councils make their Religion; and who knows how many General Councils (of
forty Bishops perhaps like that at Trent, for a great part of the time) there
may yet be, and what alterations of Religion they may make? And are you sure
you can go along with them in all as far as they will go? If you must break at
last, unite not on such mutable terms at first.

But there is no talking to men whose interest and passion, and partiality is
the maker of their Religion. It is not my purpose to speak any of this, either
to one of Grotius's mind (if Saraviad, and the Book called Grotius Papirans be
credible, or if he be that man that wrote the Discussio Apolog. Rivet; who
would have us unite upon the acceptance of all the Councils even that of Trent)
nor to such as come as near them as Mr. Thorndike, nor any of that degree of
affinity. For I suppose they are already gone out of the hearing of such a
voice as mine.

Yet still remember that I am not setting a Law, (no not Christ's Law) to your
selves for the rule of your own opinions or practices. If you will please the
Papists by coming yet nearer them (even nearer than the learned Forbes Bishop
of Edinburgh did), if you will have more of their Doctrine, Discipline and
Worship, take it if it will do you any good? But why must all others needs be
of your judgment? or those be of your way that are not of your judgment? And
why cannot you unite with the Papists (if you will) without destroying the
Protestants, or renouncing them. Unite in things necessary, and hold and use
the rest as matters of liberty, and it will better attain your just ends than
violence can do.

Obj. 25. But if we should abate you any thing, though but a ceremony, or a
Subscription, or Oath, or should make any alteration in the Church*Government,
(though it were but to take the Church keys from Lay Chancellors*, or if we
should reform Discipline, or any thing at your desires, you will be taken by
the people to be their deliverers and reformers, and your cause will be taken
to be good when we yield to it in any part, and it will be said that you did
not dissent from us, and make all this ado in vain; and we shall be thought to
have been in the wrong, and all this while opposed Reformation Or ( as the
young Eccl Politician speaks, page 258) This would but give the countenance
of authority to their scruples and superstitious pretenses, and leave the
Church of England under all those calumnies to posterity, with which
themselves, or their followers labor to charge it; and oblige future ages to
admire and celebrate these peevish and seditious persons, as the founders of a
more godly and through Reformation.

Ans. 1. It is the nature of all sin to blind the mind, and engage the
affections to it, that the more men have of it, the less they may either see or
hate it. And so it is with Faction, Schism, and selfishness, which is the root
of all (as the case of the Roman Clergy witnesses.) And if any besides your
selves had reported you to speak such words, which are the full significants of
these vices, ( selfishness, faction and schism), I should have judged him
uncharitable. Alas! that ever men that call themselves Ministers of Christ, and
Pastors of his flocks, should and would be thought to be the wisest and
worthiest of his Ministers in comparison of whom we are worthy to be silenced,
banished and ruined, should yet dare before God and man to vent and own the
language of pride and faction, and envy, while they cry out against pride, and
faction, and envy! But they that think they know something, know nothing as
they ought to know! The Lord teach me to become a fool, and escape their
wisdom, that I may be wise; and to know my self better than such men do, before
I pretend to know the folly, and hypocrisy, and unworthiness of men that are
wiser, and more sincere and worthy than my self. What little need had you to
disgrace your selves by telling the world that you will not amend, lest you be
thought to have done amiss, and lest those that desired it be celebrated as the
founders of a godly Reformation! Has not self-seeking and siding done enough
against us yet, but you must keep up the distinction of Parties and their
Merits for your own reputation against them whose desire is to have unity
settled upon terms of common agreement, that there may be no more names or signs
of faction among us?

Thus is the Church (or Kingdom rather) of Rome kept from Reformation, lest
they should part with the honor of their Infallibility, and seem to confess
that they needed Reformation.

2. But it is a gross mistake to think that this course will keep up your
honor to posterity, or hinder the estimation of them who desire you to amend.
For when you and we are in the dust, the world will not be afraid of you, nor
silence truth lest they incur the danger of your frowns; but will freely tread
upon your Hic jacet, and cast up your bones to make room for others, and talk
of you and your acts as freely, as King Henry the Eighth, Queen Mary, Bishop
Bonner, and Gardener are now talked of. And there will such men survive us, as
will take it for a greater fault and shame to have sinned impenitently than to
have repented; and to have refused amendment, when peace and common interest
required it, and so many arguments were used for it; yea, and to have so
afflicted their brethren that desired and sought it of them, than to have been
guilty of the mutability and weakness of amending, or of being more for love
and unity, and peace.

3. But if that be the matter, men of half your pretended wisdom, might easily
know how to heal the Church, and yet to salve your honor too, yea and to deny
the feared honor of the Dissenters, so far as such as you can hinder it. And
if you will not interpret it as an approving of your act, I will tell you how:
Cannot you abate the Subscriptions, Oaths, and other such Impositions, and tell
the world, that you do it not as convinced by the Nonconformists arguments, nor
as supposing that the things have any evil in them, but only out of your
eminent charity, as bearing with the weak, and your love of the Churches peace
and concord, more than the dissenters love them? Nay you may rail at the
Nonconformists in your very Concessions, and call them as bad as you do in your
writings, so you will but yield to healing terms; and do it not as a
Reformation, but as a peaceable forbearance of these Schismatical, peevish,
disobedient Reformers, that they may have no more pretense for Schism*

4. Did Peter Heylin, or Archbishop Laud and his adherents, if Heylin belie him
not, deal with the Papists on such terms as these? Did they say, They will
justify their Invasion 88, and their Powder Plot, and all their Treasonable
Practices, and Bulls, and all their false Doctrines for which these were done,
if we abate them any thing, or yield them the least; and therefore we will
yield them nothing at all? Did Grotius, did your Bishop Forbes, does your Mr.
Herbert Thorndike go upon such terms with them, or not? Speak out, Do you think
us or the Papists nearer to you? If they are nearer you than we are, then you
are nearer them than us; Even than us who subscribe to all the faith of the
Church of England, and differ, as you say, but in indifferent things: Than us
whose Writings declare our judgments to the world. But if you be really nearer
to us, than to the Papists, why may you not yield as far to us, for peace and
concord, as the Episcopal Reconcilers would have done to them? Even Dr. R. Cox
would have yielded to Church-Images, Vid. Epist. ad Cassand.

5. Lastly, O that you would remember, that he that denies not himself, cannot
be Christ's disciple. And that you would never tempt the world to think, that we
should all have peace, if there were none that were cast down, because Abel
offers a more accepted sacrifice than their own; yea or if there were none
that made it the chief point of difference, whether we should be seriously, or
only seemingly Christians, and live as men, that believe indeed that there is a
life to come, and that the Scripture is true.

I hope I may recite Dr. Hammonds Paraphrase on Act. 4 9. 14, 18, 21. If we
this day be examined of an action, which is so far from being a crime, that it
is a special act of mercy (as Preaching the Gospel is) -- Though they were as
maliciously and petulantly affected toward them (v. 16.) as was possible, yet
had they nothing to object, or except against the whole action. -- But Peter
and John made light of their interdict or terrors, and told them plainly that
they were commanded by God to preach; and that in all reason, God must be
obeyed before them, or the greatest Magistrate on earth, and that they
themselves could not but confess so much* -- And so not knowing what else to
say to them, being not able to deny the force of their argument (they wanted
our new wits), they added more threatenings, if possibly they might terrify
them, and so dismissed them, having nothing to lay to their charge.

And if Mr. Middlesly in Lancashire had brought out the many thousand people
converted by him, which Dr. Ames mentions, had it not been a silencing
argument against his silencer, as well as the Cure of a lame man here was?

And on 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16. It being unreasonable that they which have cast off
obedience to God, should persecute all men that come to tell them of their
duty. And this generally is the ground of their quarrel to us, that in spite
of their prohibition we preach to the Gentiles, use means that they might
repent of their Idolatries, etc. By which and the former things, the Jews do so
fill up the measure of their sins, that the wrath of God, to the utter
destruction of them, is now come out upon them, already denounced; and within a
very little while, most certain to overtake them.

I apply it no further than to tell you, that if you will still choose our
Suffering, as more desirable than our Preaching the Gospel of Christ: your arms
will sooner be tired with striking, than faithful Ministers will be tired with
Sufferings; and you will be sooner a weary of smiting with the Sword, than they
will be with preaching the Word, under all your pressures. And when your nets
have taken only the Greater fishes, the lesser fry will all get through, and
become more numerous, and in time as Great as those you took, and will make the
vanity of your trade apparent, and make you one day wish that you had left such
nets, and with Peter and them, have been fishers of men, to win them, rather
than to destroy them.

26. Obj. But Castellanus his objection against Bicot (elsewhere cited out of
Scaliger) is their greatest strength, who said Aristotle was against Monarchy:
Here they may borrow that by deceiving, which by disputing they could not
prove: The Counterminor, and many others like minded endeavor to make Rulers
and people believe, that it is Rebellion that is in our hearts, and that it is
only the renouncing of a Rebellious Covenant that we stick at, and the
Renouncing of Subjects taking arms against the King, and any commissioned by
him; and therefore the silencing of such as cherish the principles of Rebellion
is necessary: And they think that this Oven gapeth so wide, and is so hot, that
here they may boldly challenge our answer.

Ans. If men have any remnants of justice and modesty left, they shall be
constrained to confess, that my Answer to this Objection is satisfactory.

I. I take that man to be an enemy to God, to Kings, and to Mankind, who will
maintain that there is any such thing in the world, as a lawful unlimited
Monarchy or humane Power; and therefore wonder that Bishop Morley did put the
denial of this among the accused passages of my Political Aphorisms, where I
expressly speak of Gods Limitation.

1. He is an enemy to God that asserteth this, because he thereby denies God
to be the Universal Sovereign, who has made Laws for all Kings, who are all
his Subjects; and as they are finite, receive but a finite power from him: It
is Atheism to deny Gods Sovereignty. Has not God forbidden Kings Idolatry,
Perjury, Blasphemy, Murder, Tyranny, Oppression, Adultery, etc?

2. He is an enemy to Kings who will render them odious to mankind, by drawing
such a picture or description of them, as to say, A King is one that is
absolutely unlimited in his power, and therefore may deny or blaspheme God, and
may destroy City and Kingdom, and kill all the innocent people when he please.

3. He is an enemy to Mankind that would bring them into such slavery, under
such a Monster, and tell them, If your King send but a few Commissioned
executioners, to command all your Heads, and murder Senate, City and Country,
Parents and Children, and burn up all your dwellings, neither the Law of
Nature, or of the Land will allow you to defend your selves against them. Who
will defend such a monster in War against his enemies, when no enemy can bring
them into greater slavery?

II. Almost all mankind on earth agree, that all humane Power is limited, and
that Propriety is in order of nature antecedent to regiment, which is to order
the use of propriety: Men are born with a propriety in their lives, members and
health: And Nature gives them a propriety in their Children, and Contract in
their Wives, and natural Industry in the fruit of their labors: And what am I
that I should deny all this, and seem wiser (in Atheism and Inhumanity) than
almost all the world?

III. It is a known thing, that Tyranny is the great hinderer of the Preaching
of the Gospel, and so of the Conversion and saving of the World. Why is not the
saving truth of God preached among Heathens and Mahometans (who are five sixth
parts of mankind) and among Papists (who are the fourth part of the other
sixth), but because Tyrants will not suffer it? And no friend of God, Christ or
man then should set up or plead for such an evil.

IV. To stop the mouth of Malice it self, I here truly adjoyn the profession of
my judgment about all this Controversy and Accusation: I do Assent and Consent
to all that is said for the Power of Kings, and the obedience and patience of
Subjects, in all the Word of God, in all the Confessions which ever I yet saw
of any Christian Church, Reformed Greek or Papist (except what exalts the
Pope, his Councils and Agents) or which is the ordinary Consent of Politicians,
Lawyers or Divines, or which is established by the Constitution of this
Kingdom. I stand to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. I hold it unlawful
for any of his Subjects to take arms against the King, that is, against his
Person, Authority, Dignity, Rights or Laws, or against any of his Courts,
Officers or Soldiers Lawfully Commissioned by him; yea or if they be unlawfully
Commissioned, except when Gods Law of Nature, or the Kings own Law, or contrary
Commission bind me to it. And I will never endeavor to alter the Constituted
Monarchical Government of this Kingdom; Nor will I endeavor to reform the
Church or its Government, by Rebellion, Sedition, or any other unlawful means:
And I believe that no other Oath, League or Covenant does disoblige me from any
of this aforesaid, nor warranteth me to disobey any lawful Command of the King,
or any of my Governors, nor to do any unlawful thing: And I renounce all
Doctrines and Practices contrary to this profession; Especially of those Popes
and Councils of Bishops, who have decreed the Excommunicating and Deposing of
Kings, or other Temporal Lords, and the Absolving their Subjects from their
Oaths and Fidelity, and the rest of the Papal Usurpations and Church-Tyranny,
against the Rights of Princes and Christian people, though judged Heretics by
Pope, Prelates or Priests.

If this be not enough, see the 2d Plea for Peace, and my form of professed
Loyalty, in my book, called, The true and only way of the Concord of all
Christian Churches.

V. And because they still cant over the mention of the late miserable Wars, as
if they hated the Act of Oblivion and Peace; I add, that malice may have no
more to say that has the show of reason.

Silence and cast out all that ever had any hand in those Wars, (except the
Conformists) and no more, and we will give you a thousand thanks, and acquiesce
in it as unexpected justice. And is not all this yet enough?

VI. As to the particular reasons that we have against Subscribing [
Universally and unlimitedly, without any exposition given by the Lawmakers,
that it is unlawful to take arms against any Commissioned by the King, and as
referring to [ on any pretense whatsoever], it belongs to another discourse
to render them, which gives the reasons of our Nonconformity: It would be here
unseasonable, and they are many and great.

27 Obj. But good words must not satisfy, while the remembrance of your
Rebellious practices yet remains.

Ans. 1. I have elsewhere told the strangers and young men that know it not,
that it was between two Parties of Episcopal Conformists that the War began.

2. Is it not Words that you require as satisfactions in your Subscriptions and
Oaths? What more than Words is it that you would have?

3. Are not the Laws in Power, and Judges to execute them against any that
shall speak or do disloyally? What would you have more than Words, and that
men's Estates and Lives be answerable for their offenses?

Obj. But why will you not then subscribe and swear in the words of the Law,
but in your own?

Ans. To give here the reasons of that, is the unseasonable digression before
disclaimed. You may as well here call us to dispute over all our differences.

Obj. But here I am charged as an impudent falsifier of History, for saying
that the War began between two Parties of Episcopal Conformity; which makes me
pity the World in point of History, when the public affairs of a Kingdom so
openly managed shall be in such a manner controverted in the very age when they
were done. Diverse Lords are yet living who were interessed in these matters:
and it is unpleasing to give men the Catalogue of great men's Names in a matter
which His Majesty has committed to oblivion: But a breviate of all the
necessary proof, I shall draw up in a History by it self.

The Accusation 28, being made publicly by my old friend Dr. Thomas Good, in
his book, called Dubitantius and Firmianus, I will annex a Letter which I wrote
in answer to it.

ACCUS. 28.
To my Reverend and Worthy Friend, Dr. Thomas Good, Master of Baliol-Colledge
in Oxford.
Reverend and Worthy Sir,
IT is now about a Month since I received a Letter from you, for the furthering
of a good work, which I sent to Mr. Foley by his Son Mr. Paul Foley, not having
opportunity my self to see him. I have stayed so long for an answer, not
hearing yet from him, that I think it not meet any longer to forbear to
acquaint you with the reasons of the delay. He lives quite at the other end of
London from me, and my weakness and business keep me much within doors, and
it is hard to find him within, except at those hours when I am constrained to be
in bed. But I have reason to conjecture that his answer will be, 1. That the
rich men whose judgments are for Conformity, are far more numerous than those
who are of another mind, and therefore fitter to promote that work. And there
are so very few that do any thing for the ejected Ministers, that some of them
live on brown bread and water, etc. which hinders those Gentlemen from other
kind of charitable work. 2. And I must crave your patience (being confident by
your ancient kindness, of your friendly interpretation) which I tell you, that
this day I heard one say, We can expect that Dr. Good do make his Scholars no
better than himself. And what reason have we to maintain and breed up men to
use us as he has done in his late Treatise? I got the Book, and was glad to
find much good, and several moderate passages in it, (and I knew you so well as
that I could not but expect moderation), but when I perused the passages
referred to, I could say no more for them, but that I would write to you to
hear your answer about them. For I confess they surprised me; though at the
same time I received many new Books of a sanguine complexion from other hands
without any admiration.

I. The first passage referred to, was page 104. Which are confessedly things
indifferent. This is spoken indefinitely of the Presbyterians. Where have I
lived? I know not one Presbyterian living that divides from you for any thing
which he confesses indifferent. I crave your answer containg the proof of
this? at least to name some one of them that we may reprove him. We take
Conformity to be so far from indifferent, that we forbear to tell the world the
greatness of the sin which we think to be in it, lest men cannot bear it, and
lest it should disaffect the people to the Ministry of the Conformists.

II. Your p. 156. I pass by. The main matter is p. 160, 161. that though All
the Nonconformists were not in actual arms against the King, -- nor did they
all as natural agents cut off his Head; but morally, that is, very sinfully and
wickedly they had their hands stained with that royal blood; for whosoever did
abet these sons of Belial in their rebellions, treasons, murders of their King
and fellow subjects, either by consenting to their villainies, praying for their
prosperity, praising God for their successes, etc.

The Charge is high: If it be not true, 1. They are almost as deeply wronged as
you can wrong them. 2. Our Rulers are wronged by being so provoked to abhor
them, silence and destroy them. 3. Posterity is wronged by a misinforming
History.

I. You are too old to be ignorant that it was an Episcopal and Erastian
Parliament of Conformists that first took up these arms in England against the
King. The Members yet living profess that at that time they knew but one
Presbyterian in the House of Commons. Interest forced or led them to call in
the Scots, and Presbytery came in with them. If you doubt of it, see the
Propositions to the King at Nottingham, where a limited Episcopacy is one.

II. The Lord Lieutenants that seized on the Militia were far most Conformists,
and scarce any Presbyterians at all.

III. The General Officers and Colonels of the Earl of Essex's Army were ten to
one Conformists, and few if any Presbyterians save a few deboist Mercenary
Scots, if they were such, which I know not; and the General Episcopal himself.

IV. The Major Generals of the Militia in the several Counties were mostly
Conformists, and scarce any Presbyterians.

V. The Assembly at Westminster when they went thither were all Conformists,
save about eight or nine, and the Scots Commissioners.

V. One of the two Archbishops was a General in the Parliaments Army.

VI. Many of the present Conformable Ministers were in arms against the King,
and some wrote for his death, and many of them took the Covenant and Engagement.

VII. The most of the Conformable Gentry of my acquaintance that were put upon
it took the Engagement against the King, and House of Lords.

VIII. The Nonconformable Ministers of Gloucestershire, (Mr. Geery, Mr. Capel,
Mr. Marshall, etc.) were against the Parliaments War, though the Parliaments
Garrison was over them. Mr. Bampfield (who has lain six or seven years in the
Common Goal for Preaching) (with his brother (sometimes Speaker of the House of
Commons) was so much against the Parliaments cause, that to this day (even
while he lay in Goal) he most zealously made his followers renounce it. Many
Nonconformists in many Counties were of the same mind.

IX. Many of the Nonconformists lived in the Kings quarters, and never were
drawn the other way, as Dr. Conant (lately one of them) and others in Oxford,
and so in other parts.

X. Some of the Nonconformists were in the Kings Army. Poor Mr. Martin of
Weeden lost an Arm in his Army, and yet the other arm lay long with him in
Warwick Goal for Preaching.

XI. Almost all the Nonconformists of my acquaintance in England, save
Independents and Sectaries, refused the Engagement, and took Cromwell and the
Commonwealth Parliament for Usurpers, and never approved what they did, nor
ever kept their days of Fasting or Thanksgiving. (To tell you of the London
Ministers Printed Declarations against the intended death of the King, you will
say is unsatisfactory, because too late.)

XII. Most of the Nonconformable Ministers of my acquaintance were either boys
at School, or in the University in the Wars, or never meddled with it; so that I
must profess, that setting them all together, I do not think that one in ten
throughout the Kingdom can be proved to have done any of these things that you
name against the King.

XIII. We have often with great men put it to this trial, Let them give leave but
to so many to Preach the Gospel as cannot be proved ever to have had any hand
in the Wars against the King, and we will thankfully acquiesce, and bear the
silence of the rest; make but this match for us, and we will joyfully give you
thanks.

XIV. Who knows not that the greatest Prelatists were the masters of the
Principles that the War was raised on, Bilson, Jewel, etc.) (and Hooker quite
beyond them all.)

XV. But because all proof must be of individuals, I entreat you as to our own
Country where you were acquainted, tell me if you can, I say it seriously if
you can, whatever was done or said against the King, by Mr. Ambrose Sparry, Mr.
Kimberlye, Mr. Lovell, Mr. Cowper, Mr. Reignolds, Mr. Hickman, Mr. Trustram,
Mr. Baldwin, Senior, Mr. Baldwin, Junior, Mr. Sergeant, Mr. Waldern (dead), Mr.
Joseph Baker (dead), Mr. Wilsby, Mr. Brian, Mr. Stephen Baxter, Mr. Badland,
Mr. Butcher, Mr. Eccleshall, Mr. Read, Mr. Rock, Mr. Fincher of Wedgbury,, Mr.
Wills of Bremicham, Mr. Paston, etc. I pass by many more. And in Shropshire by
old Mr. Samuel Hildersham, Old Mr. Samuel Fisher, Mr. Talents, Mr. Brian of
Shrewsbury, Mr. Barnet, Mr. Keeling, Mr. Berry, Mr. Malden of Newport, Mr.
Thomas Wright (dead), Mr. Tailor, etc. These were your neighbors and mine! I
never heard, to my remembrance, of any one of them that had any thing to do
with the Wars against the King. It Is true (except Mr. Fisher and some few) they
were not ejected, but enjoyed their places; And did not you as well as they? If
I can name you so many of your neighbors that were innocent, will you tell the
King and Parliament, and the Papists and Posterity, that All the Nonconformists
(without any exception) had their hands stained with the Royal blood? What! Mr.
Cook of Chester, and Mr. Birch, etc. that were imprisoned and persecuted for
the King! What! Mr. Geery that dyed at the news of the Kings death! What, Sir
Francis Nethersole (and Mr. Bell his Pastor) who wrote so much against the
Parliament, and was their Prisoner at Kenelworth Castle almost all the Wars! --
What may we expect from others, when Dr. Good shall do thus. --

I put not in any excuse for my self among all these. It may be you know not
that an Assembly of Divines (twice met) at Coventry (of whom two Doctors, and
some others are yet living) first sent me into the Army to hazard my life
(after Naseby fight) against the course which we then first perceived to be
designed against the King and Kingdom, nor what I went through then two years
in opposing it, and drawing the Soldiers off: Nor how often I preached against
Cromwell, the Rump, the Engagement, but specially their Wars, and Fasts, and
Thanksgivings: Nor what I said to Cromwell for the King (never but twice
speaking with him) of which a great man The Earl of Orery, who was present all
the while, at both times, that ever I spoke to Cromwell, which was plainly and
faithfully to his displeasure.
told me but lately, that being an ear-witness of it, he had told his Majesty.
But yet while I thought they went on Bilsons principles, I was then on their
side, and the observator ( Parker) had almost tempted me to Hookers principles,
but I quickly saw those reasons against them, which I have since published. His
principles were known by the first book, before the last came out; and I have a
friend The Lord Chief Justice Hale told me he had Hookers last books before,
and I now have the last printed long before Bishop Gauden published them.
that had his last in M. S. But I am willing unfeignedly to be one of those
that shall continue silenced, if you can but procure leave to Preach Christ's
Gospel only for those that are no more guilty of the Kings blood than your
self; and that no longer than there is real need of their Ministerial labor.
Reverend Sir, if you will but so long put your self as in our case, I shall
hope that with patience you will read these lines, and pardon the necessary
freedom of

London, Feb. 20. 1673. Your truly loving friend, and obliged servant, RICHARD
BAXTER.




Note, 1. That this Dr. Good was one of the most peaceable, moderate and honest
Conformists of my acquaintance; and subscribed our Worcestershire Agreement
(published) for Concord; and joined with us in our Association and Meetings at
Kidderminster, and was the man that drew up the Catalogue of Questions for our
Disputations at those Meetings; and never then talked to us of what he here
writes (in a Book called Dubitantius and Firmianus). 2. Mr. Thomas Foley (a
Nonconformist Gentleman, eminent for Charity (having built near Stourbridge a
Hospital, and endowed it with about 500 l. per annum) being my friend, Dr. Good
wrote to me, to move him to give maintenance for two Scholarships in
Baliol-Colledge; and I wrote this Letter in answer to that, but the sending was
delayed till he was dead.

Accus. 29. Another to save the Nation from the labors of a Concordant
Ministry, and from the blessings of Unity, Peace and Innocence, has written a
book lately, called The Modern Pleas for Comprehension, Toleration, etc.
considered; who at his entrance says, I would fain have any of our dissenting
brethren to answer directly, Whether there be any one thing sinful in her
Communion (the Churches as by Law established), or only some things (as they
conceive) inexpedient. And p. 11. he says, Suppose that the terms of the
Communion of the Church, are not only inexpedient, but really sinful; if so,
then I shall readily grant that the Church ought not to be communicated with,
while the terms of her Communion are such. But -- I shall presume to say with
some confidence, that it is not easy to find a considerable man among them,
who will not be ashamed to own it publicly, or who does himself really believe
it. And p. 12. I have been credibly informed (not to say that I am able to make
it good) that Mr. Calamy did before his Majesty, and diverse Lords of the
Council profess, that there was not any thing in the constitution of the
Church, to which he could not conform, were it not for the scandalizing of
others; so that in his esteem the Constitutions of the Church were in
themselves innocent, and the whole objection against them lay in the mistakes
of other men. Yet says he p. 11. That the separation from the Church is so
avowed and pressed upon the people, as if that it were highly necessary, and
that communion with the Church was highly criminal, at least in the opinion of
the teachers.

Ans. And now, Reader, what a shake does this instance give to the credit of
History, at least such as is written by interessed factious men? yea what a
reproach to humane nature? For what untruth can be imagined so gross! and what
thing so nakedly evil, as may not be expected to be found in Man, yea in
professed Christians, yea in Divines (of such a character)! Either this man and
such others believe what they say themselves, or not! If not, what Preachers,
what Christians, what Men are these? If they do, what matter of fact can ever
be so notorious, as that we can hope that such men can know it? What History of
such Writers can deserve any credit? What regard can the people be encouraged
to give to the Words and Writings of such Doctors, that no better know such
public notorious matters of fact, and so confidently and boldly deceive the
world, in cases where so many thousands, yea the Churches Peace and Concord is
so much concerned? Reader, judge by these notorious evidences of fact, of these
men's credibility and usage.

1. The judgment of the ancient Nonconformists is declared to the world by
abundance of Writings, in which they thought that they proved much in the
English Constitutions to be sinful, and such as men must suffer deprivation and
death, rather than consent to. And are all these Writings no evidence of their
judgments? nor their sufferings neither?

2. Since his Majesty's Restoration, the present Nonconformists still
distinguished, 1. Between Diocesan or National Churches, and Parish-Churches.
2. Between the Communion and Conformity of private men, and of Ministers: And
3. Between Approbation of the Church-Constitutions, Practicing all imposed and
peaceable behavior and submission: And though some exasperated persons have by
the late sufferings of conscionable men, been tempted to separate from the
Prelates and their party, as far as St. Martin did from the Bishops about him,
and their Synods; yet the main body of the Nonconforming Ministers, as far as
ever we could learn, did judge as follows. 1. That those Parish-Churches
which had true Ministers (not utterly incapable persons) were true Churches of
Christ. 2 That the ordinary Liturgy, appointed for the public worship, was
such as a good Christian may lawfully join in (not speaking of Baptizings,
Burials, etc. in which some things they thought more dubious). 3. That though
combined Churches, whether you call them Diocesan or National, are not any
otherwise a Divine Institution, than as Concord is commanded us in general, and
may not be set up to the detriment of the particular Churches, which are of
Divine Institution; yet a good Christian may and must live peaceably and
submissively, where some such combined Churches are guilty of Usurpation and
sinful abuse. 4. That Conformity to all the Subscriptions, Declarations, Oaths,
Covenants and Practices now imposed on Ministers, would be to us a very great
and heinous sin, (modesty forbidding us to meddle uncalled with the Consciences
of the Conformists).

3. Their judgment of the sinfulness of Ministerial Conformity, they declared
to his Majesty and the Bishops in many Writings, when they had encouragement to
attempt once the healing of the divisions: And when, because they agreed to
leave out all harsh provoking words, in their accusations of the Church-Orders
and Ceremonies, the Lord Chancellor had put into the first draught of a
Declaration, That we do not in our judgments believe the practice of those
particular Ceremonies, which we except against, to be in it self unlawful. In
our next Address we desired that those words might be expunged, and so they
were. Yet this extended not to Subscriptions, Oaths, etc. And afterward many
particulars were mentioned which we thought sinful, and the supposition
vindicated in a Reply; to which the Bishops never answered. And in a long
Petition for Peace, p. 6. we make this Protestation following: Who can pretend
to be better acquainted with their hearts than they are themselves? For what
man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him? And
they are ready to appeal to the dreadful God, the searcher of hearts, and the
hater of hypocrisy, that if it were not for fear of sinning against him, and
wounding their consciences, and hazarding and hindering their salvations, they
would readily obey you in all these things; That it is their fear of sin and
damnation that is their impediment, they are ready to give you all the
assurance that man can give, by the solemnest professions, or by Oath, if
justly called to it. And one would think that a little charity might suffice to
enable you to believe them, when their noncompliance brings them under
suffering, and their compliance is the visible way to favor, safety and
prosperity in the world: And if men that thus appeal to God, concerning the
intention of their own hearts, cannot be believed, even when the state of their
worldly interest bears witness to their professions, but another shall step
into the throne of the heart-searching God, and say, It is not as they say, or
swear: It is not conscience, but obstinacy or singularity: All humane converse
upon these terms will be overthrown: And what remedy have they but prtiently to
wait, till God whom they have appealed to, shall decide the doubt, and show who
were the assertors of truth or falsehood. And p. 19. They are not Indifferent in
the judgment of dissenters, though they be so in yours. And p. 13. And if it be
said that men do willingly keep out the Light; we must say, that few men are
obstinate against the opinions which tend to their ease and advancement in the
world, and to save them from being vilified as Schismatics, and undone: And
when they profess before the Lord, that they do impartially study and pray for
knowledge, and would gladly know the will of God at the dearest rate: we must
again say, that those men must prove that they know the dissenters hearts
better than they are known to themselves, that expect to be believed by
charitable Christians, when they charge them with wilful ignorance, or
obstinate resisting of the truth.

This was then the profession which the Nonconformists consented to, no man of
them once contradicting it: and Mr. Calamy (here accused) among the first.

4. After this in their debates with the Bishops at the Savoy, they undertook
to prove the sinfulness of several things then imposed: And when Bishop
Cousins, then in the Chair, gave them in a writing, desiring them to
distinguish sins from inconveniences, and to debate only that which they
accounted flat sin; they gave him in eight particulars, reserving liberty to
add the rest; and one of them was, That it is sinful for a Minister of Christ
to exclude or reject from the Churches Communion in the Sacrament, persons
Godly, and otherwise duly qualified, merely because that (fearing it, though
causelessly to be a sin) they dare not receive the Sacrament kneeling. This they
earnestly desired to have begun with, and dispute at large, and offered to have
then given in their arguments, and then to have proceeded to the other seven
particulars.

5. The Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical affairs, had a little before
given them a relaxation or indulgence as to those things which they accounted
the greatest sins; such as in the Declaration may yet be seen; especially the
Subscription, that there is nothing in all the books there mentioned contrary
to the word of God, etc. And it did not concern us, or become us, to talk at
the the Savoy against the sinfulness of those particulars which his Majesty had
in Clemency, and as a healer, so lately freed us from: But why were they in the
Declaration suspended (as for our Concord), if they had not been judged to be
unlawful by the dissenters, when we ever professed that in all lawful things we
would obey?

6. But yet the part of our Answer is, that at that time the new Subscription
and Declaration since imposed, and the alterations in the Liturgy, and the
Corporation and Oxford Oath, etc. were not invented, or in being, and so we had
never opportunity and leave to declare our judgment and reasons of the
sinfulness of the new Conformity, which to us was the heaviest part.

7. But surely our Nonconformity on terms so hard, declared it sufficiently to
all reasonable men. If 1800 Ministers (none of them cast out as accused of any
other crime) should have ceased the work of their office, and occasioned
divisions in the Land, and have cast themselves and families into so many years
distress and poverty; and all this for to avoid that which they took to be no
sin; they had not deserved the name of Christ's Ministers, of Christians, or of
men.

8. Lastly, Those Writings which any of the Nonconformists have since ventured
to publish for their cause, have all of them downright endeavored to prove
that Conformity is a sin; Let Mr. Cawdrey's, Mr. Hickman's, Dr. Collins's, or
any of all the rest be perused; and this will be found the scope of the books.
Yea he that they judged moderate in these matters, in his book called,
Sacrilegious Desertion of the holy Ministry rebuked, says, O be not too angry
with those that censure you as sinners -- God hates sin, and so must all that
truly love him: And they are our best friends that do most to preserve us from
it; and they are our greatest enemies that would flatter us into it. To preach
against sin is your Ministerial office: And if any man think that you make a
solemn Covenant to sin, that you may have leave to preach against it, yea that
you deliberately commit a greater one, that you may have leave to preach
against a lesser in other men; this man deserves to be heard, though he
mistake. If we say nothing to you, yet it is easy to gather by the costly
terms on which we avoid it, that we take Conformity to be a sin. -- I must tell
you, that we cannot but think that you need repentance, great repentance, for
sinning more (and that by public, deliberate, chosen, convenanted, ministerial
sin, protesting against repentance) in the day when judgments called us all to
renew our repentance for our former sins. -- We beseech you be not too angry
with us for differencing between good and evil, between him that swears, and
him that fears an Oath, as long as we do it to the loss and suffering of our
own flesh, which disputes in us more cunningly and strongly for Conformity,
than all the Durells, the Fullwoods, the Stilemans, etc. in England. We have
naturally no more love to poverty, to scorn, to a prison, than you have. -- It
is not pleasure, profit or worldly preferment that we contend for: we would do
no man hurt or wrong: If our lovers of Churchpower do think us intolerable,
because we obey them not as fully as they desire; we profess before God and
Man, that it is not because we would not be subject and obedient to any, as far
as will stand with our obedience to God; but only because we dare not; we will
not do that which we believe that God forbids us: And if we err, it is not
for want of studying, perhaps as hard and impartially as they, to know the
truth. -- It is sin, and no small or tolerable sin, which our consciences fear,
in our forbearing Subscriptions and Conformity. -- Chapter 12.

And now, Reader, Pity, pity, pity, the Ministry, the Church the World, that
have such men, such usage, such historical informers as these, that can, that
dare thus publicly and confidently face down the ignorant, that we take not
Ministerial Conformity and Communion with them to be sin: And never wonder at
it if the same men should as confidently print, that we are all professed
Mahometans.

And as to his report of Mr. Calamy's words before the King, we must testify
some of us, that we were from first to last in his company at such meetings,
where those matters were transfacted, and at all the meetings before his
Majesty that we heard he was present at, and we over and over have heard him
profess that he took several things in Conformity to be intolerable sins, but
never heard a word from him to the contrary: And he may be judged of by the
Preface to our Reply, which he wrote; and by his not only refusing a
Bishopric, but by his Sufferings, and constant profession to his death.

This Writer, to save the Church from Concord, by restoring the silenced
Ministers, feigneth Comprehension to be a late device, a thing unknown, or that
amounts to no more than a pretty artifice of saving the reputation of about a
dozen persons, who are sick of their separation, and stand in need of a
plausible pretense, under which to return unto it. Their credit will not suffer
them to renounce their old principles, and they are weary of sticking longer to
them. Now if the pride of these men should be thus far gratified, etc.

Ans. 1. See how boldly this man pretends to search the hearts of others. 2.
How he feigneth that to be New, which they so labored for 1660, and ever
since: Read but their Petition for Peace and Judge. 3. Does he not take it to be
more for our Reputation to conform, and to be dignified and preferred, than to
live under the scorn and sufferings that we do? Do not Bishop Reignolds, and
many others that conform, live in more reputation in the world, than we that
are thus reviled by so many Doctors of the Church, and sometimes lie in the
common Jayls, and are fain to stoop to be beholden for our bread or necessary
maintenance? 4. Who are those dozen men? and why does he not name them, and
prove his charge? Are they not men of strange facinating power, that could make
1800 such Ministers (distant in all Counties) to deny Conformity? And are they
not strange persons that will (all over the Land) give over preaching, or live
in poverty and suffering (some have dyed through the effects of want), and all
to gratify a dozen men (no one knows who)? (And it is like some that he
means in his dozen, have done more to displease many of the rest than
others). 5. What Nonconformist has not groaned for our divisions, and been
indeed aweary of them from the first day, and longed for our common Concord?
but that is not to be weary of their principles. O that he would procure us but
liberty to preach the Gospel, for all the rest that earnestly desire agreement,
and shut out the dozen that he means, whoever they be. But pardon me for
saying, that these men do satisfy us, that Sadduces are blind, who believe
that there is no Devil, when so much of him appears actively in the World.

But our difference is not in Government and Ceremony only, but in Doctrines of
Grand importance in Morality: For he says, page 66. For unless it* (the
Covenant) be lawful in every particular respect, no body can be obliged by it.
O dreadful Doctrine, to come from a Doctor of a Christian Church! That a
Covenant and Vow to God can oblige no body, unless it be lawful in every
respect: If so, Protestants that hold that imperfect man has no sinless work,
and so no Vow or Covenant is in all respects lawful, must hold that they are
bound by no vow or covenant. If this be so, every erroneous man, or every
knave, that has the ignorance or craft to drop in any one unlawful thing into
his Covenants and Vows, is obliged by none of them at all. How easily then may
a Papist, or an Atheist shake off all Oaths of Allegiance or Supremacy, by
adding one unlawful Particle? It Is true, that if some one clause in a Vow were
so essential to all the rest as to be their sense; if that were unlawful to be
kept, all were so: And as to the denomination of the frame, as consisting of
several parts, it may be called a bad or unlawful Oath, if part were so*
because bonum est ex causis integris, and the sense is; but that it is unlawful
quoad hoc, or secundum quid. But as to obligation (though the Actus imponentis,
and the Actus jurantis be unlawful; yet if the materia juramenti have ten
parts, and one only be sin, that does not nullify the obligation to the rest:
No nor though nine parts of it were sin, their neighborhood nullifieth not the
obligation to the tenth.

But what wonder if Conformity by Oaths, Subscriptions, Declarations and
Covenants seem lawful to Doctors of such principles as these? What if a Popish
Prince or People, put an unlawful clause into their Covenants? Are they
therefore wholly disobliged as to each other? The same I say of Covenants of
Peace between several Princes? And of Covenants between husband and wife; and
so of other Contracts; but especially of Vows to God. But what if Perjury prove
a greater sin, than not conforming to it? yea a sin meet for none but utterly
debauched Consciences, and such as threatens dreadful ruin? And what if such
principles and practices would make us guilty of the Perjury and impenitence of
many hundred thousand persons? Should we be drawn into such a guilt by such
words as these, and that in a time when God by his Judgments is searching
after, and finding out the Nations sins? God forbid.

Another since called, A Reproof to the Rehearsal Transposed, p. 457, 458.
says, Do you at all know what were the abatements they demanded to bring them
off with Conscience? To let you see your confidence, I tell you they demanded
none at all; but the question being solemnly put to them (and that as I am
told) in his Majesty's presence, Whether they knew of any thing in the Liturgy
with which they could not comply without sin? they all declared their own
satisfaction, but only desired some abatements for the ease of weak brethren;
or rather as you tell us bluntly, to bring themselves off with some little
reputation.

Ans. O patient God! Alas for strangers, and the Generations to come that must
read such history! Alas for the Souls and Churches that have such Guides! Alas
that he whose Character is to be the old Liar and Murderer, can do so much in
the Churches at once to destroy Love and Souls, to make odious Gods Ministers,
and to render it so difficult to believe Church History! If this man had thus
published, that we were not English*men, or that we did at that same time the
horrid'st Villainies that he could devise, what other answer could we make than
that which these words must have? It is a forgery against such notorious
evidence, that I will not undertake for the man that dare print this, but that
he may say any thing that can be devised, how false soever.

I have told you, 1. That we gave them in writing an account of what we thought
sinful. 2. That we in dispute maintained it. 3. That to that very question we
after gave in a paper of eight particulars in the Liturgy, which we undertook
to prove flat sin. 4. That we published that profession in our Petition for
Peace. 5. That this was before the worse new Conformity. 6. And had it been
otherwise, what were our thoughts to 2000 men that were absent?

I must profess I (that was still with them) cannot imagine whence this
inhumane fiction could arise, unless it were from these words of my own, which
others seconded. When we spoke for common Concord, we told them, that [ the
question now was not what would satisfy us few men, but what was necessary to
the common union? And I added, That I never scrupled E. g. kneeling at the
receiving of the Lords Supper; but better men than I did scruple it, and I
undertook to prove it a great sin to cast them out of Christian, Sacramental
Communion for that cause.] I verily believe that the horrid forgery had no
better color of proof than these words.

Accus. 30. Of men's injurious imputing to us the errors and faults of all the
Sectaries.

The course that some Writers (that should have modesty and justice) take to
defame us is, to jumble all sects (besides their own) together under the name
of Nonconformists, and then to rake up the unwarrantable expressions of men of
several parties, as the Nonconformists Doctrine; and so whatever they find
written by an Antinomian, a Separatist, an Anabaptist, (and why not a Papist or
a Quaker too) they lay at the Nonconformists doors. When 1. all men of reason
know, that though affirmative titles use to signify some union, so do not
negatives. To call a man a Papist or a Protestant, signifies somewhat in which
he agrees with others. But to be no Papists, or no Protestants, agrees to all
other parties in the world.

2. And if before Conformity was required (and so there were no Conformists)
the several Sects were aliens to each others, surely they are so after, or else
you may know who is the cause.

3. And why do the Papists (and such Arminians as Episcopius) who are
Nonconformists, claim kindred and kindness to and from the Conformists, rather
than the Nonconformists, if they know not to whom they are best affected?

4. Did not the Heathens do thus also by the ancient Christians, when Sects
swarmed among them, and deride and accuse them for their divisions? And did not
the Papists so by the Reformers? yea, and do to this day? What more common with
them, than to say, All these Sects swarm out from you? And so did the
persecutors of the old Waldenses, when the Manichees were among them.

5. If Nonconformity cause all these Sects, then they are the causes of them
that cause Nonconformity. And if you will call in your Impositions, there will
be no Nonconformists. Let impartial sober reason judge who it is that causes
all these Sects. If all the Decrees of General Councils were imposed on all men
to be subscribed, would not thousands be Nonconformists that are now
conformable? Who cry out against Sects so much as the Papists? and yet who in
all the world more cause them, even by the manifold Laws by which they pretend
to cure them? If only a peaceable communion with the Church had been required,
instead of all the Covenants, Oaths, Declarations, and Subscriptions, how many
thousand fewer Nonconformists had there been? If any should impose Oaths,
Covenants or Subscriptions, against Episcopacy, and for Lay Elders, would it
not make most of the Conformists Nonconformable? And what is it that those do
who subscribe the same doctrine with you, to make other men heterodox?

6. Thus were the old Nonconformists accused, when they wrote more against
Sects and Separation than all the high Conformists did. And we must say, That
if Separatists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, and such like, had not been more
effectually confuted and kept under by the Nonconformists, than they have been
by the persecutors or sharp opposers of Nonconformists, they had been like to
have so abounded, as to have carried down most of the zealously religious sort
in the stream. Let posterity judge by the Writings of Hildersham, Paget,
Gifford, Bradshaw, Ball, Rathband, and many more such, against Separation; and
by many of the present Nonconformists, against Antinomianism, Anabaptistry,
Popery, etc. who have done most against these Sects. If men that would draw
birds to their nets, by throwing stones, or hooting at them, or that would beat
the water to make the fish bite at their hooks, or that will still spur-gall
their horses to keep them quiet; will revile those that have more skill, as the
causes of their unsuccesfulness, because they do not as they do; such men must
at last be taught by experience, if ever they will learn. For our parts, we
cannot be of their minds.

Accus. 31. Of some printed Accusations of us as Covetous, and other such like.

But it has pleased some late Writers (of great account with some) to lay such
matters to our charge as the cause of our nonconformity, as one would have
thought should never have entered into the thoughts of a sober man that ever saw
or heard of the English affairs, and present state.

1. The year 1674. was published a Book under the name of Dr. Asheton Chaplain
to the Duke of Ormond, who in his introduction supposes the Nonconforming
people to be such as merely believing the Ministers, and the Ministers to be
such lest they scandalize the people that think the things unlawful. And so he
applies himself to confute them on that supposition (a thing easily done, if
this were all). And he cites the words of one of us about scandal, against our
selves. To which we say, 1. Seeing even Pagans, Papists, Socinians and Quakers,
Anabaptists and Separatists, and some Arminians and Prelatists too, are
Nonconformists in the largest sense (as refusing Conformity) and seeing it is
not imaginable that all the persons of any one profession should be just of the
same degree of understanding, and in every thing of the same opinion; it is not
impossible but that some one called a Nonconformist, may be as brainless and
dishonest, as he describes them. But we must say, that we remember not that
ever we met with one of them that was such, and that had no stronger reasons
against Conformity, or that took the things avoided to be indifferent. 2. And
whether we our selves are such, let our Writings and Reasons therein given
against Conformity be the evidence. Could he hope to make the world believe,
that men not mad with factious humor would live as we live, and suffer what we
have suffered, and durst forbear much of the work to which we are devoted, and
all to avoid that which we account indifferent, and no sin? And hear then how
he does more than justify us himself, page 30. [ If Conformity be unlawful; if
having begged Direction from the father of lights in hearty prayer, and having
used all moral diligence to satisfy your consciences, you cannot as yet be
persuaded of the lawfulness of it: O do not dare for any outward respect
whatsoever, to go against the light and checks of conscience? Quod fit contra
conscientiam edificat ad gehennam, is a noted truth]. Ay, but what then must we
hear and bear from such as you, when we wonder that any of you can doubt of the
unlawfulness of what we refuse?

And coming to our Accusation page 71. he thus speaks (even to our
astonishment, that ever humane nature can be tempted into such a state.) When I
have first told them that I shall meet them at the day of Judgment, I can then
with greater confidence assure the world (what some men's prejudice will not
suffer them to consider) that the chief reasons why so many Nonconformists
refuse subscription, are these two, Their Credit and their Interest, springing
from those roots of bitterness, Pride and Covetousness.

What then may not the mind of man be persuaded to, if a Doctor living in
England, in London, can say and believe this, and say it with such an appealing
mention of the day of Judgment! O who should not fear what his soul may be
seduced to think and say? 1. Let it be noted that he speaks not of any odd or
singular persons, nor with distinction, but of the [ so many Nonconformists].
2. He speaks of all their hearts and secret intents, even that which moves
them to refuse Subscription. 3. That the thing of which he accuses them is as
odious a crime as most can be charged on man: To disobey the Magistrate, to
forsake their flocks, to give over much of their office to which they are
devoted, to keep up factions and divisions among the people, and to propagate
it to posterity, and protest before God and man that they would conform, but
that they are persuaded it is sin (and heinous sin), and all this in
hypocrisy, when Pride and Covetousness are the cause, what an odious people
are these Nonconformists, if this be true? 4. And Hatred and Prosecution are
the proper effects which his accusation tends to. Who can repent of hating and
destroying so odious a sort of hypocrites as he describes? 5. And what is the
credit for which their pride does seduce them? 1. Consider what is the thing
that they look for credit in. 2. From whom it is. 1. It must be somewhat that
has at least an appearance of good, that they can look for credit by: Pride
lives not upon Evil, as known to be evil. We suppose he means, that it is
the reputation of being better Preachers, holier and honester persons than
others, and of more faithful Consciences, who fear lying, perjury, covenanting
to sin, and practicing more than the Conformists do. 2. And either they expect
this reputation with high or low, with many or few. 1. The world knows that
the Lawmakers, and Rulers, and Nobles are for the most part against us; yea
that the Oxford-Act of Confinement, and others, cast upon us the suspicion of
as odious crimes as most are in the world: And the Conformists, who are
desirous to make us contemptible, use to persuade the people, that there are
few Wise or Learned men among us, but that such are almost all for them; and
that it is but a few inconsiderable Mechanic Sectaries who are for us. And if
all this be so, what is here left for Pride to work upon? How contemptible does
the Novel Ecclesiastical Politician, and the Debate-maker, among many others
render us? And why should not our pride rather incline us to desire the esteem
and favor of the Highest, Richest, and most Honorable, than of mean contemned
people, and of the greater number than of a few? Honor is in the Honourer, and
Laudari a laudatissimis is the ambition of the proud (of which we were as
capable as they, but for these and such other differences of mind and life);
and unless we must hear with Balaam, [ God has kept thee from honour]. But if
the people that so honor us, as to feed our Pride (against such depressions as
the frowns of some Superiors, the voluminous, Pulpit and private reproaches and
derisions of many that should be better employed, and the debasedness of
poverty and long prosecutions) be indeed considerable for number and quality,
it seems they see somewhat in those that others abhor and scorn, to make them
believe that indeed they are another sort of men, than such would make the
world believe they are. And it is to be noted, that the people in question are
no strangers to us, either as to our minds, or parts, or practices, being those
with whom we converse, and have long conversed; whenas the reproachers, even
our Clergy-neighbours, such as this Doctor, are strangers to us, and we to them
for ought we know; and though they live near us, converse so little with us,
that they know us but little (if any whit) more, than men of other Kingdoms (as
is fully proved even by their description of our judgments; for we must not
think that they knowingly speak falsely).

But his proof of his accusation follows: First, their credit and reputation;
wherein I am fully instructed by a learned person (Friendly Debate, p. 113.)
who having proposed this doubt, Why did many of them deliberate so long whether
they should accept of Dignities in the Church? He thus adds, If it was so plain
a business that their Conscience and their Covenant would not let them, one
would think they should have professed it openly, without any more ado; And
therefore I conclude, that pause and deliberation was about somewhat else; not
about matter of Conscience, but of Interest and Policy: As whether the people
would take it well, and not laugh at them as so many Magpyes, etc. You think
perhaps that they spent their time in fasting and seeking God to direct their
consciences. No, no: It was not their conscience, but their credit, which then
lay at stake -- Because I have heard some of them acknowledge, they did not
scruple what we do, but thought it unhandsome for them to do it.

To all this, we have committed the answer to one of the persons to whom one of
the mentioned Dignities was offered, who answers as follows.

1. Is such a charge of men's secret thoughts and intentions well proved, by
telling men what one of your selves has said, with the same spirit and front
as Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, etc. are now proved wicked by the Papists,
because some of their adversaries so reported them heretofore?

2. Are 1800 or 2000 men accusable upon the account of four men's secret
thoughts? What is this to all the rest?

3. Is it possible for either of these Authors to know a negative, and that by
secret heart-action by four other men, viz. that they sought not God to direct
their consciences.

4. Would not any other men have thought that accepting of dignities had been a
likelier sign of pride, than refusing them. If either of these Doctors had
refused them, we should have thought it a sign of their humility. What a case
are we in with such men as these, when we must needs be proud whether we accept
or refufe?

5 Would not the favor and honor of those that would have advanced us to
Dignities, have weighed down the displeasure of those that we should have
offended? Do you not think that they are more, and more honorable persons,
whom our conformity would have pleased?

6. What scorn or derision does Bishop Reignolds now undergo, or many of your
Doctors, who some were, and some reputed formerly of our mind?

7. What scorn would it have been to Baxter, who had written two years before
the change, for moderate Episcopacy and Liturgies, and whose Books was pleaded
and produced at the great meeting at Worcester-house, before the King and
Lords, and Bishops, and Nonconformists, with these words of the now Bishop of
Winchester, No man has written better of these things than Mr. Baxter. Who
answered, That he stood to all that he had there written. And why does he now
suffer so much obloquy and displeasure from the separating part of the
Nonconformists, if it be reputation that he stuck upon? Why do your party tell
him that he is more calumniated by the Nonconformists, than by any others? Why
has he lost the esteem of so many (as he had once almost done of his own
quondam flock) for persuading them from going too far in heart and practice
from the Bishops (when it was their silencing Himself and such others that was
the thing which turned his old hearers hearts against them).

8. But, judge all men of common Reason, sobriety and honesty of these men's
Accusations now by the matter of fact it self, which I opened before as to a
former Objection.

Again, Let common reason and equity here be judge of the ingenuity and credit
of both these Defenses: When of three men that were offered Bishoprics, but
one delayed his resolution, and two that were offered Deaneries; and when the
notorious reason was, to see whether the refused Conformity would stand or
fall, when no one of them ever talked of accepting, if that Conformity should
stand, and when these were but three men among Eighteen hundred Nonconformists
that after were cast out (and that Conformity was Actually dispensed with at
the time when one refused, one accepted, and three delayed). Whether this be a
good proof that it was not Conscience, but Interest that these men stuck upon?
and that consequently this is the chief reason that 1800 men subscribed not?
And will not posterity rather think that the change may prove sad to the Church
of England, when instead of so many men that are silenced for avoiding that
which they fear to be Perjury, Lying and Covenanting against the Commands of
Christ; such men are set up, that dare talk at this rate, and that in Print,
and with the mention of God and the day of judgment. And whereas the
Debate-maker says, That he heard some of them acknowledge that they scruple
not what others do; through Gods mercy they are all, save Mr. Calamy, yet
living, and solemnly profess that they never so thought or said to him, or any
other, but have often openly professed the contrary: But if he means any others,
what proof is that of these accused persons thoughts?

His second proof runs thus: If this excellent Author shall be condemned as
Apocryphal (and it is a very easy confutation to cry Fie upon him, when they
are not able to answer his Arguments, (Alas for the Church of England, if her
Doctors take such inhumane Calumnies for unanswerable Arguments)! I shall then
give them an Authority, formerly little less than Canonical: How the case
stands with him at present, I am wholly ignorant: However he is one that
fullwell understands the Intrigues of his party. Baxters Def. of the Princip.
of Love, p. 92. And here he recites the Authors words against that pride and
self-interest which we are accused of.

And here again we appeal to common ingenuity, 1. Whether this man who
professes himself wholly ignorant of the Authors case (and to him is utterly
unknown), be liker to know the secrets of his and other men's hearts (it is like
as much unknown to him) than he himself, who he says knows the intrigues of
his party? 2. Whether it be a good proof that Nonconformists are chiefly moved
by Pride, because they openly write against it, and condemn those that are so
moved, with words which the Accuser himself highly approves?

Obj. But it seems by your words that some such there are among you, and it
is not Baxter himself that he accuses.

Ans. 1. Yes; for his application follows [ Ex ore tuo], which properly
should mean that he condemns himself. 2. But suppose it otherwise; Know,
Reader, that the person against whom that Book was written, was Mr. Edward
Bagshaw, an Anabaptist, Fifth Monarchy man, and a Separatist, and a man of an
extraordinary vehement spirit, who had been exasperated by many years hard and
grievous imprisonment; and that it was such as he that were described; and that
the Nonconformists of England were so far from being of his mind and spirit,
that when Baxter had written three Books against him, and such as he, even as
Separatists (without meddling with him as an Anabaptist, or a Millenary), no one
Minister of England wrote in his Defense, nor, that ever his Confuter heard of,
pleaded for him. And did we ever dream that no Sectary is moved by Pride to
Nonconformity? Do we justify the secret thoughts of all Nonconformists, whom
we know not? Or is it a proof that Pride chiefly moves the Nonconformists,
because they call out to Sectaries to take heed, lest it be so with them.

3. But because this Doctor has told the world that Baxter fullwell
understands the intrigues of his party (as he calls them). Let the world judge
whether his testimony then of that party be not more credible than his that so
little knows them? And he solemnly professes to the world, that though he
has reason to call the best of men to be very jealous of their hearts, lest
pride and self-interest should pervert them; yet he verily believes, that
there is not this day on earth (that he hears of) a more conscionable, godly,
faithful party of Ministers of the Gospel, than those that are now ejected,
silenced Nonconformists in England (though they are not all equal in judgment,
or Ministerial ability, or self-denial). As far as his credit will go, let
posterity believe this: And his testimony shall be believed, when the Defamers
and Calumniators shall not.

2. He thus proceeds, [ A second reason why they conform not, is their
Interest]. If this be thought a Paradox (it being a strange method to consult
their interest, by losing their Livings), the dissatisfied person is desired to
consider, that the Ringleaders of the faction having possessed themselves of
other men's preferments, and foreseeing that they should be restored to the
right owners, thence made a virtue of necessity, by assuring their Proselytes,
that they were resolved to stick to them; and as they had defended the Cause
with their Tongues and Pens, they were now ready* if Providence call them to
it, to seal it with their blood. (And is it a sign of covetousness, to dye for
what they hold?) But by this he tells us, that [ the people were melted into
such kindness, as that the Preachers are no losers by their silence (Here Is the
wonder: Hear the proof.) 1. Many of them gain more at present from their party,
than they could from the Church, if they conformed.]

Ans. 1. O that he would name those many, and let us try the case? and see also
whether they are a considerable number? The Independents are commonly thought
to be best provided for in London -- But how small is their maintenance to what
they had, or might have had heretofore? And why might they not now have more if
they could conform? We were just now accused by him and another, about our
deliberate refusing of Church Dignities? And does he think that we get more now
than a Bishopric or Deanery would have amounted to? And as for what he talks
of our being in other men's preferments, we took our Labors indeed for
preferment, but not our maintenance; and those that are now Conformists, as
well as the Nonconformists, were formerly in sequestrations; and some were out;
and others (where the old sequestered Incumbents were dead) were settled by Law
long before the time of silencing. And would not covetousness rather have
persuaded them all to conform and take new Livings, than to leave all. Is it
possible for an English man to think that we live more plenteously upon our
Neighbors charity, than the Conformists do upon their Dignities, Tithes, and
Charity together, even such as live in the houses and favor of the Nobles and
great men of the Land? Does he not here much commend the charity of those that
are for the Nonconformists, before he is aware, in comparison of others? But
the Reader shall know the truth of this anon.

But suppose some did gain so much by their Nonconformity, would that cause
many hundred to continue Nonconformists, who live in want, and have no such
hopes?

His second proof runs thus, They retain a power and interest in their party to
prefer their conforming sons -- And this is such a piece of impiety as (were
there not too much ground for the suspicion) I should not think any Christian
could be guilty of.

Ans. And this is such a kind of charge and proof as we think a just and sober
Heathen or Mohammedan would abhor and would be as a wonder to us, if the sight
and hearing of the like from such men did not tell us what Monstrous pravity
has corrupted the nature of man. And we are sorry that posterity must know by
such passages, that the Church of England has such Doctors to succeed the
silenced Nonconformists, and the houses of the Nobility such Chaplains, whose
most deliberate Writings when they appeal to the day of Judgment, are such as
may make human nature blush.

1. Of 1800 or 2000 silenced Ministers, we know not of twenty that have sons
that are Conforming Ministers: suppose there should be 40 or 50 such in
England, would 1750 others be purposely Nonconformists, that those 40 or 50
sons of other men might get Livings? What are they to them? or what get they by
it?

2. Would it not be a greater prey for covetousness for both Father and Son by
conforming to have Livings, than for the Son alone? Yea, for 1800 Ministers to
have Livings, than 40 or 50 of their sons alone?

3. And who knows not (as they boast themselves) that Nobility and Gentry who
have presentations to Church Livings, are so many of them conformable, and
distaste the Nonconformists, as shameth this accusation? Do not the Parliament
and Laws tell us how they are affected? And does not the prosecution of the
Nonconformists tell it us? Will they that make Laws to eject, silence, confine,
imprison, and banish the Nonconformists, if they preach, prefer their sons
because their fathers are Nonconformists? Were not those few sons liker to get
Livings, if their fathers got favor by conforming? and if all the rest
conformed too? Either he would have men think that the Nobility and Gentry who
most like the Nonconformists, are many, or but few: if many, there is sure some
cause that so many who live with them, and know them, should like them better
than the Conformists; they take them not to be such as these Doctors do
describe them. If but few, is not Preferment rather to be got from many than
from few?

Another Book called, A free and impartial Enquiry into the causes of that very
great esteem and honor that the Nonconforming Preachers are generally in with
their followers: in a Letter to H. M. Proceeding from the like spirit, uses
the like (but more) Accusations. His first assigned cause is p. 36. A preaching
up of an empty, formal, notional kind of Religion, and causing and encouraging
men to build their hopes of heaven upon very easy and pleasing conditions. And
p. 54. No men have ever given people ground to hope for the salvation of the
spirit with less pain, trouble to the flesh, than these men have done.

Ans. Wonderful! that so many thousands should be so deceived! Make their
hearers believe this, and they will soon forsake them. We know no one thing
that causes men's dislike of the Conformists so much, as that they take them to
be just such as he describes the Nonconformists to be. We cannot express their
opinion of too many of them in apter words. Nor do we know of any thing in the
world that causes men to like the Nonconformists so much, as that they judge
them to be just contrary to this man's character. And have the people no sense,
nor acquaintance with the persons? This is a charge which we meet with few of
our enemies that believe. Let these evidences decide the case: 1. Which side
has (generally) the strictest followers? Which side are the generality of the
Blasphemers, Whoremongers, Drunkards, and Debauched persons on? And which side
has the most serious, religious sort of persons?

2. Why is it that the Nonconformists and their followers are commonly accused
for preciseness and overmuch strictness, for being hypocrites, as
counterfeiting more holiness and austerity of life than others?

3. How many of the Ministers were ever cast out for drunkenness, fornication,
deceit, swearing, perjury, or any loose living or immorality? Not one of the
1800 that ever we heard of; but all for Nonconformity alone.

4. If you should turn your charge upon the Sectaries, who has written more
against the Antinomian loose opinions, than the Nonconformists have done? The
many Volumes of Mr. Anthony Burges, the Writings of Mr. Richard Allen, Mr.
Joseph Allen, Mr. John How, with many more of late, and of Mr. Hildersham, Mr.
Ball, Mr. Dod, Mr. Greenham, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Perkins, and many more such of
old, will tell posterity whether the Nonconformists preached loose licentious
Doctrine.

5. But the fullest decision of this case will be from their cause it self. The
Liturgy and Canon, 1. obliges us to refuse no Child that is offered us in
baptism. 2. The Rubric pronounces the baptized Infants so dying certainly
saved (not excepting any child of any Infidel or Atheist, or open denier of a
life to come, or derider of Christ and the holy Scripture (of which there are
now great store). 3. When the baptized Children can say the words of the Creed,
Lords Prayer, etc. though they know not what they say, they are confirmed by
the Bishop. 4. Being confirmed, they are to be admitted to the Lord's Supper,
though they know not what it means; yea they are compelled for fear of
Imprisonment and ruin to communicate. 5. When they are sick, if they will but
say they repent, and desire it, they must be Absolved in absolute terms; though
they give the Minister no satisfaction, that they are truly penitent, and have
lived till then a most ungodly life, and perhaps lie cursing, and swearing, and
railing at a holy life on their sickbed. 6. And being dead, we must pronounce
our hope of every one in England, except unbaptized ones, excommunicate and
self-murderers, that God in mercy has taken to himself the Soul of this our
dear brother out of the miseries of this world; Though they were professed
Atheists, Infidels, scorners of Christ, notorious adulterers, or other
criminals, and never once so much as said, I repent. 7. And the Discipline of
the Church being managed by one Lay-Chancellor and his Court, with some small
assistance, in a Diocese of many hundred Parishes, is utterly incapable of
calling one of an hundred to repentance, or keeping clean the Church. And these
are much of that which the Nonconformists refuse to subscribe their full Assent
and Consent to, and to Covenant never to endeavor to reform, for which they
suffer the loss of all. And now judge which side has the looser principles and
cause. And add their refusal to approve of that which they fear to be in many
thousands, Perjury, and the rest which the Conformists never scruple, and try
who are the looser, and have the greater Latitude of Conscience. And never did
we yet meet with many that do believe that we live in more fullness, and
idleness, and fleshly liberty than most of the Conformists do, which we speak
not as accusing any, but in our necessary defense.

But he pretends to prove it, 1. By our Books. 2. By particular doctrines of
Election, Justification, Good-works, etc.

But 1. Does not the world know that the Nonconformists offer to subscribe the
same Doctrine of the Church of England as the Conformists do, in the 39.
Articles and the Book of Homilies? If one then have a wrong faith professed, so
has the other. And let them that must contradict the Doctrine which they
subscribe, bear the greatest shame and punishment, and spare us not, if it be
we. 2. Why is there no public accusation against us these years, in which by
his Majesty's License we have preached openly, as for any unsoundness of our
doctrine? 3. Who knows not that such accusing inferences are usually brought
by all factious, quarrel some Divines against their adversaries? Whence such
Writings as Caivino-Turcesinus, etc. have sprung up. 4. The Reporter here
either charge on the Nonconformists the Doctrines of the Antinomians, (which
none have more confuted) and of a few half Antinomian erroneous men (against
whom he might have read the Writings of Mr. Burges, Mr. VVoodbridg, Mr.
Gibbons, Mr. Warren, Mr. Jessope, Mr. Gataker, and many other Nonconformists)
or else he falsifieth their doctrine. He cites the Marrow of Modern Divinity,
written thirty years ago, by a Barber tainted with Antinomianism; and though he
cite the names of five Independents that then approved or commended it too
hastily, he never tells you how commonly both the Presbyterian and Episcopal
Nonconformists (and very many Independents) reject and condemn it; and how many
have confuted it (more than Conformists ever did). And blessed be God that our
forecited Books are visible to report our Doctrine to the World. 5. But he
singleth out one of us from the report of a Conforming Contradictor, as making
heinous sins, such as Peter's, Lots, etc. consistent with true Grace. Reader,
this is the true case (in which you will still see what justice we have from
this kind of men), Baxter about near thirty years ago, endeavored with all his
power and diligence to reconcile the Episcopals, Presbyterians, and
Independents, at least to join in the same Communion. He found the two latter
full of distaste against the Prelatical party of Ministers, but especially of
the common people (even his own hearers) still saying, they are swearers,
drunkards, mere worldly, loose, ungodly people, that have no seriousness in
Religion, and it is not lawful for us to have communion with such. To cure them
of this distaste, he stretched his charity as far as he thought just, to
extenuate their faults, and told the people, That though many of these
Prelatists would swear and curse, and had diverse such faults; in the exercise
of Church Communion, they that were not-Pastors, but private men, must bear
what they could not reform; and withal must compassionately consider, that
many foul faults committed more through passion and custom, than love and
interest, might stand with grace; and Paul's counsel, Gal. 6. 1, 2. was to be
well considered. This being the scope of his discourse, and the end, what does
Mr. Tho. Pierce but retort it on him unthankfully to his reproach, as holding
too loose a doctrine? Which this man here also now repeateth. But as he told
Mr. Pierce, that for all this, if one were necessary, he had rather dye in the
case of Noah, Lot, and Peter, in the time of their sin, than in the case of Mr.
Pierce when he wrote that book (being persuaded that they had then more of the
love of God and man than he); the same also he still professes to this
Enquirer, and all of his spirit that so unthankfully requite men for persuading
the people to judge as charitably as they could for Concord sake of scandalous
Prelatists: But if we be odious for pleading for charitable censures to such,
what are they that live in the sin it self, and they that receive them
constantly to their Communion?

And here as a proof he tells us how Dr. Hammond's Catechism, and Mr. Fowlers
book of Holiness being the design of Christianity, have been censured, and Mr.
Baxter for daring to justify the argument of that book, p. 109. To which we
say, 1. We highly value Dr. Hammonds Practical Catechism; And it is strange,
that if one of us have justified the argument of the other, that our Doctrine
should not rather be gathered from such as he, than from we know not whom: For
we must say that we know of none accounted Orthodox among us, who have at all
disowned that book of Mr. Baxters: But we observe that these men most
injuriously impute the very opposition of some Sectaries, and passionate weak
persons, to us that are opposed by them, because that all go under the name of
Nonconformists.

2. His second Reason is, Our mighty show of zeal in all Religious
performances. Ans. And how knows he that it is but a show? Are they like to
be better that show no zeal? Can a man believe the great things of Heaven and
Hell, and preach them without great seriousness and zeal, and not play the
hypocrite? Who is it that said, Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, lift up thy voice like a
trumpet? etc. But Christ's kinsmen themselves went about to lay hold on him,
thinking that his zeal was a transportation or distraction, Mat. 3. 21. [Vid.
Dr. Hammond in loc.] no wonder if men's tongues condemn us for zeal, though our
consciences condemn us for remisness and coldness in matters of everlasting
consequence.

3. His third Reason is p. 21. A very great specious seeming sanctity in
carriage and common deportment; the sheeps clothing worn by the wolves, etc.
Ans. 1. Will not even strangers from such words suspect that our adversaries
own not, or have not at least so much as such a seeming sanctity of carriage?
How else could this be noted as a difference? 2. And how knows he that
knows not hearts, that this is but seeming? 3. And how do these charges of a
loose doctrine and great seeming sanctity, well agree? 4. Would he have us not
so much as seem holy (and so not seem Christians) that we may escape such
censures? 5. And how show we that we are Wolves? Christ meant that Wolves are
known by their cruelty; and Paul says, Acts 20. 29. that the grievous wolves
that shall enter, will not spare the flock. We confess ( v. 30.) that we ever
expected, that from our own selves some would arise, speaking perverse things
to draw away disciples after them, by reason of whom the way of truth should be
evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 2. and it has accordingly come to pass with some;
but with fewer of the Ministry than we might have feared according to the
experience of the first ages of the Church. But sure it is not we that wearing
white garments have bloody jaws; we persecute none, we silence not our brethren.

And let our enemies judge of our Accuser by his own words, p. 125. No men ever
were better studied in all the little things that make a fair show in the sight
of the vulgar, and carry with them any appearance of piety. No men ever were
exacter at Oral and Gestural sanctity, than they are; what their hearts are,
God and their own consciences know, we will not judge them (when yet the Book is
an opprobrious judging them): What can be said more for us than this? and how
contrary is it to the rest of their Accusations?

4. His fourth Reason runs thus, p. 126. Another method by which these persons
attract a great veneration from their followers, is the suffering a seeming
persecution -- They appear evidently on the suffering side, and providence has
cast them upon acting the sadder scene, the Laws are something smart against
them --

Ans. 1. This man yet confuteth the former that makes us gainers. 2. But what
escape is possible from such Accusers? Did we make those Laws against our
selves? Do we persecute our selves? Shall Clergymen provoke Magistrates to
make such Laws as he calls smart, and then make our sufferings to be one of
our methods? If this be the method to obtain Veneration, I doubt such as the
Accusers will hardly learn it. 3. But in our experience the vulgar usually most
honor the prospering and upper side, and set light by sufferers, as if their
very usage proved their desert. It is like to be the better sort that are so
compassionate, and so much value men that for conscience are vilified by others.

But p. 132. he has found out covetousness in our sufferings, which others lay
upon us; and says, that Calamy found three days in Newgate more gainful than
half a years preaching at Aldermanbury: so that now we have found out another
Vice that may possibly be in this matter, Pride and Covetousness too, etc.

Ans. Is this the Justice of Sacred Clergymen? 1. Do they lay us with Rogues
in the common Gaols for preaching the Gospel when they forbid us, and then envy
us that charity there relieveth us, and that any are more merciful than
themselves? Do these men believingly preach Matthew. 25. I was hungry, and ye fed
me -- I was in prison, and ye visited me? etc. 2. How knows this man what Mr.
Calamy received? Is it likely that he knows what he says to be true? which
none of us know, that better knew Mr. Calamy than he. 3. If our friends are so
liberal, sure they are a better sort of people than the Conformists, if those
Preachers say true who tell the world what a wretched case their Clergy would
be in, if their maintenance depended on the will and charity of the people. But
to make them no better than they are, one of us that writes this, can say by
experience how like this report is to be false: for when he lay (for the
ordinary cause) many times three days in the Common Gaol, he was never offered
a groat by any, but one Country Knight, one Lady, and one Citizen (and a by
offer from one that he had reason to refuse) nor received a farthing from any
but these three, which did but defray his Prison and Law charges, but not by
many pounds his Losses by that prosecution.

5. His fifth Reason is, Their continual applauding and commending their
people, and crying them up as saints.

Ans. 1. And what get we by so doing? 2. Why are we censured for preaching
against men's sins, if we are flatterers? 3. Whom is it that we cry up for
Saints? Is it only Nonconformists? Let our Writings witness whether our
description of Saints be right or wrong. But if none must be justified as
Saints, none will be saved as Saints. Which does the world among us take for
the plainer dealers? and which party for the more smooth and toothless
Preachers?

And now let it be judged by impartial men, whether our sufferings were not
enough, and the far sadder sufferings of the peoples souls by our divisions,
and the (undeniable) want of due teaching in many places, without all the
addition of these hard reproaches? And whether the cited Debate maker, Vol. 1.
p. 113. spoke like a Divine, a Christian, or a man, when he said, There can no
account be given of their behavior since, in cherishing this fancy among you,
(or suffering it to grow) that Conformity is unlawful, unless it be this, that
they think it will make more for their reputation among you, if you believe it
was conscience, not care of their own credit and reputation, that kept them
from conforming]. When we can obtain leave to be heard, and give in our
reasons, it will be better known whether they be but fancies. In the mean time,
he that so boldly does that which so many others take to be sin of so grand a
magnitude, should have better asked us for our reasons, before as a
heart-searcher he had pronounced that no other account can be given: and he
that is so free in naming those whom he traduceth, is not by sober charity to
be believed when he tells us that he has heard some acknowledge that they did
not scruple what these men do, when he names none; and we never knew such
wretched fools, who were for number or quality so considerable, as that the
Nonconformists (and the refusers of Preferment in particular) should be known
even in their secret intentions, by their words, and from them be
characterized. But sure he thinks himself, that some considerable party of men
take Conformity for no indifferent thing, but a very shameful wickedness, if he
think that we deny even Lordships and worldly Honors and Wealth, and all the
love, reverence, and honor which from the Conformable party is given to the
Dignified Clergy, and take up instead of it, with poverty, reproach, and
sometimes a Gaol, and all to escape the dishonor of Conformity, and obtain the
contrary esteem. But they are not ignorant for all this talk, that some of us
by free reprehending the faults of Nonconformists as well as others, (for they
have their faults) have been as prodigal of our Reputation with them, as with
the Conformists, when we could (with great gain also) have easily preserved it.

It is none of our desire to recriminate, or make any of our Conforming
Brethren odious. We suffer much with those people who think they may call a
Spade a Spade, for seeking to moderate their censures of many or most of the
Conformists. But we must not be blind and senseless under that calamity which
wringeth out the Kingdoms tears and groans; nor on pretense of charity, be void
of compassion to many hundred thousand souls. And therefore the Writings of
Gildas, Lucifer Calaritanus, Salvianus, Sulpitius Severus, and St. Martins
Separation from the Prelates, are rendered to us the less censurable, by
acquaintance with this age. And we read not Alvar. Pelag. without a Commentary;
nor these words of Nic. Clemangis Specul. Eccles. Pont. p. 7. de corrupt.
Eccles. stat. [ Ubi vero (ut fere assolet) paulum ex divitiis rerumque
secundarum affluentia, luxus and insolentia in Ecclesiam subiere, tepescere
sensim coepit religio, virtus hebescere, solvi disciplina, charitas minui,
tolli humilitas, paupertas opprobrio esse, simulque parsimonia. Sed ut pompis
and luxui res subesset, avaritia crebescere, quae non suis diu contenta
finibus, aliena non modo ambire, sed rapere and invadere moliretur, inferiores
opprimere, and tam jure quam injuria spoliare -- p. 9 Ita factum est, ut
paulatim extincto in cordibus eorum spiritu, frigescente charitate, tepescente
devotione, Deo denique oblito, solis terrenis fructibus capescendis inhiarent,
sola in dignitatibus beneficiisque aliis emolumenta pensarent. Nulla prorsus
hodierna die in assumendis pastoralibus sarcinis, in curaque animarum subeunda,
de servitio divino, de salute subditorum aut aedificatione, mentio habetur, de
proventuum ubertate tantummodo and quantitate quaeritur -- p. 31. Si quis forte
pastor, surrexerit qui non hoc more incedat, aut qui pecuniam contemnat, aut
avaritiam damnet, qui denique non omni via seu justa seu iniqua, aurum a suis
subditis extorqueat, aut salutari exhortatione vel praedicatione animas
lucrifacere studeat, and plus in lege Divina quam in legibus hominum meditetur,
extemplo in morsus ipsius omnium dentes acuentur: Illum prorsus ineptum, nec
dignum sacerdotio clamitabunt. -- p. 34. Quid loquar de exercitio suae
jurisdictionis? Qua ita violenter and tyrannice regitur, ut magis hodie homines
eligant tyrannorum immanissimorum, quam subire judicia ecclesiae. -- Dici non
potest quanta mala faciant illi scelerati exploratores criminum quos Promotores
appellant; simplices and pauperculos agrestes, vitam satis innocuam in suis
tuguriis agentes, and fraudis Urbanae nescios, in jus saepe pro nihilo vocant:
Causas and crimina contra eos sedulo confingunt, vexant, terrent, minit antur;
sicque eos per talia se componere, and pacisci cogunt: quod si facere renuant,
crebris eos citationibus quotidie impetunt, and supra modum infestant. Quod si
semel qualibet occasion praepediti comparere desierint, censura illos
Anathematis, ut rebels and contumaces feriunt; si vero ad diem venire,
quoties vecati erunt, perseveraverint, eorum audientias apud judicum tribunalia
impedient -- quo longo taedio, longaque sui temporis jactura fatigati,
superventuram vexationem atque impensam, pecuniae pactione redimere cogantur*
-- p 37. Ex isto font profluit illa copiosa vilium atque indignissimorum
Presbyterorum multitudo -- si quis hodie desidiosus est, si quis a labor
abhorrens, si quis in ocio luxuriari volens, ad sacerdotium convolat, quo
adepto, statim se caeteris sacerdotibus voluptatum sectatoribus adjungit, qui
magis secundum Epicurum quam secundum Christum viventes, and Cauponulas seduli
frequentantes, potando, commessando, pransitando, convivando, cum tessaris and
pila ludendo, tempora tota consumunt. Sed redeo ad nostros Episcopos, qui in
omni lubricitate ab ineunte adolescentia educati, tales testes ut ita dixerim
Ministros in Ecclesiam introducunt, quorum gesta memorabilia. Illud a me
praetermitti non debet quod multi ex eis qui pastorali apice potiuntur, perque
annosae tempora potiti sunt, nunquam civitates suas intraverunt, suas Ecclesias
viderunt, nunquam pecorum suorum vultus agnoverunt, vocem audierunt, vulnera
senserunt, nisi ea forte vulnera, quae ipsi suis uberibus spoliis per alienos
mercenarios eis intulerunt. Alienos dixi, quia and ipsimet mercenarii sunt, qui
non gregis sui custodiam, salutem, profectum-quaerunt, sed solum temporalis
mercedis retributionem. Itaque ipsi vere sunt Mercenarii, tantum Episcopi
habentes nomen, quia res per nomen signata procul abest. -- sui corporis curam
agunt; sese and non oves pascunt. -- Disp. p. 115 Quia plerique carnales quibus
hodie supra modum abundat Ecclesia, propterea pacem illam optant, ut in otio
and tranquilla quiet, nullo interpellante turbine adversitatis, suis possint
voluntatibus (ne dicam voluptatibus) liberius servire. Et quis illos in nomine
Christi dixerit Congregatos, qui hac mente unitatem quaerunt Ecclesiae? qui
tamen tot sunt, ut non facile sint numerabiles. Hi autem carnales filii
Ecclesiae non solum spiritualia nec curant nec sentiunt, sed etiam persequuntur
eos qui sunt secundum spiritum. -- Hi sunt qui pro temporalibus tantum commodis
ad ecclesiam convolant, qui ad secularium formam in ecclesia vivunt, ambiunt,
capiunt, rapiunt, praeesse gaudent, non prodesse; subditos opprimunt and
spoliant, praelationis honor gloriantur, pompis, fastu, luxu laetantur, qui
questum pietatem aestimant -- qui volentes sancte, just, cast, innocenter,
spiritualiter vivere, cum cachinnis irrident, hypocritas appellant,
crucifixosque comestores. -- Talibus hodie ecclesia plena est, ut vix singulis
capitulis aut collegiis alios invenire contingat. -- p. 122. Qui nihil non modo
probare, sed nec patienter audire possunt, quod suae voluntati vel cupiditati
contrarium sit; Qui nihil de spiritualibus donis gustantes, siquis aliquid de
spiritu dixerit, velut insulsum and insipidum cum risu and subsannatione
excipiunt, cum sibilis exufflant, cum clamore and contentione rejiciunt.

Bernard. Sermon. 33. in Cant. Vae generationi huic a fermento Pharis^orum quod
est hypocrisis; si tamen hypocrisis dici debet quae jam latere prae abundantia
non valet, and prae impudentia non quaerit: Serpit hodie putida labes per omne
corpus ecclesiae, and quo latius eo desperatius, eoque periculosius quo
interius. Nam* si insurgeret apertus haereticus, mitteretur for as and
aresceret, etc. Ecce in pace amaritudo mea amarissima: Amara prius in nece
martyrum: amarior post in conflictu haereticorum: amarissima nunc in moribus
domesticorum: Non fugare, non fugere eos potest, ita invaluerunt and
multiplicati sunt supra numerum: Intestina and insanabilis est plaga ecclesiae,
and ideo in pace amaritudo ejus amarissima* Pax est, and non est pax: Pax a
paganis: pax ab haereticis; sed non profecto a filiis. -- Id. Ep. 249. Quis
dabit mihi homines literatos and sanctos in ecclesiis Dei praeesse Pastores,
sin non in omnibus, certe in pluribus, certe in aliquibus saltem?

But though we sigh and groan out these words of others, we intend not by them
the accusation of any Worthy men, but to tell those that revile us for not
being silent, that we cannot possibly believe them, who in this age persuade us
that our labors are unnecessary.

The true Case of the Nonconformists Sufferings, which they are said to undergo
through Covetousness of gain.
We affect not to be querulous (though nature inclines them to it that are
hurt), nor yet to bring our Superiors under the dishonorable title of
Persecutors; else had we not so many years been silent as to our own defense:
But when even our Sufferings are made our crime, and said to be chiefly from
our Pride and Covetousness, faithfulness to the Souls of men that are thus led
toward the guilt of calumniating the afflicted; and faithfulness to the
interest and honor of our office, requires us modestly to tell the truth.

1. When Gods mavelous Providence restored his Majesty, we were some of us in
Parishes whence the Parliament had before ejected others, yet alive, who
presently took possession of their places in 1660: This is none of the matter
of our complaint. But on Aug. 24. 1662, we were by Law made incapable of any
station in the public Ministry, unless we subscribe, declare, and do the other
Conditions required by that Law. Not one of us that ever we heard, was cast out
as criminal, for any error that we preached, or any evil that we had done: But
for not Subscribing, Declaring and Doing, as aforesaid, about 1800 or 2000 were
at once disabled and cast out. The penalty for every Sermon that they should
Preach (besides the loss of all the Ministerial Maintenance or Benefice) was
three Months imprisonment in the Common Jayl, and 100 l. for Administering the
Sacrament by any not ordained by a Bishop, though otherwise ordained when
Bishops were deposed, and not to be had. Those Ministers who could bring their
Consciences to hold all the things imposed to be lawful, did Conform. The rest
being solemnly dedicated and vowed to the sacred Ministry (some by the
Ordination of Bishops, and some of City and Country-Pastors) durst not lay
aside their Office: Partly because of their Vow, conceiving it to be Sacrilege
to alienate consecrated persons, and greater than to alienate consecrated
things; and partly because of the notorious Necessity of the people; Multitudes
being ignorant, and vicious, and ungodly, some Popish, or erroneous otherwise;
and many Parishes not competently supplied, and the number of fit men both
Conformable and not-conformable, too small in proportion to the peoples wants:
Yet they concluded, that if once the Number and Quality of the Conformable
Ministers were such as would make our labors unnecessary, we might either be
silent, or go try to learn the language of some Foreign Land, where we might be
of use: And we agreed, that the Magistrate having the power of the Temples, and
public maintenance, we must lay no claim to either against his will: And that
though our office might not lawfully be deserted, nor the peoples Souls, yet
the circumstances of Time, place, and numbers of hearers, etc. should be so
chosen, as most tended to the ends of our office (the Churches good and men's
edification), and to the preservation of the public peace, and the due honor
of our Governors): And that love, peace and submission to the higher Powers,
and obedience to their Authority in all things lawful, was our indispensible
duty, with Patience under all that we should suffer for our Ministerial work.

2. Some Ministers by their Patrimony, or what God had otherwise blessed them
with, were able to live when ejected, without extremity of poverty: but a great
number had nothing, or next to nothing at all, having lived in places where
they had but about 30, or 40, or 50, or 60 l. per annum, and not foreseeing a
time of want: And a greater number that had some small matter of their own, had
Wives and many Children, to whose maintenance their estates were very
insufficient; so that most of the Nonconformists (as far as we can compute)
were cast upon the Charity of others for their own and families subsistence. In
this case some that pitied the distressed, would have set on foot a course
among the Londoners and Country Gentlemen that were willing, for orderly help
of those in their several Counties: But so many rumors of plots and jealousies
were then raised, that men durst not undertake it, lest they should be
accounted Plotters against the Government, and encouragers of those that the
State discountenanced. One of us therefore moved, that our Rulers consent might
plainly be requested, and he was sent to the Lord Chancellor Hide to request
it; who said, God forbid that men should be forbidden to exercise their own
Charity to Ministers in want: But yet though some talk, and uneffectual attempt
was made hereupon, it was not prosecuted, because men's aforesaid fears still
continued. But some charitable persons pitied the needy, and kept them from
famishing and utter distress. And some few Ministers, of more than ordinary
Parts, and Name, and Acquaintance, were better supplied than the rest. But
those that were (as conscientious, but) of meaner parts, and more obscure, and
small acquaintance, and lived in poor Countries, were in great necessities:
some have long lived with many Children, with almost nothing but brown-bread
and water; and some have been put to work for their living at very low and
fordid employments (as Musculus once did with a Weaver, and in the Town-ditch):
some took Farms, and for want of stock and skill, run into greater poverty and
debts: some that had studied Physic, turned Physicians, and so escaped want:
some left the obscure Villages, through mere necessity, and betook them to
London, and other Cities and great Towns, where the Numbers and Ability of the
inhabitants might afford them some relief. And some by this siege did yield up
their Consciences, and stretched them by forced interpretations of the words of
the Declaration and Subscription, to Conform, and upon the review were cast
into miserable distress of soul, which was more troublesome than poverty and
famine: And some that thought it not their duty to be very scrupulous, and
because they had not taken the Covenant, or meddled in matters of Civil
Contention or War, did judge themselves more capable than others of Conforming,
did after upon review repent, and give up the places they had taken, and the
practice which they had begun. But all found, that the Number of persons that
were both able and willing to relieve so many needy families, was small, and
that most were either unable or tenacious of their money; so that the
sufferings of many were very great.

3. But the service that the silenced Ministers did, being now in private; an
Act was made against Conventicles, and such penalties annexed as I need not
here recite: And when the Act was expired, it was again revived, with many
additions. And because that these Ministers lived mostly now on Cities and
Corporations, or their former flocks that were acquainted with them, an Act was
made (in the heat of all the grievous Plague) at Oxford, imposing on them an
Oath, which he that took not, having kept any Conventicle, and after came
within five miles of any City or Corporation, or place where he had lately
preached, was to be sent six Months to the Common Jayl, and pay 40 l. This Law
was harder to them than the former: For, 1. many men that had made some shift
to settle their habitation in the cheapest or most convenient place they could
get, were forced to remove; yea most of the Nonconformists in England were
constrained to change their dwelling. 2. Some lived with some friends or
relations who would give them house-room or help, and they were thus driven
away from their friends and relations, and such entertainments. 3. Abundance of
them had their houses for a certain time, having Leases of them for years or
life: And they knew not how to get Tenants to take such houses which were
incommodious to Farmers, though fit for them. And they that before wanted bread
and clothing, were put to the streights of paying Rent for houses that must
stand empty, being driven from them. 4. And they were hard put to it to find
places in England to fix their dwellings in: for Corporations in most Counties
are so near, that he that withdraws five miles from one, does come within
five miles of another; or at least within five miles of some place where they
had preached: And some laborious men, that thirsted after men's salvation, had
gone about preaching over a great part of the Country, or the Land, and so
were almost sentenced to banishment by this Law. And when they did find out a
place that was five miles distant from all the prohibited places, it would be
strange if there they should find empty houses, when Landlords use not to leave
their houses untenanted and unpossessed: And if a house were empty, that it
should be fit for a poor Minister, that could not take the ground or farm,
would be strange. And 5. when they found a capable place, they had not money to
take it: Being poor before, and poorer by their removal. 6. And when they
borrowed money to take it, they wanted money to pay for the removing of their
goods, and the furnishing of their new habitations: Those that have tried such
changes, know how chargeable, as well as troublesome, they are.

But the thing that most eased them in all these straights, was, that [
Market-Towns] were not put into the Act with [ Corporations]; and so many
Market Towns being no Corporations, and there being houses to be had without
farms or ground, many Ministers got into those Towns: which gave Dr. Fullwood
occasion to reproach them as dwelling in populous places, which had least need
of them (of which more anon). And some Ministers finding their streights so
great, as that their imprisonment in the common Jayl was not more to be feared;
and finding especially that they were no more warranted by God to desert the
Souls in all Cities and Corporations, and all their ancient flocks, and all
places where they had preached, and five miles round about all these, than the
rest of the Land, yea that populous places had the greatest need, and their
former Hearers might claim the greatest interest in them, and that Christ
commanded his Apostles, when they were prosecuted in one City, to fly to
another; they resolved to follow their work where they were invited, and to
commit their liberties and lives to God.

But Gods dreadful judgments were the great cause of their freedom from these
streights. The terrible Plague consumed so many thousands a week in London,
that some Nonconformable Ministers durst not leave them in that distress, but
stayed and preached to them, and visited them, and gathered money abroad for the
poor, which greatly won the peoples hearts; and the face of death so prevailed
with multitudes to awaken them from security, that the success of the Ministers
was very great, and so great, as fixed their resolution to hold on, whatever it
cost them. Multitudes of young people penitently lamenting their former sins,
and begging of the Ministers not to forsake them in their distress. And so many
of the Conformable Ministers fled from the infection, that the Bishop thought
it best to connive at the preaching of the Nonconformists during that
necessity. And quickly after, the lamentable fire consumed with the Houses
Eighty nine Churches, which made the necessity of preaching in other places
more extensive and notoririous; it being unmeet that so famous a Christian City
should forsake all public worshipping of God till the Houses and Churches
should be all rebuilt. So that by this necessity a greater number of
Nonconformists were needed and entertained in London; yea many
Countrey-Ministers that came thither, and by their example the rest throughout
England were much encouraged to appear more openly and resolutely in their work.

But in the mean time the Country Gaols were possessed by many faithful
Ministers, where some have dyed, and some excellent men contracted those
diseases of which they dyed shortly after; and some have dyed by the effects of
poverty, by cold, and ill food, for want of necessaries. And the complaints of
Wives and hungry Children, and the burden of debts for meat, drink, clothes,
fire, and houses, has been a sharper trial to very many of them, than their
revilers seem to be acquainted with. And had they felt it but one year
themselves, it is like they would not have thought this a way to gratify either
covetousness or pride. It Is true, that we should rejoice in all our
tribulations, and in every condition be content; but humane frailty must be
confessed; that some by such distress have been cast into sad melancholies,
which yet seemed more tolerable too, than gripes of conscience for wilful sin.

And indeed the minds of few ingenuous persons will account it an ease to live
on alms, and to be beholden to men's charity for their daily bread; especially
when it is too well known how much most men do love their money, and how
tenacious they are of it; and if they give once, how hardly they are brought to
it again. Who that is able would not rather with Paul get their bread by some
labor, than fordidly live on a barren and backward sort of charity? And the
truth is, it is the poverty of the friends of the Nonconformists that has been
the cause of these defects. It Is well known that it is but few comparatively of
the Gentry that have owned them; but the Country Farmers of their several
Parishes, whose payments and charges were so great, that they had little to
spare from the maintenance of their own Families. And the lamentable fire so
greatly impoverished the Londoners, and all the Country Tradesmen that
depended on them (together with the decay of Trade) that the Streams were dried
up that should have supplied the Nonconformists wants; so that if some very
charitable Citizens and others, had not done extraordinarily for them beyond
all others, they might have perished by Famine. And after all, the number in
the City and other parts, who by the peoples liberality have a tolerable
maintenance (which ignorance and envy call a Plenty) is very small in
comparison of all those through the rest of the Land who have greater wants,
and lesser helps.

And it has not been the least of the said Ministers sufferings, that the
continual uncertainty of their condition, has disabled them from any
commodious fixing of their habitations, and put them to the trouble and charge
of frequent removals; one while severities drive them to retirement; and
afterward his Majesty's gracious Licenses draw them out to more populous
places, and encouraged them to take houses accordingly, and put off the old:
And shortly after, the revocation of the Licenses, and the sharpness of
prosecution, puts them on the necessity of another change, which indeed to
single men is less; but to the far greatest part who have families to remove
and care for, they that have tried it, and have no money to defray the charges
of such removals, know what it is to be thus unsettled.

But all these are light afflictions, compared with the delights of pleasing
God, and saving Souls, and with the pleasures of our daily work, while we are
employed in studying, proclaiming and trusting the certain promises of eternal
life, and waiting for the promised reward in glory. And far be it from us to
mention them as murmuring at the Providence of God; but only in confutation of
the hard-faced Calumnies of some men, and to acquaint posterity historically
with the truth. God is just in all the corrections which he lays on us; we
have deserved silencing, mulcts and imprisonments from him, yea he is exceeding
merciful to us, both in our sufferings for truth and conscience sake, and in
our preservations and deliverances; and we are far from repenting of our
Masters work: But whether we deserve from men the accusations and usage which
these 17 years we have undergone, we refer to his judgment, who will shortly by
his just and final sentence decide this Controversy, and justify the just.

33. Mr. Hollingworth (in an Assize-Sermon printed) tells a story to prove his
Schismatics as cruel as the execution of the Laws against us would be, that
some one leading Sectary said, He would have all banished that would not
subscribe the Doctrine of the Church in the 36 Articles. I wrote to him to know
whom he meant, and he would not tell me, but (in a very respectful Letter)
said, It was not nor Dr. Manton, etc. I since understood that this is said of
Dr. Owen: But 1. he professes it is false. 2. He is known to be for much
liberty. 3. If he did say it, it was but to avert the odium of an overlarge
toleration from the Independents. 4. And what is this to the case of the many
hundred Nonconformable Ministers in England? But they be rendered odious for
this word of his.

I will end with the Charge of Henry Fowlis (passing over his abusive Volumes
of Collections, lest I be over-tedious) in his History of Popish Treasons, this
is his accusation, he says of those whom he calls Puritans: I think the
Puritans to be the worst people of all mankind. A Sect that will agree with you
in the fundamentals of Religion, but will take Miff, and destroy all for a
trifle; and rather than submit to an innocent Ceremony, though imposed by
lawful authority, will ruin Kingdoms, Murder Bishops: A Sect that would hate
Christ, but that he said he came not to bring Peace, but War. As for the Roman
Catholic, I must needs have a greater kindness for him than the former
firebrarnds, as being an adversary more learned, and so to be expected more
Civil and Gentile; and wherein they differ from us, they look upon as
fundamental, and so have a greater reason for their dissent, than our
Phanatical Presbyterians* a people not capable of a Commendation, nor to be
obliged by any favors, their very Constitution being ingratitude.

At this rate the Ecclesiastical Politician, and others inform the world, of
Puritans and Presbyterians in the Gross. Those that knew this man's Morals,
laugh at his Railery; but posterity will not know what he was. I shall only
desire the Reader to note, 1. That Puritans and Presbyterians now do signify
what the speakers please. Mr. Robert Bolton, a Learned Conformist, thinks
that the name Puritan, as commonly used in England, in the mouths of common
drunkards, and the profane and impious sort, is turned against true Godliness,
with the greatest spleen that ever word was in the world. 2. Mark, that we are
called The worst people of all mankind, even Heathens, Jews, Turks, Cannibals
not excepted; and yet we agree with the Accusers in all fundamentals: This is
the Charity which we meet with from these men. Those of their own Religion, not
charged with one doctrinal difference, if they obey not their Wills in every
Ceremony, are the worst of all mankind. Reader, is this the Religion taught by
St. Paul? Romans 14. 15. and Phil. 3. where mutual forbearances, and Receiving
dissenters is commanded, against both Censurers and Despisers? Will ever Church
on Earth have Concord on these terms? Are such mouths fit to call others
Firebrarnds? Is not this a disgrace to the Christian Protestant Religion, that
all its fundamentals will not keep a man that differs but in a Ceremony from
being the worst of mankind.

3. Look back but on the Instances of our Nonconformity before laid down, and
then tell thy self what to judge of such men, and such pens, as proclaim to the
world, that it is but an innocent Ceremony that we submit not to. See the
Nonconformists Plea for Peace.

4. Bethink you what our Nonsubmission or Nonconformity does to ruin Kingdoms,
in comparison of the course of such accusers. If poor men desire to serve
Christ, though in poverty, with diligence, and peace, and Lordbishops shall
say, Either subscribe, say, and swear all this, or be silenced and cast out of
all your Ministry and Maintenance; Does he now that patiently bears all their
penalties, loses all, and goes quietly to the Common Jayl among Rogues, for
Preaching Christ's Gospel to more than four without Swearing and Conforming,
become hereby a Ruiner of Kingdoms, while they are innocent that do all this
against them? Do they not toto and nudato pectore taelum recipire and tantum
non, with great Cameron unbutton them, and cry Feri miser? Is there any one
word of Rebellious Doctrine proved by this man, when he has done his worst out
of any one Church-Confession of those whom he revileth? And if he can find any
thing which is not found in the books of any particular men, in the late Wars,
is that their fault that never owned it, and were then scarce born? Does he, or
any of all the malicious tribe, charge those whom they reproach with
drunkenness, gluttony, luxury, fornication, ambition, fraud, lying, or any such
immorality?

5. Are those that suffer, and do so much for that which they think to be the
truth of Christ, well charged with hating Christ? and is not the exception a
profane scorn of Christ? but that he said he came not to bring peace. It is
easy to say with Tertullus of Paul, that he is a Ringleader of a Sect, and a
pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among the people: but where is the
proof?

6. And mark why he professes himself kinder to the Papists: 1. Because they
are more Learned, Civil and Gentile. 2. Because they differ in supposed
fundamentals. But 1. did he not know our advantage in Learning then was a great
cause of the success of the Reformation in Luthers days? And who that knows
the pitiful Priests in France, Spain and Italy, and what a generation Erasmus,
Stephanus, Vives, Hutten, and others describe, and what men the Reformation
found in the Priesthood in England, and all other Countries, will believe this
man, that the Papists are more learned? And though we truly* honor the later
Leared men that have been bred among them, their Suarez, their Petavius, and
many more; yet he might know that our John Reignolds, our Chamier, Sadcel,
Bochart, Capellus, Rivet, with multitudes of their like, were learned men as
well as they: and so were Rob. Parker, Amesius, Bradshaw, Paget, and many other
Nonconformists here: and Twisse, Gataker, and many more of the
Westminster-Assembly. And all the Learning of the Papists in the world is not
enough to make them know Bread and Wine, when they see, and touch, and taste
it, which without Learning may be easily known.

2. But that differing in supposed fundamentals, should prove the Papists so
much better than us, does tell us with what sort of men we have to do. By that
rule the Mahometans are much better than the Papists, and the Heathens yet
better than the Mahometans, for they differ from us and them in greater things.
I perceive why the Jews were crueller than the Heathens, and the Papal than the
Pagan Rome, against the Ministers of Christ, because they differed not from
them in so many and weighty points. Note, Reader, that this man's book of 20s.
Price, is written to prove that Treason, Rebellion and King-killing is the very
Religion, and the ancient and later practice of the Papists: Their Councils are
cited for it; and their chiefest and most learned Writers cited as maintaining
the excommunicating and deposing Kings to be in the power of the Pope, and that
in so great a number, in their own words, the very Pages accurately and fully
cited; that after a multitude that have written on that subject, he has quite
over-done them all, and brought whole loads of Testimonies to prove it, to be
the common doctrine of the Roman Church; so that no man that ever wrote has in
this done so much to render them unreconcilably odious to all Kings and
Magistrates, as this man has done; and he has given them the deepest wound in
point of Policy and History that was ever given them, with as bitter and odious
terms of aggravation: And yet we that agree with him in all fundamentals, and
refuse (as he dreameth) but a Ceremony, are worse, far worse than they. Had he
only done by us, as he did by them, recited the words of our Syno^s and
Professors, we would contentedly have left all to judge of our Confessions, and
of each particular Author, as they deserve; and those that are proved culpable
to bear the blame: But his sentence and inferences only tell us, how desirable
the coming of Christ is to his Servants; and how earnestly we should pray to
the Judge of the World to come, and to come quickly.

Reasons why the Conformable Clergy should be desirous of their Brethrens
Ministerial liberty, that cannot Conform, as is now required.
1. YOU ought to be better acquainted with the Common state of peoples Souls,
and the great necessity of Teaching in the Land, than Parliaments or
Magistrates can be expected to be, who converse not with the people about their
everlasting hopes, as your calling bndeth you to do. And you are obliged also
to a double zeal, for the Kingdom of Christ and men's Salvation; As you still
profess a zeal for the Church, when Revenues, Power or Ceremonies are the
things in question. And men that have acquaintance with the Common state of
Souls, cannot choose but know, how insufficient they are of themselves without
help, for so great a work among such multitudes, and what need most Parishes
have of more than one (much more of one). If the Shepherds themselves should
either be so ignorant, as to think that their ignorant Parishes need no more
help than one man is able to afford to many thousands, or hundreds of Souls;
and that the labors of others may be spared, because that which they do
themselves is enough; or if they should be so proud, and strangers to
themselves, as not be conscious of their single insufficiency, and the
defectiveness of their own endeavors, and their need of help; or if they
should have no more care of Souls, than to let them be untaught, or be deprived
of such helps as God has provided for them, rather than such as we should
assist them; how unhappy will the people be that have such Pastors? and how
unhappy will they find themselves at last? It will be woeful enough to be
charged at the last day, with the neglect of Souls; much more with the
hindering of their Salvation, or being unwilling that other men should help
them.

2. It has in all ages been the way of Malignant enemies of Christ and
Godliness, to hinder, silence or oppose the Preachers of the Gospel: Therefore
if you do that which such men use to do, you will hardly ever escape being
taken for such your selves by the people. For though you can distinguish your
selves out of the guilt, if you be your own Judges, and can say that you
silence not the Preachers of the Gospel, but the Schismatics, the
Nonconformist, that fears Oaths, and Subscriptions, and Ceremonies; yet the
Wits of the vulgar are too dull to feel the strength of such subtle
distinctions. If your Ax was used but to kill the Fly that sat on his
forehead, yet if the man dye of the blow, the foolish people will say that you
killed the Man. If a High-way-man take a man's Purse, and say, I took it from
him, not because he is an honest man, but because he is Rich, and I am poor;
yet the grosswitted people will accuse him for robbing an honest man. If you
should forbid half the Workmen in London to labor in re-building the City,
and say you do it not to hinder the building, but because they durst not take
the Corporation-Oath, or use a Ceremony; yet the Citizens that cannot
distinguish, will think that you hinder the building for all that. If you would
cashiere a considerable part of the Kings Army when they should go fight
against the enemy, and say you do it only because they refused to wear any
Colors besides the Generals, lest he should be offended, when perhaps the
Chaplains impose other Colors on them also of their own, the dull-headed
people would think for all that, that you were enemies to the Kings service,
and should have punished them otherwise, without punishing the whole Army of
the King.

And if the people take you for Malignant Enemies of the Gospel and Godliness
which you preach, they will give you but little comfort in your Ministry, and
they will receive but little profit from it. I speak not upon surmises, but
that which I foretold you long ago, and that which now I have sad experience
of: Before I and many hundred more were silenced, I found my self capable of
persuading my old Hearers to some good opinion of you, and to incline them to
come as near you as was possible: But since then, I have lost my power in that
point: They are more averse to Communion with you than ever. The name of a
Bishop is quite another thing in their ears, than it was before. All the
interest that I have in them, and all the means that I could use, I am
confident will never reconcile them to you more, till your own good works and
merits reconcile them. They had before hard thoughts and fears of Bishops,
because they heard how many Ministers they had silenced; But when they see and
feel it, their apprehensions are deeper of such matters than before. And if we
talk to them against experience and sense, we talk in vain: If we tell them
that you are their Superiors, and must be reverenced; and they say, so are the
Prelates and Inquisitors to the people of Spain; who are worthy of fear, but
not of Love, they think they have answered us. If we tell them that you are of
the same Christian Religion with us, and do all that you do for Order and
Decency, and preach the Gospel your selves, though you are against our
Preaching: If they reply to us, Tell us not of their sheepskins, but see
whether they have not claws and fangs, and see whether there be no blood upon
their teeth! they think they have silenced our Charity by the reply. If we tell
them that you are the Fathers and Rulers of the Church; and they bid us see
whether you take not away the Childrens bread, and give them not a stone? and
whether the Churches Lights be not put under a bushel? and whether they are
snuffed or put out? We can give them no answer, which they will take for
satisfaction in spite of their senses and experience. Of all the people that
are and have been against Bishops in my days, I profess I knew not one of
twenty, forty or an hundred, that was against them for their Order sake, as the
disputing
Presbyterians and Independents are, but for their Works sake: Alas, it is not
one of an hundred that now dislike you, that ever studied any such
controversy, whether Episcopacy be Jure divino or not; or whether they differ
from Presbyters Ordine vel Gradu: But when they find their Ministers silenced,
as Schismatics, and reviled as the odious part of the Land, whom they have
tried and known by long experience, to be able, godly, faithful men; this is it
that makes them cry down Bishops. I find among all my sober acquaintance, that
the name of Usher, Hall, Davenant, and many more Bishops is venerable with
them, because they think they were good men. But judging by experience, is a
disease that the people will never by all your Logic be cured of: Their
weakness is such, that whatever flies away with the Chicken, they will call a
Kite, and will not believe that it was a Dove! And whatever teareth the Lambs,
they will call it a Dog or a Fox, and will not believe that it was a Sheep.

And indeed Malignity is so heinous a sin, that no Christian should too easily
smile upon it. Sensuality turns a man into a Beast; but Malignity into a
Devil. He therefore that would not be accounted such, must neither do as they
do, nor that which is so like it, that none can distinguish them, but those
that borrow the Agents spectacles. If you had only made a Canon, that we shall
be silenced when ever we Preach Heresy (though you had denied us a first and
second admonition), or else when we Preach Treason, Sedition, or Schism, the
people would have justified you! But if you will say, Cross a child* or
subscribe that we have not mistaken a word in all these three books, etc. or
else you shall not preach the Gospel of Salvation, nor labor to save the
peoples Souls, nor persuade them to think on the life to come: they will
presently remember such Texts as these, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16. They have
persecuted us: they please not God, and are contrary to all men, forbidding us
to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always;
for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, Acts 4. 2, etc.

3. Experience assures us, that from the beginning of the Church, to this
present day, Christ never gave too many able faithful Ministers to his Church:
Supernumeraries of such were never its disease, nor the amputation of them its
cure. There is still need of the Lords-prayer, Thy Kingdom come; And, Pray the
Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers, etc. That man is but a Christian
or a Pastor in jest, and Image, and not in earnest and reality, who thinks
that the Pastors now allowed are so sufficient for the great employment of the
Ministry, that more are but supernumerary, and the rest may be spared, without
any detriment to the souls of men. Even in the Apostles age of Miraculous
gifts, Dr. Hammond thinks the Pastors were so scarce, that every Episcopal
Church had no more than one Bishop, with some Deacons, without ever a
Subject-Presbyter; And that there was de facto, none of the Order of
subject-Presbyters in Scripture-times, (And so think all the Presbyterians
too). And it is a notorious truth, that afterward the Presbyters were so low
in abilities, that public preaching in the Church, was mostly used by the
Bishops only. And many Countries have lost the Gospel for want of Preachers:
And wherever ignorance and profaneness have broken in upon the Church (as the
Greeks, Abassines, Armenians, Moscovites, Papists, and too many Protestant
Churches), it has commonly been by the decay of able, godly, faithful Pastors:
And if one City or Parish of ten thousand have had too many, their near
neighbors have so much wanted them, that they could not be esteemed
supernumerary. And in England there are few Parishes which need not helps, even
where the ablest men are placed, much more where -- Is it seasonable then, or
does it answer the Will or Providence of to call in so many, when the Church
has always had too few?

4. The punishment which you inflict upon the Ministers, does fall a thousand
times more heavily on the souls of the innocent people, who without being
accused, or speaking for themselves in a Legal trial, have so great a penalty
inflicted on them, as none but a believer that judges of things in reference
to Eternity, is able to estimate a right.

Alas! to the Preacher the suffering is small, in comparison of the peoples!
What if they live poorly! what if they want house, or clothes, or bread! How
small a matter is that in comparison of the want of knowledge and faith, of
grace and salvation? I confess their sufferings will cost them dear that are
the true cause, (when Christ condemns those that do not relieve them): But to
themselves it is no such dreadful business: Nay if they were but discharged in
conscience from the Ministerial Office, most of them might live in much more
peace and plenty in the world. There are many other Callings to betake
themselves to, in which they might live quietly, and not be as the Hare before
the Hunters, pursued from place to place with cries, as if they that will
imitate Paul in labors, must bear also his reproach, as pestilent fellows, and
movers of sedition among the people; that do contrary to the decrees of Caesar,
and turn the world upside down Yea, many are already turned Physicians; and
they have better words, and kinder usage.

But every man that has the eyes of a Christian in his head, and sees what
the people of England, Wales, and Ireland are, for members and for quality,
and sees and hears also what Ministers for number and quality do instruct
them, does know as certainly that many hundred thousand souls do woefully need
more Ministerial helps, as he knows that five hundred Scholars do need more
than one Schoolmaster, or five hundred sick men need more than one Physician.
But O what a plague is it to the Church and World, to have Ministers who when
they read of the necessity of knowledge, holiness, and salvation, do neither
believe Christ nor themselves! Argue not the people into such hard thoughts of
you, as if this were your case, by persuading them that it is no matter whether
their souls have any more Ministerial helps than now is given them.

Either you believe that where the Gospel is hid, it is hid to them that are
lost, and that the cure of gross ignorance, hardheartedness, unbelief, and
sensuality, are of necessity to salvation, or not. If not, deal openly, and
silence both your selves and us. If yea, then either you know how these
maladies abound in the people, and how much labor the cure does usually cost,
or not. If not, then take not on you to be Pastors or English men, or competent
Judges of any of the peoples cases and concernments, but confess that these are
matters that you are strangers to. But if you do know this, then I need to say
no more to you, but to desire you to fuppose that soul-necessities are not the
less because men complain not of them; but greatest where there is the greatest
insensibility and contentedness with them. The Turks and Heathens cry not out
for the help of Christian Pastors. The worldling, drunkard, and fornicator, is
most miserable, that would have no reproof or help. Suppose therefore that
their necessities are instead of cries, and that you hear them calling to you
for help: O pity the many hundred thousand souls that are drowned in ignorance,
unbelief, insensibility, worldliness, and sensuality, that are utter strangers
to that life of faith, and love, and holiness, without which none can please or
see God; and must quickly be converted and made new creatures, or they are lost
for ever. Or suppose that their necessities being their complaints, you heard
them expostulating with you for their souls: O take not from us that means
which God by Nature and by his Institution has made so needful to our
salvation! Alas, our ignorance, and deadness, and worldly-mindedness, and
fleshly affections, are too hardly cured by all the best means and diligence
that can be used: what shall we do then, if you deprive us of that which we
have enjoyed! Alas! say not that the reading of the Scriptures, and a few
lifeless notes of a Sermon will serve turn: We confess that it should do so, if
our disease were so light as to need no more; the thing it self is good, and
every word of God is precious; but it is the nature of our disease to be read
asleep, and hardened in our sins by the customary hearing of a few good words in
a sleepy saying tone: It is the skilful choice of pertinent Truths,
convincingly and clearly uttered, and closely applied with life and
seriousness, that our case requires: We confess, that if a Schoolboy, or a
raw ignorant youth from the University, did but read a chapter, or say over a
less pertinent cento of good words, we should be moved and converted by it. But
our disease is deadness, darkness and disaffection to holiness, to God and
Heaven; and liveliness, deceit, and love to the world and fleshly things; and
without a miracle these will not be cured, nor our souls be saved, without
lively, clear, and affectionate preaching, agreeable to the sacred Truth
delivered; nor without the help of prudent conduct, and the constant
watchfulness of tender love, and the example of a holy heavenly life. O
therefore pity our miserable souls, that must be saved now by the Gospel of
salvation, or be damned to everlasting fire. You tell us so your selves; and if
you would have us believe you; show us that you believe your selves. You speak
for good works, and what better works than the saving of men's souls! And how
shall we hear without a Preacher? O give us such for number and quality, as
will imitate Paul, Act. 20. that covet no man's silver and gold, but will teach
us publicly and from house to house, day and night with tears; that will be
instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all long
suffering and doctrine, in meekness instructing even opposers of the faith,
much more the tender children of him who is the father of mercies. Alas! we
have enemies enough, the Devil, and the World, and the Flesh, are enemies of our
faith, and holiness, and salvation; and we are the greatest enemies to our
selves: be not you also our enemies and destroyers, who call your selves our
Pastors and our Fathers. Think what it is for such a multitude of souls to be
shut out of heaven for ignorance, unbelief, impenitency and ungodliness, and to
lie in hell for ever; and how little comfort it will be to us in our torments,
to be told that the Order and Decency of Church Affairs did require it; or that
it was necessary to preserve the interest of the Diocesans. O make not such
merchandise of our souls. Christ purchased them with his blood: Do not you sell
them for thirty pieces of silver. He scourged the buyers and sellers out of his
Temple; do not you drive out the faithful Preachers. He overthrew the tables of
the money changers; do not you overthrow the doctrine, discipline, or Table of
the Lord. He came from Heaven into flesh to seek and save those that were lost;
do not you contrive and labor to famish and destroy them. He gave them his
flesh and blood for food; do not you devour their flesh and blood. He preached
in Ships, and Mountains, and Wildernesses, and Houses, to many, and to few; to
rich and poor, to ignorant women, and the meanest and the worst among the
people; do not you think then that to read to us those words which we can every
day read at home, or to make a formal speech to us once a week, is enough to
cure such souls as ours. There is joy among the Angels of God in heaven over
one sinner that repents! O do not you rejoice to hinder the preaching of
Repentance unto thousands! Christ set up a Ministry, to preach the Gospel to
every creature under heaven, and to teach them whatever he has commanded, even
to the end of the world! Do not you contradict him, and say, Preach not! Kick
not against the pricks! Woe to him that striveth with his Maker! Who has
hardened himself against him, and has prospered? The saving of Souls is too
good a work for any that is good to strive against! And Christ's Ministers are
workers together with him, and not against him. If you take away from our
mouths the bread of life, it will be cold comfort, and a poor relief to us in
our misery in hell, to tell us that they were pestilent fellows, and
ringleaders of a sect, that would have saved us; that is, that they were not
conformable to your Subscription, Oath and Ceremonies. Suppose them to be in
the wrong, and you in the right! Why must our Souls be left to damnation,
because our Teachers think that a sin, which you think you your selves have
made a duty? Shall not the soul that sins dye? If they have eaten sour
grapes, why must our teeth be set on edge? If he be mistaken that thinks that
it is aggravated Lying and Perjury which he refuses, which you say is but a
thing indifferent, yet Christ is not to be blamed for that: And why shall the
fire of his kindling be quenched, his gifts be suspended, his Gospel hindered,
his redeemed ones forsaken, because some of his Ministers were, as you thought,
too fearful of offending him?

O hear these expostulations of miserable Souls, before you are speechless
under the Expostulations of the tender Savior of Souls?

5. You have other punishments enough, besides forbidding them to preach
Christ's Gospel, whereby to be revenged on Nonconformity. Is their fearing an
Oath a greater sin than profane swearing? If not, let us pay at the same rates
for not swearing, and for not disobliging all others from a Vow, as swearers do
by the Law for every Oath. And we will not desire you to execute the Laws as
seldom on us, as they are executed on them; which is not, I think, for one Oath
of Twenty thousand? Or are we worse than drunkards, or fornicators? If not,
punish us no worse than they are punished? Are we worse than petty thieves? If
not, let us be put in the stocks and whipped, as Paul and Silas were* so we may
but preach Christ's Gospel? Or if we are as bad as felons, allow us our Clergy,
and burn us in the hand, use us as Prin, Bastwick and Burton were used on the
Pillory, so you will not hinder us from preaching to sinners, the word of
salvation. Or put us in the House of Correction, and use us as the Israelites
were used in Egypt, rather than forbid us to labor to save the peoples Souls?
Can your profound understandings find no way to punish a man that fears
Lying, Perjury, and false Worship (suppose mistakingly), which will consist
with such intermission and liberty as is necessary to the doing of our Masters
work? The servants of the King and Parliament are privileged from arrests and
molestation, which would hinder them from their necessary duty: We crave no
impunity for our sins above the basest subjects in the Land! We will be
thankful to be under no severer usage, than Colliers, and Bargemen, and Seamen,
and begging Rogues and Vagabonds have; yea constrain us to beg our bread in
rags from door to door, rather than restrain us from doing the work to which in
our Ordination we are devoted, and by the belief of a life to come, obliged.
Have all other faults more suitable punishments, save only those of the
Ministers of Christ? You can punish your child, without forbidding him to love
you or obey you: you can punish a Schoolboy otherwise than by forbidding him
to learn; and a Master, otherwise than by forbidding him to teach; and your
Servant, otherwise than by forbidding him to work; and Eighteen hundred
scrupulous Physicians, otherwise than by forbidding them to help the sick. Deal
not worse with Christ and Souls.

But if still you say, that there is no other way to save men's souls from our
false doctrine, or false worship, or any other danger which our Ministry will
bring upon them; We still answer you, Make Canons and Laws against false
Doctrine, or against Seditious, Rebellious, Schismatical, or other intolerable
Preaching, or against Idolatrous, or superstitious Worship, or against either
Tyranny or omission of Church Discipline, or against a worldly, fleshly, idle,
or otherwise vicious life; and let us be liable to the penalty of those Laws,
as others are. But the next shall further answer this.

6. It is a most certain thing that your method will not attain the Churches
Edification, Unity or Concord, but is the directest way to subvert all these:
No nor your own establishment, or honor in the world, if that be it which you
mean still, by the Interest of the Church. And why should any men use a means
that will subvert, and will never attain his ends? Did you know this, you would
never choose or use it. But I perceive you do not, and for ought I see you will
not know it. I shall give you those reasons that should make you know it, if
you have but the understanding of ordinary men; supposing what is distinctly
said in the Propositions.

Every wise man in the use of means, will both foresee the probable effect, and
fore resolve how far to carry them on. Either you think that your silencing,
and other hard usages of the Ministers, shall convince and change them, or
disable and destroy them. The former I have showed you is a most vain surmise:
For, 1. Kindness is more forcible to change the judgment; than violence and
hard usage. This uses oftener to set men in opposition to what a hurtful
adversary reasons for. It is seldom that an enemies words convert. Opposition
rather kindles an opposing zeal.

2. You may partly conjecture by your selves. If you thought it were Lying,
Perjury and false Worship which was imposed on you, would you change your
judgment, by threatenings or by punishments? There is nothing in force to
illuminate the mind. If you say, It will tame their obstinacy, and make them
hearken more to reason, I answer as before: It most powerfully exciteth those
prejudices and passions, which hinder reason, though it may promote hypocrisy
in some.

3. And experience tells you and all the world, that you are mistaken: We
read the same books out of a prison, as in it (if there we may have them): And
what abundance of Ministers* within these ten years, have come out of long
imprisonment in the same mind as they went in (yea much confirmed). But who can
you name that came out convinced that his way was wrong? How long have they
suffered, not only poverty and reproach, but that silencing which they account
a greater evil? And yet how few are changed by all this (For the
Novel-Politicians talk of a hundred men that continue to displease you, is but
a means to tell the world, how exactly your Actions and Historical Narratives
agree, and what posterity must expect from the later, as well as we from the
former).

4. But if 9 or 10 years experience be too little for you, look back to the
experience of all the world. Your Bishop Tailor, and many of your own, can tell
you, how opposition inflameth the opposed party into a greater zeal.

5. In a word, I know not only my self, but so many of the Nonconformable
Ministers of England, that I utterly despair that even silencing or
imprisonment should change their judgments.

2. The next question then is, Whether it will make them hypocrites, and force
them to go against their judgments? And this I am as confident it will never do
with the most: 1. Because I know so many of them to be truer to God and to
their Consciences. 2. Because experience also long evinced this. 3. And so has
the experience of former ages, in such as they: some have still shrunk in a
time of suffering: But enough have suffered to fill up such Volumes as Mr. Fox's,
and the Century-Writers, and many others. 4. And here also I ask, Would you do
so your selves? Would you do that which you think to be Lying, Perjury,
renouncing Reformation, etc. against your consciences, rather than suffer? or
would you not? If yea, you tell the world what your Religion is? If not, judge
by your own course, both now and formerly, whether they or you be liker to
choose sin before suffering. I know not you so well as them; and therefore know
not what you would do, so well as I, and you, and all the world may know what
they will do. 5. And if they were such Villains, as to sell their Souls for the
safety of their flesh, why should not the same principle now prevail with them,
to stretch their conscience by some distinction, and take Livings and Honor
among you with Conformity, instead of a hunted and afflicted state of life? If
Satan shall say, Skin for skin, and all that he has will a man give for his
life: Let me touch his body, and I will make him curse thee to thy face;
whereas now he serves not God for naught. Yet God would support and vindicate
the integrity of Job; and though he may fall into some impatiency, he would not
yet forsake his Master, nor leave his integrity to the death.

3. The last question therefore is, Whether their destruction will do your
work, or not, seeing neither their change of judgment, nor for saking their
consciences, is to be expected by your means?

I find that the Novel-Politician is confident of it, that sharp execution is
the way, and would easily do it: And so are most that write against us, as well
as Bishop Gunnings Chaplain. But, 1. He speaks but like one of Rehoboams puny
Counselors; contrary to all the experience of the world. I hope God will give
his Majesty wisdom to avoid such counsels, that would have him make his little
finger heavier than Solomon's loins. I confess if the work be to extirpate
Christianity it self, they that will and can follow it to the height of the
example of Japon, might imagine a possibility of the like success. But it
cannot be done so in England, if there were any that would do it: Because the
body of the Nation is of the same Religion, as the Japonions were against. Or
if the work were to suppress the Protestant Religion, the Inquisition in Spain
would be a probable means, where there are but very few to be tormented, and
the thing may be done secretly in vaults, out of the peoples sight and noise.
But for Protestants to destroy each other, yea such and so many as must be so
destroyed, and this for the advancement of the Protestant interest, is a course
that will not do that work for which it is pretended.

For, 1. Blood was never yet of light digestion: Nebuchadnezzars furnace
devoured the Executioners; and so did Daniel's Lions too. God has ever showed
himself a God of Love, and an enemy to the enemies of it. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous; but God has many ways to deliver them out of
all. As I said already, who would have thought that enough should have escaped
Queen Mary's Bonefires to have planted a Protestant Church so soon? Or so many
escaped the French Massacre, as so soon to have made that fact repented of, and
ring to the Odium of the Actors through the world; Yea that so many should
survive the Two hundred thousand murdered in Ireland, as to see so terrible a
revenge: Yea that the far greater Murders of the poor Waldenses and Albigenses
should be followed with a resurrection of the witnesses of the truth, with
double advantage; and leave the everlasting odium of bloody cruelties upon
Rome; and that the German-sufferings should so soon be revenged by the Swedes?
Or that the desolations, which for the Interim were made among the German
Ministers, should so soon be repaired? Or that the Prelacy which Constantius,
and other Arrian Emperors set up, should so soon be changed, and the Arrian
cruelties recorded to their perpetual shame? And that the Vandals in Africa
should but murder Ministers enough to kill themselves with the stroke: Or that
the true Persecutions of the Heathen Emperors should but increase the Church of
Christ, and the blood of Martyrs should be its seed? Or that fewer
Nonconformist Ministers than there be Counties in England in 1640, should
multiply into that number as they did within two or three years? Or that the
Diocesan-Ministers, suppressed by Cromwell, should revive to the strength that
they were in, within three years after his death? Men may contrive, but God
will dispose: Caiphas may think that one should dye for the people, rather than
all the Nation perish; and the fact may prove their speedy and most dreadful
ruin.

2. And as blood cries loud to God for revenge, so it usually makes the
actors so odious in the world, that men will hardly leave it unrevenged. There
is no hope that ever you should be able to extirpate both grace and good nature
out of the world. There will be some sparks of love and humanity in the minds
of men, when interest quenches them not, when you have done all. And these
sparks of charity and humanity will make all the actors of cruelty odious; and
the people will take them for Bears and Wolves. Yea, if you were able to
persuade others by your words and books, as you do your selves by your interest
and passions, that we are as very fools, and disobedient to your Lordships, as
you describe us, yet most men, and especially English men, will pity the
suffering side, and will think with heart-rising on the men of blood. When the
Puritans suffered, the people pitied them, and cried out against the Prelates.
When the Diocesan party suffered, the people pitied them, and cried out against
Cromwell and those that cast them out. And now they are turning about again
(though I know there are many more cases do concur).

3. And God having resolved that the memory of the just shall be blessed, and
that the name of the wicked shall ^ot, and that the greatest of the ungodly
shall not be the Master of Fame, nor any more able to leave an odium on the
name of the just, than to pursue their souls with malice into heaven; no, nor
so much as to preserve their own names from odium, any more than to keep their
bodies from corruption. It hence comes to pass, that the very odor and perfume
of sufferers names that endure the wrath of man for the sake of God and
conscience, does so invite posterity to their mind and way, that multitudes
quickly rise up in their steads. And the loathed names of the persecutors of
the godly, does make posterity shun their courses. What a stink has the name
of David Seton in Scotland, of Bonner of London, and Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, left behind? The like I may say of all such men.

4 Moreover the same reasons that prevail with us, will prevail with others
when we are dead. They will be as fearful of lying, and perjury, and of
swearing Allegiance to Church-usurpers, as we have been. There will still be a
people seriously religious, that are Christians in good sadness, and really
believe a life to come. There is no hindering it; God will have it so, and who
can gainsay him? And these men will be as loath under pretense of order and
decency to have Religion dwindle into a lifeless form of words and ceremonies,
and to take the chaff and straw for the corn, as ever we have been before them.
And the History of our sufferings will but animate them.

5. Besides this, 1. While you are doing your work, you are dying; you are
(alas! that is the cutthroat of your comforts) but mortal men your selves;
Bonner is dead, and Gardener is dead; Guise is dead, and D' Alva is dead. King
Edward's Reformation, and Q. Mary's Persecution were both cut short by the
shortness of their lives. When you have destroyed ten, or twenty, or an hundred
Ministers, and are resolving, Thus we will use them all; A Fever, or an
Apoplexy, or some other Messenger of an offended God, does stop you in your
course, and call you to judgment, and tell you that when it is too late, which
you could not hear from such as we. Cum tamen a figulis munitam intraverit
urbem.
Sarcophago contentus erit: Mors sola fatetur,
Quantula sint hominum Corpuscula --.


Nature will not suffer you long; and Justice often anticipateth the time of
Nature. The strange Histories of Gods Judgments are not all fables. Nullane
perjuri capitis, fraudisque nefandae
Poena erit?
Juv.

6. And sometimes God stops a Saul in his way with greater mercy. And
sometimes crosses make men melancholy, and retire from their cruel course. Can
you think of two such instance; as Dioclesian and Charles the fifth, without
admiration? And oft-times an accusing-conscience begins such a hell on
earth, as interrupteth the execution of malicious purposes. And sometimes the
very odium of the people turns them off with shame; both which the same Poet
intimates, Sat. 13. Exemplo quodcunque malo committitur, ipsi
Displicet auctori, Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur, improbae quamvis.
Gratia fallacis Praetoris vicerit urnam.
Quid sentire putas omnes Calvine, recenti
De scelere, and fidei violatae crimine.


And domestical afflictions may cool the fire of vour consuming zeal! You must
not look to be still imposing crosses, and making crosses for your neighbors,
and feel none your selves: It may be your great Patrons may dye, or fall, or
forsake you, and then your hearts are broken! It may be death may enter into
your own families, and make you think what blood-thirstiness does tend to. Ut
Vigeant sensus animi, ducenda tamen sunt
Funera natarum; rogus aspiciendus amatae
Conjugis, and fratris, plenaeque sororibus urnae.
Haec data poena diu viventibus, ut renovata.
Semper clade domus, multis in luctibus, inque
Perpetuo maerore, and ingra vest senescant.


7. And you must consider also, that if blood or destruction be the means which
you trust to, you must set up a Shambles, or trade of butchery, and make it the
profession of all your lives: For it is egregious folly to think, that it is
but like the fighting with an Army, where all your enemies are in sight before
you; and if you conquer them, you may kill them all at once: For they are
dispersed all over the Land; and they cannot all, in a little time, be
detected, and fairly convicted and brought to execution: But you must be a long
time about the killing of those that are now in being; And when they are gone,
the Surculi that spring out of their stumps, will in number perhaps exceed
them, and find you work as long as you live. And then one cruel act will seem
to cause a necessity of another, to justify it, and to make sure work, lest
those that you have wronged, or any of their friends should possibly live to
see your folly make you miserable (Therefore the Japonians killed and tormented
not only the Christians, but their kindred, and all the next inhabitants). And
besides, when men turn to so great sin, God usually so forsakes them, that
they cannot tell how to make an end; They thirst for blood, till like Leeches
they fall off with fullness: And the more wickedness they do, the more they are
disposed to do. That you may see I have my boys School-books, though I am
driven from my own, you shall have some more of Juvenal: Mobilis and varia est
ferme natura malorum.
Cum scelus admittunt, superest constantia: quid fas
Atque nefas tandem incipiunt sentire peractis
Criminibus; tamen ad mores natura recurrit
Damnatos fixa, and mutari nescia: Nam quis
Peccandi finem posuit sibi? quando recepit
Ejectum semel attrita de front ruborem?
Quisnam hominum est quem contentum videris uno
Flagitio?


And verily there was never any, or many known, that set up this carnificine
trade, the stink of whose name did not reach as far as fame could carry it to
the ears of men. And you will tempt men not only to think odiously of your
selves, but to suspect your cause that needs such a trade to keep it up: Even
Erasmus had almost been made a Protestant, by the burning and tormenting of
some Protestants: And Hospitalius, Thuanus, and the whole tribe of those
learned moderators in France, were driven from the extreamer sort of Popery by
the extremity of their bloody cruelties. The nature of man pitieth and loves
chickens, and lambs and harmless loving creatures; and it hates Foxes, Wolves
and Kites, that live on flesh, and devour those that are better than
themselves. Or if you could pretend that you had been first abused your selves,
and did it in revenge, the world will think that you should be revenged but
proportionably, and that on none but them that did it: yea revenge it self is a
sign of a weak, ignoble soul, that has little of a man, and less of a
Christian. Quippe minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi, exignique, voluptas
Ultio; continuo sic collige quod vindicta
Nemo magis gaudet quam faemina; cur tamen hos tu
Evasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere coedit
Occultam quationte animo tortore flagellum?
Poena autem vehemens, ac multo saevior illis
Quas and Caeditius gravis invenit, aut Rhadamanthus,
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.


Therefore the foolish Ambitious Idols, who would fain be like to God in power,
will yet pretend, that they would be like him also in Love and Mercy! And Nero
will not disdain to read Seneca de clementia, and de Ira. They would have power
to do as much mischief as you can imagine; but they say they would not use it,
but affright men by it into the obedience of their wills. Et qui nolunt
occidere quenquam
Posse volunt.


But as the power breeds fear, so usually fear breeds hatred. Though, I
confess, it is not possible to have a sufficient Power to do good, without a
Power to do some hurt.

8. And then the whole Country will take notice how many worse men you leave
alive, which will increase the odium; and make them look on you but as the
enemies of mankind, and of all virtue and civility: or as the seed of the
Serpent, that have an enmity to the Woman's seed: They will call you by the name
of Cainites, when they see the blood of your brother Abel, while evil workers
still survive. When such as Ames, Baine, Bradshaw, Hildersham, Dod, etc. yea as
Hooker, Bilson, Jewel, etc. are hanged (which must be done if you will extend
the punishment to all Nonconsormists), the people will take notice, that
thousands of fornicators, drunkards, ignorant sots, and senseless Atheists are
suffered to live in peace! And do you not know what they will say and think of
you upon such observations? They will say, If these Learned, holy, faithful
Preachers would but have turned drunken sots, they might have escaped your jaws
as such have done. As the forecited Poet mocked at Cicero's, O fortunatam, natam
me Consule Romam,
Antoni gladios potuit contemnere si sic
Omnia dixisset: ridenda poemata malo,
Quam te conspicuae divina Philippica famae --.


If these Preachers would have talked a little half sense, and read a cold
Oration, and lived like those that have little to do with God and Heaven, and
would save men by a charm of words and shows, without this serious Godliness
and Christianity, they might have had countenance and maintenance, and as much
honor as such men as these can put upon them: But judicious, serious, hearty
Godliness is intolerable to all the fleshly tribe, whose mind neither is nor
can be subject to the Law of God, to which their interest and disposition has
an enmity. Eloquium ac famam Demosthenis aut Ciceronis
Incipit optare, and totis quinquatribus optat,
Quisquis adhuc uno partam colit ass Minervam,
Quem sequitur custos Augustae vernula capsae:
Eloquio sed uterque perit orator: utrunque
Largus and exundans letho dedit ingenii fons:
Ingenio manus est, and cervix caesa, nec unquam
Sanguine Causidici maduerunt nostra pusilli.


9. But especially forget not, that the number of Nonconformists in England is
so great, that it will weary the hangman to dispatch them; or Executioners enough
will scarce be found: For what if you hang a Thousand or Eighteen hundred
Ministers, you cheat your selves (as you have wilfully long done) if you think
that you are ever the nearer your ends: For the people are more averse to your
Conformity, than most of the Ministers are; and they are hardlier kept to the
rules of Patience and Charity to those that destroy them; and they will choose
Teachers and Pastors out of the best qualified of the people that survive, and
will not lay down the worshipping of God according to their consciences, though
they were used for it as Daniel was, for praying thrice a day openly in his
house, contrary to the Law. And these new Pastors perhaps will have less
moderation than the old: And thus you will be troubled with a succession of
dissenters.

10. And suppose (as it is not improbable) that one half of the people, and
some of the Pastors, should be constrained to Conformity, your Icabod has told
you in his Groans what they will do. Their judgments would not be changed, but
they would only stretch their Consciences to take your Oaths and Subscriptions
with their own interpretation, contrary to the plainest sense (as abundance do
who now Conform). And these men will do more against you than the open
Nonconformists, being abler to supplant you, as being nearer to you; As the
Conformable Westminster-Assembly did; and the Conformable long Parliament; and,
as Heylin thinks, Abbot and the Puritan Bishops and Clergy did by Laud and his
party.

11. Those that survive (as thousands will do when you have done your worst)
will take their first opportunity, to show their sense of your horrid
inhumanity, with far greater animosity, than if you had never tasted blood; and
your cruelties will but be the fuel of their fiercer opposition.

12. And there are some hypocrites, no doubt, among those that will suffer by
you, who are carried on by a self-conceited zeal: And these may be tempted by
your extremities to break out into Treasons, Seditions and Rebellions; The
truly wise and godly will not: But all that are against you, are not such: Nay
you your selves, I suppose, think that few of them are such. And if oppression
may* make a wise man mad, no wonder if it make weak foolish people and
hypocrites mad: and then you know that one Felton may end the Great Duke of
Buckingham. Because we abhor the thoughts of such villainies, we would not have
you lay such temptations on men, as you are not able to bear your selves. If a
little worldly wealth and greatness could tempt you to think that you do God
service when you killed his Servants, why should you think that among many
thousands, there will no hypocrites be found, that will break Gods Laws to save
themselves by sinful means? You know how deeply the principle of
self-preservation is planted in nature; and what need there is of considerable
grace, to make men patiently resign their lives, when they think they are taken
away injuriously. If Peter in fear might deny his Master, and all the disciples
forsook him and fled, an hypocrite may be tempted to a sinful defense against
his persecutors. I do hereby warn all men that they take heed of such
temptations, and plead not Nature against the Laws of Grace; and that they not
only live, but dye in honoring their Rulers whatsoever they suffer by them;
and say not as the Poet that lived among Heathenish impatience: Ad generum
Cereris sine caede and vulnere pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.


The true fear of God will teach men to live and dye in patience. But while you
your selves think that those that you afflict are wicked, and know that cruelty
is the most powerful temptation to sinful self-defence, do you think that you
will be innocent by such temptations? What if it were felony to cry! Were he
innocent that would scourge men, women and children till they bleed, and then
call out for Justice against the felons that cried? Some men will think that
your cruelties are of purpose to constrain or tempt some hypocrites into
seditious words or deeds, that you may have matter to accuse the rest of.
Rehoboams young Counselors, in my opinion, could not justify themselves from
the guilt of all the sufferings of that King, by saying, It was the rebellious
ten Tribes that did forsake him: It was an unhappy proof of their own Loyalty,
to be the Counselors of so great a temptation. We hate Rebellion and Treason
so much more than such as these, that we would not have you say, The King shall
have no Loyal Subjects that will not lay down their lives to show their
Loyalty: He that strikes the flint, is guilty of the fire: He that will kill,
or banish, or undo men for nothing, to try if he can find any among them all
that loves his life better than his Loyalty or Subjection to Superiors, that
he may prick him forward to Sedition by torments, will prove no Loyal Subject
himself at last. I remember a person of Quality, more great than good, was
reported to assault a Farmers house, to have defiled his daughters: But the
door being bolted, and no threats would open them, one of his company bid him
throw drown the Hive of Bee's in the Garden in revenge: The Bees, when the Hive
was broken down, had almost stung the great man and his company to death. If
the question was, Whether the owner or the Bees must be accused of the crime? I
can only say, that the Counselor was not innocent. And if a Thief should break
into a Bishops house, and bind his Servants, and set a Pistol to the breast of
one, and bid him disclose his Lords money, and he should dye rather than be
guilty of disclosing it, and all the rest should dye save one, and that one
should confess to save his life; I do not think it would be congruous for him
that did affright him to it, to say, I am innocent (though perhaps he took not
the gold himself); so he that should by cruelties tempt men to such a wicked
act as Felton or Card. Betons executioners used, would not be found the truest
friend to Peace or Government.

13. If you say, We will not hang or burn, but banish them: I answer, so were
some fugitives exiled in Q. Mary's days, who yet soon returned to head the
Diocesan Churches of England. And those few of the Clergy that fled from
Cromwell, returned to see revenge upon Usurpers. And what stricter Laws would
you have both for banishment and death, than is made here against the Romish
Priests? and yet they live in peace among us. Banished men are alive, and are
exasperated; and your guilt will make you think that you are not safe from them
till they are dead. Amesius at Franekera did more service to the Church of God,
and more disservice to the English Diocesans, than Ames at Cambridg did. Some
have banished themselves for an opportunity by writing to do the more against
their adversaries, and said, Difficile est satyram non scribere: Nam quis
iniquae
Tam patiens urbis? Tam ferreus ut teneat se?
Si natura negat, facit indignatio versum --
-- Quando artibus, inquit, bonestis
Nullus in urbe locus, nulla emolumenta laborum;
Res hodie minor est quam fuit, atque eadem cras
Deteret exiguis aliquid, proponimus illuc
Ire satigatus, ubi Daedalus exuit alas
Dum nova Canities; dum prima and recta senectus,
Dum superest Lachesi quod torqueat, and pedibus me
Porto meis, nullo dextram subeunte bacillo
Cedamus patria: Vivant Arturius istic
Et Catulus: maneant qui nigrum in Candida vertunt.


I think this much, with what is said in the Propositions, may satisfy men
that are willing to understand, that your way will never attain the peace and
concord of the Churches, nor in likelihood your own ends; 1. Either by changing
men's judgments. 2. Or bringing them to conformity against their judgments. 3.
Or by destroying them. Nay, that it is the most destructive course to all good
ends that you can take.

And I may add, that if you should banish them, the worth which they carry with
them (as in Amesius his instance) will shine where they come; and their honor
will be your shame: for men are naturally (and not without cause) inclined to
think them to be extreme bad men, by whom men so good, and learned, and
unblamable, do so much suffer. And methinks you of all men should not be guilty
of so much self-denial, as to contemn your Reputation in all other Countries,
and not to care how odious your Names are to others, and to posterity, so be it
you hear not their words your selves (of which more anon.)

But here I would insert an humble request to my silenced brethren, that they
will study, and pray, and labor so diligently, and live so holily and
innocently, that whithersoever they be driven, their light may shine to the
glory of their Lord, and the service of his Church; and that they would not
disgrace their silencers and afflicters by hard words, but by eminent knowledge
and holiness: and they shall find that this splendour of their worth will speak
more for them, and against those that hate them, than all our apologies will do.

I will here, to this purpose, cast in a brief History both for your afflicters
sake and yours. It is the occasion of the translation of Philosophy from Greece
unto the Saracene Arabians, as it is recorded by Caelius August. Curio Histor.
Saracen. l. 2. and out of him by Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 4. p. 287, 288.
Mamunus their Califf, or King, was a great lover of learning; in whose time
there was among the Greek Christians one Leo a Bishop of Thessalonica, who for
differing from those in power in the controversy about Images, which then
troubled the Churches, was driven from his flock; and coming to Constantinople,
he lived in a poor cottage privately; but being a most excellent Philosopher,
taught many in his private School; so that many excellent Philosophers went out
of it in a little time: Among whom one young man was taken prisoner by the
Saracens in the Wars, who being excellent in Geometry, fell into the hands of a
great man, by whom his fame was brought to the King; who trying him, and
finding him to excel all his Philosophers, must know who was his Master. He
told him, one Leo, a man that was frowned into obscurity and poverty, but a
most excellent Philosopher. The King Mamumus was so inflamed with a desire of
Leo, that he presently wrote to him, and offered him all the Honor and Riches
that he could desire, so he would but come to him. Leo showed the Letters to
the Emperor at Constantinople; whereupon the Emperor not willing that such an
honor should pass to his Enemy, gave him License to teach in public. King
Mamumus despairing of Leo, sends important Letters to the Emperor to beg
Leo's presence but a little while, professing that he would have come with the
request himself, but that the Government of a fierce sort of people detained
him. Hereupon the Emperor coming to know his worth, and how his own Honor was
interessed in the business, restored Leo to his Bishopric, and had him in
great honor, and gave him great Riches. And Mamumus not obtaining his desires,
wrote many of his difficulties as Questions to Leo, and so procured some of his
instructions in Writing, by way of answer, to his great satisfaction. And this
is noted as the introduction of Learning into that Country, which since
Mahometanism has famished.

O that we were all such, that our worth might be our apology! and O that those
who think it their interest to afflict such, and suppress them, and render them
odious to the world, did better understand their own interest, and know on whom
the dishonor will redound at last! which I wish not to befall them, but wish
them to prevent.

7. If you could procure Uniformity by the means of violence, it must be both
got and kept up at dearer rates than the thing is worth.

1. Uniformity must be purchased at the loss of Unity. If Violence drive men's
bodies nearer together, it will make the heart-separation much wider. Christ
has said, that by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love
one another: but not, By this, if ye all swear obedience to the Bishops, or
subscribe that their Writings are infallible; or if ye use the same Liturgy,
Cross, or Ceremonies. Our salvation lies more on our unity in Faith and Love,
than in our uniformity in things unnecessary. And that is the most prosperous
state of the Church, in which men's salvation is most promoted. He that loves
not his brother whom he sees daily, loves not God whom he never saw. And he
that hates his brother, is a manslayer; and no manslayer has eternal life
abiding in him; and violence and cruelty are the great and known destroyers of
Love. He that says as some, Let them hate, so they fear; does show that he
hates God and man, and will prove the greatest hater of himself at last.

2. You will wrong the King and Kingdom by depopulation, and weaken it so, that
it may become not only the scorn of our common enemies, but their prey. For
ought I can discern, you that have despised my predictions of that kind, have
increased the number already manifold of those that dislike you and your way.
And if your self-conceitedness and unskilfulness shall first make most of the
Kings subjects distaste you, and then your cruelty shall suggest that they must
be punished till they love you, or be destroyed for disliking you, this will be
but like the work of unhappy Surgeons, that must cut off the limb, because they
have themselves made the wound uncurable. Believe it, the hanging or banishing
of a few hundreds or thousands, will not do your business, but make it worse (I
told you so long ago as to silencing, and you would not believe it); nay, it
will make it incomparably worse: And if you banish or kill all that are against
you, Land will be very cheap, and Houses cheaper; and others will call that
Solitude, which you call concord, uniformity, and peace. And our unity will be
like theirs in Moldavia and VValachia. And who shall compensate the Kings
damage?

3. And Foreign Churches and posterity will be brought by it to so great a
hatred of Prelacy, that they will never be reconciled to it more, but prefer a
poor and humble Ministry. And indeed it is already so known by its fruits, that
I am much in doubt, the experience of it will alienate the people from that
Primitive lawful Episcopacy which I would have them to desire. They say
already, Give us the old, honest, humble, serious Puritans, that lived not upon
Gold and Worldly greatness, and cherished not men's sins, that they might
cherish them. Fruatur vocibus obscaenis omnique libidinis art,
Qui Lacedomonium Pytismate lubricrat orbem,
Namque ibi fortunae veniam damus (alea turpis,
Turpe and adulterium mediocribus): haec eadem illi.
Omnia cum faciant Hilares, nitidique vocantur. Juv.


I suppose you know how much it alienateth men from Popery, that their Religion
must be fed, and live by blood; yea by precious blood. Some of you have written
your wishes, that the course had been followed, which was begun in the days of
Whitgift and Bancroft, when diverse Nonconformists were hanged: And some have
written, that it was not for Religion, but for Treason. As for Hacket and
Coppinger, it is known they were crackt-brain'd men, pretending to be sent to
judge the World, whom the Nonconformists condemned: which Bancroft himself in
part confesses. And whereas Dr. Sutliffe conjectured that Cartwright was privy
to all: Mr. Simeon Ash gave me a Manuscript, supposed to be Mr. Cartwrights own
writing, fully confuting that accusation.

And as for the rest, it is true that the Bishops then labored by exposition of
a Law to make Treason by consequence of that which was spoken against
themselves: But it will be long ere the confutation of that is well answered,
which is written by some one learned in the Law, called, A Petition to her
Majesty, etc.

And what the same Author says ( Page 25.) of that Pious man Mr. Udal, will by
others (and perhaps one day by your consciences) be thought on with respect to
the 2000 silenced Ministers of late, and the many that have dyed in and by
imprisonment, and much more of so many, as if you prosecute what you have
begun, you must destroy.

His words are, That the Bishops should be so unnatural as to seek the life of
a right, godly and faithful Preacher of the Gospel, I mean Mr. Udal, to whom
Life was offered if he would take his Oath, that he did not make a book whereof
he was supposed to be Author. A rare example; that a man should be known
standing at a bar, shackled in bolts (but quaere quo jure?) and coupled with a
murderer, whose conscience was thought so faithful and sound by the Judge
himself, that he would not swear falsely to gain his life. (He had not learnt
some men's rules for expounding Oaths): Nor loved his life so well as some men
do a Benefice). But were no worse men suffered?

8. You may have all that is truly desirable, and to be expected in this world,
as necessary to Unity and Concord, to Order and Decency, and to your own
honor, accomplished ten thousand times easilier, surer and better, by obvious,
honest, lawful means.

God never puts men upon such bloody and desperate courses as some advise:
It is no necessity of Gods making that is pleaded for such means, but of their
own sinful making, or false imagining. God never wants lies or cruelty to his
service or glory. They are usually wicked selfish ends (whatever is pretended),
for which men choose and use such means: Or if the ends were never so good, they
will not justify such means; nay good ends will condemn them as contrary,
incongruous, and destructive. But when there are easy, suitable and honest
means enough at hand, the choice of such as are forementioned, beseems none but
those whose design is to destroy.

If you say, What be those means? They are easily told you; but your little
self-interests will not give you leave to think them tolerable. I shall tell
you more particularly anon. I will now speak but of the generals.

Quest. 1. What if you would learn of the Holy Ghost to impose no other than
Necessary things? Act. 15. What if you had the patience to endure the
Apostolic Primitive way of Discipline and Worship, and suffered men to go to
Heaven in the same way as the Apostles and Christians of those times did? What
if you kept all that Wisdom to your selves, in which you excel the Apostles,
and put no more upon the Churches than they did? Would the inconveniences of
this weigh down the mischiefs which are now upon the Churches throughout the
world by the contrary course? Let not your passion make you run away with a
conceit of an intolerable conclusion, and say I would reduce you to the
Primitive poverty or persecution: No, I talk not of matters extrinsick to
Discipline and Worship (for faith we will yet suppose we are agreed in), I
suppose you think not that Poverty or Riches are parts of the instituted
worship of God. I am as far from expecting that you should consent to be as
poor and persecuted as the Apostles, as that you should be as good as the
Apostles. Those that you have to do with, believe that the Scripture has more
exactly determined how God will be worshipped, than h^w much a year shall be
the Revenues of a Bishop. We meddle not with your Lands or Lordships (whatever
our own opinion be of such matters): Though we are ambitious of your higher and
wealthier condition, yet we neither envy it, nor think it our duty to diminish
your wealth. But the question is, If you let men worship God, without any more
yokes or burdens than Christ and his Apostles laid upon the Churches, what harm
would it do? Did they then want any needful uniformity? Did they not pray
decently without a Surplice? Did they not baptize decently without the Cross?
If you say, that they had their rites of decency then, though not the same that
we have now: I answer, Impose no other than they imposed: Leave those free
which they left free. Though you think your own to be better than theirs, so do
not all Christians: If it be men's infirmity to think that the Scripture-rites
are better than yours, yet what harm will it do you to bear with that
infirmity? What if you required no more Oaths of obedience to the Bishops, than
the Apostles required to themselves, or to any Pastors of the Church? What if
you required no Subscription to any thing as certain truth, but only to the
infallible Oracles of the Spirit? Nay the Apostles required not any to
subscribe to all the books of Sacred Scripture, but only to receive them in
general as the Doctrine of Christ and the Holy Ghost; and they culled out the
few necessary Articles of the faith, as the matter of a necessary particular
profession. I will tell you what good these things will do, and do you tell me
what harm they will do, and let the good and hurt be well compared.

1. It would either Unite all Christians, or make their Union an easy thing,
as soon as the minds of men were prepared for it. All Christians are agreed
that the Holy Scriptures are infallible; All Christians are not agreed that
your three books are infallible: Therefore all Christians may easilier unite in
their subscription or belief of the Scriptures, than of your three books.

Perhaps you will say, that it will not unite us with the Papists, nor with any
that require more. I answer, We shall be so far united, as that they will
approve of all our Religion, though we approve not of all theirs? For they
confess the truth of all our Canonical Scriptures; and confess that all things
universally necessary to salvation are contained in them (and much more): So
Bellarmine, Costerus, and many others, and especially the old Schoolmen freely
assert. And it is a great advance to Concord, and to our satisfaction, to have
the common concession of all Christians, that our Religion is all true, and
nothing of absolute necessity wanting. But I have spoken more to this before;
to which I refer you.

2. It would make it as easy for any Protestant to justify all his Religion,
as it is to justify the sacred Scriptures, to those that confess them to be
true; and so to tell the Papist where our Religion has been in all ages, and
what succession our Church has had.

3 It would take none of your forms or ceremonies, or superadditions, from any
that will needs have them: while you make them not the necessary terms of union
and communion, he that will may be without them.

4. Christian love, and saving unity and concord, may be thus maintained by
mutual forbearance, while nothing is done contrary to the nature of love, to
mortify it. And if any would take occasion by differences to revile and
villifie one another, the Magistrate may have the approbation of all sober men,
in keeping the peace, and punishing all the fruits of such uncharitableness
that tend to the destruction of love or godliness.

5. A thousand unhappy crimes will be prevented, which will follow the death of
Christian love, and the exasperation of men's passions and tongues by their
sufferings.

6. The Pastors when they grow like to Christ in meekness, gen tleness, and
love, will be loved and honored by the flocks, and the name of a Bishop will
not be odious any more; and consequently the lives of faithful Pastors will be
more comfortable.

7. And then the doctrine and labors of Ministers will be more successul, and
consequently piety and justice will increase, and multitudes more will be
sanctified and saved.

8. It will be a comfort to the King and Magistrates to be loved, honored, and
obeyed, by an united willing people, and to be excused from the unpleasing
works of fining, imprisoning, banishing, or hanging their subjects for
differing from them about some cases of sin and duty, when the fear of
offending the God of heaven is that which brings them to their sufferings.

9. It will be a great strength and beauty to the State, and Church, and
fortify us against a common Enemy, and end our fears of Sedition on account of
Religion at home.

10. In a word, it would make us liker to the primitive believers, and lead the
way to all Christian States and Churches, for the right reconciling of all the
Christian World.

And what now is the hurt that these Scripture primitive terms would bring?

Obj. It would make as many factions as there be different Opinions or
Ceremonies.
Ans. 1. Do you judge of others by your selves? Are all men so proud and void of
humanity and love, that they must needs be factious if they do but differ in an
opinion or ceremony from others? or that they cannot live in love and peace
with any that differ from them in an opinion or ceremony? or that they can
endure to see none live at liberty out of Gaols, that be not in all such things
of their mind? 2. If there be any such proud and uncharitable persons, the
Magistrate may curb the expressions of their folly, that it wrong not others.
3. If that were true, there would be as many Factions as men (if you will
pardon your contradiction): for all men differ in opinion from each other, and
in as great matters of Religion as a Ceremony. 4 Does the differences
forementioned among yourselves (as between Dr. Tailor, Mr. Thorndike, and some
others, from the Doctrine of the Church of England) make any such Factions
among you? Did the difference mentioned by Heylin between Bishop Mountague and
Wren, about coming up to the Altar to communicate, make any factions? Does the
difference now between your Arminians and Calvinists, which we ordinarily hear
in your own Pulpits, make such Factions? Does the different modes of Cathedral
and Parish-worship, make such Factions? If not, why should it make a Faction
for one man to cross a child in Baptism, and another not? Do not the very
Papists keep up their unity and strength, by allowing far more and greater
diversities in Doctrines, and in Religious Orders, Rules, and Ceremonies,
according as every Order has desired?

Obj. But if any be allowed to forbear, those that use the ceremonies or
subscriptions will be censured by the followers of the nonconformists.
Ans. And is it indeed to preserve your honor, that we must undergo all these
convulsions? Speak it out then plainly, that the world may understand you. Must
all that differ in a ceremony from you, be silenced and hunted about the world,
lest the people should think worse of you than of them? 2. But how notoriously
do bad means overthrow the ends of them that use them? It is Honors Motto,
Quod sequitur fugio, quod fugit ipse sequor. Do not the people know that we
differ from you in these things, as much when we are silenced, as when we
preach? Will imprisonment or banishment make us agreed, or make the people
think we are agreed? Or will they forget all the difference, think you, when we
are out of sight? If the bare different opinion and practice make them
undervalue you, will not they think worse of you when they think you do worse?
Will they not distaste a Conformable man, whom they judge an envious persecutor,
more than a Conformable man whom they judge a meek and loving man? One would
think that you should need no answer to such objections. But I have answered
enough before.

2. Well! if the Scripture simplicity be too narrow for you, my next question
is, What harm will it do you to unite on such terms as all the Churches did
unite in, in the days of Tertullian and Cyprian, yea for 300. years after the
birth of Christ? Look whatever was then the terms of the Churches union and
communion, and we shall not be unthankful to you, if you will make that, and
only that to be so now. I do not say, that you should make all that necessary
which was then used on terms of liberty and indifferency; they had then their
necessaries for u^ion, and their unnecessaries, which were used at liberty as
every Church saw good. Impose no more than they imposed; no more of Liturgy, no
more of Ceremony, no more Subscriptions, Promises, or Oaths, and it will heal
us all. Impose Liturgy no further than they then did (which at the most was but
every Bishop on a particular Church that was united for personal (not
representative) communion, and was no bigger than one of our Parishes for
number of souls). If these terms will not serve you neither, you shall not with
us have the reputation of the best friends of Antiquity, Unity, Love or Peace.

Q. 3. What harm would it do, if the Churches were healed by such means as all
the most grave, experienced Conciliators have pitched upon as the only way, at
least in all the Protestant Churches? We are contented with Lerinensis terms,
Qu^d ab omnibus, ubique and semper receptunest. All the famous reconcilers of
the last age and this, Acontius, Melancthon, Pelargus, Duraeus, Calixtus, Lud.
Crocius, Joh. Bergius, Conradus Bergius, Junius, Paraeus, Hottonus, Amy^aldus,
Usher, Morton, Hall, Davenant, Chillingworth, Hales, Bucer, Buroughs,
Stillingfleet, and every man that ever wrote a rational Irenicon, conspire in
this one necessary means, the forbearing all imposition of doubtful unnecessary
things, as necessary to actual unity and communion, and the centering and
cementing all on the terms of the few certain, great, and necessary things
which we are commonly agreed in; or as Rupertus Meldenius his oft-cited words
are, In necessariis, unitas, in non-necessariis libertas; in utrisque charitas.
Do you think verily that all these were mistaken? and that you are wiser than
they who have studied the art of peace as much as you have done the arts of
victory, and getting down those whom you first make, and then call your
adversaries? I know you will still say, These are good terms for our union with
neighbor churches, but not for our church within it self. To which I have
answered you already; and now add, 1. Every company of Christians associated
for personal communion in Gods public Worship (as distinct from distant
communion in Spirit only, and from communion by Delegates or Representatives)
is a true particular church, taking Pastors and people to be the parts thus
associated. Every such Church had a Bishop in Scripture-times, as Dr. Hammond
in his Annot. will tell you over and over; and in Ignatius his time too; For he
says, That to every Church there was one Altar, and one Bishop, with his
fellow Presbyters and Deacons. And this one Altar (which showed only one place
of meeting for ordinary public Communion), and one Bishop, were the notes of
Unity to every one Church, as Mr. Mede also fully opens it. And Dr. Hammond
will further bear witness what every Bishop with his Church is, in 1 Timothy 3.
And such all the particular Churches of the whole world, considered together,
under the Supreme Head Christ Jesus, dispensing them all by himself, and
administering them severally, not by one Oeconomus, but by the several Bishops,
as inferior Heads of Unity to the several bodies, so constituted by the several
Apostles in their plantations, each of them having an (...), a several distinct
commission from Christ immediately, and subordinate to none but the supreme
Donor or Plenipotentiary -- And before, so was every such regular Assembly of
Christians under a Bishop, an Oeconomus set over by Christ (the house of God)
-- Mark all this then, and let your Impositions be measured by this Rule; so
that either you will have the many Churches in one Kingdom, to be united on
terms of Regiment, or only on terms of Concord. On the terms of the extrinsick
accidental Regiment, we grant that all the Kings Subjects are united, and that
he has power circa sacra: But so you might have said of all the Roman Empire;
And so if the Christian part of the World had all one Monarchy, your own
Concession must be overthrown (that neighbor Churches must unite on necessary
terms, leaving indifferent ones to liberty); or else you will see that the case
of the Catholic Church, under such an Empire, would be the same with a
National Church under one King: And our Churches are as much to be accounted
Neighbour-Churches, as those in such an Empire would be. But if you speak of
one Essential, Constitutive, Ecclesiastical Head and Governor, we know none
such, any more than one Pope. Therefore it must be an Union of Concord, by
which you call many Churches in a Nation one (or an extrinsick accidental
Union). And consequently it is an improper speech, because it is not locutio
formalis, sed accidentalis; for the form denominateth. We being therefore One
Church but Accidentally (by one King, and by Concord, as several agreeing
Churches may be called), it follows that we must hold our Concord
accordingly, with those at home, as well as with those abroad, upon terms of
equal charity and liberty, (except what the King will take away). For as for
Councils, even General ones (much more Provincial, it is not Bishop Ushers
opinion only, but ordinary with Protestants, that they are to the particular
Bishops not directly Regimental, but means of Agreement. Mark your Bishop
Bilsons words of Christ. Subject. page 229. To Councils, such as the Church of
Christ was wont by her Religious Princes to call, we owe communion and
brotherly concord, so long as they make no breach in faith, nor in Christian
charity: Subjection and servitude we owe them none: The blessed Angels profess
themselves to be fellow servants of the Saints on earth, Rev. 22. What are you
then, that with your tribunals and jurisdictions would be Lords and Rulers over
Christ's inheritance?

2. The same Reasons which require you to agree only on necessary terms with
foreign Churches, will oblige you to the like course at home. The judgments of
Natives are of the same temper, and their differences will be as certain and
constant, and your charity to them should be no less than to strangers. Only
this we all confess, 1. That all the Churches must agree in their subjection to
the same King. 2. And every particular Church must agree with their particular
Pastors in the exercises of Communion. 3. And that Concord in one Translation,
one Meeter, and such like is desirable, not so much because we are under one
King, as because we are neighbors, and of one language, and would be desirable
if we were of several Kingdoms, in the same propinquity: But it is not to be
procured at a price which is above its worth.

3. When you profess Concord with the foreign Churches, upon Catholic terms,
and deny the same to the Churches that are under one King, you do plainly tell
them how little they are beholden to you for their peace; and that it is,
because you have not power to take it from them, which you would do if you
could.

4. You greatly injure Christian Monarchs, while you would make the world
believe that they are the great adversaries of the Churches peace and unity;
For it is not only from the Will of their several Princes, that several
Churches must unite only on Catholic terms, or not at all: but it is from the
impossibility that all the Christian World should ever come in all things
controvertible and indifferent to be of one opinion, any more than to be of one
stature and complexion: And now you come and tell them, that if they had all
one Emperor, they must all agree upon all the controvertible and indifferent
things, which Canons and Laws should impose upon them, or else their Ministers
be forbidden to preach Christ's Gospel to the people, and the Churches forbidden
to meet and worship God; yea, prisons and other penalties shall constrain them.
And what a temptation is this to men that know the wonderful variety of humane
temperaments, educations, advantages, apprehensions, that is, who know what it
is to be a mortal man, and a weak Christian, to pray against the largeness of
Empire, and to dread it as the most certain Engine to wrack the Churches in
pieces, and to silence, imprison, unchurch and distress the Christian Ministers
and Churches.

To conclude this reason, Take away but your Imposition of the few things
controverted, and leave the particular Churches free in things confessed
indifferent by your selves, and we are then all one, and the quarrel at an end.
And a little love to Christ, to the Gospel, and the Souls of men, would tell a
disinteressed person, whether the fruits of that Concord, or the fruits of our
present Uniformity in those Subscriptions, Oaths and Ceremonies, would be the
better; and which is the more lovely and beautiful state of the Church.

9. The different estimation which the two Parties have of the things imposed,
does make your violence notoriously unequal in the sight of any equal Judges.
You call the Impositions (antecedently) Things indifferent. The Nonconformists
do not so, but take them for such heinous sins, that they dare scarce
denmoinate them to you* lest while they do but tell you their own reasons for
avoiding them, they be thought to make you, or the imposers odious, by their
censures. So that they are fain to suppose their judgments to be scruples, and
themselves to be the weak Christians, and bring all under that name of
Tenderness of Conscience, lest if they should tell you that they are strongly
persuaded, that if they should Conform (not meddling with any others), it would
be in them no less than owning the Perjury of many thousands, and a public
Ministerial renunciation of a needful Reformation, and a promising to God, or
declaring before all the people that we will not obey him, nor repent and amend
what is amiss in our places; and an owning of all the Usurpations and abuses
committed by many others, and a public lying on deliberation, declaring, that
we assent and consent to more than we do indeed, or can do* and a justifying of
all the failings in that worship which is thus prescribed (when we dare not
justify the best prayer that ever we put up to God in all things), and an
offering to God a worship which we cannot in faith be assured that he
accepts, etc. These are the Names of their fears, which they dare scarce
utter, lest the incarnate Accusers of the brethren cry out, They make us all
perjured, and public rebels against God, and they make our Rulers the Imposers
of such things: (But the day is coming when it will be proved an unhappy
artifice to stop the mouth of innocencies defense, by making the crime imposed
(in their judgments) so great, that it shall not be judged a thing sufferable
to name it).

But if you believe that ever there will be a judgment where equity shall be of
any regard, methinks you should see, that quoad hoc their end of the balance
much weighs down yours; and that the opinion of Indifferency should yield to
the opinion of so desperate a danger. If you prove it the right, yet you
confess, that God may be worshipped decently in a comely Gown, without a
Surplice, and that a Child may orderly and decently be baptized, without the
transient Image of a Cross appointed to a dedicating half-sacramental use; and
that a man may acceptably worship God, that cannot subscribe that your three
books are Infallible to a word, etc. But if it should prove that the
Nonconformist is in the right, Aggravated Perjury, deliberate lying, rebellious
profession of disobedience to God, owning great and public sins, corrupting
holy worship, etc. are more tremendous matters than a thing indifferent: Let
any then besides your selves be judges, whether not yielding and complying be
the heinouser crime in them or you?

If you say, that [ By this rule we must abate the Imposition of things
indifferent to all that will but be so erroneous as to account them heinous
sins]. I answer, 1. If you did do so, it were but the doing according to the
Wisdom of the Holy Ghost and the Apostles* Acts 15. to impose nothing but
necessary things: And to do as Paul did, that would forbear eating flesh while
he lived, rather than the weak should be offended or scandalized. 2. But
whether there be no more reason of the Nonconformists dissent and fears, than
what such silly scrupulosity as you intimate may suggest, have patience till we
come to the particulars, and we shall tell you, if you can endure to hear it.

10. The Argument from real scandal in this matter, is of greater force than
you seem to take notice of: We fear that we shall do much to make our hearers
infidels, impenitent, or utterly debaucht, and to make all our Ministerial
labors a vain and fruitless thing to them, if we should Conform.

We still tell you that we are not accusing the Lawmakers or you; but telling
you what we fear it would be in us, if we should do it. You see here that we
plead not against the mere displeasing of our Hearers, but the damning of them;
nor for the preservation of our own interest in them, but for the preservation
and salvation of themselves. And is this kind of scandal, think you, which
consists in tempting, ensnaring and damning men, regardable or not? Had Paul
a soft head, in having so soft a conscience in this point? We were never
Apprentices to the Butchers trade, but to the Physicians: It is not with us a
thing indifferent, to send Souls, as much as in us lies, to Hell. You shall
hear the reason of our fears.

Our Calling is to save men from sin (without which we cannot save them from
Hell): Were it not for this end, we had nothing to say to you; no request to
make to you; nor would we stoop to be beholden to you for our Ministerial
liberties. Many of us can live otherwise; and if we live as Ministers, it has
been in the days of our liberty with many of us, more to give than receive: And
we have too much of the suggestions of the flesh, which would be glad if we
might cast off the burden which you take from us, and would take our Silencers
for our greatest friends. But the Spirit of God has taught us yet to prefer
things spiritual and eternal, for our selves and others: He that said, Ye are
our Crown and our rejoicing, etc. And now we live, if ye stand fast in the
Lord; and I count not my life dear, that I may finish my course with joy, and
the Ministry given me, etc. shall be our pattern as far as we can imitate him.
The saving of the people from their sins, was Christ's work, and must be ours.

And we fear t^^t we shall persuade them to all sin and villainy if we conform;
For, first, the sins which we fear being guilty of, are as great as almost any
that ever we shall preach against in them. 2. Our owning and justification of
them will be as notorious as most ways that we could devise to do it: For, 1.
it must be Deliberate. 2. Public. 3. Ministerially. 4. Perseveringly: And
therefore sure Impenitently.

1. A man in a passion, or by a surprise, or inconsiderately, may lie, or speak
an unjust thing: But when a man is called to do it, to study the case, and to
do it upon mature deliberation, does show more of the habitual temper of the
will.

2. A man that is secretly perjured, or false, destroys himself: But he that
openly both practices it, and professes and justifies it, does his worst to
destroy the hearers and beholders.

3. If a Minister preach sound doctrine, and in his life be a drunkard,
fornicator, or the like, I will hear him in case I can have no better, because
his sin is Personal, and not Ministerial: But if in the open Church, as a
Minister, he will declare that to drink away a man's reason is no drunkenness or
sin, and to use forbidden congress is no fornication or sin, etc. This is a
heresy, and a Ministerial wickedness, that is not so easily to be born.

4. If a man commit a fault in his drunkenness or passion, and after repent of
it, God will pardon it, and so may we: But if a man publicly persevere both in
the committing and justifying heinous sin, and live by it in the world, yea and
entitle God to it, and say he does it for his service -- Blame us not to fear
such things as these.

Now the sins which we fear being of the greatest sort that Hell suggesteth,
Perjury, and owning the Perjury of thousands, and doing that which is
equivolent to the preaching of Impenitency to them, and say Repent not, for I
declare that it is no sin; and lying deliberately; and making a public
Ministerial profession of Usurpation and Church-Corruption, and of our
resolution never to obey God in doing any duty of ours in order to a
reformation; and other such like; I say these being the sins we fear, what can
we think less than that the fornicators; drunkards, swearers, thieves, etc.
that hear us should say, Is ours a sin, and is Ministerial Perjury, etc. none?
What an hypocrite is this wretch, to talk against Lying and Swearing, with a
deliberate Lying, Perjured tongue, and to consent to be a public, ministerial,
professed, impenitent Liar, and Perjured, on condition that he may have leave
to serve God in persuading us from Lying, Swearing, and other sins? Shall we
believe his Sermons, or his profession and practice? Or can we believe that he
believes himself? What does he mean by talking against sin? Is there any sin
much greater than that which he lists himself a defender and practiser of?
And are we like to win Souls on such terms as these? yea, or can we expect that
God should bless our labors, when we offer him Lying, Perjury, etc. for a
sacrifice, and so blaspheme him? as interpretatively, to say, I deliberately
commit these sins against thee, and will declare them to the Congregation to be
no sins, that so I may have leave to Preach against sin. This is the scandal
which we fear, and plead against.

11. It is the work of your own calling, and your Ministerial interest, to
cherish a true fear of sinning in the people: And if you will prosecute them
with Imprisonments or Excommunications, and Violence, who are come to so much
regard of your doctrines, as to fear sin (if you think there be any error in
the materials), what could you do more to contradict your preaching and office,
and destroy that which is or should be your end: Especially, if withal, you
do, as it were, proclaim, [He that will do all these things that we bid him do,
and will not fear lest he incur any guilt of perjury, lying, professed
disobedience to God, etc. in so doing, shall be capable of Church-preferment].

If you go this violent imposing way to work, whether you can see it or not,
men that stand out of the dust can see, that there are but these ways to escape
your punishment and censures: 1. Either to be so perfect in understanding, as
to know in all things, what is lawful, and what not: And that is an impossible
way, because the generality of subjects will never possibly be brought to that
perfection: Nay if they were, it would be the way to their certain suffering
and ruin. For it is most certain that you your selves have not attained this
perfection, and therefore are still fallible; and when you your selves take any
one sin for a thing indifferent, if the subjects know it to be sin, they must
fall under the punishment of your imposing Domination. 2. Or else they must be
men that believe nothing to be sin (which is the case of all that believe there
is no God), and so dare do any thing to save their flesh: And this way will
make all the world conformable to you, that are under your power. 3. Or else
they must be such as believe that nothing is sin which you or their Rulers
shall command them (As all do, who believe that you are Gods, or above God, and
consequently indeed that there is no God); Or that believe that God has made
men absolute Rulers of the peoples Souls, and put Heaven and Hell into their
power. Can you imagine how very many others should ever be exact Conformists to
your imposing wills universally. If a few individuals should chance to be in
all points of your judgments, indeed (which must be a rare case) it cannot be
expected to be so with many, much less with all.

And if your interest should lead you to debauch the people, and take away all
fear of sinning, by forcing them on that which is so feared, you would find
your own interest crossed at last: For it is the godly or the superstitious
people that must long keep up your reverence and honor: We see by daily
experience, that the Atheists and Infidels, and professedly impious ones,
deride you behind your backs, and come very seldom to the public Assemblies.
Your Assemblies are more made up of such as dislike your proceedings, than of
these that are brought beyond all fear of sin or punishment.

12. The Preachers whom you silence would do you less hurt in their permitted
public Ministry, than they do now, or will do when you have done your worst.

In public, 1. Your friends and multitudes of several sorts will be their
hearers, and witness against them for every word that they say amiss. But in
secret they may take more liberty to oppose your way, if they affect so doing.
2. Your kindness, and their own and the Churches interest, will more oblige
them to forbear you when they have public liberty, than when you prosecute
them as foes. 3. And the very Assemblies of men separated by expulsion and
violence, does seem to invite all the people to a sense of the cause thereof,
which a liberty of such meetings without danger and unkindness would not do. 4.
And if you keep them from Assemblies, they will make the deeper impressions on
the people, in the families and secret converse which they use. 5. Or if you
banish, imprison, or hang them, their sufferings will do far more against you,
than all their preaching. I am assured that it is you that advance the
reputation of many Nonconformists, and arm them thereby against your selves.
The truth is, though they are commonly the most hearty, serious, feeling
Preachers, yet some of them are weaker as to the congruity of expression, than
the Debate*maker, or the young Politician. But when the people see them true to
their consciences, they value them much more than they would have done if you
had let them alone. Whether you like it or not, so it is, and so it will be.
Therefore it is you that fight against your selves.

13. You take the way to make your Church an unknown thing. None are to be
reckoned for Christians and Church Members, but voluntary professors of it.
Coacti non est consensus. And as Protestants tell the Papists, They may know
who come within their Temples, but they never know who are members of their
Church, because they know not who professes voluntary consent, and who does it
involuntary by mere constraint. And so it may be said of others that go their
way.

14. By the course fore-described, you will have a Church so corrupted, as will
be a continual temptation to the most religious sort to distaste it, if not to
separate from it. When men that fear sin are the suffering side; and
fearlesness of sin, and a conscience that can do any thing, is full security
from all those penalties, it is easy to foresee what sort of people you will
make your friends, (who will do you more harm than good) and what sort will be
more and more alienated from you. And then the zealous sort of Ministers and
people will from age to age be the sharp reprehenders of your vices. And then
that will increase your enmity against them! And what will this come to at last?

I will give you but two instances now to calm you. Gildas our ancient Britain,
has so characterized the British Clergy, even in those elder and less tempted
times, that he doubts not to call them Wolves and not Pastors; and plainly to
profess, that he that took them for Ministers or Pastors, was not eximius.
Christianus, one of the more excellent sort of Christians. What could a
Separatist have said more of you? And yet you can praise Gildas (for it is not
in your power to eclipse his glory) and not endure the same words from any one
that is near you. The other is that often mentioned instance of St. Martin, who
would not come to their Synods, nor communicate at all with Ithacius, Idacius,
and the rest of the Prelates of the Synods and Country about him, though of
the very same belief, because by their cruel ungodly prosecution of the
Priscillian Heretics, they had taught the world the way of violence in matters
of Religion, and had made the strictest Religious people every where brought
under the malignant suspicion of being Priscillianists: so that having but once
for the saving of a condemned man's life, communicated with the Bishops (being a
Bishop himself) at the persuasion of the Emperor Maximus, he was, as he
professes, sharply rebuked for it by an Angel in a Vision, and would
communicate with them no more. And what worse do the Separatists do by you, as
to communion? And yet Sulpit. Severus tells you by what abundance of Miracles
Martins credibility was confirmed.

Hear a little of the story from your own Hooker, with his application, judge
you to whom, I deny not but that our Antagonists in these controversies may per
adventure have met with some, not unlike to Ithacius, who mightily bending
himself by all means against the Heresy of Priscillian, ( the hatred of which
one evil was all the virtue he had) became so wise in the end, that every man
careful of virtuous conversations, studious of Scripture, and given to any
abstinence in diet, was set down in his Character for suspected
Priscillianists: For whom it should be expedient to approve their soundness of
faith, by a more licentious and loose behavior: such Proctors and Patrons the
truth may spare. Can you endure these words of Hooker? (too short a scrap of
that notable history) and can you mark them, and learn by them to know your
party, and to foresee the end, and perceive what service such do the Church?
Nonconformists think that this is too like our present case.

15. Sword-severities, as coming from the instigations of the Clergy, do
abundance more harm, than if they came from the Magistrate alone. Experience
tells us, that they have ever made the Clergy much more odious than the
Magistrate: Because the Sword is the Magistrates weapon: And if he err in using
it, it does the less abate men's respect to his person, because it is but the
misdoing of his proper work: Or if he drive men into hard thoughts of his
person, it has not much influence on the honor of Religion. But Ministers
have nothing to do with the Sword: Their office is exercised by Gods Word
alone, and that is the only weapon with which they are to strike offenders. And
their office being only to govern by Light and Love, the people cannot bear
that from them which they do from Magistrates: It seems a monstrous and
horrible usurpation to them. And if the Clergy will play the hypocrites, as the
Papists do, and say, We do not meddle with the Sword, but only deliver them up
to the Secular power to be punished, when they tell the Secular power that it
is their duty, and drive them on to it, with the threats of Excommunication or
Damnation: this will never reconcile the people to their cruelties. Of all
beasts, they love not sheep that have bloody teeth and fangs; nor of all birds,
a Dove, that lives like the Hawks, on flesh.

And when the Clergy are once made hateful to them, I have told you that the
scandal tends to make them think hardly of their doctrine, and at least to
run into some contrary extreme, if not to dislike Religion it self. I have
seldom observed any extreme in Heretics or Schismatics, which was not notably
caused by the Clergies contrary extreme. Antinomianism rose among us from our
obscure Preaching of Evangelical Grace, and insisting too much on tears and
terrors. Arminianism rose from men's profane abuse of the Doctrine of Election,
saying, If I am elected, I shall be saved, whatever I do; and when God will
give me grace, I shall have it; and till then, it is not in him that wills or
runs. The Quakers arose from the pride and vanity of Religious people, from
which they fled into the fordid extreme. And Separatists have almost always
risen from the ignorance, ungodliness, the shameful disabilities, idle
negligence, pride, covetousness, or cruelty of the Clergy. This is true, as the
experience of all ages tells us. The insufficient and naughty Clergy make
Separatists. At this day the superstitious think they can scarce go too far
from men that they account so ungodly, malignant and cruel: And the ungodly,
and infidel, and cruel sort of men, do think they can scarce go too far from
the superstitious. If you would read and learn of such reprovers, as Gildas,
and Salvian, and Nazianzen, and Hilary, and Alvarus Pelagius Planct. Eccles.
and Acontius, and such like, you need not have so many thousands flying from
your Churches, as from an house on fire, or infected with the Plague; nor
reporting your Crimes, as the Parliament-Centuries, or the Gloucester-Cobler,
or your groaning Icabod have done.

16. You should rather help to cure the prejudice that the world has against
the Clergy, as envious, selfish, and cruel, than increase it. The World already
thinks that the Clergy are so covetous, proud and envious, that they can
endure no man that stands in their light; but like the great dog that has
got the carrion, snarl at every little dog that looks at them, suspecting
they come to take some from him: It is their common opinion, that the Clergy
are the incendiaries and troublers of the world; And that the worst Princes
left to themselves, are not half so cruel against the faithful Preachers and
Practisers of Christianity, as the proud and covetous Clergy are. It is
therefore your duty not to confirm the world in this opinion, by seeming as
envious and cruel as others have been; but to cure it by love, and tenderness,
and self-denial.

17. Have you ever considered and regarded, whether the Apostles ever took your
course? You say your selves, that they had power to give men over to the Devil
for Corporal punishment: And yet when did they ever do so*by any but desperate
Infidels, (as Elymas) or desperate Heretics, that denied fundamentals, as
Alexander, Hymenaeus and Philetus? Or whom did they so much as threaten
Church-sharpness to, else, unless it were such a proud domineering Bishop as
Diotrephes, who would neither receive some brethren, nor permit others to do
it, but cast them out of the Church, prating with malicious words against the
Apostle. Paul blamed Mark, but did not silence him. He fell out with Barnabas
to a parting, but did not hinder him from preaching the Gospel. He blames
Demas for forsaking him, and loving the world, and many more for forsaking him,
when he appeared before Nero, and elsewhere, They all mind their own things,
and not the things that are Jesus Christ's: And yet he silenced none of them
that preached the same Gospel which he did: He met with some Preachers so bad,
that they Preached Christ of envy and strife, of contention, not sincerely,
supposing to add affliction to his bonds: What then? Notwithstanding every way,
whether in contention or in truth, Christ was preached, and he therein
rejoiced, and resolved to rejoice, and not to silence them, Phil. 1. 15, 16,
17, 18. Some indeed that preached the Law, and, as it were, another Gospel, he
says must have their mouths stopped; but none that preached the same Gospel;
nor they, by the Sword, but by the convincing Word. He that wrote as he did,
Romans 14. 15. was far from silencing Preachers for not using Ceremonies, or
things called indifferent, or for not taking an Oath of obedience to himself.
And will you prove wiser and better than the Apostles at the last?

18. Methinks (as I said before) even selfishness should make you have some
regard to your surviving names! Think not that your party shall be the Masters
of fame: Think but on all history, whether those that suffered in their times,
as the Martyrs, and such Bishops as Athanasius, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, etc.
have not left a sweeter name to the Church, than those by whom they suffered!
Whether the name of the Nonconformists, John Rogers, and his followers, and
Bradford, Sanders, Glover, Hooper, Latimer, Ridley, Cranmer, etc. be not
sweeter now than Gardiners and Bonners? And think on the nature of your cause
and ours: When you have done your worst against Christ's faithful Ministers, and
sought to justify it by calling them Schismatics, posterity will enquire into
the Merits of the Cause, and the Evidence of their words and yours: and their
Writings at least will some of them survive when you have done your worst. And
do you think that they who read such Works, as Amesius, Hildershams, Hierons,
Baynes, Balls, etc. of old, and as Gatakers, Vines, Anthony Burgesses, Allens,
etc. of late, will believe that they were Schismatics, or unworthy to preach
repentance and faith in Christ? I have written so much against Schism my self,
as that I defy malignity it self, to make posterity believe me a Schismatic.
When they peruse the Declarations, Subscriptions, Oaths, and actions which we
refuse, and weigh our reasons, they will judge otherwise than interest, and
partiality, and malice will do at the present. The next Sulpitius will describe
us liker Martin than you, and the Fanatics like the Priscillianists, and too
many of your selves like Ithacius and Idacius, and their Synods of Bishops;
which you may easily foresee when your Hooker himself in his Preface does it by
some Conformists already.

19. You take so notorious a way to tempt the people to their present
suspicions of your overmuch kindness to Popery, as that charity to them
obliges you to help to cure them of that uncharitable suspicion of you. And, I
confess, if I would have liberty for any one sect my self, I would counsel and
persuade men to take away the liberty of Religion from as great, and worthy,
and considerable a part of the Ministers and People as I could, that the cry
for changes and liberty might be so great, that others may be let in with them,
as if it were to gratify them. But it is our comfort that we have a King and
Parliament, whose aversness to Popery, and their Law against all such surmises,
does put them out of the peoples suspicions! And I think you should do no less,
but more than any others, to avert all unjust suspicions from your selves.

20. Is it possible that any partiality, interest or passion can make you
think, either that the people of England need not as much Teaching, and
Exhortation, and Ministerial help, to bring them to Repentance and Salvation,
as all the qualified Ministers in the Land together are able to afford them? or
that God may not bless the labors of such men as Burges, Allen, Norman, and
hundreds more that now are silenced, to the conversion of many hundred or
thousand sinners, unto Repentance and a holy life? And if you cannot, or dare
not deny this, have you considered whether your reasons for silencing them be
so weighty, as will countervail the salvation of so many Souls, and will
comfort and excuse you at the bar of God? And whether then you can justify
your selves by saying, Lord, though so many Souls persisted in sin, and are
damned, that might have been saved by the Ministry of these learned, grave and
godly Preachers; yet the good which we obtained by their silencing, and all
their other sufferings, was greater than so many men's salvation would have
amounted to.

And if deliberately you will venture on such a cause your selves, what would
you wish the silenced Ministers to do? You say it is our duty to forbear
preaching when we are forbidden. But what if it prove otherwise, and that we
must be judged as sacrilegious for alienating consecrated persons from Gods
work? and as guilty of the blood of all those souls that have perished by our
silence and neglect? What say you? Will you undertake to justify us, and
answer for us, and bear all the divine displeasure your selves which shall fall
upon us for our obeying your silencing commands? Are you willing to run all
that danger for us? But why do I ask you such a question, when your undertaking
would but show your greater obdurateness, and neither save us nor your selves?

If you say, that the crime is ours for not conforming; that is to be examined
by it self.

If ever Episcopacy had two learned and judicious defenders, it was Bishop
Bilson and Bishop Andrews: let not interest now make you differ from your
chiefest champions. I will add the words of one of them at large.

Bilson of Subjection, p. 399. says, The election of bishops in these days
belonged to the people, and not to the Prince: and though Valens by plain force
placed Lucius there yet might the people lawfully reject him as no bishop, and
cleave to Peter the right Pastor.

And indeed the people so rejected Lucius, that the boys in the street would
not touch the ball any more which Lucius's horse feet had trod upon; and to the
last suffered all the Magistrates displeasure in refusing the Pastor imposed on
them (who yet persuaded them that he was Orthodox). And the error of a
Magistrate takes not away his power, as I before said, but only his aptitude
to use it aright. And the Nonconformable people think that they lawfully adhere
to their old known faithful Pastors, and reject unknown obtruded persons.

Page 236 he says, Princes have no right to call or confirm Preachers, but to
receive such as be sent of God, and give them liberty for their preaching, and
security for their persons. And if Princes refuse so to do, Gods laborers must
go on forward with that which is commanded them from heaven; not by disturbing
Princes from their thrones, nor invading their Realms, as your holy father
does, and defends he may do; but by mildly submitting themselves to the
powers on earth, and meekly suffering for the defense of the truth what they
shall inflict.

How you gather out of this, or any words of ours, that Christ and his Apostles
might not preach the Gospel without Cesar's delegations, and license from
others, the Kings of the Countries whither they went, I see not, except you
take the word [Supreme] for superior to Christ; all which stands neither with
our assertion nor intention, but is a very pestilent and impudent
sophistication of yours -- Marg. Bishops may preach without Cesars leave, if
they submit themselves to Cesar's sword, as the Apostles did.

To this, I pray add his two pages, p. 233, 234. to prove that Patriarchs were
not erected by Christ, but by the consent of Bishops; and that Archiepiscopal
and Metropolitan Dignities were the gifts of Princes; and then consider how far
that Office of Presbyters, which is of Christ's own instituting, is to be
forsaken in obedience to the command of a Metropolitan, or any power of man's
ordaining.

Page 226. The charge which the Patriarchs and Bishops of England have over
their flocks, proceeds neither from Prince nor Pope, nor depends on the
will or word of any earthly creature; therefore you do us the more wrong to say
what you list of us -- By supreme Governors we do not mean Moderators,
Prescribers, Directors, Inventors, or Authors of these things as you misconster
us, but Rulers and Magistrates, bearing the sword to permit and defend that
which Christ himself first appointed and ordained, and with lawful force to
disturb the despisers of his will and testament. Now what inconvenience is
this, if we say that Princes as public Magistrates may give freedom,
protection and assistance, to the preaching of the Word, Ministering of the
Sacraments, and right using of the Keys -- Does that prove that all
Ecclesiastical power and cure of Souls do proceed and depend of the Princes
right?

See also Page 362.

And p. 259. As Bishops ought to discern what is truth, before they teach; so
must the people discern who teaches right before they believe.

Page 261, 262. Princes as well as others, must yield obedience to Bishops,
speaking the word of God: But if they pass their Commission, and speak besides
the word of God, what they list, both Prince and people may despise them.

See him further, proving that all have a judicium discretionis, Page 259, 260,
261, 262.

Bishop Andrews his determination against giving unfit Kings the Sacrament, and
in what sense the Pastors rule their Princes, (and consequently may not obey
them in the neglect of their own office), I have showed in the decision of the
Erastian Controversy, and need not repeat it; yea he allows the very Deacon
to deny an unworthy King admittance to the Sacrament. And Chrysostom would
lose his life, rather than give it to the greatest that is unworthy. How far
then Christ's Ministers must give over Preaching, Sacraments and all, if men
command them so to do, you may hence gather by these men's judgments.

And in the conclusion, let me again remember you, that the trick of twisting
your interest pretendedly with Princes, and making them believe that those that
you would have to be afflicted, or expelled, are more against Monarchy and
Loyalty than you are, though it be an old device, and of great success, has
ever been hateful to sober men, when the falsehood has appeared, and will but
make your blot the fouler. There were two great Philosophers in France, in the
time of King Francis the first, Castellanus and Bicot. Bicot was a most
profound interpreter of Aristotle, and says Hornius, has got the immortal
fame of Scaligers testimony ( Hist. Phil. l. 6. p. 314.) And indeed Scaligers
words are very high in his praise, Exercit. 307. n. 15. Page 904. and smart
against his adversaries: Haec quidem risui sunt atque contemptui nostris
Lucianis atque Diagoris Culinariis, sed non neglecta sunt a maximo Philosopho
Guilielmo Bicotio, qui quidem pene solus hoc summum jus hodie tuetur in
reconcilia Philosophia. But Castellanus hated Bicot because he was a
Peripatetick. The King being a great lover of learned men, heard Castellanus
often; and when some Courtiers extolled Bicot, and desired the King to hear
him, Castellanus in wrath and cunning together says, What do you praise an
Aristotelian? And that you may know, O King, what men these Aristotelians are,
they affirm that Aristocracy is better than Monarchy. Which knocked the nail on
the head, and the King would not hear Bicot, but Castellanus. Melancthon has
recorded the whole Story, and Hornius after him. These devices may do the feat
for a while, and serve for a shift against not only Aristotle's Philosophy, but
more necessary Truths; but at the long running they will be out of breath, and
flattery and calumny will stink.

Postscript.
LET the Reader, who has read my Repetitions of Martins and Bicots Stories in
other books, know that this was written before them all, and cast by, till men's
importunity have prevailed with me to publish it.

AND now we humbly lay these Petitions at your feet, and beseech you (not for
our own ease, or honor, or wealth, but) for the Souls of many Hundred
thousands of ignorant, sensual, impenitent sinners, that you who call your
selves their Pastors, and the Fathers of the Church, will not deny them the
bread of life. We beseech you for the Souls which are ready to appear before
their Judge, and to receive their final doom, and are lost for ever, if they be
not presently recovered! Their lives are going! Time will not stay while you
are waiting for advantages to attain your ends! They are posting into another
world! O let them know whither they are going before they are there! And feed
not your anger, envy, or interests, at so dear a rate, as the damnation of so
many! If you believe that if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost, and that men cannot love, desire or seek what they know not, deny not
poor souls the means of knowledge. If you yet believe that ignorance and sin is
not so common as we think, or that the silly, dry and dead discourses or
sayings over of some broken Notes, which is the food of too many Churches, is
enough to cure them; we beseech you come out of your Palaces a while, and dwell
in some Countrey-Village, and be familiar with the people, and confer with all
the poor of the Parishes, as we have done, that you may not see many Hundred
thousands damned, by your means, and have nothing to say when it is too late,
but a non putarem. As ever you believe there is a Heaven to be obtained, hinder
not Souls from entering in, if you will not help them: Strive not for a title
to the Keys, that you may lock the doors, and neither enter your selves, nor
suffer them that would to enter. If you believe there is a Hell, have some pity
on Souls, and tie not their hands who desire to save them. If you believe not
the Gospel, confess it, and deal plainly with the world. If you do believe it,
forbid us not to preach it, till you have made our labors needless by better
supplies. We beseech you remember the price that was paid, the blood that was
shed by Christ for Souls, and sell them not now for a thing of naught, and make
not merchandise of them for your honor, interest, or passions. Remember that
you, and we, and they, are ready to lie down in rottenness and dust, and our
Souls to appear before our Judge! And where then will be your wealth, and ease,
and greatness! And how will these things appear in the review, when you shall
stand in that more clear convincing light? Fall not on the cornerstone that
you should build upon, lest you be broken; and strive not against it, lest it
fall on you, and grind you to powder. Who will set the briars and thorns
against him in battle? Will he not go through them, and burn them up together?
Remember that our God is a consuming fire. Though (as Paul once) you have
verily thought that you ought to do many things which are contrary to the
Gospel and work of the Lord Jesus, be warned in time, and do so no more. O that
God would make them sensible by repentance who are truly guilty, how many
thousand persons damnation is like to be charged upon them, for what they have
already done in above seventeen years, hindering so many faithful Ministers of
Christ to labor the saving of their Souls.

Right Reverend Lords! though we are your Petitioners for the sake of poor
Souls, and of the Church and Gospel, and for the sake of Christian Love and
Peace, and for the sake of Christ who valueth these; yet are we not your
flatterers. Had we not seen in history and experience, especially in the
numerous Roman Clergy, how far interest and self-love can blind men, and bring
both Learning, Reason and pretenses of Religion into their service, it would be
a wonder to us, that humane nature could be guilty of your course, and that in
the face of such dreadful judgments as have lately been upon us! That when Gods
displeasure had afflicted your selves (or some of you) for many years, you
should come out of the fire so unrefined, as to use the Gospel and Ministers of
Christ much worse than your Predecessors did before you! and show that you have
learnt so little by all Gods judgments on you, and on the land, as to forget
what God did, and what your selves did, while you remember only what the
Instruments of his wrath did! Nay under pretense of remembering your afflicters,
your wrath burns implacably against the innocent, that never hurt you, nor
had the hundredth part so great a hand in your afflictions as you had your
selves. Wonderful! that in the very time while the Plague was devouring, and
souls crouding out of time into eternity, and each man a terror to another, and
about a hundred thousand dead in one City, you should be a terror to your
surviving brethren, and study how to stop the mouths of those that would but
help to prepare poor souls for so great a change! That when such dreadful
flames have followed such Wars and wasting Plagues, yet nothing moves you to
see so great and grievous sins* as the silencing so many hundred Ministers, and
the starving so many hundred thousand souls, that never deserved evil at your
hands! That the instances of the obduration of Pharaoh, and the Pharisees, with
the consequents, make you not afraid, lest the wrath should come upon you to
the uttermost, while you please not God, and are contrary to all men,
forbidding Christ's laborers to gather in his harvest, and to preach to the
ignorant and impenitent that they might be saved! 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. That you are
no more sensible of the foretold tenor of Christ's final doom on them that did
not feed, cloth and visit the least of his servants; but think that you please
him by reproaching those whom he calls his Brethren; and think still that you
do God service, when you do so much against his servants, and against the
peoples souls! Wonderful! when Christ had so plainly rebuked his Disciples for
striving who should be the greatest, and forbidden them to Lord it over his
Heritage, and told them the necessity that they become as little children, and
the servants of all; that yet the pomp and vanities of this world, and an
uncharitable mind, can make the very name of Obedience to your selves, seem a
sufficient pretense for the lamentable dissipations and confusions of the
Churches of true believers! That ever you can preach for Loving your neighbors
as your selves, and not feel the convictions and sentence of your Consciences
for what you have already done! For my own part I have little sense of any of
your injuries to my self! Nor am I unthankful for that respect of my
Governors, which would have advanced me to your degree of honor. But, I must
profess, if it were the last word that I should speak in the world, that I had
rather be the basest scavinger, yea and suffer many deaths, than be found at
the Judgment Seat of Christ, in the place, and under the guilt of those of you
who have done what is done against the Gospel and Church of Christ among us in
this Land.

I am not so foolish as not to know that all this talk is grievous to you, and
not the way to my ease, or honor with you, nor to procure favor in your eyes:
But if in such a day, and in such a case we should all be silent, and none so
much as call you to repentance, nor plead the Cause of an injured Savior, and
deserted souls, we should partake of the crimes which we are lamenting; and not
only Gildas and Salvianus, and such like, but all the Prophets and Apostles
would condemn us.

And if all that is here said have no other effect, than to increase your
indignation and our sufferings: Judge O posterity! Judge all disinteressed
impartial men, between these Reverend Lords and us; whether the Petitions here
presented to them, be selfish, or unreasonable, or such as should be rejected
at so dear a rate as our lamentable divisions and Church-distractions come to!
yea Christ, whose cause and interest we plead, will certainly and shortly
judge; before whom their worldly grandeur and dignities will be insignificant,
and wrathful reproaches will not prove the innocent criminal, nor justify them
that condemn the just, or that will not understand the will and interest of
their Lord. Even so, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, Amen.

If you ask why I write all this to you, and not to His Majesty and the
Parliament. I answer, It is not them, nor any of their Laws or Actions, which
in all this book I intend to speak against. The most pious Princes and Rulers
have been most addicted to reverence the Counsels of the Bishops in the matters
of Religion: All men are supposed to know more than other sorts of men in their
own professions. Uncontrolled Fame imputes all our sufferings to your designs
and wills. And I have reason to remember, that when his Majesty did graciously
authorize you by his Letters Patents, to make such Alterations in the Liturgy
as were necessary to the satisfaction of tender Consciences, you would make
none at all, but what is now done, which makes our burden much greater than
before. And more than once his Majesty by his public Declarations has
warranted us to be confident, that his Desires are and have been for the quiet,
peace and welfare of his Subjects, upon moderate terms. And I know not any man
alive that doubts, but if you would cordially desire it, and endeavor it,
the King and his Parliament would soon be found the healers of our wounds, and
the restorers of Unity and Concord, by casting out that which has cast out
Love, and turned the people as into Guelphes and Gibelines; and we might soon
see the blessed fruits of Concord.

Amen.
A Postscript to the Apology for our Preaching.
SInce the writing of what goes before, I have heard so much from the most
learned Accusers, of their accusations of us, as enableth me the better to know
what objections to answer. And the ablest that I have met with, argues at this
rate [Mr. H. Dodwell.]

1. He confesses that we cannot subscribe, declare and swear as is required,
without stretching the words to an improper sense; and such as I think will
allow (by parity of reason) almost any lying equivocation or perjury in the
world. Some others of them say, If Rulers will go about by fraudulent
impositions to turn us out of our Ministry, we will countermine them, and take
their words in any tolerable sense to which we can subdue them. But we cannot
practice that art.

2. He confesses that we ought not to perform active obedience herein against
our consciences.

3. But he says it is Schism in us to preach as we do, because the passive
obedience of silence is our duty. His reasons are, 1. Because a Presbyters
calling is dependent on the bishop, and not otherwise to be exercised. 2.
Because by preaching we become Church*Rulers, and take the Bishops Office on
us; as if a man should depose the King, and take his place, because he
governs not aright, (as he conceives.) 3. Because without such passive
obedience, no peace can be kept by any Government. 4. Because the Bishops and
not we are Judges who should preach or not. 5. And Presbyterians are for
silencing some. 6. And the hurt that follows our silence, must be charged on
the Bishops, and not on us.

So that the great crime of the Nonconformists is preaching Christ's Gospel when
the Bishops forbid them.

Here he grants all the following matter of fact and right.

1. That the Preachers in question ( e. g. my self, etc.) are consecrated to
God in the Sacred Ministerial Office.

2. That it is Sacriledg and soul-murder to alienate our selves.

3. That in God's ordinary way men cannot be saved without knowledge, faith and
obedience.

4. Nor be brought to these but by Teaching.

5. That few of the Churches that were burnt in London, are rebuilt.

6. That many Parishes are so large, and the Churches so small, and the
Preachers voice so low, that one of ten or twenty of the Parishioners cannot
hear, if they were never so willing.

7. That many Ministers are insufficient (and the Parson of the Parish where I
live, has been suspended ab officio these two or three years, or at least has
not officiated.)

8. That therefore the silence of all the Nonconformists is like to prove the
damnation of many thousand souls.

9. That if the King only forbid us preaching (and not the Bishop) we are not
bound to such silence as he requires.

10. That our Bishops are not chosen by the Presbyters of the Diocese, or the
people, but by the King (whatever formality seem to contradict this.)

11. That the extent of their Diocesses is not jure divino.

12. That none of them is jure divino, the Bishop of me, or any other such.

13. That National Churches are but of humane institution.

14. That what man instituteth, man may abrogate or undo.

15. That if King or Bishop forbid me to relieve the poor in true necessity, or
to feed any family, or teach them, I must not obey.

16. That the prime part of Religion is in positives, and but the second in
negatives; and therefore sins of omission are the first sins.

17. That no sin must be matter of obedience to Bishops or any man.

18. That the Apostles had their power to edification, and not to destruction.

19. That in case of controversies of Faith, the Church may not judge in partem
utram libet, but only for the truth.

20. That all Bishops power is limited, and not absolute.

21. That when they command without power, only passive obedience is due.

22. That Bishops are not made Judges whether there shall be preaching and
worshipping God or not; but only to order it aright, and judge by whom it shall
be done.

23. That Bishops cannot dispense with the Law of God, nor humane power prevail
against Divine.

24. That order is for the end and for the thing ordered, and not against it.

25. That natural morals are to be preferred caeteris paribus, before
positives, much more before humane orders, and God will have mercy and not
sacrifice.

26. That the silencing of the faithful Preachers of the Gospel greatly
pleases the Devil; and that he is so far of the Silencers mind.

27. He accuses not the silenced Ministers with any false doctrine.

28. He charge them not with Immoralities, or a bad life, saving his supposed
sin of Schism, for preaching Christ's Gospel when forbidden.

29. He confesses that Paul must preach, though forbidden; and that he
charge Timothy before God and Angels to preach in season and out of season.

30. He confesses that the Pastors for 300. years preached when lawful
Magistrates were against it, and for bad them.

31. I acquaint him, that I my self have the Bishops ordination, the Bishop of
the Diocese License not repealed, and the Kings License: and yet unless I will
say, that I trust to the Bishops License, as that without which all were
Schism, it is Schism still: so that it seems to be made necessary, not only
to have it, but to believe in it, or trust it.

On the other side we grant as follows.

1. That we must not overvalue our own grace or gifts, nor undervalue other
men, nor pretend that our labors are more necessary than they are.

2. We must not disobey our lawful Rulers by omission or commission* in any
thing which it belongs to their office or power to command or forbid us.

3. That if they command or forbid without power, that which belongs not to
their office (as that which belongs to a man's private Trade, or
self-government, or family-government, etc.) if it be not in it self evil, we
should materially obey them finis gratia, to preserve order and reverence to
their office, and that we embolden not men to disobey in other things* though
formally that particular injunction be powerless of itself.

4. That if they command us that which God forbids, or forbid that which God
commands, we must patiently suffer what unjust punishment they inflict on us
for not obeying them, and not resist them in their executions by force. (Though
we cannot say that this has no exceptions; as if a Bishop would ravish a
woman, she may resist him to save her chastity; yet at least no resistance is
lawful which deposes the Governor, or disableth him to govern).

5. We think it not lawful to invade or take the public Temples or Tithes, or
other maintenance of the public Ministers, against the Kings will, or without
authority.

6. We believe that lawful Rulers have power to forbid such ministers to preach
in this or that place, or any where in their dominions, whose preaching is such
as tends to do more harm than good.

7. Had we any reasonable conviction that our Ministry is unnecessary, we would
obey our Rulers, though they silenced us causlesly; and would seek some other
place or way of serving God.

8. In those times, places, and circumstances, which persuade us that more hurt
than good will come by it if we preach, we will then and there forbear it,
though it be not as an act of formal obedience, nor a desertion of our Office,
or of the exercise of it at other times.

9. We judge it our duty to further the good success of the Conformable
Ministers to the utmost of our power.

10. And we take Schism to be a great sin, and that which we are bound to do
the best we can not only to avoid our selves, but to cure or hinder in others.

But we cannot in our present case give over the preaching of Christ's Gospel
for the Reasons before given.

1. We judge it a violation of the grand Law of Charity to agree with the
Bishops, that the people shall be damned by thousands, and content our selves,
that not we, but they shall answer for it.

2. We judge it perfidiousness to violate our Ministerial Covenant with God, in
which we gave up our selves to his service.

3. We judge it also heinous sacrilege, it being a holy work to which we are
devoted.

4. It is an Idolatrous setting up man's will and power above and against Gods.

5. It is a preferring of pretended Order, before the thing ordered, and that
which is less than sacrifice (even sin) before Mercy, yea the greatest mercy.

6. It is a pleasing of the Devil, who is the great enemy of Preaching the
Gospel, and of sinners repentance and salvation; and whose instruments the
hinderers of the Gospel are, we leave to consideration.

7. It is a contradicting of the prayer taught us by Christ; Pray the Lord of
the harvest to send forth laborers: For we are sure he has not sent forth
supernumeraries.

8. It is a wilful running on Christ's damning sentence after his premonition,
Matthew. 25. by omitting greater matters than feeding, clothing, visiting, etc.

9. It will be a burying our talent with the unprofitable servant, and denying*
God the service which he has qualified us for, and all our former time has
been spent in preparing for: and so it is as a casting away our time and life.

10. It will be a wilful compliance with Phariseism, after the warning of their
ill examples, who preferred their orders, traditions, sabbaths, and their own
authority, before the good of the peoples souls and bodies.

11. It will be an encouraging compliance with Church-tyranny in exercitio, if
we will give over Preaching as often as Bishops forbid us, because we will not
take their Oaths, and be stigmatized with their PER: I say, supposing this had
been the case.

12. We think it will be a compliance with Church-tyranny quo ad titulum, being
ready to prove not only that the present Diocesans have no true power over us
(but what is given them by the King as Magistrates), but also that their frame
of Government is destructive of the Churches Ministry (both Episcopacy and
Presbytery) and Discipline of Christ's appointment.

13. We are afraid of being guilty, as things now go, of men's (...)his was
writ(...)n when we (...)ad the Kings (...)icense.
Usurpation and injury against the King; while we have the Kings License to
preach, and they tell us not only that the King has not so much authority to
License us as they, but also that he has less authority to silence us than
they; and that it is lawful to preach when Kings unjustly forbid us, as the
ancient Pastors did, but not when these Bishops forbid us.

14. In short, When we think what a work it is to damn souls by starving them,
or to hinder their salvation, our hearts dread to participate in such guilt,
considering, 1. It is contrary to the very nature of God, who is Love it self:
And we find that the silencers are ready to trust in Gods Love to themselves in
the hour of their extremity: And shall we think that he so little loves the
souls of men, as to desire that they should be damned, rather than saved
against the will of a Diocesan? 2. It is contrary to the very office and design
of Christ, who laid down his life a ransom for many, and came to seek and to
save that which was lost, and would not cease when the Rulers forbad him to
teach the people, and demanded an account of his authority, but would break
even the rest of the Sabbath to save men's health, telling them, that the
Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath; and if Prelacy be of
God, it is for the peoples salvation, and not their salvation to be sacrificed
to a Prelates will. 3. It is contrary to the sanctifying-work of the Holy
Ghost, who by the Gospel converteth man to God. 4. It is contrary to Christ's
institution of the Ministerial office, which was for men's salvation. 5. It is
contrary to our duty to the Catholic Church, whose increase we must endeavor.
6. It is contrary to our daily prayers: To pray God to have mercy upon all men,
and to deny them his mercy, and starve their souls, is gross hypocrisy. 7. It
is contrary to our Baptismal-vow, in which we engaged our selves to fight under
Christ's banner (in the place where he should set us) against the world, the
flesh and the devil. 8. It is contrary to our due Love to our native Country;
for whose temporal welfare even a Heathen would have dyed. 9. It is contrary to
that peace of the Church which is pretended for it: For it destroys the
necessary foundations and ends of peace. 10. And it is contrary to the very
honor of the Prelates themselves, which is set in competition with things of
inestimable worth: For it will make the people that believe the Gospel, to take
such men as (prosessing themselves the Fathers of the Church) do silence the
faithful Preachers of it, to be grand enemies of Christ and Souls, and the
Captains in the Army of the devil. 11. All good men long for the propagating of
the Gospel to the Heathen and Infidel World! And shall we then be guilty of
suppressing it at home? 12. The Papists, and all such will condemn us, who will
not give over Preaching, even when King, and Law, and Bishops forbid them. And
shall we incur all this guilt by ceasing for nothing, yea even now while we are
licensed by the King? We had rather be taken in the company of thieves in a
pursuit, than to be found among PER's, and soul murderers at judgment: Sion is
the City of Salvation, but in Babylon is found the blood of souls, of whom for
carnal ends they made merchandise.

The foregoing Reasons of our Accusation are sufficiently answered already.

I. Where it is said that our Calling is dependent on the Bishops! I answer: It
is yet lis sub judice, whether such a Prelacy be of God, we mean the English
Species (that is, for one man to destroy a thousand, or many hundred Churches,
and make them but Parts of one Diocesan Church, and without any Bishop under
him, to Rule and exercise the Power of the Keys over that one Church by a
Lay-Chancellor, in a secular manner, and deny the Power of the Church-Keys to
all the demi-Presbyters)?

If these Diocesans were of God, so is not every one that by worldly power gets
possession of the place, being neither chosen by the Clergy or the people, any
more than one that forcibly usurpeth the name and dignity: What makes that man
a Bishop over me any more than another man? Had they said the King, I should
have reverenced the answer at least (Though the Arrians had the same in
Constantius and Valens's days): But when they trust not to this, but to their
divine right, what is it that is their title? They say, Consecration. I answer,
1. Consecration is but a Ministerial investiture (like Marriage) of one that
before had right by election: This they deny, and lay all on Consecration, and
not Election. 2. But if so, then if the unjustest claimer be Consecrated, he is
our Bishop. And then the Consecrators have more power to determine who shall be
Bishops than Kings and People. 3. But who be these Consecrators? Are they any
Bishops whatever, or some in special above the rest? If any, then any wicked
Bishops may make more, and undo the Church? And then, what if three Bishops
Consecrate one, and three another, and three another, over one Diocese? Are
they all the Bishops of that Diocese? or which? 4. But the Objectors confess
that Consecration does but make one a Bishop without a determinate Church; but
to make him the Bishop of this or that Church, humane application is necessary.
But, 1. Where find they in Scripture a Bishop made, that was not made the
Bishop of a particular Church? I believe that a Minister of Christ in general,
and an Evangelist in specie, may be made before he is fixed to any particular
Church: But not a Bishop, if Scripture must be the rule. 2. But if he be
Consecrated a Bishop, and not my Bishop, (or any other man's) this lays on me
no obligation to obey him. 3. But they are forced at last, to resolve all their
power and our duty into Humane will or institution. It is Man that must make
him my Bishop: And this they call the application of the power! But by what Act
is this application? Is it by Election? or by another Consecration? or how?
sure they will say by Election. And doubtless some one must first Elect him to
be a Bishop indeterminately? It Is strange that men must be Consecrated that no
men choose. Then they choose themselves: And then the Consecrators must
Consecrate any one that will choose himself to be a Bishop: But if not so, they
make the Consecrators chusers, and therefore should not say that Election does
nothing to make him a Bishop. But who are the second determing Electors? They
know not who to lay it on, nor who it is that makes a man Bishop of these
persons, and this place. One will say the Consecrators (and then they know not
who these must be, and we may possibly have ten Bishops at once), another will
say the Clergy (which really here choose not); another will say the King, and
they must all come to that or nothing, though they are very loath (for none of
them will say, The People).

2. But what is the dependence of our calling on the Bishops (supposing them of
Gods appointment)? Is it a dependence, 1. Of Essence, 2. For Operation, 3. Or
for the Order and Circumstances of operation? And do they mean that we depend,
1. On the Bishops first Ordination? 2. Or on his continued Will?

1. If our Calling (as to Authority and Obligation) did depend in esse on the
will of the ordainer as such, that is, that we receive it from him (of which
more elsewhere); yet does it not follow, that the continuance of it depends
on his Will, and that he may undo what he has done. For he engages men to God
durante vita in a perpetual office (which makes the Papist call it an
indelible Character): In Ordination a Contract is made between Christ and the
Minister; and till they null it that contracted it, he cannot do it that did
but Ministerially contract them. A Priest may Marry man and wise, but cannot
unmarry them. A Bishop may Crown and Anoint the King, but cannot depose him.

2. And if the Bishop cannot null the esse of our Calling, than the operation
is not at his Will: For 1. the Esse is nothing but the Potestas operandi cum
obligatione. 2. Else it were left to the Will of Bishops whether Christ should
have any Ministers and Worship, and whether the Gospel should be preached, or
Souls be saved.

3. But if it be only the Time, place and order of our Ministration that is
left to Bishops, they have no power to forbid the necessary preaching of the
Gospel, on pretense of ordering it: To order operation, is not to prohibit it:
He does not order my studies, writing, travel, building, who bids me study,
write, travel, build no more.

4. As the Bishops of Spain at Trent defended the Divine right of their office
against the Pope, so must we ours against the Prelates. Christ has instituted
the office of Presbyters himself; which is more generally agreed on among
Christians, than that he has instituted our Prelacy: But if Dr. Hammond's
opinion hold true, that there were no subject* Presbyters in Scripturetimes, we
shall think it hard to prove that there ought to be any now: And then all
Ministers must be of one order.

5. Suppose Scotland possessed of the Christian Religion under such Presbyters
as Coleman, Aidan, Finan, etc. and after a Courtier persuades the King to call
one man their Bishop, and make him be Consecrated; Are all those Churches and
holy Pastors on a sudden by that act become such dependants on that Bishop, as
that they must give over preaching when he bids them?

6. By your Rules men may enlarge Diocesses at their pleasure; and if the King
will make all England one Diocese, he may put down all the Bishoprics save
one, and give one man power to choose whether Christ shall have any Gospel or
souls in England; and so Christ must shortly be no Christ or Savior, without
the Bishops leave.

II. To the second Reason, I deny that by preaching we use any Prelatical
power; the (pretended) Office of a Prelate is not to be the sole Preacher, but
the Governor of Preachers. If we made our selves Governors of Preachers, we
should assume their power. But to preach is our own work.

Obj. You call and govern assemblies.

Ans. We govern not Diocesses nor other Presbyters; and to guide particular
Assemblies in worship, was ever acknowledged the Presbyters work.

Obj. Yes, under the Bishops government, but not without him.

Ans. To do the work of his own office without him that should govern him,
could be but a disobedience against that Governor, but not a deposing him, and
usurpation of his Government. If a Physician, Tailor, or Shoemaker, exercise
his Calling when the King forbids him, yea or a Schoolmaster or Minister who
governs others, this is not to depose the King, and take his power, but only to
disobey his power. Can you persuade all Popish Priests in England, that they
depose the King?

III. The third Reason is as gross a fallacy, supposing that our silence is but
passive obedience; but passive obedience (as it is commonly called) is but
patient suffering without resistance. If the Bishops excommunicate us, or
imprison us, or deprive us of all Ministerial maintenance, or take all our
Estates, we never resist them, but endure all. But when the first part of
Religion is positive, and the second negative, will any say that it is but
passive obedience to omit all our duty if a Bishop forbid it us? Then it were
but passive obedience to give over loving God and man, and maintaining our
Families, or praying to God, or doing any good, if the Bishop forbid it us.

2. And for keeping peace (which you demand how it should be done) I answer
you: 1. Satan keeps possession of his Kingdom in some peace. Peaceable
unholiness is the surest way to hell. 2. We are commanded, but if it be
possible, and as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with all men. But peace
is first in the power of Rulers; and if they will have no peace, it is not in
our power to procure it against their wills, but only to do our part toward
it. If a Bishop should forbid all men to feed their children and servants with
any wholesome food, and then say, What peace or order can you have without such
obedience? This is but to put a scorn on the Churches when they have persecuted
them, and to take away their peace, and then ask them why they will not have it.

IV. To the fourth Reason, That the Bishop is judge who shall preach. I answer:
1. Were the Bishops Calling justified, yet he has not power to judge in partem
utram libet, whether there shall be preaching or none. The Churches in London
are burnt down; the Parishes are many so large, that one of ten or twenty
cannot hear in public. If it be in the Bishops power to judge that nine parts
of London shall have no preaching, why may he not so judge of the other tenth
part? And if he may judge that there shall be no preaching, then why not that
there shall be no praying and worshipping God? And if so in London, why not in
other places? and so whether there shall be any Gospel, Religion, or Salvation?
In cases of Faith, a Council has power only to judge truly that there is a
Christ, a Resurrection, a life to come, and not to judge that there is no
Christ, no Resurrection, etc. And holy practice is as necessary to our
salvation, as right believing. And therefore the Bishops may judge that we shall
preach, and pray, and worship God, but not that we shall not.

Obj But they are to judge who shall preach. The Gospel is not cast out, if two
thousand of you be silenced. If there were not Preachers, there may be Readers,
and the Liturgy.

Ans. Let them set up such competent Teachers in a sufficient number of
Churches as will tell a sober conscience that all our labors are become
unnecessary, and then we shall think further of the case. But is it so in
London now? Or can any be ignorant that it is not so?

And God uses to work according to the aptitude of means; and too many
Churches in the Countries have such Teachers as say over a few cold words as
boys do their Lessons; and when experience tells us how few are the better
for them, we are afraid of being so hypocritally modest as to let souls perish
for fear of seeming to undervalue your raw Lads, or scandalous ignorant
Priests, and to overvalue our selves.

2. Are the bishops absolute Judges, or not? If absolute, we must obey them if
they command murder or idolatry. If not, what are the limits of their power?
Sure it is Gods universal Law. They have no power against his commanding or
forbidding word; none against him, or against the common good, and men's
salvation. If Popish and other Casuists use so to limit Kings, as to say that
they are Ministers of God for good; and that they have no power against the
common good, and that all Laws against it are null; may we not much more say so
of all our Diocesans?

You grant that they cannot command us to sin, or forbid us duty: But then
either we have a judgment of discerning to know what is duty and sin, or not.
If not, then still if they forbid us duty, and say it is no duty, or command
sin, and say it is no sin, we must obey. But if yea, then if we prove in an
error, it will be our sin: And if the Bishops prove in the error, it will be
theirs. And to obey conscience before a bishop, is in our sense nothing but to
obey God before a bishop, in doing what we judge to be his will.

V. The next reason is none to us: For if Presbyterians or any other, silence
Christ's Ministers causlesly, and forbid that preaching of the Gospel, which is
necessary to men's salvation, we abhor it in one as well as in another.

VI. And as to the last, 1. We believe not that if Christ should ask us, Why we
preach not, it would excuse us to say, The bishop forbad us; no more than if he
ask us, Why did you not feed, clothe, visit me in my servants? The Reasons
forementioned tell you why we think we cannot be excused.

2. But if we could, Nature and Grace incline us to do all the good we can do
in the world. And if thousands were like to be drowned, if we did not help the
Ship-master when he forbids us, Nature teaches us to prefer their lives before
his will. And when our first question is Whether according to Gods ordinary
operation by means, so many thousands shall be saved from ignorance, sin, and
hell, or be damned? For you to determine that they shall be damned if the
Bishop will, and then come in with a second question, Who shall answer for it?
is so horrid to us, as frightneth us from obeying the Silencers, as if we saw
Satan himself persuading us to obey them.

Will you give us leave openly to tell the people where our controversy lies?
That it is the Bishops will that they shall rather be all damned in their
ignorance and sin, than taught, converted, and saved by Nonconformists? But
they say, that it is they, and not we, shall answer for it. As if they said,
Their blood be on us. But we are loath to yield that you must be untaught and
damned, though we were never so sure to be excused.

Whose interest or work it is, Christ's or Satan's, to forbid faithful Ministers
to preach the Gospel, and do their office, the light of Grace, when you have
all done, will tell the gracious, as the light of Nature tells men whose
interest and work it is to deny to as many their necessary food. Should you
deny the necessity of either ( word or food) still Grace or Nature would from
age to age resist you. Of the two, methinks those that persuade us to stretch
to conform against our consciences, that we may preach, do look more favorably
toward the common good, than those that persuade us not at all to conform, but
merely to give over preaching the Gospel. The very motion has an ugly aspect;
it affrights us, as perceiving the voice of an affrighting Solicitor in it. It
amazeth us to think that some Scholars of great parts, and humility, and
obliging carriage, dare make such a motion to so many vowed and consecrated to
the Ministry, while in so many Parishes so many thousand souls are wallowing in
ignorance, impiety and sensuality, and have not a Church to hear in, nor a
Minister to instruct them, but must stay at home, or worse, for want of room,
were they never so willing. Shall the Churchwarden on his oath present twenty,
or forty, or fifty thousand in a Parish for not coming into a Church where two
thousand can scarce hear the Preacher? Or shall all those thousands be idle,
play or drink, without trouble and a few hundreds of them be hunted and ruined,
that rather join in Gods Worship with a silenced Minister? O how easy would it
be to our flesh, and how dreadful to our consciences, to forbear, and leave men
to themselves! Have men nothing to accuse us of, as our intolerable crimes,
but the greatest and costliest duties that ever we performed in the world. The
Lord keep us all from seducing Faction, and forgive us the sin which we see,
and which we see not, and cause us to pray harder for his glorious appearing,
and most righteous final Judgment. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Amen.
INTEREST real or mistaken, RULES THE WORLD.
Gods Interest is the highest with all the sanctified.

I. GOD's Interest is the pleasing of his will in his glory, which is much in
the LOVE and Concord of his servants.

II. The Interest of the Universal Church is, the pleasing and glorifying God
in its unity and strength, in the same Faith, Hope, Love and Obedience to
Christ the sole Universal King.

III. The Interest of particular Churches is, their pleasing and glorifying God
by their union with Christ and the Church Universal, by Faith, Love and
Obedience; and their holy Union between Pastors and people, and of the people
among themselves.

IV. The Interest of the Kingdom is, its pleasing and glorifying God, and the
welfare of the whole by a holy unity with God the Universal King, and of the
Sovereign and Subjects, and of the Subjects among themselves.

V. The Interest of the King is, the pleasing and glorifying God in the
foresaid welfare and just government of the Kingdom, his own salvation, and his
Political strength and honor, which consists much in the most inseparable
twist of union and interests with his united subjects.

VI. The Interest of the Pastors of the Church is, the pleasing and glorifying
God in the ministerial uniting of souls to God in Christ, and among themselves,
in the same holy Life, and Light, and Love, and their own salvation and
consolation herein.

VII. The Interest of each particular Christian is, his pleasing and glorifying
God in his holy union with Christ, and with the Church Universal; and
subordinately his holy unity and concord with the Ecclesiastical and Civil
Society where he lives.

VIII. The true Interest of an honest Separatist and Papist (in England)
(supposing them uncurably such) requires them to live quietly and peaceably in
subjection to the King, and in love with others, in the concordant practice of
so much of Religion (even the Laws of Nature or common Christianity) which we
are all agreed in, and in such tolerated exercises of their several errors as
is consistent with the common welfare, and not to exasperate others by
reproaches, or striving to get into suspected power.

IX. The mistaken Interest of the Pope and Papal Clergy is, to have their own
wills in ruling all the world; and to that end, to weaken and disable Kings and
States by divisions, contentions, and diversions, and to draw them by deceit to
a voluntary subjection, as necessary to their salvation, and to the concord of
their subjects, and the Christian world; and to silence and disgrace all such
as are against them.

X. The mistaken Interest of English Papists, Quakers, and all true uncurable
Separatists is, to increase and strengthen their several parties, and if it may
be to get into power, and to that end, to unite in the bond of a common
Toleration, and to make the tolerated party as strong as they can; and to
weaken the united Ministry and Churches; and therefore to cry down a
Comprehension or Union of the sober Conformists and Nonconformists; and to
desire that those Impositions which themselves account sinful, may be
continued, that good may come by the evil, viz. lest the union of the rest
should weaken the tolerated party, and render them inconsiderable; and to bring
the established Ministry, and all that are for union with them, into contempt
by reproaches.

XI. The true Interest of a mere Nonconformist requires him, to commit no
known sin on pretense of obedience, unity, or peace; nor forsake his Ministry,
whatever he suffer for it; but to live in loyalty, peace, and patience, and in
love and communion with the Parochial Churches, and all Christians, so far as
they are agreed.

XII. The true Interest of a Conformist requires him, to use all lawful means
to procure as comprehensive a Union and Concord of all sound and faithful
Ministers and Christians as they are capable of, and to bear with tolerable
differences; to live in peace among themselves, and by Ministerial skill,
fidelity, diligence, and holy living, and by condescending humility and love to
all men, to win Dissenters, to edify and unite the people, and so to advance
the true honor of the Ministry, and to increase and corroborate the Church.

October. 27. 1675. R. B.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
A Prefatory History of our Case. Page 1, etc. Our judgment how far we are
bound to Preach. p. 14. Our Reasons for Preaching. I. We judge it sacrilege to
for sake the work to which we were consecrated. p. 20. II. We cannot be
ignorant of men's obliging necessities. p. 22. III. Many express texts of
Scripture oblige us. p. 32. Many Objections answered, to p. 44. Whether Princes
may silence us? Largely answered. Of man's binding Conscience. Of the Peoples
choice of Pastors.
IV. By deserting our Ministerial Work, we shall sin against the Natural Law of
Love, and be guilty of soul-murder. p. 45. Objections and Accusations answered,
1. That our preciseness falsely pretends men's necessity. p. 52. 2. That we
think too highly of our own Preaching as necessary. p. 55. 3. That our
Preaching does more harm than good. p. 56. 4. That we have made the People
disobedient, hypocrites, etc. p. 64. 5. That when we had liberty we cast out
Catechizing, the Creed, the Lords-Prayer, Decalogue, and Church Government,
etc. p. 69. 6. That we lived in sequestrations on other men's bread. Mr. Durel's
accusations of my self herein, answered. p. 77. 7. That we silenced and ejected
others when we had power. p. 83. 8. The better must suffer with the worse, if
they will join with them. p. 85. 9. That our Preaching will increase men's
dislike of Government. p. 86. 10. That our pretended Piety is Pharisaical
hypocrisy, pride, zealous Villainies. The Pharisees described. p. 91. 11. Of
gathering Assemblies, and separating from the Church. p. 97. 12. For coming
into Cities and Corporations, within five Miles* p. 102. 13. The Church gives
you power, and may take it from you, as the old Conformists (in Mr. Rathbands
book etc.) confess. p. 104. 14. You are against Bishops, because you cannot be
Bishops. Why did you demur so long before you refused Preferments? p. 106. 15.
Must the Laws be changed as often as tender heads will scruple? p. 108. 16.
Obedience beseems tender Consciences: Disobedience is as the sin of
Witchcraft. p. 110. 17. The only reason why some forsook the Ministry is, that
they durst not abjure the Covenant. Why do they not do the rest? p. 111. 18.
Why not all tolerated as well as you, and so let in Popery? p. 113. 19.
Preaching was necessary before the World became Christian, etc. p. 114. 20. Why
do you not go preach among the Indians? p. 115. 21. The folly and villainy of
your Religion is so opened by the Debater and the Ecclesiastical Politician,
that you should be ashamed to ask leave to preach. ibid. 22. You overthrow all
Principles of Government ( p. 120.) This is answered since in a full Volume,
called, The 2d Plea for Peace. 23. They object our Doctrine as Calvinism and
Puritanism, etc. The intended Scheme of my Reconciling doctrine (since
published). p. 121. 24. You would make our Reconciliation with the Church of
Rome impossible, which is more desirable than with you. p. 128. 25. Abating
would countenance your scruples by authority, and make you thought to be true
Reformers. p. 134. 26. It is rebellion that is in your hearts, as your not
renouncing the Covenant, and resistance shows. (The foresaid 2d Plea for
Peace fully answers this accusation). p. 137. 27. We remember your practices
heretofore, etc. p. 140. 28. Dr. Goods Charge of the Kings death, answered in a
Letter to him. p. 142. 29. The inhumane Calumnies of a book, called, The Modern
Pleas for Comprehension, Toleration, etc. considered. p. 147. 30. The errors
and faults of Sectaries imputed to us. p. 155. 31. Dr. Ashtons and the
Debate-makers Accusation of us, of covetousness, and pride, and delaying to
refuse preferment. p. 157. 32. The Calumnies of a book, called, A free and
impartial enquiry into the Causes of the very great esteem and honor that the
Nonconformists are in, etc. p. 165. A notable passage of Clemangis, and another
of Bernard. p. 173. The true Case of the Nonconformists sufferings which they
are said to under go by Covetousness for gain. p. 175.
33. Mr. Hollingworths Story of a Nonconformists cruelty. p. 182. 34. Henry
Fowlis heaviest accusation examined. p. 182. Twenty Reasons why the Bishops and
conformable Clergy should desire and endeavor the Nonconformists Ministry;
Plainly and seriously urged to their consciences. p. 186. A Postscript,
Answering Mr. H. Dodwell's Reasons against our Preaching and public worship,
when forbidden by the Bishops. What he cannot deny us; what we grant him; what
we cannot grant, with the reasons of our dissent. p. 237. An Account of the
Interests of all the several Parties among us: Interest rules the World. p.
250.


Reader, I have not time to gather the Errata of the Press.


