Catholic Unity: OR The only way to bring us all to be of one Religion.

By Rich. Baxter.

To be read by such as are offended at the differences in Religion and are
willing to do their part to heal them.

JAMES 3.17. But the Wisdom that is from above, is first Pure, then Peaceable,
Gentle, easy to be entreated, etc.

London, Printed by R. W. for Thomas Underhill and Francis Tyton, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Anchor and Bible in Paul's Churchyard, and at the three
Daggers in Fleet Street. 1660.

To all those in the several Parishes of these Nations, that complain of the
disagreements in matters of Religion.
Men and Brethren,
AS in the midst of all the impiety and dishonesty of the world, it is some
comfort to us, that yet the Names of Piety and Honesty are still in credit, and
ungodliness and dishonesty are terms of disgrace; so that those that will be
ungodly and dishonest, are fain to use the Mask and Vail of better names, to
hide their wickedness; so also it is some comfort to us, in the midst of the
uncharitableness and discords of this age, that yet the Names of Love and
Concord ^ound so well, and are honored by those that are furthest from the
Things: For thus we seem agreed in the main cause, and have this advantage in
our debates, that whatever shall be proved to be against Love, and Unit^, and
Peace, we are all o^ us obliged by our professions to d^sown. I may suppose
that all that read these words will speak against the uncharitableness and
content^ons, and divisions of the present times as well as I. Does it grieve my
soul to hear professed Christians so censoriously condemning, and passionately
reviling one another, while they are proudly justifying themselves? I suppose
you will say, It grieves you also? Do I mourn in secret, to see so many divisions
and subdivisions? and Church set up against Church, and Pastors against
Pastors, in the same Parishes; and each party laboring to disgrace the other
and their way, that they may promote their own? I suppose you will say, You do
so t^o. Do I lament it as the Nations shame, that in Religion men are of so
many minds, and manage their differences so unpeaceably, that it is become the
stumbling block to the ungodly, the grief of our friends, and the der^sion of
our enemies? I know you will say, that this also is your lamentation. And is it
not a wonder indeed, that such a misery should be continued, which all men are
against; and which cannot be continued but by our wilful choice? Is it not
strange that we are so long without so great a blessing as Unity and Peace,
while all men say they love it, and desire it, and while we may have it if we
will? But the cause is evident: while men love Unity, they hate the Holiness in
which we must Unite: While they love Peace, they hate the necessary means by
which it must be obtained and maintained: The way of Peace they have not known;
or knowing it, they do abhor it. As well as they love Unity and Peace, they
love the Causes of discord and division much better. The drunkard, and
whore-monger, and worldling say they love the salvation of their souls: But yet
while they love and keep their sins, they will miss of the salvation which they
say they love. And so while men love their ungodliness and dividing ways, we
are little the better for their love of peace. If men love Health, and yet love
Poison, and hate both medicine and wholesome food, they may miss of health,
notwithstanding they love it.

Where know you a Parish in England, that has no disagreements in matters of
Religion? In this Parish where I live, we have not several Congregations, nor
are we divided into such parties as in many other places; But we have here the
great division: some are for Heaven, and some for Earth: some love a holy
diligent life, and others hate it: some pray in their Families, and teath them
the word and fear of God, and others do not: some spend the Lords Day in holy
exercises, and others spend much of it in idleness and vanity: some take the
service of God for their delight; and others are weary of it; and live in
ignorance, because they will not be at the pains to learn. Some make it the
principal care and business of their lives, to prepare for death, and make sure
of everlasting life; and others will venture their souls on the wrath of God,
and cheat themselves by their own presumption, rather then be at this sweet and
necessary labor to be saved. Some hate sin, and make it their daily work to
root out the relicts of it from their hearts and lives: and others love it and
will not leave it, but hate those that reprove them, and endeavor their
salvation.

And as long as this great division is unhealed, what other means can bring us
to any happy Unity? It would make a man's heart bleed to consider of the folly
of the ungodly rout, that think it would be a happy Union, if we could all
agree to read one form of prayer, while some love, and others hate the holiness
which they pray for: and if we could all agree to use the sign of the Cross in
Baptism, while one half either understand not the Baptismall Covenant, or
wilfully violate it, and neglect, or hate, and scorn that mortified holy life,
which by that solemn Vow and Covenant they are engaged to. They are solicitous
to bring us all to unity in the gesture of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, while some take Christ and life, and others take their own damnation.
When they should first agree in being all the faithful servants of one Master,
they make a great matter of it, that the servants of Christ, and of the Devil
may use the same bodily posture in that worship where their hearts are as
different as spirit and flesh. Poor people think that it is the want of
Uniformity in certain Ceremonies of man's invention, that is the cause of our
great divisions and distractions; When, alas, it is the want of unity in
matters of greater consequence, even of Faith, and Love, and Holiness, as I
have here showed. If once we were all children of one Father, and living
members of one Christ, and all renewed by one sanctifying Spirit, and aimed at
one end, and walked by one Rule (the word of God,) and had that special Love to
one another which Christ has made the mark of his Disciples, this were an
Agreement to be rejoiced in indeed, which would hold us together in the most
comfortable relations, and assure us that we shall live together with Christ in
everlasting blessedness. But, alas, if our Agreement be no better, then to sit
together in the same seats, and say the same words, and use the same gestures
and Ceremonies, our hearts will be still distant from each other, our natures
will be contrary, and the malignity of ungodly hearts will be breaking out on
all occasions. And as now you hear men scorning at the practice of that
Religion which themselves profess, so if God prevent it not, you may shortly
see another War take off their restraint and let them loose, and then they will
seek the blood of those that now they seem to be agreed with. At furthest we
are sure, that very shortly we shall be separated as far as Heaven and Hell, if
there be not now a nearer agreement then in words and outward Shows and
Ceremonies.

It being then past doubt, that there is no happy lasting Unity, but in the
Spirit and a holy life, What hinders us from so safe, so sweet, so sure a
Peace? Why might not all our Parishes agree on such necessary, honorable and
reasonable terms? Why is there in most places, but here and there a Person, or
a Family, that will yield to the terms of an everlasting peace, and live as men
that believe they have a God to serve and please, and immortal souls to save
or lose? Is not God willing that all should be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. and that all should agree in so safe a path? Why then
does he invite all, and tender them his saving mercy, and send his messengers
to command and importune them to this holy Concord? He would take them all into
the bond of his Covenant: How often would Christ have gathered all the Children
of Jerusalem to him, as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings? but it
was they that would not, Mat. 23.37. He would have the Gospel preached to every
creature, Mar. 16.15, 16. and would have the Kingdoms of the world become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ.

What then is the cause of this sad division in our Parishes? Are Ministers
unwilling that their people should all agree in holiness? No, it would be the
greatest favor you could do them, and the greatest joy that you could bring to
their hearts: They would be gladder to see such a blessed Unity, then if you
gave them all that you have in the world. O how a poor Minister would boast and
glory of such a Parish! He would bless the day that ever he came among them;
and that ever he was called to the Ministry; and that ever he was born into the
world for their sakes. How easy would all his studies and labors be, if they
were but sweetened with such success? How easily could he bear his scorns, and
threatenings, and abuses, and persecutions from others, if he saw but such a
holy Unity among his people to encourage him? So far are your Teachers from
excluding you from this happiness, that it is the end of their studies, and
preaching, and prayers, yea and of their lives, to bring you to partake of it.
And glad would they be to preach to you, and exhort you, in hunger and thirst,
in cold and nakedness, in all the contempt and derision of the world, if
thereby they could but bring their parishes to agree in a life of faith and
holiness.

And sure our difference is not because the godly will not admit you to join
with them in the ways of God; For they cannot hinder you if they would; and
they would not if they could. It is their joy to see the house of God filled
with guests that have o^ the wedding garment.

We must conclude therefore that it is the ungodly that a^ the wilful and
obstinate div^ders. They might be unite to Christ, and reconciled (...) God,
and they will not. The might be admitted into the Communion of Saints, an^ into
the household of Go^ and partake of the Priv^ledges of his children; an^ they
will not. They have lea^ to Read, and pray, and meditate, and walk with God in
a heavenly conversation, as well as any of their neighbors; but they will not.
It is themselves that are the refusers, and continue the division, to the
displeasing of God, and the grief of their friends, and the gratifying of
Satan, and the perdition of their own immortal Souls. We might all be united,
and our divisions be healed, and God much honored, and Ministers and good
Christians be exceedingly comforted, and the Church and Commonwealth be
delivered and highly honored, and themselves be saved from everlasting misery,
if we could but get the hearty consent of these foolish obstinate ungodly men.

What say you, wretched Souls, can you deny it? How long have your Teachers
been laboring in vain, to bring you to the hearty Love o^ God, and heaven, and
serious holiness? How long have they been persuading you to set up Reading, and
Catechizing and constant fervent prayer i^ your families, and yet it is undone?
How long have they in vain been persuading the worldling from his worldliness;
and the Proud person to humility, and the sensual beast from his tippling, and
gluttony, and other fleshly pleasures?

And besides this, most of the disorders and divisions in the Churches are
caused by ungodly men. I will instance in a few particulars.

1. When we ask any godly diligent Ministers, either in London, or the Country,
why they do not unanimously catechize, instruct and confer with all the
Inhabitants of their Parishes, man by man, to help them to try their spiritual
state, and to prepare in health for death and judgment? they usually answer
us, that alas their people will not consent, but many would revile them if they
should attempt it.

2. When we ask them why they do not set up the practice of Discipline, which
they so unanimously plead for? and why they do not call their people to
Confirmation, or open profession of faith and holiness in order thereto; they
tell us, that their people will not endure it; but many will rather set
themselves against the Ministry, and strengthen the enemy that now endangereth
the Churches safety, or turn to any licentious Sect, then they will thus submit
to the undoubted Ordinance of Christ, which the Churches are so commonly agreed
in as a duty.

3. We have an ancien^ too-imperfect version of the Psalms, which we sing in
the Congregations; and in the judgment of all Divines that ever I spoke with
about it (of what side soever) it is our duty to use a better Version, and not
to perform so excellent a part of the public Worship, so lamely, and with so
many blemishes. And if you ask the Ministers why they do not unanimously agree
on a Reformed corrected Version, most of them will tell you, that their people
will not bear it, but proudly and turbulently reproach them, as if they were
changing the Word of God.

4. In many places the Sacrament of Baptism is ofter used in private houses,
then in the public Assemblies; and if we ask the reason of so great a
disorder, the Ministers will tell us that it is the unruliness and wilfulness
of the people, that proudly set themselves above their Guides, and instead of
obeying them, must rule them, and have their humors and conceits fulfilled,
even in the holy things of God, or else they will revile the Pastors, and make
divisions in the Church: And this is done by them that in other cases do seem
sufficiently to reverence the place of public Assembly as the house of God,
and that speak against private meetings, though but for prayer, repeating
Sermons, or singing to the praise of God, while yet themselves are wilfully
bent for such private meetings as are set up in opposition to the public, and
that for the administration of so great an Ordinance as the Sacrament of
Baptism, and in cases where there is no necessity of pr^vacy: And who knows not
that our Sacramental Covenant with God, and engagement to a Christian life*
and reception into a Christian state and privileges, is fitter to be done with
the most honorable solemnity, then in a conventicle, in a private house?

Too many more such instances I could give you, which show who they be that are
the enemies of our Unity; Even those that cry out against divisions while they
cause them, and cry up Unity, concord and obedience, while they destroy them.

And shall we thus continue a division that does prognosticate our Everlasting
division? Is there no Remedy for so great a misery, when yet our poor ungodly
neighbors may heal it if they will? What if the Ministers of the several
Parishes, should appoint one day of public Conference with all the people of
their Parishes together, and desire all that are fit to speak, to debate the
case, and give their Reasons, why they concur not in their hearts and lives
with the holy diligent servants of the Lord? and let them he^r the Reasons why
the godly dare not, and cannot come over to their negligent ungodly course? and
so try who it is long of among them, that they ar^ not of One mind and way?
what if the Ministers then urged it on them, to agree all before they parted,
to unite on the terms which God will own, and all u^animously to take that
course that shall be found most agreeable to his Word; and whoever does bring
the fullest proof that his course is best in reason, the rest should promise to
join with him What if we call the people together, and bespeak them as Elijah
did, 1 Kings ^8.21. How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. [If a car^less, ungodly, worldly,
fleshly life be best, and most please God, and will comfort you most at death
and judgment, then hold on in the way that you are in, and never purpose
hereafter to repent of it, but let us all become as sensual as you. But if it
be only the life of faith and holiness, and seeking first the Kingdom and
Righteousness of God that God, and Scripture, and reason will justify, and
that will comfort the soul in the hour of extremity, and that you shall with a
thousand times you had followed, (in everlasting misery, when wishing is too
late) if now you continue to neglect it; does not c^mmon reason then require,
that we all now agree to go that way which all will desire to be found in at
the last?]

One would think, if a Minister should treat thus with his Parishioners, and
urge such a motion as this upon them, they should not have the hearts or faces,
to deny, or delay such a necessary Agreement and Engagement, that would make
their Parish and their souls so happy, and which nothing but the Devil and the
befooled corrupted minds of sinners has any thing to say against! And yet its
likely we should either have such an answer as Elijah had, even silence, (v.
21. The people answered him not a word.) Or else some plausible promise, while
we have them in a good mood, which would quickly be broken and come to nothing.
For indeed, they are all engaged already, by their baptismall Covenant and
profession of Christianity, to the very same thing: and yet we see how little
they regard it.

But yet because it is our duty to use the means for the Salvation and Concord
of our people, and wait on God by prayer for the success, I have here showed
you the only way to both. Read it impartially, and then be your selves the
Judges, on whom the blame of our greatest and most dangerous divisions will be
laid; and for shame, either give over complaining that men are of so many
minds, and profess your selves the enemies of Unity and Peace; or else give
over your damning, and dividing course, and yield to the Spirit of Christ, that
would Unite you to his Body, and walk in Communion with his Saints: and let not
these warnings be hereafter a witness against you to your confusion, which are
intended for your salvation, and the healing of our discords by

An unworthy servant of Jesus Christ, for the Calling and Edifying of his
Members, Rich. Baxter.
December. 10. 1659.
The Contents.
THE Introduction and Explication of the Text, to p. 14 D^ct. The true Unity of
the Catholic Church of Christ consists in this, that they have all one
sanctified Spirit within them, p. 14 Explic^tory Propositions, p. 16 Twenty
Arguments to prove that Ungodliness is the great divider, and that if ever
there be a Union, it must be by the ungodlies comeing ov^r to a holy life, p.
19 Use 1. Showing plainly who are the causes of our great divisions, p. 37
Ungodliness is all Heretical opinions combined and reduced to practice, p. 43,
etc. It is against every Article of the Creed, and every one of the
Commandments, and every Petition of the Lords Prayer, and every Ordinance of
Worship, p 65 They are worse then mere Sectaries, p. 73 Use 2. How little cause
the Papists have to glory, when they draw an ungodly man merely into their
Church, p. 80 Use 3. How falsely Papists and Quakers tell us that the ungodly
persons are the fruit of our Ministry, p. 83 Use 4. A serious Motion for Unity
and Peace, to all that would have us of one Religion, p. 88 Some more
undeniable Reasons to prove that there is no other way of Unity but this one,
p. 100 Quest. What is that Godliness that we must all unite in, p. 136 Quest.
What the nearer an Agreement should we be? Do not the godly differ among
themselves? p. 178 Use 5. How little hope of perfect Unity on earth; And how
much Unity may be expected among the Godly, p. 195 Quest. Whether Unity in the
Profession of one Faith, Government and Worship, may serve turn? Ten
discoveries of the insufficiency of a Union, in mere profession, p. 203 How
much true godliness would conduce to heal our lesser differences; and that we
might do well notwithstanding them, p. 234 Manifested in twenty four
particulars. Quest. How then comes it to pass that there are so many
differences among those that you call godly, Answered, p. 288 Advice to the
godly, p. 308 Romans 14.1. Explained, p. 313 Doct. It is the will of God that the
Unity of the Church should not be laid on indifferent, small or d^ubtfull
things: but that true believers that differ in such things, should yet have
inward Charity and outward Communion with each other not censuring, nor
despising, nor dividing upon this account, p. 323 Convincing Reasons, p. 326
Several Uses or Consectaries: and an Exhortation applied to our difference
about Christmas Day, p. 358
ERRATA.
PAge 90. l. 9. r. enquire: p. 91. l. 6. r. except: p. 192. l. 7. for now, r.
in time: p. 275. l. 16 for or, r. as: p. 366. l. 12. for it, r. them: p. 377.
l. 12. dele in.

Catholic Unity.
EPHESIANS. 4.3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

IT seems that Unity and Felicity are near kin, in that the world is so like
affected to them both. As our Felicity is in God, and we lost it by falling
from God; so our Unity is in God, and we lost it by departing from this Center
of Unity. And as all men have still a natural desire after Felicity in general;
but God who is their Felicity, they neither know nor desire; so have we still a
natural desire after Unity in it self considered; but God who is our Unity, is
little known or desired by the most. And as nature can perceive the evil of
Misery which is contrary to Felicity, and cry out against it, and yet does
cherish the certain causes of it, and will not be persuaded to let them go: So
Nature can perceive the evil of Division, which is contrary to Unity, and cry
out against it, and yet will not forbear the causes of Division. And therefore
as we say of Felicity, Nature by Philosophy seeks it, Divinity finds it, and
Religion possesses it: So may we say of true Unity; Philosophy or Nature seeks
it, Divinity finds it, and Religion or Holiness possesses it. And as most of
the world do miss of Felicity, for all their high esteem of it, and fall into
misery for all their hatred of it, because they love not the object and way of
Felicity, and hate not the Matter and Way of Misery. Even so most of the world
do miss of Unity, for all their high esteem of Unity, and fall into miserable
distractions and Divisions for all their hatred of Division, because they love
not the center and way of Unity, and hate not the occasion and causes of
Division. And as the very reason why the most are shut out of Happiness, is
their own wilful refusing of the true matter and means of Happiness, and no one
could undo them but themselves, for all that they are loath to be undone: Even
so the very Reason why the world attaineth not to Unity, is their own wilful
refusing of the true Center and Means of Unity; and it is themselves that are
the wilful causes of their own Divisions, even when they cry out against
Divisions. And as there is no way to Happiness, but by Turning to God from whom
we fell, that in him we may be happy; and no way to God but by Jesus Christ as
the Savior, and the H^ly-Ghost as the Sanctifier; so there is no way to true
Unity, but by Turning to God that we may be one in him; and no way to him, but
being united to Christ, and being quickened by that One most holy Spirit that
animateth his members. And yet as poor souls do weary themselves in vain, in
seeking Felicity in their own ways and devices; so do they deceive themselves
in seeking Unity in ways that are quite destructive to Unity. One thinks we
must be united in the Pope; and another, in a General Council; another says,
we shall never have Unity till the Magistrate force us all one way; (and yet
they would not be forced from their own way.) Another turns Atheist, or
Infidel, or Impious, by observing the Divisions that be among Christians, and
says, [It is this Scripture, and Religion, and Christ, that has set the world
together by the ears; and we shall never have Unity till we all live according
to Nature, and cast off their needless cares and fears of another life.] And
thus the miserable deluded world are groping in the dark after Unity and
Felicity, while both are at hand, and they wickedly reject them; and many of
them become so mad, as to run away from God, from Christ, from the Spirit, as
if he were the cause of Misery and Division, who is the only Center of Felicity
and Unity. And thus as it is but Few that arrive at Happiness for all their
desire of it; so it is but Few that attain to Unity; to such a Unity as is
worth the attaining to.

I dare presume to take it for granted, that all you that hear me this day,
would fain have Divisions taken away, and have Unity, and Concord, and Peace
through the world. What say you? would you not have us all of one ^i^d, and of
one Religion? and would you not fain have an Agreement, if it might be, through
all the world? I am confident you would. But you little think that its you and
such as you that are the hinderers of it. All the question is, What Mind that
is that all should be One in? and what Religion that is that all men should
agree in? Every man would have all men of one mind, and one Religion; but then
it must be of his mind, and of his Religion; and so we are never the nearer an
agreement,

Well! what would you give now to be certainly told the only way to Unity and
Agreement? There is but One way; when you have sought about as long as you
will, you must come to that One way, or you will be never the nearer it. What
would you give to know undoubtedly, which is that One way! O that the world
were but willing to know it, and to follow it when they know it. Well! I dare
promise you from the information of the Holy Ghost here given us in this Text
that now I have read to to you, to tell you the Only way to true Unity; and
blessed is he that learneth it, and walks in it.

This Text is a Precept containing the work required of us, with its double
Object; the one the means to the other. The next verse is an exposition of
this. As the Natural man has One Body, and One Soul, which constitute it a
man; so the Church which is the mystical Body of Christ, is one Body,
consisting of many members united by One Spirit. Every Commonwealth or
Political Body has 1. Its Constitutive causes that give it its Being and its
Unity; and 2. Its Administration and preserving causes, as Laws, Execution,
Obedience, etc. that exercise and preserve, and perfect its Being. The
Constitutive cause is the Sovereign and the Subject conjoined in their
Relation. So is it with the Church, which is a Political Body, (but of a
transcendent kind of Policy.) The Constitutive Cause of the Church are Christ
and the members united in One Spirit: And this is the final part of the Duty
here required [ To keep the Unity of the Spirit] The Preserving cause is the
Peaceable behavior of the members: and this is the mediate Duty here required,
[ In the bond of Peace] Our own Endeavors are hereto required; because as
every natural body must by eating, and drinking, and fit exercise and usage, be
a cause of its own preservation, and not forbear these under pretense of
trusting the allsufficiency of God; and as every Political Body, must by
Government and Arms in case of need preserve themselves under God; so must the
Body of Christ, the Church, be diligent in using their best endeavors to
preserve the Being and well-being of the whole. So that you see here are two
causes of the Churches Unity expressed: 1. The principal Constitutive cause in
which our Unity consists; and that is [ The Spirit.] 2. The Preserving cause,
by which our Unity is cherished, and that is [ Peace] which therefore is called
[ the bond] of it. The fifth and sixth verses do open this Unity of Spirit, in
its parts, effects and ends. [ There is One Hope of our Calling] that is, One
Heaven or Life Eternal, which is the end of our Christianity and Church
Constitution [ There is one Lord] Jesus Christ; One Head, one Savior, one
Sovereign Redeemer, to whom by this Spirit the members are all United. [ There
is One Faith] both one sum of holy Doctrine, which all that will be saved
must believe (which was used to be professed by the adult at Baptism) and One
internal saving Faith, which this Spirit causes in our Spirits, and uses it
as a means of our union with Christ in whom we do believe. [ There is One
Baptism] or solemn Covenanting with God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and
the same promise there to be made by all. And [ there is One God the Father of
all] from whom we fell, and to whom we must be recovered, and who is the End of
all, and to whom Christ and all these means are the Way. So that all these are
employed in, and conjunct with [ the Unity of the Spirit.]

The sense of the Text then briefly is this: [ As all the living true members
of Christ and the Church have one Spirit (and so one Faith) by which they are
all united to Christ the Head, and so to the Father in and by him, which Union
in One Spirit is your very Life, and it that constituteth you true members of
Christ and his Church; so it must be your care and great endeavor to preserve
this Spirit in you, and this vital Unity which by this Spirit you have with
Christ and one another: and the way to preserve it, is by the bond of Peace
among your selves.] It is here evident then that all the members of Christ and
his Body have One Spirit, and in that is their Union. All the question is, What
Spirit this is? And that is left past all doubt in the Chapter: For though the
common gifts of the Spirit are sometime called by that name, yet these are no
further meant in the Text then as appurtenances or additions to greater gifts:
As godliness has the promise of the common mercies of this life, as well as of
the special mercies of the life to come; but yet with great difference; the
later being absolutely promised, and the former but limitedly (so far as God
sees best for us): Even so the Spirit gave to the members of the Church both
Sanctifying Grace, and common Gifts; but with great difference: giving
Sanctification to all and only the members of Christ; but giving common gifts
also to some others, and to them but with limitation, for sort, and season, and
measure, and continuance, as God should see good. It is then the same
Holy Ghost as our Sanctifier into whose name we are baptized, as well as into
the name of the ^ather and the Son, and in whom we all profess to believe, that
is here meant in my Text. And it is only the Sanctified that are the people
United to Christ and to One another. This is proved expressly by that which
fo^loweth, verse. 6, 7. It is those that have the One Hope, one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one God the Father, verse. 12. It is the Saints and body of Christ
that are to be perfected by the Ministry, verse. 13, 15, 16. It is those that
must come in the Unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God to a perfect
man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; and that grow up
in all things in Christ the Head: It is the Body that is United to him, and
compacted in Love, and edifieth itself in Love: verse. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. It is
those that h^v^ so le^rned Christ as to put off the ^ld man that is c^rrupt,
and are r^newe^ in the Spirit of their ^in^s, and put on the n^w man, which
after God is re^t^^ in righteou^ne^s and true holiness. If there^^re any words
be plain, its plain that its true ^aints only that are here spoken of, that
have the Unity of spirit which they must preserve in the bond of Peace. And
therefore I shall make this Observation the ground of my discourse.

Doct. The true Unity of the Catholic Church of Christ consists in this,
that they have all one Sanctifying spirit within them.
By the Holy Ghost within them they are all United to Christ and to one
another: By this One Spirit they are all made ^aints, or an Holy people, having
One Heaven for the matter of their Hopes, One Christ their Head, One sum of
Christian doctrine, which they believe, containing all the Essentials of
Christian Faith; and One living principle of Faith to believe it; One solemn
Covenant with Christ; and One God the ^ather their End and All.

It is only the Sanctified that have true Christian Unity; and it is unholiness
or ungodliness that is the cause of the miserable Divisions of the world. Now,
Sirs, you see the Only way to Unity: Even to have One Sanctifying spirit within
us, and be all an Holy People; and there is no way but this: Now you see the
principal cause of Division; even unholiness, and refusing the Spirit of Grace.

In handling this point, 1. I shall give you some Propositions that are
necessary for the fuller understanding of it. 2. I shall demonstrate the Point
to you, by fuller Evidence of Reason. 3. I shall make Application of it.

I. PRop. 1. Though it be only the Sanctified that have the true Un^on of
Members with Christ and the Body; yet all that make Profession of
Sanctification, and Null not that Pro^ession, have an Extr^nsick, Analogical
Union in profession: As the wooden or dead leg is united to the body, and the
dead branch to the Vine: And so even Hypocrites must not only dwell among us,
but be of the same visible Church with us, as the chaff and tares are in the
same cornfield. And as long as they seem Saints we must value them, and use
them as Saints, and love them, and have Communion with them as Saints: Not as
conceiving them certainly to be such, but probably, and by that humane faith,
by which we are bound to believe their profession; not as we believe God, who
is Infallible; but as men that are fallible: And this in several Degrees,
according to the several Degrees of their Credibility, and the Probability of
their Profession. So that you must not after this m^stake me, as if I tied our
external Church Communion only to true Saints; for then we must have Communion
with none; because being not able to search the hearts, we know not what
Professors are sincere. But yet even this External Church Communion belongs
only to them that make Profession of Love and Holiness, as well as of Belief;
and no lower Profession must serve the turn.

Prop. 2. There is a Common Unity of humane Nature that we have with all men,
and a common Peace that as much as in us lies we must hold with all, Romans
12.18. But this is nothing to the Unity in quest^on, which belongs to our
happiness. The Devils have a Unity of Nature, and some order and accord in
Evil; for if Satan be divided, how can his kingdom stand? Mat. 12.26.

Prop. 3. The Unity of the Saints in the Spirit of Holiness, consists in this
life with much imperfection and discord, according to the imperfection of their
Holiness. But as Grace is the seed of Glory, and the beginning of Eternal Life,
for all its weakness, and the sins that accompany it ( John 17.3.); So the
Unity of the Spirit of holiness, is the seed and beginning of the perfect Unity
in Heaven, for all the differences and discord that here accompany it.

II. HAving showed you the only bond of Unity, I come now by fuller evidence to
convince you of the truth of what is said, and even to force it into your
understandings, if you will but use your Reason, and believe the Word of God.
It is unholiness and ungodliness that causes our Discord; and it is the Spirit
of Holiness that is the Uniting Principle; and there is no true Christian Unity
to be had with ungodly men: Never think of Unity by any other way then
Sanctification: You are as on the other side of the River, and cannot be united
to the servants of Christ, till the Spirit Convert you, and pass you over. You
are dead men, and unfit to be United to the living; and its the Spirit that
quickneth, and this Life must be our Union. You madly rail against Division,
and yet stand at a distance from Christ and his Church, and maintain the
greatest division in the world. Believe it, you do but dote and dream, if you
think to have true Christian Unity on any other terms, then by the Sanctifying
Spirit of Christ. And this I shall now evince as follows.

1. You know sure that there can be no Christian Unity, but in God as your
Father, and the Center of Unity: All the true members of the Catholic Church
must say [ Our Father] and be as his children United in him. If you will have
Unity without the favor of God, it must be the Unity of Rebels, and such a
concord as is in Hell: The family of God do all Unite in him: As all the
Kingdom is United in one King; so is all the Church in God. Can you think it
possible to have Unity, as long as you will not Unite in God? Well then;
there is nothing plainer in the Scripture, then that all men by nature are
departed from God, and none are United to him but those that are regenerate and
made new creatures, not a man is his child by Grace, and in his favor, but
only those that are sanctified by his Spirit, Ioh. 3.3, 5. Mat. 18.3. 2 Cor.
5.17. Heb. 12.14. So that there is no true Unity without S^nctification, because
there is no reconciliation with God, nor Unity with him, without it.

2. There can be no true Christian Unity but in Christ the Redeemer and Head of
the Church: For how can the members be United but in the Head? or the Scholars
but in their Teacher? or the Subjects but in their Sovereign? You know there is
no Christian Unity but in Christ. Well then; What Unity can we have with those
that are not in Christ? The unsanctified have indeed the name of Christians:
but what is that to the nature? Some branches not bearing fruit are said to be
in him the Vine, by outward profession: but they are dead and withered, and
must be cut off and cast away for the fire: and so are unfit for Communion with
the Vine, John 15. He that is in Christ is a new creature: old things are past
away, behold all things are become new. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ (which is this sanctifying Spirit) the same is none of his. I
pray you mark the plainness of these passages. All you that are unconverted and
unsanfied, are out of Christ, and none of his, though you may talk and boast of
him as long as you will. And therefore you cannot have Unity with Christians,
till you will first have Unity with Christ himself. Till you are engraffed into
him, you are not engraffed into the Catholic Church, but only seem to be what
you are not.

3. The dead cannot be United to the living: who will be married to a dead
corpse? or would be tied to it, and carry it about? It is life that must Unite
us: The unsanctified are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.5. and the Spirit is given to
quicken the dead, that they may be fit for converse. What Union can there be
between a block and a man; or a beast that has but a sensitive life, and a man
that has a rational Soul? So what Union between the sensual world and the
sanctified Believer? If you could have Unity without the Sanctifying Spirit,
why are you then Baptized into the name of the Holy Ghost as your Sanctifier?
To have a Unity of Being is common to us with the Devils; for they are Gods
creatures, and so are we. To have a Union of Specific Being is common to us
with all the damned, for they are men as well as we; and common to the Devils
among themselves. But it must be a Unity in the Spirit of Holiness that must
prove us happy, and afford us comfort.

4. There is no possibility of having Unity with those that have not the same
ultimate principal end. But the sanctified and the unsanctified have not the
same end, nay have contrary ends. If one of you will go to York, and the other
to London, how can you possibly go one way? This is the great difference that
sets the world and the sanctified by the ears: You serve Mammon, and they serve
God: You have one portion, and they another: Your portion is in this life,
Psalm 17.14. Here you have your good things, Luke 16.25. and here you lay up
your treasure, Mat. 6.19, 21. Your belly is your God, and you mind earthly
things. Phil. 3.18. But it is the Lord that is the portion of the Saints, Psalm.
16.5. They lay up a treasure in heaven, Mat. 6.20. and there they have their
conversations, Phil. 3.20. Being risen with Christ, they seek the things that
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God; for they are dead,
and their life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.1, 3, 4. The business that the
Saints, and that the ungodly have in the world, is clean contrary. Their
business is for Heaven; and yours is for earth; They are sowing to the spirit
in hope of everlasting life, and you are sowing to the flesh, and shall reap
corruption, Gal. 6.6, 7. They are making Provision for another life, that never
shall have end; and you are making provision for the flesh, to satisfy its
desires, Romans 13.14. And how is it possible for these to be United? What
concord between light and darkness? or Christ and Belial? or righteousness with
unrighteousness? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. Can two wal^ together except they be agreed?
Amo. 3.3. We must better agree of our business in the world, and of our
journeys end, before we can keep company with you. While you are for earth and
we for heaven, it is not possible that we should go one way. While one is for
the world and another for God, they must needs differ: For God and the world
are masters that are unreconcileable. If you will cleave to one, you must
despise the other.

The work of the Butcher and the Soldier is to kill: and the work of the
Surgeon and Physician is to cure. And do you think these will ever take one
course? The Soldier studies how to wound and kill: The Surgeon studies how to
close these wounds and heal them. And surely these must go contrary ways.
Sirs, as long as your business is principally for the flesh and the world; and
the business of the sanctified is against the flesh and world, and for the
Spirit and the world to come, how is it possible that you should be agreed? You
must bring heaven and earth together first; yea heaven and hell together first,
before you can have a Christian Unity and Agreement between the sanctified and
the unsanctified.

5. There is no Unity to be had, but in the Gospel. The Apostle tells us, there
is One Faith, Ephesians. 4.5. If an Angel from heaven would preach another Gospel, he
must be accursed, Gal. 1.10, 11. But the unsanctified do not truly and heartily
entertain this Gospel. You think and say you truly believe it, when you do not.
If you truly believed it, your lives would show it. He that indeed believes an
everlasting Glory, will sure look after it, more then after the world or the
flesh.

6. There is no Christian Unity but in the Christian Nature. Contrary natures
cannot close. Fir^ and Water, the Woolf and the Lamb, the Bear and the Dog, wi^
not well Unite. The sanctified have a new, divine and heavenly nature Ioh. 3.6.
2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Cor. 5.1^ Their Disposition is another way then it was before.
But the unsanctified have the old corrupt fleshly nature still. One is as the
fire, still bending upward; the other as the earth or stone, still bending
downward to the earth: And how can these agree together?

7. There is no Christian Unity to be had, where the Affections run quite
contrary ways. But so it is with the sanctified and the unsanctified. One
loves God above all, and cannot live without holy Communion with him, and
retireth into him from the distractions of the world, and makes him his Rest,
Content and Solace: The other mentions the goodness of God, but finds no such
sweetness in him, nor desires after him. One treads the world underfoot as
dirt, or valueth and uses it but as a help to heaven: And the other makes it
his happiness, and sets his heart on it. One delights in Holiness, and the
other hates it, or regards it not. One hates sin as a Serpent, or as death;
and the other makes it his meat, and drink, and business. And how is it
possible for men of such contrary affections to be agreed? and natures at such
enmity to Unite?

8. The sanctified and unsanctified are moved by contrary Objects: One lives by
faith on things that are out of sight, and strives for Heaven as if he saw it,
and strives against Hell as if he saw it; for his faith is the evidence of
things not seen. Heb. 11.1, 7. We live by faith, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.
2 Cor. 4.18. But the unsanctified live upon things that are seen, and things
believed little move them, because they are not heartily believed.

9. The Holy and the unholy do live by contrary Laws. One lives by the Law of
God, and there asks counsel what he must think, or say, or do, resolving to
obey God, before his flesh, and all the world. The other will say, he will be
ruled by Gods Law, till his flesh and carnal interest contradict it, and then
he will take his lusts for his Law: His Pride is a Law to him, and the
pleasures and profits of the world are a Law to him, and the will of great
ones, and the customs of men are his Law. And how is it possible for m^n to
agree that walk by such contrary Rules as these?

10. There is no true Unity but in the Covenant with Christ. As Marriage
Unites man and wife; so every truly sanctified man, has delivered up himself
to Christ in a peremptory absolute Covenant, and has quit all claim of
interest in himself, and is wholly Gods. But the unsanctified will not be
brought to this, any further then the lips, and therefore they cannot be well
United.

11. The true members of the Church are built on the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20, 21. But the unsanctified regard them not, if they
cross their minds.

12. There is no true Christian Unity, but with the Holy Catholic Church. The
body is but one, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Ephesians. 4.4. But the unsanctified are not of
the Holy Catholic Church, but only in the visible external Communion of it.

13. There can be no true Christian Unity with the Saints, without a special
Love to the Saints For by this we know that we are passed from death to life,
because we love the Brethren; he that lovet^ not his brother abides in death,
1 John 3.14. By this must all men know that we are Christ's Disciples, John
13.35. Love is the bond and cement of the Church. He that does not heartily
love a godly sanctified man, because he is such, has no true Unity with the
Church. But the ungodly love them not as such: They see no such beauty and
loveliness in Holiness. Though Scripture call it Gods Image, they be not in
Love with Gods Image; but think it a conceit, or hypocritical pretense, or a
wearysom thing. Why! poor carnal wretches, do you hate the godly, and yet would
you have Unity with them? Do you hate them, and yet cry out against Divisions,
when your hearts are thus divided from God and his servants? You must learn to
Love them with a special Love, and Christ in them, before you can be United
with them.

14. There is no Unity to be had without a Love to the Body that you are United
to. You must Love the Church and long for its prosperity, and the success of
the Gospel, and the downfall of wickedness. Thus do the Saints: but thus do not
the ungodly. Nay many of them are glad when they hear of any evil befall the
godly.

15. There is no true Unity without a singular respect to the special members
that are the ligaments and chief Instruments of Unity; even the Officers of the
Church and most useful members. The Overseers of the Church must be highly
esteemed in Love for their work sake, 1 These. 5.12. Th^s do the godly, but not
the ungodly.

16. There must be an inward inclination to the Communion of Saints* before
there can be any agreement and Unity. All that are of the Holy Catholic
Church, must desire the Communion of Saints. Their delight must be in them,
Psalm. 16.3. But the ungodly have no such delight in their Communion.

17. If you will have Unity and Communion with the Church, you must have a Love
to the Holy Ordinances, which are the means of Communion: as to the Word of
God, heard and read, to Prayer, Sacraments, Confession, etc. But the ungodly
have either a distaste of these, or but a common delight in the outside, and
not in the Spirit of the Ordinance. And therefore they cannot agree with the
Church: when you loath that which is our m^at and drink, and we cannot feed at
one Table together, what Agreement can there be?

18. If you will Agree, you must w^rk in the same Vineyard, and labor in the
same employment, and walk the same way as the sanctified do: And that is in a
way of holiness and righteousness, giving all diligence to make your calling
and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. If you live to the flesh, and they live to the
Spirit, ( Romans 8.5, 13.) What Unity and Agreement can there be?

19. There is no Unity to be had, unless you will join in a defensive and
offensive league, and in an opposition to that which would tend to our
destruction. What Commonwealth will Unite with them that defend their enemies
and rebels? There is an enmity put in the beginning between the seed of the
woman and of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. Because we are not of the world, the world
will hate us, John 15.19. If you will be United to the Church and people of
Christ, you must be at enmity with sin, and hate it, and join for the
destroying of it; and you must be soldiers in Christ's Army, which the Devil
and his army fight against; and you must fight against the flesh, the world,
and the devil, and not live in friendship with them. But this the unsanctified
will not do.

20. And therefore because you will not be United to them in the state and
Kingdom of Grace, you shall not be United with them, in the state and Kingdom
of Glory.

And thus I have made it plain to you, that none can have true Union with the
Church of Christ, but only they that are sanctified by the Spirit.

Use I.
BY this time you may see, if you are willing to see, who it is long of that
the world is all in pieces by divisions, and who are the greatest hinderers of
Unity. Even unsanctified, ungodly men. And you may see how fit these men are to
cry out against Divisions, that are the principal causes of them: And how
wisely they deal to cry up Unity, and in the mean time resist the only ground
and way of Unity: As Joshua said to Achan, 7.25. [ Why have thou troubled us?
the Lord shall trouble thee this day.] So I may say to all the ungodly, Why
trouble you the Church, and hinder Unity? you shall one day have trouble your
selves for this. They cry out against the Ministry and others that fear God, as
Ahab did to Elijah, Art thou he that troubles Israel? But says Elijah, It is
thou and thy Fathers house that trouble Israel, in that ye have forsaken the
Commandment of the Lord, 1 King. 18.17, 18. Sirs, I tell you, (and I may
confidently tell you when I have proved it so fully), that it is the ungodly
that are the great Dividers of the world. Its you that make the breach, and
keep it open. We are willing to agree to any thing that is reasonable or
p^ssible; but there is no possibility of Agreeing with the ungodly, unless they
will turn. It would make any honest heart to ache, to see these wre^ches set all
on fire, and then cry out against others as the Authors of it. As Nero set Rome
on fire, and then persecuted the Christians for it, as if it had been done by
them. They pluck up the Foundations, and hold most damnable practical errors;
and when they have done, they go about reviling other men as erroneous. I speak
not in the excuse or extenuation of other men's errors. I have spoke my part
against them also: But I tell you, it is the profane and ignorant rabble, and
all the ungodly, whether Gentlemen, Scholars, or of what rank soever, that are
the great dividers, and stand at the greatest distance from Christian Unity. O
what a happy Church should we have, for all the sects that trouble us so much,
if it were not for ungodliness that animateth some of those sects, and
virtually contains many more! Had we none but men fearing God to deal with,
we should have no opposition to the Essentials of Religion; and we should still
have the comfort of agreeing with them in all things necessary to salvation.
They would carry on their differences in Christian meekness, charity and
moderation: and at the worst our Agreement would be greater then our
disagreement. But when we have to deal with haters of holiness, or at least
with men that are strangers to the sanctifying work of the Spirit, we have
predominant Pride, and Selfishness, and Covetousness to strive against: We have
radicated Infidelity, and enmity to God and holiness, giving life and strength
to all their errors, and making them stubborn, and wilful, and scornful,
against the clearest truths that can be showed them. There is no dealing
effectually with a carnal heart, for any but God himself. Unless we can create
light in them, as well as reveal the truth to them, what good can we do them?
What good does the Sun to a man that is blind? They have understandings left,
and therefore they can err: but they have no heavenly light in them, and
therefore they cannot choose but err: They have wills, and therefore are
capable of sin: but they have no holy rectitude of them, and therefore sin they
will with obstinacy. When we dispute with the godly, that err through weakness,
we deal with men that have eyes in their heads, and life in their souls, and
some favor and experience of the matters of God. But when we dispute with the
ungodly, we deal with the blind, we talk to the dead, we offer the bread of
life to men that have no appetite, or savor of it: yea we speak for God, to
enemies of God; and for truth, to the natural enemies of such truths; and the
more obstinate enemies, because they know it not. Had we nothing but mistakes
to argue against, and had we but to do with men that have the free use of their
reason, we should do well enough with them. But when we must persuade the deaf,
the distracted and the dead; when we must dispute with Pride, and Passion, and
Enmity, and persuade a Lion to become a Lamb, and a Serpent to lay by his
venom, no wonder if we find a difficult task of it. Had we none but the Godly
to deal with, we should have abundant advantage for success; we should deal
with men that Love the truth, and are willing to use right means to discover
it: They would pray with us for truth, as well as dispute; they would with
meekness search the Scripture, and see whether these things be so or not: They
would yield to light when it appears to them, and not in prison it in
unrighteousness. And it would move us to more tender dealing with them, while
we see and love Christ in them, and when we remember that the men that we now
dispute with, we must live with in Heaven, and join with in the everlasting
Praises of the Lord. I profess Sirs, I speak to you from sad experience, I have
been troubled with Antinomians, and Anabaptists, and other errors in
well-meaning men, as much as most: And many a days work they have made me in
writing and disputing against them. But alas, this is nothing to the trouble
that the profane, ungodly do put me to. I thank God, I have dealt with all
these errors with so good success, that I live in peace by them; and I know
not of an Anabaptist, or Socinian, or Arminian, or Quaker, or Separatist, or
any such sect in the Town where I live; except half a dozen Papists that never
heard me But Infidels, Atheists, ungodly wretches I am pestered with still One
heresy called Drunkenness that denies the use of reason it self, does still
walk the streets in despite of all that I can say, or all that the Magistrates
will do; and none of us all are able to confute them. In one hours time they
will fetch more arguments from the Alehouse, then all the reason in the Town
can effectually answer.

And as the ungodly are most desperately principled of any Heretics in the
world, both for the quality and the radication of their errors, so there are
far greater numbers of them, then of all other Heresies set together. It may be
we have one or two Anabaptists in a Parish, and in some Parishes none; in some
few it may be twenty: But O that I could say, I had not twenty, and twenty, and
twenty, and twice twenty more unsanctified ungodly persons in my Parish! though
I hope there is as many better, as in any Parish I know. Alas, Sirs, into how
many Parishes may you go, and find gross ignorance, profaneness, worldliness,
contempt of God and heavenly things, to be their common air which they breath
in, and the natural complexion of the inhabitants, as blackness is to
Ethiopians. It is a blessed Parish, that of three thousand inhabitants, has
not above two thousand natural heretics; even ungodly persons that are
strangers to sanctification. And who then do you think is likest to be the
cause of our distractions and divisions?

Moreover, let me tell you, Profaneness and Ungodliness is not a single error
or heresy; but it is the sum of all the heresies in the world. You will
think this strange, when you see so many that join with us in a sound
profession, and some of them zealous defenders of the truth; and many of them
cry out against errors: But alas, they believe not that which they think they
do believe. They hold not that which they say they hold. There Is much in their
Creed, that was never in their Belief. Doubtless ungodliness is the nest of all
the Heresies in the world.

Will you give me leave to instance in some particulars. The greatest error in
the world is Atheism, when men deny the Godhead it self. And do not the most of
the ungodly deny him in their hearts? If he be not Just, he is not God: and
they deny and hate his Justice: If he be not Holy, he is not God: and they deny
in their hearts, and hate his Holiness: If he be not True, he is not God: And
they commonly believe that he is not true: show them where he has said, that
none but the converted, the sanctified, the regenerate, the heavenly, the
self-denying shall be saved; and they will not believe that this will be made
good, but hope its false. If he be not wise, and be not the Governor of the
world, he is not God. And these wretches qua^rel with his holy Laws, as if they
could tell how to mend them themselves, and were wiser to make a Law then God
is; and by flat Rebellion deny his Government. So that we may truly say with
David, Psalm. 14. that these fools say in their hearts that there is no God: or
else they durst not say and do in his presence as they do.

Moreover Idolatry, which is the setting up of false Gods, is a most abominable
damning sin. And every ungodly man is guilty of it. Covetousness is idolatry,
Ephesians. 5.5. and the sensual make their belly their God, Phil. 3.18. And Pride and
Selfishness which are the heart of the old man, are nothing else but making our
selves our Idols. Every unsanctified man is his own Idol; giving to himself the
honor, and pleasure, and love that's due to God alone; and setting up his own
will instead of Gods.

Polutheism, which is the feigning of many Gods, is a most damnable error: And
how many Gods have all that are ungodly? No man departs from the one true
God, but he makes to himself many false Gods in his stead. His wealth, and his
credit, and his throat, and his recreation. (...) Rulers that are capable of
h^rting him, are all as his Gods, and to them he gives that which is due to God
only.

Infidelity is one of the most damning errors in the world; when men believe
not in Christ that bought them: But this is the case of all the unsanctified.
An Opinion they have that the Gospel is true; and Christ is the only Lord and
Savior: but Infidelity is predominant in them, and therefore should denominate
them; or else they should be saved, if they were true Believers. Never did they
give an hours true entertainment to Christ in their hearts.

To set up a false Christ, is one of the most damning sins in the world. And
what else do all the ungodly, that place their hopes for pardon and salvation,
either in their own good works, or carna^ shifts, or at least, by false
conceptions do make Christ not indeed to be Christ?

To have many Saviors, is a damnable error. And how many do the ungodly make
to themselves, while they depart from the Lord Christ?

To deny the Holy Ghost, is a damnable error. And what el^e do all the ungodly
in the world that will not be sanctified by him: This is the most palpable
error that they are guilty of: They are baptized into the name of the
Holy Ghost as their Sanctifier, and yet they will not be sanctified by him: Nay
some of them make a mock of the Spirit, and of sanctification. And some of them
w^ hearken to false deceiving Spirits instead of the Holy Spirit o^ God.

Some Heretics have denied some parts of the Scripture, and Infidels deny it
all. And what less do all ungodly men, that believe it not heartily, and will
not obey it, but deny it in parts, and refuse subjection to it? They will not
be so holy, not they, let Scripture say what it will. Are not all the ungodly
against the Scripture? Many a time have I heard them, when the times more
encouraged them, deriding the Bible, and those that did but carry a Bible, or
speak of the Scripture, or read it in their houses. Certainly, he that fights
against Scripture in his life, is more against it, then he that only denies it
with his tongue.

Moreover, the Pelagian Heretics denied Original sin, and justified man's
Nature: And so does profaness in a very great measure. Never were the ungodly
truly humbled for their Original sin, nor saw any such matter in themselves, as
to make them abhor themselves! And what is this but actually to deny it?

The same Pelagians made light of Grace, which is Gods Image upon the soul. But
in this the ungodly go quite beyond them: They make a matter of nothing of
Holiness, but account it a fancy, or a needless thing; and many of them hate
it, and if the times did but favor their malice, there were no living near
them for any that fear God: In this they are De^^h in flesh; I cannot liken
them to any heresy, but Devilism, they go so far beyond the professions of
them all.

One sect is against those that are their opposers, and another see against
their opposers; but ungodliness is against all that are godly of every party
whatsoever: and is in open arms or secret enmity against the army of Christ,
and against himself.

The Simonians, and Nicolaitan^ and Gnostics of old, did hold that men might
do any outward action, when there is no other way to escape suffering, as long
as they keep their hearts to God. So think the ungodly, as appears by their
practice: Before they will lose their estates and be brought to poverty, or
before they will lie in prison, or be burnt at a stake, they will say any
thing, or do any thing: They would worship a piece of bread as if it were God:
they would turn to Papists or any that can do them a mischief, if it were the
Turks.

Alas, the particular sects among us, do play a small game in comparison of the
ungodly; and hold but petty errors to theirs: One sect is against one
Ordinance, and another sect is against another Ordinance; but the ungodly are
against all. The Sectaries are against something in the manner or outside of
the work: but the ungodly are against the Spirit and Life, and substance of the
duty it self: One sect depraveth the doctrine of Faith; and another the
doctrine of Repentance, and another the doctrine of Obedience: But the ungodly
deprave all the doctrine of Godliness; yea deny it, and not only deprave it:
They sweep away all before them, and go by wholesale: They stand not to speak
as other Heretics, against this Grace or that Grace, but against all: It is
Godliness it self that the ungodly are against.

The Sectaries oppose all parts of the Catholic Church saving their own: But
the ungodly are against the Holy Catholic Church it self; as it is a Church,
and as it is Holy, they are against it. The Church is a Society combined for
holy obedience to Christ: and the ungodly are against that holy Obedience.

The Sectaries would have no Communion of Saints, but in their own way. But the
ungodly are against the Communion of Saints in it self: for they are against
the Saints that hold this Communion.

The Papists and Quakers are against our Ministry, and rail at them, and labor
to bring them into hatred. So do the worser sort of the ungodly: even of them
that say they are Protestants, of our own Religion. In their houses and in the
Alehouses, in their ordinary discourse, they are cavilling against the
Ministers, or reproaching them: And some of them are more bitter haters and
revilers of them, then almost any heretics that we meet with: Yea some of them
are glad to hear the Quakers and Anabaptists reproach them, and secretly set
them on: Only they are ashamed to own these revilers, because they see them
come off in the end with so much disgrace. But if they were but sure that
Papists, or Quakers, or any sect that is against a godly Ministry, had power in
their hands to go through with their work, the multitude of the ungodly among
us would soon join with them. How plainly did this appear in our la^ wars? when
few Ministers of noted diligence and piety, that de^ired to have lived at home
in quietness, could be suffered to live among them; but the ungodly rise up
against them as if they h^d been Turks or Jews, and drove them into Garrisons
to save their lives. The Separatists, and Quakers, and other sects dispute
against the Ministry with cavils and railings; but the ungodly would dispute
them down with halters and hatchets, with fire and sword, if the merciful
Governor of the world did not tie their hands.

The Quakers and many Anabaptists and Separatists are against Tithes, and all
settled maintenance of the Ministry. And do I need to tell you that the ungodly
covetous worldlings are of the same mind? What need had Ministers else to sue
for their Ty^hes? Were it not for fear of treble damages, the Ministers in many
Parishes of England should not have bread to their mouths, nor clothes to
their backs, before they got it by suit at Law. How commonly do they think that
all is won, and is currently their own, that they can but defraud the Minister
of? If it were not that they are under disgrace, the Quakers would soon have
disciples enough upon this very account, because they are against Tithes. And
gladly do the ungodly covetous people hearken to that doctrine, and get their
books, and would fain have that opinion take as Orthodox. If the Prince, and
Parliament would but turn Quakers, and cry down Tithes, yea and Ministry too,
the miserable ungodly multitude would quickly be of that Religion, and
entertain their Laws with ringing of Be^ls, and showts, and bone-fires.

Another heresy there is (eve^ the old sect of Anabaptists) the are against a
Christian Magistracy And another heresy (the Li^e^tines) that would have the
Mag^strates give men leave to sin. An^ are not all the Profane of the sam^
Opinion? They dare not speak freely indeed against the Mag^strate as against
the Ministry (unless when they are up in arm against him) but their very hear^
detest that Magistrate that take part with godliness, and promo^e Religion, and
puts down Al^ houses, and punishes Swearers, and Drunkards, and Profaners
(...) the Lords Day. They are commonly for the Doctrine that (...) preached to
the Parliament, that they should let Christ alone wit^ Reformati^n, and let him
do (...) work himself: Or as another has written, that he will never serve
such a God that is not able to defend his own cause without the Magistrates
sword. The wretches might as well have said [We will have no such God as cannot
Govern us himself without a Magistrate: or cannot defend us against enemies
without wars: or cannot preserve our estates without the charge and trouble of
Lawsuits: or save our goods or lives, without punishing thieves or murderers:
or that cannot teach the world without Ministers; or give us corn without
plowing and sowing: we will never serve such a God as cannot preserve our lives
without meat, and drink, and clothes; and lighten the world himself without a
Sun.] God can do all this! But must these dunghill worms impose it on him, and
give him a Law, and take down his creatures, and (...), and means, and bid him
do all without them himself, or else he is (...) God. O wretched blasphemers
Why how much of this blasphem^ are the ungodly guilty of, that ha^^ the
Magistrate or any other that executes Gods Laws, and would hinder them from
sin, and driv^ them to the means that shou^^ make them better!

The Antinomians corrupt t^^ doctrine of faith, and take it to b^ a Believing
that their sins are pa^doned, that Christ has even repented and believed in
their stea^ and he that has this belief they think is safe, and that a man
cannot thus believe too much or too soon And this is just the common Faith of
the ungodly: They trust in Christ to save and pardon them even without
Sanctification or Convers^on: and trust they will let Ministers say what they
can presumption is taken to be true believing, and by it they think to be
saved. They believe that God will save them, and therefore they think they are
true Believers.

The Antinomians say, that no man should be discouraged from such a belief by
any sin whatsoever. And this the ungodly hold and practice. The Antinomians
hold that no man should stay for any Evidences of Grace in himself, before he
thus believe that he is a child of God, and Justified. And this the ungodly
hold and practice. They believe and hope they are Justified and shall be saved,
when they have not a word of proof for their hopes, nor any reason why they
should be saved more then the rest of the world that will be condemned. Only
they believe it and hope it, and that they think shall serve the turn.

The Antinomians are against Repenting and Grieving for sin, and Confessing it,
as a means of pardon. And I am sure the ungodly are practically against it.
Repent, and mourn, and turn from sin, they will not; nor confess any more but
what they know not how to deny; but as much as they can they will hide it,
excuse it and defend it.

The Antinomians would not have one of their believers, if he fall into the
grossest sins, to make the least question of his pardon and Justified state for
that. And so is it wi^h the ungodly: They will confess, when they swear, or are
drunk, that they sin (because they cannot deny it:) but they w^ll not believe
that they are graceless and unpardoned: but all are sinners; and the best have
their faults, and so have they: and this is the worst they make of their sin.

The Pelagians say that the will of man is so free, that he can turn and become
a new creature at any time. And if this were not the Opinion of the ungodly,
how could they put off Conversion, and say, Its time enough hereafter? but that
it seems they think they can turn at any time, as if they had the Spirit and
Grace of God at their command.

And yet they hold the contrary to this. (And this is no wonder: for there is a
very Babel of confusion in the soul of the unsanctified.) The Antinomians say,
that man can do nothing to his own conversion, but is merely passive: if God
have Justified him before he was born, he shall be a Justified person; and if
God will give him grace, well and good; if not, he cannot help it. Just so say
many of the ungodly: {If we are elected we shall be saved: If not, let us do
what we can, we cannot be saved: if God will not give us grace, we cannot have
it; and if we perish what remedy?] As if God did deny his Grace to any of you,
but those that forfeit it by wilful sin? Or as if your wilful resisting of it
were no fault or forfeiture: Or as if God did predestinate any besides the
sanctified to salvation.

Abundance more such Heresies I might reckon up, that are all comprised in
ungodliness. Some Infidels question the immortality of the Soul: And so do many
of the ungodly: I have heard some of them flatly deny it: and others of them do
not well believe it.

Some Infidels question whether there be any Hell. And so do the ungodly in
their hearts, or else they durst never so boldly venture on it, and so merrily
live in the sudden danger of it.

Some Infidels question the Joys of Heaven. And if the ungodly did not so in
their hearts, they would not think an holy life too much ado to get it, nor
would they part with it for the pleasure of a filthy sin.

There is never an Article of the Creed but some Heretic or other does oppose
it: And the ungodly are against them altogether, even while they profess to
believe them all.

There is never a one of the ten Commandments, but ungodliness is against it.
There is never a Petition in the Lords Prayer, but ungodliness is against it;
for all that they are content to use the words. Instead of Hallowing the name
of God, they dishonor it, and instead of living to the Glory of God, they seek
themselves and their own honor. The Kingdom of Christ they are enemies to: In
the Church without them, they love not his Government. In their hearts within,
they will not endure it: and the coming of his glorious Kingdom they are afraid
of. Instead of doing his will, they quarrel with it, and murmur at it, and
disobey it, and do their own wills, and would have God do their wills too, and
have all others do them. Instead of being content with daily bread to fit them
for Gods service, they drown themselves in pleasures, or in worldly cares to
make provision to satisfy their flesh. Instead of valuing and accepting the
forgiveness of sin, as purchased by Christ, and offered in the Gospel, they
have slight apprehensions of so great a mercy, and refuse the conditions of it
as too hard, and run deeper into debt, and wilfully sin more. Instead of
avoiding Temp^ations, and flying to Christ for deliverance from evil, they
tempt themselves, and run into Temptations, and seek after them, and love the
evil of sin, and are loath to leave it and be delivered from it. So that they
are against every Petition in the Lords Prayer, though they use the words.

They are also against every Ordinance of God, and lick up the vomit of all
sects that do oppose them. One sect is against the Lords day: and so are the
ungodly against the sanctifying of it, and spending it in holy worship, and
delighting themselves thereon in God. Else what need so many Acts to restrain
them from sports and other profanation of it? And all will not do.

Another sect is against Praying but by the Book, and would have Min^sters
restrained from praying in any other words, then are commanded him. And the
ungodly easily receive this opinion, an^ reproach all other prayers as (...)
temporate and disorderly.

Another sect is against Church Government by any but Mag^strates; these are
called Erastian And the ungodly are not onl^ against it, but detest it, and
reproach it. Let them be called (...) Public Repentance and Confession for any
public sin, and (...) whether they be not against the discipline. I know no
outward d^ty that they are more against. The will hear us Preach with some
patience and quietness: but when w^ come to reprove them personally and recover
them from scandalous sins by necessary discipline, they storm and rage against
us, and w^ not endure it.

Some Separatists are for the Peoples Governing of the Church by a major Vote;
and Consequently ruling those that God does ca^ their Rulers, and commands
them to obey, Heb. 13.17. And so are the ungodly; they would rule their Rulers,
the Ministers, and have them administer the Ordinances of God according to
their fancies; but they will not be ruled by them: Let the Minister but require
them to come to him to be instructed or Catechized, and they will not be ruled
by him, they are too old to be Catechized: Let him call them to any necessary
profession or other duty, and they will do what their list. Let him but cross
any of their conceits and customs, and they will sooner revile him then be
ruled by him.

The Separatists will withdraw themselves from our Churches and Gods
Ordinances, if things be not suited to their mind. And so will many of the
ungodly. Most Parishes in England, that I hear of, where any kind of Discipline
is exercised, have more Separatists then Communicants. The fa^ greater part of
many Parishe^ forbear the Communion of the Church in the Lords Supper, an^ have
done many years together even because they cannot be admitted without
examination, or without some necessary or lawfu^ profession, or because they
cannot have the Sacrament kneeling, or put into their hands, or the like. They
will separate and be without the Sacrament, or take it in a separate society,
rather then they will be ruled by the Pastors of the Church in a gesture or
undoubtedly lawful thing.

Another sect of late will not sing David's Psalms: And the ungodly will not do
it heartily and reverently, but only with the voice.

Another sect (the Anabaptists) are against Baptizing Infants. And the ungodly
do not holily and heartily devote themselves and their infants to God: they do
not themselves renounce the world, the flesh and the devil, and take God for
their God, and Christ for their Savior, to heal and rule them, and the
Holy Ghost for their Sanctifier to make them holy: and how then can they do
this for their children, which they refuse themselves? When they have offered
their children to God in Baptism, they bring them to the flesh, and the world,
and the devil in their lives, and teach them to break the Covenant which they
made. So that they are far worse then Anabaptists.

Another late sect will not Pray morning and evening in their families, nor
crave Gods blessing on their meat, nor teach children and servants the duties
of Religion; And so is it with the ungodly: How many of you that hear me (...)
day, have prayerless families? th^^ let your people go about their l^bours as
an Ox to the Yoke, without calling upon God? How fe^ use to instruct and
admonish the families, and help to prepare the^ for death and judgment? All
th^^ are about you, may see that yo^ are guilty of this heresy.

Another sect alate is risen up that will not keep any const^^ times of prayer
neither in fam^^^ or in private, but only when they find themselves in a good
mood, then they will pray. And so it with many of the profane.

I am aweary of mentioning these desperate errors: More of them might be
mentioned; and the case made plain, that almost all the Heresies in the world
are me^ together in the ungodly and unsanctified.

Would you see the sum of all my charge in order? It is this: 1. Many sects
that trouble us much, do yet hold no errors but what may stand with
Christianity and Salvation. But the ungodly err in the Essentials, and
overthrow the very Foundation of Religion. Their errors will not consist with
grace or salvation: They are damnable heresies. Yea beside all that the sects
aforesaid hold, they have many damning heresies of their own. These deadly
heretics hold, that the world is rather to be sought then everlasting Glory;
that the pleasure of sin is to be chosen before the Holiness of the Saints:
that their flesh is to be pleased before God; that its better venture on their
beloved sins, and keep them yet a little long^r, then presently forsake them;
that the way to heaven which God commands, and Ch^^st and all his Apostles
went in, is (...) and preciseness; and godliness is mo^^ ado then needs; and
that the bod^ must have more care and diligen^ then the soul; and the trifles
(...) this world be more looked after then the one thing necess^ry!

These and abundance such damnable Heresies do dwell in our C^ties and
Countries, in the minds (...) those that cry out against Heresie^ Ungodliness
is the greatest Heres^^ in all the world.

2. Other Heretics have some of them but one or two errors but the Ungodly
have all these together: They are the sink of al^ errors: As all Gods Graces
ma^e up the new creature in the sanctified; so all deadly errors an^ vices go
to make up the body o^ ungodliness, when it is complete Its name is Legion; for
there are many of these evil spirits in it. The Anabaptist has a scab; and the
Separatist has a wound; but the common ungodly multitude have the leprosy,
and plague-sores from top to toe.

Profaneness is a hodge-podge and gally-mawfry of all the heresies of the world
in one.

3. Many other heretics do err but in Speculation, and only the brain is
infected, and they do not at the heart digest their own mistakes. But the
Heresies of the Profane ungodly people are Practical, and have mastered the
will: the Poison is working in the heart and vital parts; so that it is far the
more mortal for this.

4. Many sects at least do not Practice their errors; but the ungodly live
upon them. Yea their lives are worse then their opinions: they say bad, and do
worse. You may see more Heresy, then you can hear from them.

5. Some erring persons have the substance of Christian truth mixed with their
error, by which the power of the venom is abated, and they do good in the
Church as well as hurt: But the ungodly do not savingly, heartily and
practically hold fast any the most fundamental truth.

6. Some sects are meek and temperate in their way. But the ungodly are carried
on with fury and malice, against the whole body of the Holy Catholic Church.

7. And some Heretics are so thin and few, that where we have one of them to
do hurt, we have an hundred or a thous^nd to contradict them. But the
unsanctified and ungodly are the greater number, and think they should rule
because they are the most; and the flock of Christ is a little flock. And so
many thousands swarming all over the world, and making up the far greatest part
of the world is like to do more against truth and peace, then here and there a
poor Sectary in a corner.

8. And lastly, the errors of some others are easier cured: but the whole
nature of the ungodly is turned as it were into error; it is rooted so at the
heart, that no power on earth is able to cure it, till God Almighty by
insuperable light and life of grace will do the cure.

And now I beseech you, judge impartially who they be that are the deadly and
dangerous Heretics: and who are the hinderers of Unity in the Church. And how
unfit these miserable people are to call for Unity, and cry out against our
many Religions, who are heartily of no Religion themselves, but against the
life and practice of all. To hear an ungodly man go crying out of Sects, of
Separatists, of Anabaptists, and this and that, is as if we should hear a
Blackamore scorn one for a spot on his face; or a murderer rebuke a man for an
angry word; or a Soldier that kills as many as he can, cry out of the Surgeons
for curing no more, or blame others for a foul word; or a common whore reproach
another for a wanton word, or uncomely garments: Or as if a mad man should
revile men for every slip he finds in their speeches, and call them fools. O
that we knew how to cast out this master Devil of Ungodliness! this Beelzebub
the Prince of Devils! and then I should not fear the rest; no not all the sects
and errors in the world that are found with true godliness.

Yet still remember these two cautions: 1. I do not excuse the errors of the
best: and I lament that they have lamentably wronged the Church, and in some
respects they have the greatest aggravations. 2. And I still confess that some
of the unsanctified are so civil and Orthodox, as to be very useful in the
Church, and helpful against sects and heresies: because they are right in the
brain as to speculation, and right in the tongue; and their error is kept
buried deep in the heart, and therefore they err more to themselves then to
others. I doubt not but many such are profitable Preachers and defenders of the
truth; and the Church must be thankful to God for their gifts. And yet all
that I have affirmed stands good, that Ungodliness is the transcendent
Heresy and Schism.

Use 2.
BY what has been said you may easily perceive, how little cause the Papists,
or Ceremonious, or any others, have to glory in such members of their Churches
as I have described. Can they expect a Unity of the Spirit with these? If they
glory that they have men and multitudes on their side; so may the Turks that
have more then they: and so may the Heathens that have more then either. And
yet when a Papist has deceived a poor licentious, or ignorant man, or a proud
or vicious silly woman, they glory in their Convert. Never yet did I know any
Prot^stant turn Papist, that was not an ungodly wretch before, and without the
power of the Religion which he professed. Do not say I speak censoriously or
uncharitably in this; for I think upon consideration all Papists will confess
it: For they teach that all that be not of their Church are void of charity,
and cannot so be saved: and that all must therefore come into their Church,
because there is no Charity or Salvation without it. Though this be false, yet
you see by it that they confess that never any but graceless unsanctified
Protestants did turn to them: Nor can they invite any to them but ungodly
people. And who ever turns Papist, does thereby confess that he was ungodly
before, and that he was not an honest godly man. For in turning Papist, he
professes to go into that Church out of which there is no salvation, and
consequently no Charity or saving grace. And if indeed you desire none but the
ungodly to turn to you, take them if they will needs go, and try whether you
can do any more good on them then we have done. I think we have little cause
(but for their own sakes) to lament our loss of such as these: and that you
have little cause to glory in your Proselites. And I have yet seen none that
show us any more Holiness since their change, then they had before. A fair
Church you have, that is the common stie for all that will come to you; and
that is glad of any to make up the number, that you may have that in quantity,
that is wanting in quality.

Use 3.
FRom hence also let Quakers, and Papists, and all reproachers of our Churches
take notice, how groundlesly they hit us in the teeth with the ungodly that
live among us. [ These are your Protestants, say they; These are your Churches:
These are the fruit of your Ministry! say the Quakers.] No; these are the
enemies of our Ministry and Doctrine: These are they that join with you, and
such as you, to reproach us and revile us! These are the obstinate despisers of
our Ministry; that instead of learning of us, do revile us; and instead of
obeying our doctrine, do make a mock at it. If they are any of them brought to
a sound confession, and restrained from any vice, they may thank the doctrine
which we preach for that (unless they do it only for fear of the Laws.) But
their profaneness is it that we have endeavored to cure them of, and cannot;
for they are obstinate.

If Papists or Quakers accuse our Doctrine as dead and weak, because it cannot
cure all our hearers; What forgetful dotards are they that observe not how they
condemn themselves? Do the Quakers or Papists change us all to their opinions
by their books or preaching? Beyond Sea they are fain to keep men in their
Church by fire and sword for fear of losing them: and here, it is but here and
there an ignorant ungodly wretch, or a proud raw novice, that turns to them.

You may therefore as well hit us in the teeth with your selves that revile us
and say, [ We are the fruit of your Ministry] as with the ungodly, and tell us
that [they are the fruit] of our Ministry. For though they live among us, they
are not of us. And we teach men no more to be ungodly, then to be Quakers or
Papists. If you say, that they are in our Churches; I answer, where Discipline
is exercised, the most of them are out; and the rest we weed up as fast as they
so discover themselves, that we may do it without danger of pulling up the
Wheat with them. Many of us reject them by Discipline: and all of us rebuke and
disown them by doctrine. If Jews and Heathens were among us, we could not
preach more against them, then we do against the ungodly; nor could we labor
harder to cure them. Tell us not therefore of them: they are none of ours: they
disown us, and we disown them: They are our persecutors as you are, that hate
us when we have done our best for them, and love us least when we love them
most; and cast back all our instructions in our faces, or cast it behind their
backs, and tread it under feet. They are those against whom we shake off the
dust of our feet: They are not our Disciples; but such as refuse to be Christ's
own Disciples.

Nay I wonder that Papists and Quakers do not to their shame observe, that it
is like to be some evil Spirit that sets them a work to rail against us; seeing
all the Drunkards, and Whore-mongers, and covetous wretches, and ungodly
malicious people in our Parishes be of their mind, and rail against us as they
do: Its like to be the same cause that has the same effect. If it be the Devil
that sets the Profane to rev^le us, judge who it is that sets these sects to
spoke the same or like words against the same persons?

And you that are Profane and ungodly, I pray you here take notice what a case
you are in! You are so vile that a few besides your selves will own you. We
disown you: You are none of ours; because you will be none of Christ's. And the
very Quakers and other sects disown you, and hit us in the teeth with you, as
if you were our shame: All these bear witness against your ungodliness: And
therefore if yet you will be ungodly, when Quakers are against you, and all are
against you almost as well as we; if you will hear neither Ministers nor
Sectaries, neither Teachers nor Railers, how many witnesses will rise up
against you, and how speechless will you be?

Use 4.
I Have been all this while but about preparatives: and now I come to the work
that I intended. Do not think that I have spoken all this of the ungodly to
hinder a Union and Christian Concord, but to prepare for it, by telling you the
reason of our distance, and division, and what must be removed before we can be
One. Truly Sirs, I come to you with Peaceable intentions. I come upon a treaty
with you, to see whether you will become One with us, and be reconciled or not?
For the Lords sake attend me considerately and impartially, for it is a weighty
buness that I have to propound to you, and a most excellent motion that I have
to make. As you regard the God of Unity that sends to you, and Christ the
Prince of Peace, and the Spirit who is the Principle of Unity, and the Church
that is the seat of Unity, and your selves that may have the blessing of Unity,
hearken to the motion of Peace and Unity that I have to make to you from the
Lord. Sirs, What think you! has the world been long enough divided or not! Are
our distances from one another broken into pieces enough or not? Are we cut into
shreds enough, and great enough, and our spirits bitter enough or not? Is it not
time think you to sound a retreat to our foolish wars? You call for Unity: Y^u
talk for Unity, and against sects and divisions: Do you mean as you speak? and
are you in good sadness, or are you not? Would you have us to be all of one
mind and way, or not? You talk against being of so many Religions: Is it the
true desire of your hearts that we should be all of one Religion? If it be,
hold fast to this: So far we are agreed: Let us lay this as a g^ound-work; We
must be all of One Church, One Faith, One Religion, if we will be saved.

Well the^, it lies next before us in order to enquiry, What One Religion and
Way we must be of? and what is our distance, and what course must be taken to
make us One? Are you willing to lay by passion, and scorn and hatred, and
bitterness, and come to a treaty about the matter? O Sirs, if you were but all
truly willing to search out the business, and to be ruled by God and reason, we
should soon be agreed, for all our differences. And how happy would this be for
the troubled Church? How happy for the offended distracted world? how happy for
your own souls? Well! what terms shall we agree upon? Some body must begin the
motion; sitting still will not heal us. I will make a motion that never a man
of you that has the face of a Christian, can tell what justly to accept
against. Let us set the Word of God before us, and take the best helps on both
sides to understand it, and let this decide the case with us: What say you?
will you stand to the Word of God? Shall we app^al all to Christ, and try our
differences by his revealed word? If this may carry it, we shall soon be agreed.

But if any of you have caught the Popish perverseness, and say [The Scripture
is dark, and a dead letter; every sect pleads Scripture for their way; this
will not serve our turn; we must have a living Judge] I answer such a one as
follows. 1. Is the Scripture the Law of God or not? If you say Not, you may
as well say you are Infidels. If you confess it is, then it must have the use
of a Law. And, 2. Must not subjects understand a Law to live by it, though they
be not Judges? And when estate and life depends on our obedience to the Law; if
this Law now be so dark that the subjects cannot understand it, then it is no
Law, as not being capable of the use and ends of a Law. And so if our salvation
or damnation lie on our obedience to Gods Word and Law, its an intolerable
reproach to God and it, to say it is such as we cannot understand. 3. Must we
not be judged by this Law? Undoubtedly we must. And then should we not measure
our Causes by it now? 4. May not Arbitrators make use of a Law to decide a
controversy, before it come to the Jud^e? Doubtless they may. 5. What Judge
would you have? There are but two in the world that pretend to be the Universal
Infallible Judge of controversies: and that is the Pope, and a General Council.
For a General Council, there is none now in the world, nor like to be to the
end of the world: God forbid we should defer our Peace till then. And its
Decrees are as dark, and much more uncertain then the Word of God. And for the
Pope, he is Head of a sect or party, and therefore not fit to be judge: you may
well know he will judge on his own side. He must be judged by this Word of God
himself. He is too far off, of all conscience, for us to go or send to. Where
Rome is, the most of you know not: A shorter journey may better dispatch our
work. The Papists themselves tell us that many Popes have been Murderers,
Adulterers, Simonists, perjured persons, and some Heretics and Infidels. And
must such as these be our only Judges? They have erred often already, and
therefore they may deceive us: And if you send for the Popes Sentence, you must
take the Messengers word that he was there, and that its true.

But yet if all this will not serve turn, I will make a motion that none can
gainsay that has the face of a Christian. Let us first agree in all those
points that Papists and Protestants, Calvinists and Lutherans, Arminians and
Anabaptists, and Seperatists, and all parties that deserve to be called
Christians, are agreed in! What say you, is not this a reasonable motion! O
happy you, and happy the places where you live, if you would but stand to it!

And let us consider of this motion first in the General state of our
difference, and then in the particular parts of it!

Truly Sirs, the main difference in this world is between the Godly and the
Ungodly; and all other differences that are not parts of this, are nothing to
this, being of lesser danger, and easier toleration or cure. The whole world is
divided into two Armies: Christ is the Captain General of one, and the Saints
only his true Soldiers, and the seeming Saints his seeming Soldiers: The
Devil is the General of the other, and all the unregenerate or ungodly are his
Soldiers. An enmity is put since the beginning between the seed of the woman
and of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. and there is no middle state, nor one man on
earth that is not in one of these Armies. I come not to reconcile the
Commanders, Christ and Satan; for they are unreconcileable; but to reconcile
you to Christ, and draw you from a deceiver. I tell you, ^irs, this great
difference between the holy and the unholy, is the first that must be healed.
We can go no further with you, if you will not begin here at the heart of the
difference. When this is do^e, you shall see before I have done with you, that
I will quickly tell you how we may do well, for all our other differences. You
know if one of us believe that there is a God, and another that there is none,
i^ were foolery for us to dispute how God must be worshipped, before we are
agreed that there is a God. So here; when it is the nature of ungodliness to
make men false to the very truths that they do profess, and heartily to be of
no Religion at all, it is in vain to dispute about circumstances and mode* with
such kind of men. Who would dispute whether Infants should be baptized, with a
man tha^ knows not wh^^ Baptism is? [ Ev^n an accepting of God for ou^ God, and
Christ for our Lord and Savior, and the Holy Ghost for our S^nctifier; and an
absolute delivering up our selves to the blessed Trinity in these relations, by
a solemn Covenant professed and sealed by water, renouncing the flesh, the
world and the Devil.] O were but this much practically known, we should be all
United in this one Baptism. Still I say, Unholiness is the great point of
difference, and the dung^on of Confusion, and puddle where all the heresies of
the world are blend^d and made into a body that is something worse then
heresy. When you cry up Unity, and cry down Holiness, you are distracted and
know not what you say. You talk of joining us together, and you cast away ^he
glue and soder. You talk of building the Church in unity, and you cast away the
lime and mortar, the pins and nails, and all that should fasten them. You
complain that the garment of Christ is rent, and you throw away the needle and
thread that should sow it up. You see our wounds and blood, and take on you to
have pity on the Church, and call for healing, but you hate and cast away the
only salve. Do you not yet know that the Churches Unity is a Unity of the
Spirit, and of Holiness? and that there is no way in the world for us and you
to be United, unless you will be Sanctified, and live in the Spirit, as you
have done in the flesh?

Sirs, let us come nearer the matter: ^ know our Towns and Countries have two
sorts of persons in them; some are Converted, and some Unconverted; some holy,
and some unholy; some live for heaven. and some are all for earth; some are
ruled by the Word of God, and some by their own flesh or wills. If ever these
agree and be United, one party must come over to the other. Either the Godly
must become ungodly, or the ungodly must become Saints and godly: Which must it
be? which do you think in your Consciences is the way? Must we yield to you; or
should you (...) away to us? (Pardon that I (...) my self with the sanctified;
(...) dare not deny the mercies of God, and the privileges of his house) Let
us come fairly to debate the Case, and lay our Reasons together; and I will
here protest to you, if you can give us better reasons why we should forsake a
godly life, I Will turn to you: and if we can give you better reasons why you
should embrace an holy life, will you here promise to turn to us? and let them
carry it that have the better cause, and let us be resolved to go away United;
and fall all together into that one way that shall be proved to be the best.

Well, let us come to a debate, and see whether we must come to you, or you to
us.

1. If we ever agree and unite, you know it must be on terms that are possible.
He that propounds Impossibilities to be agreed on, is the enemy of agreement.
But it is impossible for us to come to you, and so to Unite with you. Th^s I
now prove. 1. ^t is Impossible to have any Universal Unity but in an Universal
Head and Center, and that is only God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. As I
told you, the Army must Unite in the General, the Kingdom in the Sovereign, the
Family in the Master, the School in the Schoolmaster. In order of Nature, you
must Unite with God in the Redeemer by the sanctifying Spirit, before you can
Unite with us. But while you are unsanctified you are divided from God. Do you
not feel your minds strange to him, your hearts draw back from him, and find by
his strangeness to you that there is a division? Its impossible for us to be
United to you, till Christ be United to you. For, 1. Its against Nature, seeing
he is the Center, and the Head and Fountain of Life: And what good would it do
you to be one with us and not with him? 2. God is against any Unity without
him: If you will not begin with him, he will take it but as a treasonable
conspiracy, and will break it. We dare not go without him, lest he be angry and
destroy us: Soldiers must not make either Peace or war, not so much as treat
without the General. Do you not remember how Iehosaphat had like to have sped
by a friendship and confederacy with Ahab?

2. Moreover the Godly and ungodly are of contrary natures: I told you God has
put an enmi^y between them. You must chan^e your nature or we ou^s, before we
can Unite. You may as well think else to Unite fire and water, or to build in
the air, or to incorpo^^^^ fire and Gunpowder; or to reconcile men and
serp^nts, and ma^ry the dog and the bear together Sirs, these things are mere
imposs^bilities. 2 Cor. 16.14. There is no agreement between Christ and Belial,
righteousness and unrighteousness, light and darkness, death and life, the
members of Christ, and the members of an harlot or a drunkard, or such like: We
have contrary spirits; how then can we be One? One has the Spirit of holiness,
and the other the Spir^^ of profaneness; One is led by the Spirit of God, and
the other by the flesh: We live not by one Law. Gods will revealed in h^s Word
is Our Law: and the will of the flesh and the course of the world is your Law.
We live not on one sort of food; how then can we accord together? Christ and
his heavenly truth, and holy Spirit, and Ordinances, is the meat and drink of
the Saints: they cannot live without them: And the world and fleshly delights
are your food; you cannot be without it. Your food would be our poison; your
worldly cares, your drunkenness, and profaneness would be a torment to an
honest heart. They cannot live without some Communion with God in Faith and
Love by Prayer and ^editation: and your heart is against it. They have not the
same and as you have. Their work is all for Heaven, and yours is all
principally for earth. Their work and yours are contrary. They go one way, and
you another. So that its Impossible to be United and agree, till one side
change. And we cannot Possibly turn to you: God holds us fast by his Love and
Spirit, and will not let us go* nor suffer us ever to be willing to go. Do you
not read Christ ^elling you, that its impossible to deceive the Elect? that is,
so far as to turn them away from Christ. We are kept by the mighty power of God
through faith to salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. And who can break away from the
upholding arms of Almighty power? Christ has such hold of us that he is
resolved none shall take us out of his hands, Ioh. 10.28. So that we cannot
come over again to you.

But you may come over to us if you will. God calls you, and Christ would
welcome you, and the Holy Ghost would h^^p y^u: the door is set open by the
bl^od of Christ: the promise is ^o you and to your children, that you may and
shall have Christ and life if you will come in, and accept the offer. The Devil
cannot hinder you against your wills; he holds you but in the fetters of your
own wilfulness, by his mere deceits. Seeing therefore that you may come over to
the sanctified, and they cannot possibly come to you, let any reasonable man be
judge on what terms we should unite and agree.

2. Moreover if we Agree, it must be on terms of wisdom and honesty. A
dish^n^st Agreement is not to be desired, but abhorred. For you to l^ave your
ungodliness, and turn to the Love and Fear of God, is an honest cours^ of
Agreement; for it is but to have dishonesty it sel^ and become honest. I hope
none of you dare charge the way of God and godliness with any dishonesty: God
calls you to nothing but what is holy, and just, and good: and therefore
Honesty requires you to yield.

But for the s^nctified (...) unsanctified; for the (...) b^come ungodly, to be
one (...) you, this were the b^s^st dish^^^sty in the world. We know your way
to be of the Devil and (...) flesh; and is it honest then to join with you in
it? We have ^yed too long already in the d^^es o^ our ignorance, and have found
it dishonest and deceitful: and would you have us go against our own
experience? We were once in the way that you are in, and were forced to
renounce it, or else we had been undone body and soul for ever; and should we
^^ck up the vomit which we were forced to cast out? we were once Agreed with
you, and God constrained us to break that Agreement: and shall we renew it
again? Alas, your way has cost us dear; Many a bitter repenting day, and many
a sad thought, to the breaking of our hearts, and the very sense of Gods
displeasure; a taste of Hell was cast into our consciences; many a groan, and
^ear, and prayer it cost us, before we could recover the hurt that we c^t^ht in
the way of ungodlin^ss; and yet we have not fully recovered it to this day. And
would you have us stark mad to forget so soon our former sorrows, and turn to a
h^e that has cost us so (...) already? No, we have paid too dear for it, and
smarted too much for it, to go that way any more: It brought us to the very
brink of Hell; and if we had but dyed in that condition, we had been damned at
this hour; And would you be so unreasonable as to wish us to go back again? No;
by that time you know as much of an unsanctified state as we do, you will run
from it your selves as fast as you can run; as ^he Israelites did from the cry
of the company of Dathan and Abiram, lest the earth should swallow them up
also, Numb. 16.34.

We are cer^^in that the Lord whom we serve is the only God; and that he, and
none but he should rule us; and that we have grievously wronged him by
disobeying him so long. And yet would you have us again forsake him? If we
should lie in tears till we die, it were too little to satis^^e his Justice for
one of the sin^ we have already committed; and if it had not been for the
wonderful ^ave and suff^^ing of the son of God, we had been lost for ever: And
yet must we turn to this course again? God forbid. It was not so wise nor
honest a course. We our selves, says Paul, were sometime foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful and hating one another (you hear how he calls his former life) But
after that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by
works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he s^ved
us, by the washing of reg^neration and ren^wing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.3, 4,
5. And should Paul have turned a fool again, and be deceived and disobedient
again, to Ag^ee with the rest of the deceived world? O Sirs, we have seen that
which you have not seen, and tasted that which you never tasted. Had you seen
and tasted the Love of God in Christ, and the delightful hopes of eternal life,
and felt the comfort of his service, and the joys of the Holy Ghost, you would
never wish us to come back again to agree with you in sin, but you would abhor
your selves the very thoughts of your former folly. Why, you may better
persuade a man to repent that he was born, and ^o go into the womb again, (...)
persuade us to ^epent tha^ we are newborn, and return to our (...) sta^e of
death. Death is not so ^weet to us; ^or H^ll, ^or the w^a^^ or (...) so (...),
^or sin w^^h (...) ple^sure so (...) tha^ we should turn to them again for
^ea^e with you. If we have escaped them (...), and will not take that for a
warning, to come ^here no more, we dese^ve to pay for it.

Why Sirs, we have made a solemn Covenant with God, in the face of the
Congregation in our Baptism, and often renewed it in the Lo^ds Supper, and vowed
that we would be his, and absolutely and unreservedly his. And would you wish
us to break so solemn a Covenant? What honesty is in such persidiousness? We
have renounced the flesh, the world and the devil; and should we turn to them
aga^n for Peace with you? O what a cursed Peace were that! Let me tell you,
that we have not found God so ^ad a Master, as to forsake him for the sake of
you or any creature. We have tried him, and found him (...) to us then all ^he
wo^ld He has never given us cause to fors^^e him. And if we should now after
all ^he trials of his love, turn back to the way of sin and ungodliness, the
Devil himself would charge us with dishonesty. What! must the godly turn
drunkards, and worldlings, and hate^s of godliness to have Peace with you? Why
you may next persuade us even to turn Devils, that we may be reconciled to you.
The God that made us, has forbid us upon pain of his hot displeasure, to walk
in your ways. He says to every one of us, as to Jeremy, 15.19. [ Let them
return unto thee, but return not thou unto them.] And should we obey God or
men? Judge you whether. Why Sirs, are you so utterly unreasonable, as to wish
us or any man living to love you better then God, or to regard you more then
God, or obey you before God? Or should we be so much worse then mad, as to
yield to you if you did desire it? Why what are you in comparison with the
Almighty! O poor worms, that are even dying while you are speaking! that are
but as bubbles ready to burst, when you are swelled to the highest in ungodly
pride! That even while you are eating, and drinking, and making merry, are
passing on apace to weeping and gnashing of teeth, and everlasting woes and
lamentations! What should we regard such dust and dirt as you are before the
glorious God! It were far greater wisdom and honesty, for your children to set
up a dog or a toad, and say, This is more to be loved and honored then my
Father. If a Traitor against an earthly Prince deserve to be hanged drawn and
quartered; certainly that man that would forsake God and his Laws to please
such silly worms as you, did deserve to be hanged in the flames of Hell, and to
be tormented by infernal fiends, and ground to powder by the wrath of the
Almighty! Well! if you have eyes that can see, you may see now past doubt, that
we cannot turn to you that are ungodly, with any wisdom or honesty in the
world, nor without the highest madness and dishonesty. But can you say so of
your turning in to us? Is it contrary either to Wisdom or Honesty for you to
turn unfeignedly to God, and to become a sancti^ied godly people? Me thinks you
should not have such a thought in you^ hearts. And therefore if we be not all
of a mind, and go not all one way, it is most apparent that it is not long of
us, but of you.

3. If we do Unite and Agree, it must be upon terms of Safety. This much I hope
you cannot deny us. You would not sure wish us to Agree to our own destruction,
and to make a bargain with you that we may all join together in cutting our own
throats? Do you think that this were a wise combination? How much less should
we make an Agreement to go the certain way to Hell, and to join together in
damning our own souls for ever? Sirs, if you dislike the way of Holiness, do
but find out any other way that will safely bring a man to heaven, and we will
promise you to join in it. But unholiness will never do it. God has told us as
plain as can be spoken, that except a man be born again, and be converted, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Joh. 3.3.5. Mat. 18.3. an^ that
without h^liness no man s^ (...) the Lord, H^b. 12.14. and that the righteous
th^mselves are s^ ^reely s^rv^d, 1 Pet. 4.18. and that if any man be in Christ,
he is a new creature; old things are past away, and all things become new, 2
Cor. 5.17. and that if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, Romans 8.9. So that if God know who shall be saved, it is as certain as any
thing in the world, that no unsanctified man can be saved. If leaping into the
water be the way to drowning, or leaping into the fire be the way to burning,
or leaping down from the top of a st^^ple be the way to break your necks, as
sure is an unholy life the ^ay to everlasting torment. And would you wish us to
undo our s^lv^s everlastingly for your ^ri^ndship? What can you say to this now
If you say that your way is not so dangerous, it is bu^ our precise
uncharitable conc^it. We have showed you the word of God for it; and forty
times mo^e we could easily show you* And shall we believe you or such as you
before God? You are liars; but God cannot lie. You see not what is done in
another world; but God sees it. You know not what is in Heaven or Hell: but
God knows. And shall we not believe God that knows and disposes of all.
better then moles that never saw it. and ignorant souls that never knew it? God
says, that Fornicators, Adulterers, Drunkards, Covet^us persons, revilers, or
the like, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.10.11. and that they
that are in the flesh cannot please God; and that if you live after the flesh
ye shall (...) Romans 8.5.6, 7, 13. And would you have us believe you that there
is no danger in a fleshly life? Sirs, we desire heartily to be United and
Agreed with you; but we are loath to buy it so dear, as the loss of God and
heaven com^s to. We are willing of Concord with you; but we are loath to be
damned with you: And do you blame us for this? And, alas, if you should tell us
a thousand times that you hope there is no such danger, or that you hope to
escape as well as the godly, this is but poor security to us. Shall we be so ^ad
as to venture our selves on such words as these against the Word of the Ruler
of the world? What s^curity can you give us that we shall escape damnation if we
turn ungodly? Are you able to save us from the wrath of God? Will you undertake
to stand between us and his displeasure? What say you? if we will forsake an
holy life, and live as careless worldlings do, and neglect God and our souls,
and please the world and our flesh, w^ll you undertak^ ^o answer for us in
Judgm^nt? and will you (...) bear the punishment (...) should bear (...) you
(...) ^o save ^s ha^mless, (...) will you per^wade ^s to (...) do? Nay, ^f you
(...) it, he were a mad man (...) trust you, and (...) on (...) such under^^^^
(...) know you are not (...) ma^^th (...) how unable w^ll (...) your selves?
(...) an hour (...), when (...) Commission to car^y you^ (...) And shall we
trust (...) your ^oa^^^g words, when (...) kn^w you are (...) help your selves?
Let us see (...) what yo^ can do f^r our selves or us agai^^^ the prefer^ ^and
of God. (...) you keep off death, and (...) diseases, and live here in heal^h
and wealth for ever, whether God will or no? How comes it to pass th^n that
here is never a one of you near two hundred years of age? Let us see you chide
back approaching death, and raise the dead bodies from their graves, and heal
all the diseases that out off mankind: If you cannot do these smaller matters,
would you have us b^lieve that you can save^s from damnation? Why, Sirs, must
your ne^ghbours lie some of them in poverty, and some in pain, some sick of one
disease, and some of another, and you look on them and cannot cure them or
relieve them, and yet must we venture our souls upon your words! You cannot
make an old man young again, and can you make the word of God prove false, or
save those that God has said shall perish, and bring unsanctified men to
heaven whether God will or no? Well, Sirs, let them that hate their souls, ^r
care not whether they are ^aved ^r damned, forsake the Lord and an holy life,
and join with you, and see whether you can sa^e the^e But for my part I believe
the W^r^ of God, and upon th^s Word (...) I am resolved to build my hop^s* and
venture my soul and a^l (...) little that I have in this (...) Trust you on
what you please, (...) shall be my trust: And they (...) can find a surer
ground to (...) upon, let them take the^r course.

But I must tell you, that if you would wish us all to cast aw^y God, and
Christ, and heaven, to agree with you* you are mo^ite^^ and not men; and if you
are s^ cruel as to desire us to damn our souls for company, we must be so
careful of our selves as to abhor your motion, and rather to have the dearest
thing or person in the world, as they would draw us from Christ and everlasting
life, Luke 14.26.

You see than what it is that stands in our way, to hinder us from turning
back to you. But what dang^r would you be in if you should turn to us? Would it
hurt or hazard you to forsake your sensual ungodly lives? Is there any danger
in turning to God, and living an holy heavenly life? What is the danger?
Forsooth you may lose your estat^s or lives! A great matter indeed in
comparison of eternal life: And must you not lose them shortly whether you will
or not? And are they not in the power of God? and cannot he pr^s^rve them if he
please? and if it be good for them, he is liker to do it for his own, then for
his enemies! But indeed he has told you himself, that he that will save his
life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for his sake, shall find it,
even in life everlasting, Mat. 16.25. and 10.39. And yet as the world now goes
in England, through the mercy of God, your lives are in no danger. It is but
the scorn of ignorant miserable men that you must endure. And will you stick at
this, in the cause of God and your salvation? Nay indeed you are in most
dreadful danger every day and night, and hour, till you forsake your former
fleshly lives, and turn to Christ! You are all the while even within a step of
death and hell, till you are Converted and made an holy people; It is but one
stroke of death to put an end to your lives and hopes, and you are gone for
ever. So that you have nothing to lose, but an Heaven to gain, if you join with
the godly. There is no danger can come to to you by turning, unless it be the
loss of your sins; and that is a loss no more to be f^ared, then a man should
fear to lose the plague, or pox, or leprosy that has it.

Now I beseech you Sirs, as men of Conscience or of Reason, set both together,
and equally consider how the case stands between us. If we join with the
unholy, we run into Hell, and lose God, and Christ, and Grace, and Salvation
for evermore: But if you turn to the Godly, you get out of danger, and make the
gainfullest match that ever was made by mortal men; and you can lose nothing
but the sensual pleasures of sin, which are but exchanged for the joys of
Saints, as sickness is exchanged for health. And which now do you think in
reason is the fitter, that you turn to the godly, or they to you? Truly, if you
make so great a matter of leaving your sins, which are viler then your dung,
that you will rather break with God and us, you must give us leave to make so
great a matter of leaving Christ and h^s holy ways and people, that we will
much rath^r break with you and all the wicked in the world* and with o^^ carnal
selves, and that which is ^ost dear to them: And I think we have good reason
for it.

4. Moreover, th^s must be considered in our treaty, that if we agree, it is
fit that our dearest frien^ be taken into the Agreemen^ Should we cast off them
to agre^ with adversaries, and leave our ol^ friends in hope of new? But if we
come over to you, and turn unholy we shall never have Gods consent to the
Agreement, we must leave him out, and utterly lose him When, alas, we cannot
live, no^ move, nor breath without him* w^ cannot have our daily bread, or one
nights rest but by his gift. And such a friend is not to be lost for you. And
we shall lose the Lord Jesus and the Holy Ghost, a^^ ^he Communion of Saints,
are the peace of our own consciences. O what a peal would conscience ring us
night and day! It would open Hell to us: It would kindle the fire of Gods wrath
in our bosoms; and be scorching us as we lie down and as we ris^ up: And who
would endure such a life as this, for all the world? (...) like it is not t^us
with you: but that is because you know not what a case you are in, nor what a
dreadful thing ungodliness is; but we know it: And therefore what shift soever
you make to keep your consciences asleep, I know not how I should quiet mine,
if I were in your case, and kn^w but what I know of it.

But now if you will join with Christ and us, your true fri^nds w^ll be glad of
it: you should no^ lose one friend in the world by it, unles^ you take the
Devil and his servants for your friends, that would destroy you. Judge then
whether you should come to us, or we to you.

5. Moreover, this must be considered in our treaty, that if we agree with you,
we have some regard to our Honor. And what Honor is it to us to become the
servants of sin and the Devil, and be forsaken of God, and return to the
slavery that lately we were delivered from? A hangman is ten thousand times
more honorable then this.

But on the other side, if you will turn to Christ, you will come out of the
greatest shame, and obtain the greatest honors that you are capable of: You
will be the sons of God, and heirs of heaven, coheirs with Christ,
fellow-Citizens of the Saints, and of the household of God, John 1.12. Romans
8.17. Ephesians. 2.19. and be built up an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians.
2.22.

6. Moreover, this is most considerable in our treaty, that if we Agree, it
must be upon Universal terms that all will agree upon; or else it can be no
Universal Agreement. If a few should Agree with you, this would not make a
Unity in the world. We must have terms that are fit for all to Agree upon. And
in good sadness, would you have all the world be such as you? Tell me, you that
are covetous and proud, would you have all the world become proud and covetous
to Agree with you? Nay if they should, when they are likest you, they would not
Agree with you: ^or the Proud will envy the Proud, and their Pride will set
them together by the ears. And the covetous would be greedily snatching the
prey out of one another jaws and their mammon would be the matter of their
strife. Tell me also you that are drunkards or unclean, would you have all the
world become drunkards and unclean for Unity with you? You that are careless
about your souls, and p^ayerles^ in your families, and forget the matters of
eve^lasting life, would you have all the world set as light by God, and Christ,
and Heaven as you? Could the worst of you all have the face to make such a
motion as this? What! would you have all Holiness and heavenly-mindedness
banished out of the world, because you have banished it from your selves? Would
you have all men shut their Bibles as much as you, and instruct their children
and servants no more then you, and love God and serve him no more then you? Is
it possible that such an heart as this can be in the breast of the worst on
earth? What! would you have all the world be drunkards, or fornicators, or
haters of godliness, or at least unsanctified, because you are so! How quickly
then would earth turn Hell, and the flames of the wrath of God consume it? How
certainly then would God forsake the world, as a man would be gone from roads
and serpents? Can there be such cruelty in any but the Devils, as to wish all
the world to be damned with you for company, or to Agree with you on such
terms, that you may go hand in hand together to damnation! Or if you had such
Devilish hearts within you, as to desire such an Agreement as this, can you
think that all the godly would yield to it? No; let me tell you, not one of
them in all the world will yield to it. If you set ^o more by the Love of God,
be blood of Christ, the presence and comforts of the Holy Ghost, and the Hopes
of Glory, yet they do, and will do. If you will run into Hell, you shall never
get them thither with you for company.

But on the other side, there is nothing in the way of Holiness, but what is
fit for all men to Agree upon. I know All will not; and therefore we expect not
an Agreement with all. But that is their unhappiness. There is no fit means of
Agreement but this.

7. Lastly, this also must be considered in our treaty; that we Agree upon
terms that are like to hold, and not to be repented of hereafter. For what good
will it do to Agree today, and to break it or bewail it tomorrow? Why, alas
Sirs, we know as sure as we breath, that if we should Agree with you in
unholiness, we should quickly Repent it, either by Grace, or in Hellfire. Nay
we know that you will Repent of those unholy ways and hearts your selves,
either by Grace or Judgment. Nay there are even now some kind of purposes in
many of you to repent. I have heard abundance of ungodly men profess that they
hope to repent hereafter, and mend their lives, and leave their sins. And would
you wish us to come and join with you in a way that you hope to forsake your
selves, and in a way that you purpose hereafter to Repent of? I know as sure as
that the Sun will set, that every ungodly soul among you, will shortly change
their false opinions; and they that derid^d the servants of Christ, would wish
then they might but be door-keepers among them: You will wish and wish a
thousand times that you had done as they did, and lived as holily as the best
on earth: You will then wish, [ O that it were to do again! and that my life
were again to be lived; and God would but try me on earth once more.] Those
tongues that railed against Religion, will a thousand times more reproach your
selves for those reproaches, and the neglect of this Religion. You will then
cry out [ Where was my wit and reason, when I made so mad a change, as of God
for the creature, Christ for sin, and Heaven for Hell] Do you think Sirs, that
it were any wisdom for us to Agree with you now in that, for which you will
fall out with your selves for ever? and to go with you in that loose ungodly
way which you will wish your selves that you had never known?

Besides, we know that it is only the Saints that we must live with for ever;
and therefore you must become Saints, if you would be Unit^d to us here. What!
Should we be so careful to Agree with you a while, and be separated from you
eternally, or do worse by suffering with you! But if you will Unite with us in
Christ and Holiness, this will be a lasting Unity; which you will never have
occasion to repent of. The Union between the Lord Jesus and his members, shall
never be dissolved. Heartily join with his servants now in the ways of
Holiness, and you shall certainly join with them in the state of Happiness, and
in the joyful fruition and praises of the Lord.

Well Sirs, in this much of our treaty I have laid the case plain and open
before you, and showed you, that we cannot come over to you: It is not
Possible, nor Honest, nor Safe; we cannot forsake an holy life without
forsaking God, and our Redeemer, and our salvation, which no man that is a man
indeed, should desire us to do nor can we do it till we first forsake our
understandings: But o^ your side the case is o^herwi^e* You may turn to God and
an holy life, without any hurt or wrong to you at all* nay it is the only way
to your felicity, and if you do it not, you are undone for ever: So that the
case is past all controversy before you, that there is no way in the world to
Unity, but by Consent in Piety? If half the Commonwealth turn Rebels, and so
shall make a Division in the body, the way to Unite them is by the returning of
the Rebels to their Allegiance, and not for the true and lawful subjects to
turn all Rebels and join with them. For without the Head there cannot be a
Union. So that if the world be still divided and disagreed, it is not long of
the godly, but of the ungodly: And if you would have an Agreement, its you that
must yield, who cause the disagreement. You may do it, and must do it, or do
worse; but the godly may not yield to you.

What say you now, would you have Unity or Division? Would you have Peace or no
Peace? You complain that the world is of so many minds: Would you have them all
reconciled and of one mind? If you would, let us see it. The work sticks with
you; on your hands it lies, and it is you that must do it, if ever it be done.
If you would have all ungodly, you deserve not to live on the earth. Shall we
then without any more ado agree all upon a life of Holiness? O that our Towns
and Parishes would all join together in this Agreement! and it must be this or
none.

But perhaps some of you will say, What need you make so many words about a
matter that no bo^y does deny? We all kn^w we should ^e Holy and Godly, and
n^ne should be ung^^ly; who doubts of this? But the Question is, What Holin^ss
and Godliness is? Tell us therefore wh^t you me^n by it, ^n^ who those be that
you tak^ to be the Godly sanctified people?

Answ. If we are all agreed of the Necessity of Holiness, then those that are
not yet agreed to be Holy themselves, do sin against their own consciences, and
condemn themselves in the things which they allow, and wilfully divide
themselves from Christ and from his Church. And if any of you have been so long
Baptized into the Name of the Holy Ghost as your Sanctifier, and yet know not
what Sanctification is, and who are to be accounted sanctified and godly, you
show that you have perfidiously cast away and broak your Covenant with God; and
made but an ^ll use of your Baptism or any Means and Ordinances since. But if
you know not who are godly or ungodly, I shall quickly tell you.

A godly man is one that being formerly in a state of sin and misery, both
strange and backward to God, and heaven, and an holy life, and prone to
earthly, fles^ly pleasures, is now by the powerful w^rk of the Word and Spirit
of God, converted to unfeigned faith and repentance, broaken-hearted for his
former sin and misery, flying to Christ as the only Hope an^ Physician of his
soul, and so is made a new creature, having his heart set upon God and
everlasting life, and contemning all the pleasures of the flesh and the things
of this world in comparison of his hopes of Glory; hating all known sin, and
not wilfully living in any; and loving the highest degree of Holiness and
willing to use the means that God has appointed to destroy the remnants of
sin, and bring him nearer to perfection; This is a truly godly man.

And he that is not such, is ungodly. He that yet remains in his Natural
depraved state, and is unacquainted with this great and holy change, that has
any sin that he had rather keep then leave, and any that he wilfully lives in,
and wilfully neglects known duties, as one that had rather be free from them
then perform them, and had rather live a fleshly life, then a sp^ritual and an
holy life, and is more in love with the creature, then with God; with his life
on earth in flesh and sin, then a life in heaven wi^h God and his ^aints in
perfect holiness; this man is undoubtedly a wicked and ungodly man, how evilly
or religiously soever he may seem to live in the world. And so I have in a few
words told you, who they be that are godly, and who are the ungodly. The
Question now that we are treating about, is, whether we shall all agree
together to be godly? Do you not believe it to be best and necessary? If not,
you are blind: If you do, let us agree on it without delay. You tell us with
many great complaints of the many differences and divisions that are among us:
but shall we Agree so far as we are agreed? that is, shall we agree in heart
and practice, so far as we are agreed in opinion and profession? O that you
would make a solemn Covenant, that you will but Consent and go along with the
Godly so far as you confess you ought to do; and would but Unite with us in
faithfulness to the truths which you cannot deny. I think it will be best to
call you to the trial in some particulars.

1. I hope we are all Agreed that there is one only God that ma^e us, and
preserves us, and Redeemed us: and therefore that we are wholly his, and
should resign our selves and all that we have absolutely to him for his
service. He is not worthy the name of a man, that denies this: And shall we
a^l Agree now in the Practice of this much? Shall we wholly resign our selves
and all that we have to God? and labor to know what God would have us be and
do, and that let us resolve upon, whatever the flesh or the world say to the
contrary. Were but this much well resolved on, we were in a fair way to a full
agreement.

2. We are all Agreed in Opinion or Profession, that this God is our only
Happiness, and his favor is better then all the world, and that he is
infinitely Wise, and Good, and Powerful; and therefore that he must be Loved
above all things whatsoever, and must be most feared, and served, and trusted,
and depended on.

And shall we but Agree all in the Practice of this much? O that you would but
heartily consent and do it! Did we but join together in Loving God above all,
and fearing, and trusting, and serving him before all, we should quickly be of
one heart and soul, and in a very fair way to a perfect agre^ment.

3. We are all Agreed (that profess Christianity) that sin has made us
miserable, and brought us under the wrath and curse of God, and that the Lord
Jesus Christ having Redeemed us by his blood, is the only Physician and Remedy
for our souls, and having manifested such infinite Love in our Redemption, and
also purchased Dominion over us, we are strongly bound to Rejoice in his
salvation, and fly to him for Safety and rest upon him, and live in the
thankful admirations of his Love, and in careful Obedience to his gracious Laws.

And shall we all Agree in the Practice of this much? Will you fly to Christ
with broken bleeding hearts, for safety from sin, and wrath, and Hell, and set
more by him then by all the world? Will you study with all Saints to comprehend
his Love? Ephesians. 3.18, 19 and admire him and his mercies, and devote your selves
to him and be ruled by him? O that we were but all agreed in this much?

4. We are all agreed in Opinion or Profession, that the Holy Ghost is the
Sanctifier of Gods elect, or of all that shall be saved, and that except a man
be born again by the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and
that without holiness none shall see God; and that no man is the Son of God,
that has not in him the Spirit of his Son, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Ephesians. 4.5. Ioh.
3.5, 6. Heb. 12.14. Romans 8.9. Gal. 4.4.

Were we but all such now as we are agreed we must be, and would you but all
Consent to this Sanctification and newness of life, the great difference were
healed, and the work were done.

5. Moreover we are all Agreed, or seem to be so, that the holy Scripture is
the word of God, and of infallible truth, and therefore must be believed and
made the Rule of our Judgments and our lives.

Shall we all agree now in the practice of this? Will you appeal to the
Scripture! and shall it be our Rule? If the flesh persuade you to another
course, and murmur at the strictness of Gods Word; if custom be against it, and
the greater number be against it; if your profits, or pleasures, or worldly
honors be against it, and your former opinions and practice have been against
it, will you yet believe the Scripture before all, and be ruled by it above all
the world? You are agreed I hope that God is to be obeyed rather then men, or
then the flesh and the Devil? Will you resolve that (...) shall be so? O if the
Word of God might be the Rule, how quickly should we be agreed? For all the
Popish cavils at its difficulty, and men's diverse expositions, yet how soon
should we be agreed?

6. We are all agreed in Opinion or Profession, that there is a heaven for the
Sanctified, even an endless unconceivable Glory with God, in the seeing of his
face, and enjoying him in perfect Love and Joys; and that the seeking of this
everlasting Glory should be the main and principal business of our lives, which
all things must give place to. He that will deny this, can have no pretense to
call himself a Christian.

O that we might but all agree in the practicing of this! and that the
principal love and desire of our souls were set upon the Heavenly blessedness,
and the chiefest of our care and labor might be laid out for the obtaining of
it. Agree in this, and all will be agreed at last.

7. We are all Agreed in our profession, that there is an Hell, or state of
endless torments, where all the finally unsanctified and ungodly must be for
ever.

But why do we not agree in the diligent avoiding of such a dreadful misery,
and using our best endeavors to escape it?

8. We are all agreed in Profession, that the flesh is our enemy, and must be
mortified. But will you agree in the practice of this mortification? We are
agreed i^ Profession, that the world is our enemy and must be contemned* and
that it is a vain and worthless thing, compared with the Glory that is to come:
But yet m^n (...) not agree to renounce the world unfeignedly, and to be
stranger to it, and part with all rather th^^ with God and a good Conscience
but while men sp^ak contemptuously of the world, they seek (...) far more
eagerly then heaven. We are agreed that the Devil is our enemy, and yet men
will not forsa^^ his service.

9. We are all agreed in profession, that sin is a most hateful thing hated of
God, condemned by his Word, and the only cause of the damnation of souls: And
yet men love it, and live in it with delight Shall we agree all to deal with
sin as we speak of it? Will Magistrates, and Ministers, and people join
together, to banish it out of Town and Country? Particularly we are agreed I
hope, that whoredom, and wantonness, and gluttony, and drunkenness, and strife,
and envying, and lying, and deceit, and cursing, and swearing, and railing, and
backbiting, and speaking against an holy life, are all gro^s, hateful, damning
sins, which every Christian must abhor. But why do you not agree in the
hateing, and forsaking, and beating down of these sins? But Town and Country
swarmeth with them as a carkase does with maggots, or a stinking pond with
frogs and toads: So that Magistrates and Ministers, punishments and
persuasions, the Laws of the Land, and the Laws of God, can do but little to
rid the Country of them; but the same men that confess all these to be great
and grievous sins, will keep them and delight in them, as if it were in
despite of God and man, or as if they bore a deadly grudge to their own
immortal souls.

10. There is none of you that bears the face of a Christian, but must agree
with us in profession, that One thing is needful, and that we must seek first
the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and labor most for the food that
will not perish. Luke 10.41, 42. Matthew. 6, 33. John 6.27. and that God should
be loved with all our heart, and soul, and might, and that no man can love him
too much, nor serve him too carefully, nor be too diligent in the seeking of
his salvation. Why then will you not all agree to do thus? But the very same
tongues that confess all this, will yet speak against the service of God, and
call it Puritanism and preciseness, and say its more ado then needs: Why Sirs,
if you will say and unsay, there is no hold to be taken of your words, and
therefore what agreement can be with you? Will you confess that all should take
more care for their souls then for their bodies, and take more care for heaven
then earth, and yet will you not agree to do it, but rather speak against them
that do it, when you confess that it is b^st? Why, if you can agree no better
with your selves, how can you agree with us? If your own opinions and
profession be at such odds with your wills and practices, no wonder if you be
at odds with others.

More particularly, I hope you will all confess, that it is the duty of all
that can, to hear the Word of God, and frequently to read it, and labor to
understand it, and to meditate in it day and night; and for Parents daily to
teach it their children at home and abroad, lying down and rising up: Deuteronomy.
6.6, 7, 8. and 11.18, 19. Psalm 1.2, 3. and to pray in their families, and in
private, even always or frequently to pray, and not to wax faint, but in all
things to make known their requests to God, that all things might be sanctified
to them by the Word and Prayer. All this is plain in the Word of God, Dan.
6.10, 11. Luke 18.1. 1 These. 5.17. Psalm 55.17. 1 Timothy 4.5. Phil. 4.6.

But will you all agree with us in the practice of these things? Will all the
Families in Town and Country agree together to pray morning and evening
reverently to God, and to banish profaneness out of their doors, and to
instruct their children and servants in the fear of God, and spend the Lords
day in holy exercises, and help one another to pr^pare for death and judgment,
and exhort one another daily while it is called to day, lest any be hardened by
the deceitfulness of sin ^ Heb. 3.13.

To what purpose should I mention any more particulars, till we see whether you
will Unite and agree in these? All these are your own Professions. I know you
cannot deny any one of them; and yet we cannot persuade you to Consent with us
in the Practice of what: your selves profess: No, nor scarce to forbear the
open opposing of it: Either resolve now that you will all agree with us in
these things which you confess the Lord has made your duty, or else tell us
plainly that you are the deadly enemies of Unity and Peace, that we may take
you to be as you are, and troubl^ our selves no more ab^^^ you. If you are
res^lved against Agreement and Unity, tell us so, and save us the labor of any
further tr^aties with you. Talk no more childishly about our petty differences
in ceremonies and forms of Worship, about Bishops and Common Prayer Books, and
Holy Days, and such like, as long as you refuse Agreement in the main. There Is
a difference between you that is an hundred times greater then these; some of
you are for Heaven, and some for Earth; some of you live to the Spirit, and
some to the flesh; some of you are hearing, reading or meditating on the Word
of God, when others think it needless, and had rather have a pair of cards or
dice in their hands, some of you make Gods Law your Rule, and some are Ruled by
the world and the flesh; some are drunkards, gluttons, wan^ons, worldlings; and
some are sober, temperate, chaste and heavenly; some think almost any thing
enough in the Worship of God, and for the saving of their souls; and others
think the best they can do too little* and when they have done most, lament
that they do no more; some Families use daily prayer, reading, and holy
instructions; and others use daily swearing, railing, ribaldry, and pe^haps
deriding of holiness it self. In a word, some give up themselves to God and
Heaven, and others to the world, the flesh and the devil; some are converted
and become new creatures by the sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost; and others
are yet in the state of nature, and never knew a true conversion.

This is the great differ^nce of the world Sirs: Till this be healed, it is in
vain to talk of the healing of our pet^y differences. And therefore once more I
tell you, if you will not be Converted to an holy life, and Unite with us on
these terms, you are the enemies of Peace and Unity, and the great Incendaries
of the world.

AND now having proceeded thus far in the treaty with you, because I will
either bring you to Agreement, or leave you at least without excuse, I will
here annex some further Reasons to move you, if it may be to so happy a work.

1. Consider I pray you, that if you will not agree with us in the things that
you make profession of, and confess to be your duty, you are then treacherous
and false to God, and to your selves, and therefore not fit for any to make
Agreement with, till you change your minds. Do you know that God is best, and
yet will you not Love him better then the world? Do you know that Heaven is the
only happiness, and yet will you not seek it more then earth? Do you know that
an holy life is best, and yet will you be unholy? Do you know sin is the worst
and most dangerous thing in the world, and yet will you not let it go? Who will
trust such men as you, that will go against their own knowledge and
confessions? If you will be false to God, and false to your own souls, no
wonder if you be false to us.

2. Moreover all your pretended desires of Unity and Concord are base
hypocrisy, as long as you refuse to Unite with us in the way and state of
holiness: To take on you that you are troubled at the Divisions of the world,
and to wish that we were all of one Religion, and to talk against sects and
opinions as you do, is me^r self-condemning, and such gross dissembling as
exposes you to shame. What! would you have us think you are against Divisions,
when you divide from God, and Christ, and the Holy Ghost, from the Scripture,
from the holy Catholic Church, and from the Communion of Saints? Can you for
shame say that you are for Unity and Agre^ment, when you are dividing from us,
and will not agree with us, unless we will be as mad as you, and damn our souls
for company with you? To hear these ungodly men talk against sects and
divisions in the Church, is as if we heard a man that has the leprosy cry out
against those that have the itch, or a murderer child another for foul words.

3. And I must tell you while you remain ungodly, you are the great Heretics
and Separatists that trouble the Church of God, more then abundance of those
that you reproach. I excuse not the least; but none of them are like you: As
death is worse then sickness, as being that which all sickness tends to, and
the worst that it can do; so Ungodliness is worse then sects and particular
Errors or Heresies, it being the worst that any error can do, to make a man
ungodly. There are no such Separatists in the world as you. It is not only from
a particular Church or Ordinance that you separate, but as I said even now, you
separate from God that made you, from Christ that bought you, from the Spirit
that should sanctify you, from the Word of God that must Rule you or Condemn
you, from the body of Christ, and the holy Communion of his people. The Church
would have you join with them in holy worship; and your godly neighbors would
have you join with them in prayer and holy lives, and you will not, but
separate from them all. They cannot have your help against the sins of the time
and place you live in: They cannot have your company in the way to heaven; but
when they go one way, you go another way. You are the great troubl^rs of the
world, and break the Peace of Church and State, and of all that you have to do
with. You trouble Magistrates and make work for Lawyers; you trouble Ministers,
and frustrate their labors, and make their lives grievous to them, when it is
much in your hands to make them joyous. You trouble all the godly that are
about you; and you will find at last that you have most of all troubled your
own souls. For shame therefore before you speak any more against Sects and
Separatists, or any other troublers of the Church, give over the ungodly
separation which you continue in, and come in to the Unity of the Church your
selves, and live in that Communion of Saints which you say you do believe, and
do not go on to trouble the Church abundance more then those that you speak
against.

4. Consider also, Whether you have not as much reason to live a diligent holy
life, and seek God and your salvation with all your might, as any of your
neighbors have? and therefore whether your own Necessity does not call aloud
to you, to Unite with them and to do as they do? Your Godly neighbors are
meditating on the Word of God, when you are thinking of the world or on vanity:
they are discoursing of the life to come, when you are talking of your worldly
business, or pouring out a company of idle words. Ask your conferences now
whither you have not as much need to study the Scripture and prepare for the
life to come as they Your godly ne^ghbours are at prayer, when you are sinning
and drowned in the inordinate cares of the wo^ld, and have no heart to their
employment. Let conscience speak whether you have not as much need to pray as
they. They abhor sin and are afraid of it, when you boldly venture on it. Let
conscience tell you. Whether you have not as much cause to be afraid of sin as
they? Yea and an hundred times more; for you are under the guilt and power of
it. O wonderful madness of the ungodly world! that the example of the godly
should not bring them to some consideration. A man that is converted and
reconciled to God, and has a pardon of all his sins, and is in a state of
salvation, and walks humbly and uprightly with God; does yet think all too
little that he can do, but fasteth, and prays, and watches against
temptations, and humbl^th his flesh, and follows after God continually, and
lamenteth after all that he is so bad, and can do no more. And his neighbor
that lives by him, is an ignorant stupid sinner, unconverted, and under the
guilt of his sin, and under the curse and wrath of God, having no assurance of
salvation; nay it is certain that he would be cast into Hell the next hour if
he die in that condition; and yet this man feels not any such need of prayer,
and holy meditation, and conference, and so religious and str^ct a life. He
that has lost almost all the time of his life, and is not only quite
behind-hand in knowledge and abilities, but is an unsanctified miserable
wretch, not sure to be out of Hell an hour, this man perceives no such
necessity of an holy life, nor why he should make so much ado. As if a rich man
should be put to daily labor, and a man that has nothing should think it
needless: Or as if a man that has the tooth-ake or a slight disease, should
send to the Physician, and he that has the Plague should sit still and say,
What needs this trouble? Sirs, I beseech you look upon the holiest and most
heavenly neighbors you have, and bethink you whether you have not much more
need to be diligent then they? Have not you immortal souls to save or lose as
well as they? Are not you in danger of damnation as much and an hundred times
more then they? Should not God be your master as well as theirs? and his Law
your Rule as well as theirs? and Heaven be as dear to you as to them? Bethink
your selves when you hear them praying, or reading, or repeating Sermons, and
Sanctifying the Lords day, and fearing to offend, [ Have not I as much need to
do all this as any of them?] If then you have as much cause and need to live a
godly life as others, join with them in it, and let all the Town agree
together, and none withdraw but he that can say, I have no need of it.

5. And I pray you consider also, how easy it would make the way to heaven, if
we would but all Unite and Agree to go together in it. This is it that
discourageth the weak, and mak^s it so hard a matter to be saved, because there
are so few that are godly: but if one or two poor people be resolved to seek
first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and to please God and save
their souls, the rest do either look on and refuse to join with them, or else
speak against them and make them their ordinary scorn. And thus he that will be
saved, must not only go to heaven without the company of the most of his
neighbors, but must go through their opposition, and reproaches, and
discouragements: And (the Lord be merciful to the miserable world) most places
that one shall come into, are more agreed against holiness and salvation then
for it; and had rather that all the Parish would agree together against a godly
life (which is indeed against Christ, and heaven, and their own souls) then for
it. And some places are so miserable, that you may h^ar them thank God that
they have not one Puritan in their ^arish, or but few at most; meaning by
Puritans, men that seek heav^n above ear^h, and had rather leave their sins
then be damned And this d^s^ea^teneth many that have some mind to godliness, to
see almost all the Town and Parish against it.

But now if you had all but so much wit and grace, as to meet together and make
an Agreement, that you will All be a holy people to the Lord, and you will All
join together in a godly life, and you will All be the sworn professed enemies
of the way to Hell, and join together against your Ignorance, and Pride, and
Covetousness, and Drunkenness, and Swearing, and Railing, and all Profaneness
and Iniquity; and if you would All agree together, to set up prayer, and
reading, and holy exercises in every house in Town and Parish, and that you
will all redeem the time for your souls, especially that you will wholly spend
the Lords day in the necessary delightful work of God; then what abundance of
your difficulties would be removed? and how easy and pleasant would the way to
heaven be! Then there would be none to discourage poor ignorant souls, by
deriding at a godly life; nor none to entice them to wicked courses, nor none
to tempt them by their ill examples; and the number of the godly would
encourage men, as the fewness of them now discourageth. Th^s troubles men in
the^r passage to Heaven, when we are ill-yoaked together, and one draws
backward as the other draws forward: and if the husband be for God, the wife is
for the world; or if the wife be for Heaven, the husband will needs go the way
to Hell and if one neighbor be godly, the two, if not ten or twenty next him
will be ungodly: And as the Israelites spies, they raise up false reports of
the Land, of the state of godliness, and of the persons themselves, to
discourage others: whereas if you would all agree together, you might march on
comfortably without all this ado.

O how sweet and pleasant a life is it to see brethren dwell together in such
an holy Unity as this? Psalm. 133.1. Happy are they that dwell in such Towns and
Parishes as these! if there be any such in the world: Where neighbors go all
hand in hand together toward heaven; and take sweet counsel together; and go
to the house of God in company; and when others meet in Alehouses, and about
fooleries and profaneness, they will meet together to talk of their meeting in
the presence of God, and the joy and praises of the Living God, and the
Communion with Christ, and with Angels, and with one another, which we shall
then possess: when they will pray together, and comfort one another with such
words, 1 These. 4.18. And when others are talking idly or of the world, they
will be admonishing and exhorting one another, and speaking words that are
edifying to the hearers, Col. 3.16. Ephesians. 4.29. and opening their cases and
experiences to each other, and fai^hfully watching over one another, agreeing
to tell one another plainly and lovingly of their sins, and to take it
thankfully of those that do so, and endeavor presently to amend! What a sweet
and blessed life were this, if all our Towns and Parishes would agree in it!
Who would not rather live with bread and water in such a Town as this, then be
a Lord or Prince among the ungodly! Well Sirs, it is much in your hands now to
make your own and your neighbors lives thus sweet and comfortable, and to make
the way to heaven thus easy: Why then will you not Agree and do it?

6. Moreover such an Holy Unity and Concord would be the highest honor to your
Towns and Countries, that in this world they can possibly receive. It is the
highest glory of the Kingdoms of the world, to become the Kingdoms of the Lord
and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. You think it a great honor for your Towns to be
rich and have fair buildings, and to have worldly privileges: bu^, alas, these
are bawbles in c^mparison of the other! O if it were but the Happiness of this
Town and Parish to be brought to such an Holy Agreement as I mentioned, that
you would all joy^ together in a godly life, and every Family Agree to worship
God with holy reverence, and all set together against p^ofa^eness and all known
sin, what an honor would it be to you of this place? How would your fame go
through all the Land! All Countries would ring of Ked^rminster, what a victory
Christ had gotten there, and what an overthrow the Devil and sin had there
received! and what a blessed place and people it is, where they are All agreed
to be Holy and to be saved, and are all like the ancient Primitive Believers,
that were of one heart and one soul, Acts 4.32. O how the world would ring of
such a Town where there is not one family that is ungodly, that serves the
Devil by worldliness, swearing, drunkenness, or any ungodly course: but all are
United in Christ and Holiness, and are like to live together in Heaven! Truly
neighbors, this would be a greater honor to you, and to the Town, then if you
were every man a Lord or Prince! In the eyes of God and all wise men, it would
be the greatest honor in the world. And O what an excellent example would it
be to all the Towns and Parishes in the Land! When they see your holy Unity and
Peace, or hear of a place that is so happily agreed, it may shame them out of
their ungodliness, and kindle in them a strong desire to be like you, and agree
together as you have done. O that you would but give them such an example, and
try the issue!

7. And I desire every one singly to consider, that it is the unspeakable mercy
of God, that he calls you to this holy Union with Christ, and Communion of
Saints; and that he does not thrust you away, and forbid you coming near, but
will give you leave to be of the holy Society, fellow-Citizens with the Saints,
and of the household of God. God has made his promise and offer so large, that
you may have part in it as well as others, if you will not wilfully shut out
your selves. The feast is prepared; all things are ready, and you are every man
and woman invit^d! Christ has opened to you a door of admittance and access to
God. And will you now re^use and undo your selves. The sanct^fied are Gods
Jewels, Mal. 3.17 his treasure and pecul^ar people: the beloved of his soul,
and his delight: and the only people in the world that shall be saved. This is
true; for God has spoken it: And you may be of this blessed number if you
will. God has not separated you from them or shut you out by forbidding you to
come among them. O do not you separate and shut out your selves. You see your
godly ne^g^bours in possession of this privilege: And may not you have it if
you will? May not you study the W^rd of God, and call upon him in prayer, and
se^ your selves for heaven as well as they? Where does the ^cripture command
them to it, any more then you? or forb^d y^u any more then them? The door ^s
open, you may come in if you will. You have the same means, and call, and
offer, and (...)* and leave to (...) life as they. And w^ll you (...) much of
thediff^ren^^ y^^rselves, as to be the only r^^users? God has done so much for
you by the de^^h of Christ, and so order^d the matter in the promises and
offers of the Gospel, that none of you shall be able to say at ^^st, [ I would
^uin have been (...) the bl^ssed (...), an^ ^ain h^v^ liv^d in the Vni^n and
Communi^^ of Saints, but I (...) not give (...); and Christ and his Church
w^ul^ not r^ceiv^ ^e and entert^in me.] Not a man ^r woman of you shall have
this excuse. And th^refor^ come in and join with the Saints; and thank God that
you may.

8. And consider also, that if you will not Agree with us in matter of
Holiness, we can never well make up the rest of our differences: Our smaller
Controversies will never be well agreed, if you will not agree in the main. But
if this were Agreed, we should in season certainly heal the rest. It would make
a man's heart ache, to h^ar wretched sinners talk of our differences about
Bishops, and Ceremonies, and Common Prayer, and Holy Days, and Infant Baptism,
and the like, that are dead in their sins, and are yet disagreed from us in the
very bent of heart and life. Alas Sirs, you have other matters then these first
to talk of, and trouble your selves with. A man that is ready to die of a
Consumption, should not be taking care to cure the warts or freckles in his
face. We have greater matters wherein we differ from you, then kneeling at the
Sacrament, or observation of days, or other Ceremonies, or doubtful opinions
in matters of doctrine. Let us first be Agreed all to serve One Master, and
seek One End, and be Ruled by One Law, and hate known sin, and live a holy
life, and then we shall be ready to treat with you about a further Agreement.
But to talk of small matters, when we differ in the greatest matters in the
world, as much as your souls are worth, and in matters which Heaven or Hell
lies on; this is but childish trifling, and whatever we may do for the Peace
of the Church with such, yet to your selves that will be small advantage.

Nay I must tell you, that it is usually but the cunning of the Devil and the
hypocrisy of your own hearts, that makes you turn your talk to these
controversies, when the great breach is unhealed between Christ and you. Its
commonly made a shift to delude and quiet a debauched conscience. Our poor
people will not by any persuasion be drawn to an holy heavenly life, but live
in worldliness, and fleshliness, ^n swearing and drunkenness, and lying and
deceit, and filthiness and pro^an^ness, and hate the Minister or Christian that
does reprove them; and then forsooth they talk of Common Prayer Bo^k, and
Holy Days, and Bishops, and kn^eling at the Sacrament, to mak^ others, and
perhaps their deluded hearts believe, that this is the controversy and
diff^rence. And so a wretched drunka^d or worldling peswades himself that he is
a R^ligious man, as if the difference between him and he godly were but about
these Ceremonies or Church-Orders: When alas we differ in greater matter^, as
light and darkness, life and death, yea next to the difference between Heaven
and Hell.

And I must tell you, that you do but wrong the party or cause that you pretend
to, when you will ^eeds engage your selves among them. What has done more to
the dishonor of the Bishops, and Common Prayer Book, and other late Orders and
Ceremonies of the Church, then to see and hear the rabble of drunkards,
swearers, scorners at holiness, and such like, to pl^ad for them, and be
violent defenders of them? If you would devise how to shame these things, and
bring them down, you can scarce contrive a more effectual wa^, th^n ^o set all
the ungodly scandalous wretches to cry them up, and become the^r Patrons: For
it w^ll make abund^nce of soberer people begin to question whether it be li^ely
to be good, that has such Defenders on one side, and Adversaries on the other
side.

And therefore Sirs, let us begin our closure and agreement in the main, if you
would be ever the better for it, and have Unity indeed. And if you say, [ What
the ne^rer shall we be for Agreement in the other things? Do not the Godly
still differ about Church Government, and Orders, and Ceremonies?] I answer, 1.
If we never should be Agreed in these on earth, we might bear it the more
quietly, because our very hearts and souls are United in the main, even in
matters abundance greater; and in all that salvation is laid upon; and
therefore we have this comfort in the midst of our differences, that we shall
all shortly come to Heaven, and that perfection and blessed face of God will
Unite and perfectly agree us in all things.

2 In the m^an time, we could hold a holy Communion with them in the substance
of Gods Worship; and we have a daily Communion with them in the Spirit, and and
an endeared Love to one another,

3. And the Holiness of their natures will incline them to manage our
remaining differences with meekness, humility, self-denial, moderation* and
with great r^spect to the safety of the whole Church, and the honor of God and
of the Gospel.

4. And yet I must add, that with such there is a far greater advantage to h^al
the smallest difference that remains, then with any other. When we have one God
to aw^ us, and one Heaven to draw us, and one Christ for our Head, and one
Spirit and new nature to princip^e us and dispose us, and one Law to Rule us,
and have all one ultima^e End and Interest* he^e is a gre^^ advantage for
healing of any particular differences that may arise. If the liv^r, or spl^^n,
or stomach, or brain, or lungs be unsound, the sores that are without will
hardly be cured; yea if there were none, these inward diseases may breed them:
but when all is well within, the strength of nature without a medicine will do
much to cure such small distempers that arise without. The life of ^aith, the
love of God, the love of Brethren, and the Churches peace and welfare, with the
humility and self-d^nyal that is in every Christian, will do a great deal to
the healing of divisions among the Godly. They will be content to meet together
in Love, and pray it out, and refer the matter to the holy Scripture, and they
have all some special illumination of the Spirit.

But perhaps you will say, [ Why are they not then more fully agreed?] I
answer, 1. Because there are such a multitude of ungodly persons among them,
that hinder them from opportunities and advantages for agreement. And many of
these ungodly ones are hypocrites, that take on them to be godly, and so are
traitors in our bosoms, and hinder peace the more by seeming to be godly when
they are not. 2. Because of the remnant of sin that is yet in the sanctified,
and because they are not yet perfect, and in Heaven. If they had no sin, they
would have no divisions: And as their sin is healed as to the dominion of it,
but not perfectly till they come to heaven; so their divisions are healed in
the main, but not perfectly till they are perfectly United to God in Glory.

9. Consider also I beseech you, what a joy it would be to Christ, and to the
Angels of heaven, and to all good men, if you would but all make such an
Agreement, and heartily join together in Holiness! The whole 15. Chapter of
Luk^ ^s by diverse Parables to tell you this, what Joy there is in heaven it
self for the convers^on of one sinner* O what would there be then, if Towns and
Countries would agree in Holiness! And I am certain it should be a Joy to the
Princes and Rulers of the ear^h; for such a Unity only will ^old, and be a
blessing to their Dominions. Plutarch makes it Ag^sil^us his reason why the
Spartans had no Walls, because the people being (...) of one mind, had no need
or Walls. And Pliny tells us of a stone that will swim if it be whole, and sink
if it be broken. And so will Commonwealths that are broken from Christ, and
void of the cement of the Spirit that should ^nite them.

And to the Ministers of the Gospel, and all good Christian^, such an Unity as
this would be an unspeakable joy. Somewhat I know of other men's hearts by mine
own. Could I but prevail with this Nation, yea with this one Town and Parish,
to meet all together and hear^ily Consent, Agree and Resolve to join all
together in an heavenly life, I should more rejoice in it, then if I had the
house full of gold and silver, yea (as to mine own interest) then if I were
Lord of all the world. O what a joyful day were this, if I could this d^y bring
you to this Holy Unity and Agreement? How comfortably should I spend the few
remaining days of my pilgrimage among you, if you would but all be brought to
this? Whereas I may now say as David, Psalm 120.5. for all the godly that are
among you, [ Woe is me that I s^journ in Mesech, that I dwell in the T^nt^ of
Kedar! My soul ^ath too long dwelt with him that hates* this holy) peace, I am
for peace, but when I speak (and persuade men to it) they are for war, and
continuance in the dividing course (...) ungodliness Alas it grieveth us to see
such divisions in all the Churches and Nations of the Christian world: and O
that we did know how to heal them! But when we cannot heal the most ungodly
separations and divisions of one Town and Parish, it discourageth us from
hoping for any great matters of such large extent. Some attempts I have made,
and more I would fain make, to further a Union and Peace among the Church^s
through the Land: But when I cannot procure the Unity of this one Town and
Parish, what hope can I have to look any further? ^l^s what a shame is this to
you, and what a grief to us, that we cannot bring one Parish, one Village that
ever I knew of, in all England, to be all of a mind in thos^ great, those
weighty, needful things, where it is worse th^n a madness for men to b^
unresolved or dis^greed? As Melanthus made a je^t of a great man that went
about to reconcile all Greece, and bring all the Princes and St^tes to Pe^ce,
when he could not bring h^s wi^e and her servant-maid to agreement in his own
house. So with what hopes can we attempt any public peace, when we cannot
bring one Parish, one Village, y^a but very few ^amilies, to agree in that
which they must agree in, or else the refusers will be certainly condemned! I
beseech you ^irs make glad the (...) of your Teachers and of all good m^n, by
your Agreement. You owe us this Comfort: and you owe it to Christ, and the
Angels of heaven: deny us not our due, but without any more delay Agree
together to live as Saints. What a Joy it would be to your Pastors, you are not
easily able to believe. When Gregory Thaumatu^gus came first to be Bishop of
Neoc^sarea, he found but seventeen Chr^stians in the City; And when he lay on
his deathbed, he desired them to make enquiry how many Infidels were
unconverted; and they found but just s^venteen Infidels left, and all the rest
were converted to Christianity: And though he rejoiced that he left but just as
many unconverted Infidels as he found converted Christians, yet he grieved
withal, that he should leave those seventeen in the power of the Devil. When I
came to you, I found you all Professed Christians; But Oh that I could say that
I shall leave but seventeen unconverted when I am called from you, for all
that! O that there were no more that are Infidels or Impious under the name of
Christians! But I and you are unworthy of so great a mercy.

10. And I pray you consider this in time, that all of you that now refuse this
Agreement in Holiness, will wish ere long that you had heartily embraced it,
and joined with the godly, and done as they. And why will you not be of the
mind that you will be shortly of? And why will you be of that way and company,
that you will wish at last you had not been of? The Prodigal in Luke 15. did
think it a slavery to be kept up so strictly by his Fathers eye; he must have
his portion in his own possession, and abroad he must be gone* but when smart
had taught him another lesson, and misery had b^ought him to himself, then he
is glad to be an hired servant, and casts himself at his Fathers feet in the
confession of his unworthiness to be called a son. God grant that th^s may
prove your case. But let me tell it you for a certain truth, the^e is not one
of you that now, (...) t^ become so (...), and join your selves in the ways of
God, but ^he time is a hand when (...) Grace or Hell shall make you ^i^h and
wish ^gain, tha^ you might have but ^he poore^^ lowest place in (...) which you
so desp^sed (...) what I say to you, Sirs, in the name of God. If the Lo^d of
Heaven do not shortly make the dullest heart, the greatest dender of godl^ness
among you, that hears these words, to wish and wish an hundred times, that he
had lived as holy an^ heavenly a life as the strictest of those that he
fo^merly derided, ^hen call me a false Prophet for ever, and spare not. When
you feel the misery of unholy souls, and see the happines^ of the Saints above
you, then O that you had been but such as they, and lived as they, whatever it
cost you! And as Bala^m you will shortly say, O that I might ill the death of
the righteous, and that my last and may b^ as his! Numb. 23.10. There is never
a one of you all but would fain be among the Saints at Judgment, and receive
their Sentence and reward; and therefore its best for you join with them now*
or it will be too la^e to wish i^ then.

11. If all this will not serve the turn, but you will needs stand off, and
separate your selves from the servants of Christ, be it known to you, you shall
ere long have separation enough, and be further from them then your hearts can
wish. As you would not be United to them, and join with them in Holines^, so
you shall not be partakers with them of their Happiness. One Heaven will not
hold you both; and there is but One to hold you: and therefore an everlasting
separation shall be made: Between them and you will a great gulf be set, so
that they that would pass from you to them shall never be able, Luke 16.26.
When they stand on the right hand, you shall be set upon the left: and when
they hear [ Come ye blessed] you shall hear [ Go ye cursed] and when they go
aw^y into lif^ etern^l, you shall go ^way into ev^rlasting punishment, Mat.
25.31, 32, 41, 46. Then you shall see that [ the man is blessed that walks
not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, n^r
sits in the seat of the scornful; but his delight is in the Law of the Lord,
and in his Law does he me^itate day and night -- The ungodly ar^ (...) so; but
are like the chaff which the wind drives away: therefore the ungodly shall not
stand in the Judgment, nor sinners in the Congr^gation of the righteous: For
the Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the Way ^f the ungodly shall
perish, Psalm 1.] Then you will say to them that now you differ from [ Give us
of your oil, for our Lamps ^re gone out.] Oh that we had part in your holiness
and your hopes! but they will answer you [ Not so, lest there be not enough for
us and you.] We have little enough for our selves, you should have done as we
did: but then it will be too late, Mat. 25.8, 9, 10. It will then make the
proudest heart to shake, to hear, Depart from me, all ye that are workers of
iniquity, I never knew you, Matthew. 7.23. You departed from me, and would not
live in the Communion of Saints, and now Christ himself of whom you boasted,
and in whom you trusted, will not know you, but cause you to depart much
further then you desired, both from his ^aints and him. These are the true
revelations of God, which may be laughed at and sl^ghted now, but will certainly
be made good on all that are not now United to Christ and his Church.

12. And let me tell you, to consummate your m^se^y, when that day of
everlasting separation comes, those servants of Christ wh^m you refused to join
with in an holy life, will be so i^ any witnesses against you to your
condemnation: As Christ tells you, Mat. 25. he will say [ In as much as you
(...) to one of th^s^, you (...) it not me] ^o in as much as you r^fused the
Communion of Saints, and pe^haps derided them, you refu^ed Commun^on (...)
Christ h^mself and derided him. Then ^hey (...) test^fie (...) you, [ We were
willing to h^v^ had his company in the way ^f holiness, but he refused it.] And
when you see them set so far above you, then your own consciences will say, [
We might have been of this bl^ss^d Society, and would not: we might have done
as they, and now sp^^l as they; we were often entreat^d (...) by our Teachers*
and full glad would the godly h^ve been of our comp^^y in an holy life; but we
^estinately refused all! Wr^t he^th^^ we are* we refused all! W^ th^^ght i^
re^^l^ss; our h^arts w^r^ ^g^inst it, we pr^ferr^d (...), an^ pr^fits, and
cre^it, (...) ^f the worl^ b^f^re it an^ (...) ^ustly do w^ p^rish in ^ur (...)
lie in yo^der ^urnin^ (...)* and be separated as far as H^^l is ^^om H^^ven,
from th^se that we wilfully ^epar^t^^ from on ^arth.]

^eloved hearers, I were not a Believer, if I did not foresee this d^e^d^ul
day: and I were not a man, if I did not desire that you might escape this
misery; and therefore I could do no less then warn you, as you love your
selves, and would not be separated from them for ever, that you would presently
be United to the Godly, and live in the true Communion of the Saints, and
withdraw your selves from the ways of the ungodly, lest you be found among
them, and perish with them. I have done my part in telling you the truth, and
now must leave the success to God.

Use ult.
BUT I must conclude with a word of advice to the Godly: I have made a very
large ambitious motion, for the conversion of all at once: But alas, it is far
from my expectation that it should prevail. I am not so unacquainted with the
power of sin, and the subtilty of the Devil, and the wilfulness of blind
unsanctified men, and the ordinary course of Providence in this work, as to
cherish any hopes that All the Town and Parish should Consent. If many or any
more do, I shall be glad. But plurima quaeras, ut pauca feras: An high motion
when reasonable, may be serviceable to lower hopes. By what I have here said,
you may see how little hope there is that ever the Church should have any such
Peace on earth as we desire. If unho^iness be the hinderance, and the greatest
part of the world are so unholy, and so our Unity is like to rise no higher
then our Piety, you may see then how much Unity to look for.

But for your own parts, be sure among your selves to maintain the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace. Love the Brotherhood, even Saints as Saints. And
because you are not the searchers of the heart, proceed according to the Word
of God. Let all that Profess themselves a sanctified people, and live so as
that you cannot certainly disprove their profession, be used as Saints by you,
and leave the infallible judgment to God. It is only ^eal Saints that have the
internal special Unity of the Spirit, and saving Communion; but its Professors
of Faith and Holiness tha^ must have external Communion wi^h us in Ordinances,
as they have a visible Union of Profession with the Church. But if they profess
not Holiness, they ought not to have any Christian Communion at all.

O Christians, keep close to Christ the Cente^ of your Unity, and the
Scripture, which is the Rule of it, and cherish the spirit which is the vital
cause; walk evenly and uprightly in a dark generation, and give no offense to
those without, nor to the Church of God. Know them that are over you in the
Lord, and be at Peace among your selves, and the God of Peace shall be with
you, 1 These. 5.12. Phil, 4.8.9.

Object. But may not a Profession of the same Faith procure a sufficient Unity
among us, though all be not Saints, and savingly regenerate? Let us first be of
one Religion, and then we may come to be sincere in the Practice of that
Religion by Degrees.

Answ. 1. For the Churches sake, we are thankful to God, when we see a common
concord in Profession, though most are false in and to the Religion which they
profess. Many ways God does good to his Church by unfound Professors.

1. Their Professing the same Faith does somewhat tie their hands from
persecuting it. And of the two, we can better bear Hypocrites then Persecutors.

2. And it somewhat tyeth their tongues from reproaching the Faith, and arguing
against it, and seducing others from it. And of the two, it would be more
hurtful to the Church to have these men open enemies to the truth, and bend
their wits and tongues against it, and to have the multitude assaulting their
neighbors with invectives and cavils against Religion, then to have them
falsely pretend to be Religious.

3. And it is a great mercy to the Church, hereby to have the benefit of these
men's common parts and interests. When they profess the same Religion with us,
though unsoundly, yet it engages them to stand for the Religion which they
profess; and their illumination and conviction may lead them to do much service
for the truth. By this means many hands are at work to build up the Church of
Christ. And by this means the lives of many faithful Christians are preserved
and their estates much spared. Many have skill in building, that are not true
heirs of the house which they build. Many have excellent gifts for preaching
and expounding Scripture, by which the Church may be edified, and the Truth
defended against the adversaries, when yet the same men may themselves be
destitute of the Power of this truth. The Church has great cause to be
thankful to God for the gifts of many an unsanctified man: Had the Church been
denied the Min^stry and Gifts of all m^n except Saints, it would have been
confined to a narrower room, and many a soul might have be^n unconv^rted, that
have been called by the Ministry of unsanctified men. By some such did God work
Miracles themselves for the confirmation of the Christian Faith. And in times
of war, if the Church had none but Saints to fight for them, it could not stand
without a continued Miracle. And if we had not the daily help of others in
civil and secular affairs, we should find by the miss of it, what a mercy we
undervalued. Were every unregenerate man an open enemy to the Church, we should
live as Patridges and such other birds, that must hide themselves from every
Passenger.

4. Moreover, this Profession of Hypocrites does much restrain them from many a
sin, by which God would be much dishonored, and the Church more wronged, and
the godly more grieved, and the open enemies more encouraged.

5. And also it is some honor to the Gospel in the eyes of men, to have a
multitude of Professors. Should Christ's visible Church be as narrow as the
mystical, and should none be Professors of the Faith, but those few that are
sanctified Believers, the paucity of Christians, and narrowness of the Church,
would be a dishonor to Christ in the eyes of the world, and would hinder the
Conversion of many a soul.

All this I have said, that you may see that we do not despise a Unity in
Profession: and that we are not of those that would have all hypocrites and
common professors shut out: Yea that we take our selves bound to be very
thankful to God for the mercy, which he vouchsafes us by the gifts, and
favor, and help, and interest of many such Professors. And such a Unity of
Profession we shall endeavor to our power heartily to promote, as knowing that
the Church as visible consists of such professors.

2. But yet for all this, I must come closer to your objection, and tell you,
that this Unity of mere Profession is comparatively so poor a kind of Unity,
that this will not, this must not satisfy us and serve the turn, which I
desire you to observe in these discoveries.

1. This Unity in mere Profession is properly no Christian Unity, because you
are not properly Christians. If this be all, it is but in the bark and shell
that we are agreed: It is but a seeming agreement, from the teeth outward: but
not an hearty agreement to be Christians. What! shall we all agree to say we
are Christians? when with most it is not so: For all this Agreement, you will
still have one Father, and we another. You will not be United with us in Christ
the Head: you will not have the same Holy Spirit, who is the Life of the New
creature: You will be contrary to us in Nature or Disposition. You will not
have the same Intention and Ultimate End with us, but you will a^m at one
thing, and we at another: You will not go the same way, nor walk by the same
Rule and Law as we: It will be but a tying ^og^ther the Living and the Dead.
Bell^r^ine himself confesses that the ungodly are but dead members. It is not
life that Uniteth a dead member to the living. You will b^ stil^ either openly
or secretly betraying the Body to which you profess your selves United, and
taking part with its deadly enemies, the flesh, the world and the Devil! Your
very Hearts and ours will still be contrary: You will love the sin that we hate
and set our selves against; and you will dis-relish that Holy Heavenly life,
which must be our business and delight. Your Affections will go one way, and
ours another. You will Live by sense, when we must live by faith; and you will
be laying up a treasure on earth, when we are laying up a treasure in heaven:
You will be asking counsel of flesh and blood, when we must advise with God and
his holy Word. You will look first to your bodies, when we must look first and
principally to our souls. It will be your business to feed those sins, which it
is our daily work to kill. You will make and apprehend it to be your Interest
to go contrary to us: And what Agreement can there be, where there are contrary
Interests? Under all your outward Profession, you will still retain a secret
enmity and hatred to the life of holiness: and will not have that hearty Love
to the Saints, as beseems all those that are members of Christ, and of the holy
Catholic Church. So that when you have Communion with the Saints, it will be
but an external and superficial communion in some common things; but you will
have no Communion with them in the same Head, and Spirit, and Promise, and Holy
Nature, and saving Benefits of the Gospel. And shall this be called Unity, that
leaves you at so sad a distance as this? This is but such a Union as a wooden
leg has to the body; or as the vessels of honor and dishonor have by being
in the same house together. In their highest Professions, the Lord himself
says of unsanctified Professors, that they are none of Christ's, Romans 8.9. and
that they cannot be his Disciples, Luke 14.33. that they are not Israel, though
of Israel, nor are they children of God, nor the seed of promise, Romans 9.6, 7,
8. and when they plead their highest Privileges, at last, Christ will tell
them that he knows them not, Mat. 7.23. and 25.12. Psalm 1.5, 6. And if in
mercy to the Church God cause the Lion and the Lambs to lie down together, yet
will he not therefore mistake the Lion for a Lamb. So that you see what a poor
kind of Unity, and next to none it is that mere profession makes. And
therefore this will not serve our turn.

2. Moreover, if we have no other Unity, we are unlike to live in Peace
together. Though it be our duty to endeavor to have peace with all men, yet we
can have but little hope of it. As long as there is so much difference and
contrariety as I have mentioned; and as long as there is a secret enmity at the
heart, it will be working into dissension, if God for the sake of his Church
restrain it not. The godly will be crossing your carnal Interest, and hindering
you in the sinful ways of your commodity, pleasure or vainglory! They will be
calling you to self-denial, which you cannot endure: and putting you upon
duties of Holiness, Righteousness and Mercy, which your sinful flesh will
utterly refuse. If you are scandalous, you will be called to Confession,
Repentance, and Reformation, or by Church Censures be cut off from them to your
shame: And the Magistrate also must trouble you by the penalties of the Law.
The very examples of a strict and holy living, which are given you by the
godly, will displease you, because they are so unlike to your lives, and
therefore witness against your negligence and ungodliness. So that it is not
possible that we should avoid offending you; for our very obedience to God will
offend you, and our studying and following the Holy Scripture will offend you,
and our diligent labor to save our souls will offend you; and our hateing and
avoiding the Poison of sin will offend you. And how then should we live in
Peace with such? If you yoke a swine and a sheep together, one will be drawing
to the wash-tub, when the other would be at grass: and one will be drawing to
lie down in the mire, when the other would lie clean: one will be rooting in
the earth, and eating dung, which the others nature is against. It is Christ,
before me, that calls the wicked by the name of swine, and the godly sheep:
And if you will come no nearer us then this, we are like to have but poor
Agreement.

And as our ways will displease you, so your galled malicious hearts will
manifest the offense, and will be girding, and maligning, if not slandering,
deriding, or openly persecuting, as far as you have power, those that thus
offend you. And what Unity is this?

3. If Reason persuade you not, do but ask experience it self, Whether in all
ages, men that Profess the same Religion with zealous godly men, have not been
their persecutors, and oft-times more cruel then Infidels themselves? The
Arrians that called themselves Christians, were as cruel to the true Believers
as the Heathens. The Papists profess the same Christianity as we, and take the
whole Scripture as the Word of God: And yet none of the Heathenish Persecutions
do match or come near to their French Massacrees, and Spanish Inquisition, and
the cruelty that in Ireland, England, and their part of the Christian world,
they have exercised upon the sheep of Christ. The many Ministers that were
silenced in Germany, and some imprisoned, and many Families undone, was by the
Lutherans, against men that were Protestants as well as they. And they that
cast out so many Learned, holy Ministers in England, and occasioned the
expulsion of so many thousand persons fearing God, were Professed Protestants
as well as we. And that there may not be the appearance so much as of a
difference in Ceremonies to cover their proceedings, abundance of conformable
men are troubled and undone as well as others, and they gave out that [ none
were worse then the conformable Puritans.] It was a holy observation of the
Lords day, and opposition to the abuse of it by Dancings, and it was hearing
Sermons, and instructing men's families, and praying together, that were the
things enquired after, that occasioned our troubles. And (who ever was in the
right or wrong) you all know that the late miserable wars among us, was between
men that professed themselves to be of the same Religion, not only as
Christians, but as Protestant, and Reformed (in the main.) To this day you see
among our selves in Towns and Countries, that those that do not only dwell with
us, and come to the same Ass^mblies with us, and profess themselves of the same
Protestant Reformed Religion, have yet many of them a s^cret malignity against
the godly, that will not be as loose and negligent as they, and will not as
madly cast away their souls: And also even ma^y greater Hypocrites, that rank
themselves with us in the same Church Order, and seem to own all Ordinances of
God, and Government of the Church, yet when this Government crosses them in
their carnal ways, and these Ordinances open the nakedness of their
miscarriages, they prove stark enemies to the Government, Officers and
Ordinances themselves.

Indeed however we may abide together (as the clean and unclean creatures in
Noah's Ark) yet still at the heart there is so much enmity or distance, and in
our Ends and Interests there is so much contrariety, that if the Ministers and
other followers of Christ, will faithfully discharge the duty that is required
of them, they will certainly be persecuted by men of the same Profession in
Religion; especially by the Prouder and Loftyer sort of wicked men. Because
some will receive the same truth better from one then from another. I will give
you my assertion in the words of a man that you shall confess did speak
impartially, and not out of any intemperance or singularity; who in a
Prosperous University, in Peaceable times, being himself in favor, and of that
Judgment and of such Learning as was likely to continue him in favor, did yet
write thus concerning persecution: I mean Doctor Iackson, in his Book of saving
Faith, sect. 2. chap. 4. page 185. [ The Ministers of Christ may deny Christ,
or manifest their ashamedness of his Gospel, as directly by not laying his Law
as closely to the great Herod's of the world, as John Baptist did (suppose the
case be as notorious, and as well known to them) as if they had been afraid to
confess him, for fear of being put out of the Synagogues, or said with those
other Jews, We know that God spoke with Moses, and gave authority to
Magistrates; but this man we know not whence he is, nor do we care for his
Counsels. Yet were John Baptists kind of preaching used in many Kingdoms,
though by such as profess the same Religion with the Potentates, they should
offend with their boldness, I think it would prove matter of Martyrdom in the
end. That any age since Christian Religion was first propagated, has wanted
store of Martyrs, is more to be attributed to the Negligence, Ignorance, and
Hypocrisy, or want of courage in Christ's Ambassadors, or appointed Pastors,
then unto the sincerity, mildness or fidelity of the flock; especially of the
Bell-weathers or chief ringleaders. Or if Satan had not abated the edge of
primitive zeal and resolution by that dishonorable peace concluded between
Christianity and Gentilism, after the settling of Goths and Vandals in these
parts of Christendom; had he not utterly benumbed mankind by locking up their
spiritual senses in midnight darkness, and fettering their souls in
superstition, since the time he himself was let loose: Rome Christian had seen
more Martyrs, even of such as did not much dissent from her in most opinions
held within six hundred years of Christ, in one year, then Rome Heathen at any
time had known in ten. Even in Churches best Reformed, it would be much easier,
I think, to find store of just matter of Martyrdom, then of men fit to make
Martyrs. And he that has lived any long time in these quiet mansions, and
seats of Muses, secure from Mars his broyls, or external violence, has great
cause either to magnify the tender mercies of his gracious God, or suspect
himself for an Hypocrite, if he have not suffered some degrees of Martyrdom:
But unto such as have been exercised therein, it brings forth the quiet fruit
of Righteousness.]

Thus you see this Learned Doctor, though in favor with the Rulers of the age
he lived in, did think that a man that would not be an Hypocrite, but
faithfully discharge his duty, was likely to suffer Martyrdom from those of the
same Profession with himself, and that it must be by very great mercy from God,
or by hypocrisy and unfaithfulness in us, if any Minister do escape the hands
of the wicked that are of his own Profession. So that you may see that mere
Profession will make but a poor Agreement or Union among us: Sin will be sin
still, and the flesh will rage still after its prey in unmortified Professors;
and the Word of God will still disgrace them and condemn them, and consequently
trouble them and exasperate them; So that if you come no nearer to us then a
Profession of the Christian Protestant Religion, you will still be soldiers in
the Army of the Devil, and be still flying in the faces of true Believers,
whenever they do but cross you in your sins.

3. Consider also, What a poor benefit comparatively it is to your selves, to
be joined with the Saints by a bare Profession, and no more Will it make you
happy to see their faces, or live among them? So do the bruit beasts, and so do
their Persecutors: Will it make you happy to be called by the name of
Christians? No more then it makes a Picture Rational to be called by the name
of a man. And what if by your parts and moral virtues, you are some way helpful
to the Church? So is the wooden leg to the body, which yet is not a member, but
a crutch.

4. Yea me thinks it should rather double your sorrows, that you are so
miserable among the happy. You live with them that have part in Christ, when
you have none in him. You join with those that have the Spirit of God, and an
holy disposition and conversation, when you have none: You kneel by them whose
Spirits are importunate with God in prayer, when your hearts are dead: You sit
by them that are quickened and sanctified by the Word, which to you is but a
dead and empty sound. You are famished among them that are feasting upon
Christ, and upon the precious promises of eternal life. You are but as carkases
among the living: Their company makes not you alive; but your noysom
conversation is grievous unto them, unless it be some of you that are embalmed
and beflowered with some common graces, for the sakes of those that else would
be more troubled with you. And is this so great a comfort to you, to be dead
among the living, and to be heirs of hell in the midst of them that are heirs
of heaven? Methinks (till you are sanctified) it should be a daily horror to
you, to look them in the faces, and think that they have Christ and grace, and
you have none; and to hear in the holy Assemblies the mention of their
happiness, and the name of that God, that Christ, that Heaven where they must
live for ever, and in which their blessedness consists, when you must be
turned out into everlasting misery.

That you may not think I am singular in all this, I will add here some humane
testimony for confirmation of it. Zenoras, Comment* in Epist. Canon. Can. 45.
ex Basil. M. Epist. 2. ad Amphiloch. give^ us this as one of the Canons of the
Greek Church received from Basi^ [If any one receiving the Name o^
Christianity, shall be a reproach i^ Christ (that is, says Zonaras, by ^
wi^ked life) his Name or Appellation is no profit at all to him.] An^ even in
the Roman Ca^on Law this is one Canon taken out of Augustine, [Parvulus qui
b^ptiz tur si ad annos rationales veniens, n^crediderit, nec ab illiritis
abstinuerit, nihil ei prodest quod parvulus accepit. Decret. part 3. did. 3.
p. 1241.] that is [ A Baptized Infant, if when he comes to years of discretion,
does not believe, nor abstain from things unlawful, it profits him nothing
which he received in his infancy.] If it were needful after the Canons both of
the Greek and Latin Church to give you the like words from particular Fathers,
I could soon perform it.

5. You are so far from being Happy by your visible Churchstate and outward
Profession, and Communion with the Church, that you have the greater sin, and
w^ll have the sorer punishment, because among such examples, such means, and
calls, and mercies, you yet resist the Grace of Christ, and are void of that
Holiness which your tongues Profess. The poor Indians hear not that which you
daily or weekly hear; nor have the opportunities in public and private that
you have had. If they lie in ignorance and unbelief, they can say, it is
because they never read or heard the Scripture, nor ever had a man to tell them
of the blessed tidings of Redemption, or open to them the way to life: But so
cannot you say for your selves. They were the less excusable, if they had seen
but one of your days, or joined but once in those holy Assemblies which you
profane. The mouth of Christ himself has told us concerning the rejecters of
his Ministers and his Gospel, that it shall be easier for Sodom in the day of
Judgment then for them, Mat. 10.15. You will find a hotter place in Hell, that
pass thither from those seats, from this Assembly, from such a neighborhood,
and such a Nation, then if you had passed thither from among the Turks o^
Indians.

6. Moreover, there is in some respects, less hope of your salvation, that have
long lived unconverted in the outward Communion of the Church, then of other
men. As a sick man is in a more desperate case that has long used the best and
only means, and all in vain, then he that never used any. I confess you have
the advantage of being still under the means; and that is your hope (as long as
it lasts): but then you have the dreadful symptom of frustrating these means;
and that is your terror, above those that yet remain without.

7. Moreover, if you agree with us but in Profession and outward Communion, you
will be thereby more capable of doing us the greater mischief. I know God does
benefit his Church by many of the unsanctified, as I said before. But many
others of them are the greatest plagues to it. One enemy in our own Armies, or
in our Councils, may do more against us, then ten thousand open enemies abroad.
False-hearted Bishops, Pastors, yea and Magistra^es, that have the Name and not
the Nature of Christians, are they that have betrayed the Church, and broken it
in pieces, and made the cause of Christ a stepping-stone to their worldly ends.
It was a Doeg that betrayed David and Abimelech: It was a Judas that betrayed
Christ himself. You are now our daily hearers, and live some of you civilly
among us, and take your selves confidently for Christians and Saints as well as
others, and secr^tly scorn those that would rob you of that honor, as
appropriating it unto themselves, and say as Zedekiah to Micaiah when he struck
him, 1 King. 22.24. [ Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speeak
unto thee?] But if the times should turn, and you had but your will, at least
if you were but forced or driven by Authority, we should soon find many of you
to be blood-thirsty enemies, that now are so confident that you are Christians
and true servants of God. A little money would hire those Iudas'es to betray
Christ, and his Cause and Church, that now are our familiars, and put their
hands into the same dish with the true Disciples. While they are among us, they
are not of us: and therefore when Temptations come, they will be gone from us.
Its well if half this Assembly that are now hearing me, would stick to
Godliness, if Godliness were but the persecuted, scorned way of the times: Yea
if they would not forsake even the name it self of Christian, and forsake these
Assemblies and outward worship, if the Rulers were against it, and did but
persecute it, so that it must cost them any thing dear to hold it.

8. Moreover, these hollow-hearted Christians, that agree with us but in the
outside and the name, are capable of dishonouring Christ and the Gospel, much
more then if they were open enemies. If a professed Heathen or Infidel live
wickedly, this cannot be cast upon the Gospel or the Christian name, nor can
Christ and his servants be hit in the teeth with it, or reproached by it: But
when those that take on them to be Christians, and join with Christians in
their public worship, shall live like Heathens, or worse then some of them,
what greater wrong can be done to Christ? will he not one day take such
wretches by the throats, and (s^y, [If thou must have thy Pride, and
Drunkenness, and Coveteousness; if thou must needs swear and curse and rail, or
live an ungodly fleshy life, thou should have kept thee out of my Church,
and not have called thy self a Christian, and taken an easier place in Hell:
Must thou bring thy wickedness into my house, and among my servants, to
dishonor me? Must I and my servants be reproached with thy crimes?]

And this is one great cause why Christ has appointed Discipline in his Church
to admonish and Reform, or reject the scandalous: And this is the reason (among
many others) why faithful Christians, (though they would make no unjust
divisions and separations) would yet have the Church of Christ kept clean, by
use of holy Discipline, as he has appointed; Because it is from such
false-hearted Professors (usually) that the name of Christ is reproached in the
world: These are they for the most part that make Turks and Jews and all
other enemies say, that Christians are as bad as others, because those that are
as bad as others, do take on them to be Christians. When Drunkards, and
Fornicators, and Covetous persons, and profane, do come to the Congregation,
and say they are Christians, when in heart and deed they are not, what wonder
then if Infidels and Enemies of the Church reproach us and say, You see what
Christians are? How could a Papist do the Protestants a cunninger and surer
mischief, then to take on him a Protestant, and then commit fornication or
other horrid lewdness, or join with some abominable Sect, to make men think
that the Protestants are such as these! And how can you do Christ a greater
wrong then to carry the dung of the world into his Church; and to cover all the
crimes of Infidels, with the name and garb of Christianity, that it may be
said, All these are the crimes of Christians! And therefore it is that Christ
and his faithful Ministers, though they would have as many as is possible to be
saved, yet are not so forward to take in all, as others be: For Christ needs
not servants, but its they that need him; and he had rather have a few that
will honor him by mortifyed holy lives then a multitude that will but cause
his name and Gospel to be reproached. It is certain from Church History, that
the holy life of some one or few persons (as Gregory Thaumaturgus, Macarius,
and many the like) has drawn in multitudes and converted Countries to the
faith: when the wickedness of whole Towns and Countries of Professed
Christians, has caused many to fall off, and caused the enemy to insult.

We will not for all this break our Rule, nor presume to search the hearts of
men, any further then they appear in outward Evidence. We will still take all
Professors of Christianity as Christians, that Null not their own Profession.
Basil was advised by Athanasius himself to receive the Arrians themselves into
Communion, if they did but disown their former errors, and subscribe to the
Nicene Creed, and seek the Communion of the Churches. And he practiced this,
though many were offended at it. But yet we must needs say, that it is better
for the Church to have a few that are Holy and answer the nature of their holy
Calling, then to have multitudes that will but prove our shame, and make the
Infidel world believe that Christianity is not what it is. Yea and these are
they most commonly too (though they may proceed to a higher profession) that
are carried about with every wind of doctrine, and that turn to Heresies, and
cause and continue the Divisions of the Church: For they that are such, serve
not the Lord Jesus, when they profess to serve him, Romans 16.17. When Heresies
do arise, it is such chaff as this that is carried away, that the Approved
Christians indeed may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11.19. Abundance of proud
unsanctified persons, do us as much good in the Church as fire in our thatch,
or as mutinous soldiers that are but the enemies agents in the Army, to set
all the soldiers together by the ears, or discover their Councils, or blow up
their magazins. And would you have us contented with such a kind of Agreement
and Communion with you as this, which you and we are like to be so little the
better for, if not the worse?

9. Furthermore, it is not this mere Ageerment in Profession that will satisfy
Christ himself, and therefore it must not satisfy us. It is not in this that
he attaineth the principal ends of his Redemption, nor sees the travail of
his Soul. Alas, the blood of Christ is lost to you, and all the Ordinances and
means are lost, and all the labor of Ministers is but lost to you as to any
pardon of sin, or life, or Heaven that ever you shall have by them, if you go
no further. And would you have us be contented with such an Agreement as this?

10. Lastly, Consider that if we Agree no further then in an outward Profession
of the Christian faith, alas, it will be but a short Agreement. We may be
together here a while in the Church, as fishes good and bad in one net; but
when it is drawn to the shore, a separation will be made. Here you may sit and
kneel among us a while, and go away with the Name of Christians: But alas, it
is but a little while till this Agreement will be broken, and a dreadful
everlasting separation must be made. Dreadful to the unsanctified, but joyful
to the Saints. And what great good will it do to you or us, to be tied together
a little while, by words and shows, and then to be everlastingly separated, as
far as Light from darkness, Heaven from Hell, and the Greatest Joys from the
Greatest sorrows. O blame us not if we motion to you, and beg of you, a far
nearer Union and Agreement then this.

I think I have now sufficiently proved, that If we will be indeed of One
Religion, and ever come to a right Agreement, it is The Unity of the
sanctifying Spirit that must do it. It must be a Union and Agreement in true
Conversion and Holiness of life, and nothing lower will serve the turn. If God
do us any good by the Profession, Gifts or Interest of Hypocrites and
unsanctified professors, we will thank him for it, and take it as a mercy: But it
is a higher Design that must be in our Hearts; and woe be to them that come no
nearer the Holy Catholic Church and the Unity of the Spirit and the Communion
of Saints, then by an Outward profession and participation of Sacraments, and
such like outward Ordinances of Communion.

Quest. BUT suppose we should be United in the Spirit, and Agree in Holiness,
do you think this would heal the Divisions of the Church? Do you not see that
the most godly are all in pieces, as well as others? Is it not such that have
been the principal causers of our late Divisions? You promised to show us, How
we might do well, for all our other differences if we were bu^ Agreed in
Holiness; will you now show us what Advantage that would be?

Answ. To be Agreed in Holiness, and to be Heartily one in the Essentials of
Christianity, is an exceeding advantage to us in all our disagreements about
lesser things. As

1. Were we but once United in the main and Sanctified by the Uniting Spirit of
Christ, our Principal differences were healed already. We should no longer be
of different minds, whether sin or holiness be best; or whether earth or heaven
should be chosen for our portion; nor whether God or the flesh or world should
be obeyed. You little think what abundance of differences are at once
reconciled in the very hour of a sinners conversion. Before that hour, we
differed in Judgment from all wise men, from all the Saints of God, from all
the holy Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, as well as from all the Godly about
us; and from all men of right Reason, and faith and experience; Yea we differed
from the Holy Ghost, from Christ, from God himself; yea from none so much as
him. Wicked wretches! you differ from the Godly because they Agree with God;
but you differ more from God then from them. When you despise a Holy life, are
his thoughts like your thoughts? when you revile his servants, and scorn his
yoke and burden as too heavy, are you then of the mind of Christ? O no; Your
darkness and his Light, are far more distant then you are able to conceive.
Were you but once Reconciled to God, by converting sanctifying light, you would
at once be Reconciled to his servants; for in the matters of chief concernment
to the soul, they are all of his mind; for he is their Instructor. And then
what a day of healing would that be! Oh what abundance of differences are ended
upon the day of true Conversion? And withal what abundance of differences would
be new made? For now you Agree with the Devil and with your fleshly desires,
and with distracted wicked men, and all this Agreement would then be broke: For
this friendship with the world is enmity to God, Iam. 4.4. and such Divisions
as these Christ tells us that he came to send, Luke 12.51. But you would
presently be Agreed with God, with the Holy Scriptures, with all the Apostles
and Servants of the Lord, and with all men of Spiritual wisdom and experience
in the world, in the great and principal matters of your lives. And it is a
multitude of particulars that is contained in this Agreement that is made when a
sinner is truly sanctified.

2. If once you were united in the Spirit, and Agreed in a Holy life, you would
differ in nothing that could keep you out of Heaven. And if we have some small
differences on Earth, as long as they are such as cannot hinder our salvation,
they may be the more easily born. Paul and Barnabas had a little falling out:
but O how sweetly are they now reconciled! Hierom and Chrysostom, Epiphanius
and John of Jerusalem, Theophilus and Chrysostom, were at odds; Luther and
Zuinglius had their disagreements; But Oh how happily are they now agreed! Our
imperfection of Knowledge causes us here to err and differ in part: But if we
are all united in Christ, and agreed in the main, how quickly shall we see that
blessed Light that will reconcile all our controversies! Marvail not to find
some contests among the most learned and most godly, unless you will marvail that
Earth is not Heaven; or that in that body we see not the face of God, which is
the all-disclosing reconciling light. If we were all here together in the dark,
and were of many opinions about the things before us; if one did but come in
among us with a candle, it might end all our differences in a moment. When we
are newly out of this obscuring flesh, and this dark deceitful earthly world, O
what an unconceiveable reconciliation will be made by that blessed Light!
There Is no contending or quarrelling: For there are none of those errors or
passions that should occasion it. As Imperfect Holiness produces an answerable
Imperfect Unity, so perfect Holiness will prfectly Unite. And is not this then
the only way to Unity, which will help us here to what is here attainable, and
secure us of eternal perfect concord, in the world that we are passing to? O
see that you be once Agreed in the things that are necessary to salvation, and
then the hour is near at hand that will end all your differences, and agree you
in the rest.

3. If once you be but Agreed in Holiness, you will have no difference left,
that shall destroy any Grace in you, that is necessary to salvation. The power
of Divine faith, and Love and Hope, and Fear and Zeal, will still be safe. Your
diseas^s will not destroy your vital faculties. And if the Head, the Heart, and
principal parts be sound, you may the better bear a small distemper. The
disagreements of the ungodly from God, from Scripture and the Saints, are
mortal to them, and prove them under the power of darkness and of Satan, that
leads them captive at his will, (2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.23. Acts 26.18.) But the
differences of the sanctified, are but as the different complexions or statures
of children, or at worst but as their falling out, which will not cause the
Father to turn them out of his family; so that as long as Faith, and Love, and
Hope and other Graces are kept sound, we shall certainly do well for all our
differences. And this is the benefit of Agreeing in Holiness.

4. Moreover, if once we were all Agreed in the Spirit, and in Holiness of
Heart and Life, we should escape all Heresies, or Errors that effectually
subvert the Essentials of the Christian faith. Mistaken we might be; but
Heretics we could not be. I stick not upon the bare word, whether smaller
errors may be called Heresy; but taking Heresy as commonly its taken, a
sanctified person cannot (at least Habitually) be a Heretic. For should a man
so hold a point inconsistent with any one Essential point of the Christian
faith (at least Habitually and Practically hold it,) its as impossible that
this man should be then a Christian as that contradictories should be true. And
therefore certainly whosoever is a true Christian, is fr^e from such Heresies.
And therefore as, if you are sure a man so holds a Heresy, you have no reason
to believe his shows of Holiness; so where you see a great appearance of real
Holiness, you must long deliberate and have good evidence, before you judg^
that man a Heretic: For this is the certain Privilege of the Sanctified, that
they cannot be Heretics, though they may have many errors (as in sensu
composito all confess).

5. Morover if we were but all Agreed in true Holiness, we should be freed from
most of those scandalous sins which are the common occasion of our reproaches
and divisions. It is sin that is the great trouble of the Church, and of the
world (John 7.25.) This breeds our quarrels This sets all into a flame. When
a Drunkard, or an unclean person, or a slanderer, or a raise^, or any
scandalous person, is r^proved, or openly admonished, or for impenitency
rejected, then the Devil and sin bestir themselves, and rage against the Church
and Officers and Ordinances of God. It is sin within that animateth the
malignant to b^ contentious: And it is to defend and take part with sin, that
they fall out with God and his Word and Servants. Now Holiness is contrary to
this sin that troubles us. Mortification of sin is part of Sanctification. If
therefore we were Agreed in Holiness, it were as ready a way to procure our
Peace, as quenching the fire in your thatch, is the ready way to save your
house. I know there are too many scandals given by the best. But it is commonly
but by the weaker worser sort of the best. And it is not a common thing with
them neither. And none of them make a trade of sinning, nor have any
unmortified reigning sin. If a Noach, a Lot, a David, be once scandalous in all
his life, this is not the case of all the godly; and it is not like the case of
the ungodly that are either often, or impenitent in it. And therefore though it
may disturb the Church: yet not so much as the frequent and impenitent
scandals of the ungodly. O could we but all Agree against this makebate, this
great disturber and troubler of the world, what Peace might we enjoy?

6. And also, if once we could Agree in Holiness, the matter and occasion of
offenses, separations and contentions would cease. What caused the Donatists
separation of old, but the scandals in the Church: and the receiving of such
upon repentance into Communion or ministry? And so the Novatian schism also was
occasioned. And though the Donatists and Novatians were too blame to be against
the Ordination or reception of such Penitents; yet the prevention of the sin,
would have been the prevention of the breach. What has caused so many to turn
separatists in England, but seeing so many ungodly persons in our Churches and
Communion? You that are most offended at Schisms and Private Churches, are the
common occasions of it your selves. If such ungodly persons were not in our
Assemblies, few godly persons would separate from them. Though I do not
justify them, yet I must needs condemn you as the cause. Were it not for you,
we should be more of a mind among our selves. But when your rotten ulcers and
corrupted lives have raised a stink in our Assemblies, this causes our
Division: The Separatists stop their noses and are gone, and will come here no
more; and the rest of us think that for your sakes and the Peace of the Church,
we should stay as long as well we can, like Patient Surgeons that will not
forsake their Patient because of a rotten stinking sore, as long as there is
any hope of cure, or of saving the body, by cutting off the rotten member. And
thus while some are more patient and charitable toward you, and some are more
impatient of your sin, or else afraid of Gods displeasure for having communion
with you, here comes our divisions among our selves, for your sakes. And
therefore if we were but Agreed in Holiness, all this were ended. There would
then be no habituated Drunkard, or worldling, or railer, or swearer, or other
ungodly persons in our Churches; and then who could scruple communion with
them? and so what should hinder but we might all be one? and yet will you not
agree in this?

7. Yea if we were united in the Spirit of Holiness, the very Dividing
unpeaceable Disposition of men would it self be healed, and so we should have
Peace. For an uncharitable, dividing disposition is part of the old man, and of
that unholiness which we must forsake. And charity and meekness, and a
peaceable healing temper, is Holiness it self. And therefore this must needs do
much to heal and reconcile us. Read but James 3. throughout, and it will
satisfy you of this, if you will be satisfied. Those that pretend to be wiser
then the rest of the godly, and to have more illumination, if yet they have
bitter envying and strife in their hearts, they Glory in vain, and lie against
the truth: For this Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual
and devilish. He that is truly wise and endued with knowledge in the Church,
must show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of Wisdom. For the
wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then Peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrsie. But where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil
work, James 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. See here what a spirit sanctification does
contain, and whether this be not the only healing way. It is first indeed Pure:
but next it is Peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated. They that cause
Divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which is taught; do not serve
the Lord Jesus, what ever they may pretend or think. Peace and Holiness must be
followed together, Heb. 12.14. Yea Peace with all men, if it be possible, and
in our power, Romans 12.18. so that by changing the unpeaceable Disposition, and
drying up the fountain of our strifes, an Agreement in the Spirit would
reconcile us.

8. Moreover, if we would all Agree in the spirit of Holiness, it would destroy
that Carnal selfish disposition, and that end which is the dividing Interest,
and take away the bone of our contentions. It is selfishness that causes the
great Divisions in Church and State, and sets the world together in wars and
quarrels: Every unsanctified man is selfish: his self and selfish interest is
more to him then God and his interest. And such men as these will never live
with any man in peace, any longer then they may have their will and way. They
will not agree with neighbors if self be but touched by any. They will have the
Magistrate when ever he would punish them. They will hate the Pastors of the
Church if they faithfully discharge their offices, in reproving them, and
calling them to Repentance and such Confession as is necessary to their cure.
If it were Father or Mother, a selfish person cannot bear it, if they go
against his selfish interest. There Is no living at peace with selfish men, if
you do but cross them in their credit or profit or sensual delights: and this
we must do, unless we will incur the displeasure of our Lord. We are cast upon
an Impossibility of living in Peace with wicked men. For God has commanded us
to to rebuke them plainly, and not to suffer sin upon them. And if we disobey
God to please men, it will cost us dearer then their favor can repay. But if
we obey God and do our duty, we are as sure to be hated and reproached with the
most, as that the earth is under our feet. Give a wicked selfish sinner as
plain Scripture and Reason as can be given, and you shall not stir him from his
selfish interest: If you punish him, or reprove him openly, or exercise
Church Censures on him, or any way touch his carnal selfish interest, and when
you have done go about to satisfy him with Reason, you may as well almost go
Reason a hungry dog from his carrion, or Reason a Wolf into the nature of a
Lamb, or Reason a Mastiff to be friends with a Bear. Many a trial I have made;
and many a time I have stopped their mouths, and satisfied them in reason, that
they ought to deny themselves, and confess and forsake their sins, and yield to
God (or made them confess so much at the least) But their selfish minds were no
more satisfied, for all that, then if I had never spoken to them. Scripture is
no Scripture, nor Reason is no Reason to them; nor God shall be no God to them,
if self do but contradict it; and that is, when ever he contradicts self.
They can no more believe and Like, and Love that doctrine or duty or counsel or
course of life that crosses self, and calls them to any great self-denial,
then a child can love to be corrected. So that self being so certain a
Peace-breaker and disturber of the world; and yet being the Reigning Principle
in all that are unsanctified, you may easily see that this is the hindrance of
our Unity and Concord; and that sanctification must needs be the Principal
remedy. For sanctification is the destruction of selfishness, and teaches men
self-denial, and centreth all men in one Interest which is God. Among the
unsanctified there are as many Ends and Interests as Men: For every one of them
has a self to Please: And then what Unity can there be? But the sanctified are
all United in God, as their common Principle, End and All: and therefore must
needs be reconciled.

9. Moreover, if we could but all Agree in the Spirit of Holiness, We should
then overcome that pride and self-conceitedness, that breaks our peace, and
raises errors, and puts us into dissentions. What makes us all so hardly to
Agree, and to be of so many minds and ways, but that every man naturally is
proud and self-conceited, and wise in his own eyes, and confident of every
fancy of his own? All his own Reasons seem strong to him: and Gods own Reasons
do seem unreasonable to him: And can we ever agree with such men as these, that
think themselves wiser then God and Scripture, and dare prefer the very folly
of their own muddy brains, before the word and wisdom of their Maker? Give
these men as plain Scripture and Reason as you will, they have more wit (as
they think) then to believe you; and what they want in Reason, they have in
Pride and Self-conceit; and therefore your wisdom is folly to them. But now
when the Spirit of Holiness comes, it takes them down, and abaseth and humbles
the proud and self-conceited, and makes them ashamed of the folly and weakness
of their own understandings, so that a man may speak to them now as to men of
reason, and have a hearing and consideration of his words. A humble godly man
is low in his own eyes; and therefore suspicious of his own understanding, in
doubtful things; and therefore is more flexible and yielding to the truth;
when others are so stiffened by Pride, that they are readier to deride the
wisest that shall contradict them: If therefore we could but all Agree in Holy
meekness and humility, what readier way could there be in the world, to draw to
an end of our differences and divisions!

10. Moreover, if we could but Agree in Holiness, it would free us from that
uncharitableness that causes our Disagreement in other things; and it would
possess us with a special endeared Love one to another: And who knows not
that Love is a uniting healing thing? Sanctification principally consists in
Love to God and man, and this the unsanctifyed principally want. Its want of
Love that makes men surmise the worst of one another, and make the worst of all
that they say and do, and draw matter of contention from that which never gave
them Cause. Love would put a better sense upon men's words and deeds, or at
least would bear them far more easily. But instead of Love, there is a Natural
Enmity in all that are unsanctified to all the servants and the ways of God.
And can we ever be agreed with our Natural enemies? why Malice will so pervert
their understandings, that all that we say or do will be misconstrued: and as a
man that looks through a red glass thinks all things to be red that he looks
upon; so these men through the distemper of their malicious minds, will find
matter of quarrelling with all that we can say or do. Ill will never says
well. Our very obedience to the Law of God, and seeking to save our own souls,
will be matter of quarrel, and taken to be our crime. If we will not run into
Hell fire with them, and think there is no danger, when we know the contrary,
it will be a fault sufficient for their malice to reproach us with: so that if
we should Agree with ungodly men, in all our Opinions of Religion; yet if we
will not damn our souls, and make no bones of displeasing the great and
dreadful God, there is no Peace to be had with them. They have no Peace with
God, and they have no solid Peace with themselves (for God has professed that
there is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 48.22.) And how then can we expect that
they should have peace with us? But Sanctification does beget that eff^ctual
Love, that is as healing to a divided Church, or to disagreeing persons, as the
most precious Balsom or Wound-selve is to bodily wounds. Love will not let you
rest in wrath, but will keep you under smart and disquietness, till you are
either at Peace, or have done your part to have procured it* Husband and Wife,
Parents and Children, Brethren and Sisters do seldomer fall into greater
dissentions then strangers do: And when they do fall out they are easilier
reconciled. The Spirit of Grace does possess unfeigned Christians, with as dear
a love to one another, as is between the nearest Relations. For by our New
birth the Saints are Brethren in Christ. If you saw an Army fighting, or a
company of people quarrelling and scolding at one another, do you think there
could be a readier way to make them all friends and end their quarrels, then to
possess them all with a dear and tender love to one another? If it were in my
power to cause all contenders to Love those that they contend with as
themselves, do you think I should not soon agree them? Why, you know, if you
know any thing in Christianity, that Sanctification causes men to Love their
Neighbors as themselves, and to Love one another with a pure heart fervently, 1
Pet. 1.22. For by this we know that we are passed from death to life, because
we love the Brethren: He that loves not his Brother abides in death, Joh. 3,
14. And therefore it is a case exceeding plain, that the readiest way in the
world, to reconcile our lesser differences, is, to be united in the Spirit, and
to Agree upon a Holy Life.

11. Moreover, were we all united in the Spirit, We should have all one God,
one Master of our Faith, and one Lawgiver and Judge of all our Controversies:
And this would be an exceeding help to unity. The Principal cause of Divisions
in the world, are the multitude of Rulers and Masters and Judges. For with
unsanctified men, their own Conceits and Carnal Interest is their Counselor
and Judge. The Rulers of the world, that have the power of the sword, and can
do them good or hurt in their estates, are the Masters of their Religion, more
then God. They will follow this Man or that Man, that best pleases their
fancies and fleshly desires; and so will never be of one mind. But
Sanctification takes down all other Masters of our Faith, save Christ and those
that declare his will. Let flesh and blood say what it will, let all the world
say what they will, if God say the contrary, his word shall stand and be a Law
to them. And can there be a readier way to Unity, then to bring us all into one
School, and subject us all to one Lord and Master, and to bring us all to refer
our differences to one most wise infallible Judge? Though we do not yet
understand his will in all things, yet when we understand it in the main, and
are resolved to search after the knowledge of the rest, it is a great
preparative to our Agreement, when we all look but to one for the deciding of
our controversies. Whereas the unsanctified have as many Judges and Guides, as
persons; For every man is a Guide and Judge to himself.

12. Moreover, were we but once Agreed in Holiness, We should all have one
Light for the ending of our differences: and that Light would be the true
Infallible Light. For we should all have the same Holy word of God as the
extrinsick Light, which is most True, as coming from the Lord of Truth: And we
should all have the Spirit of Truth within, to teach us the meaning of that
word without, and to help our understandings, and assist us in the application,
and destroy the corruptions that blind us and hinder us from perceiving the
Truth: Whereas the unsanctified are all in the Dark: and what wonder, if there
they disagree, and are of many minds! They be not guided by the word and
Spirit, and they are strangers to the Light that must Reconcile us, if ever we
be reconciled. Its true, too true, that the godly are illuminated but in part,
and therefore as yet they differ in part. But yet this imperfect illumination,
does more to a true and safe Agreement, then all the world can do besides. If
you would stop your ears against the flesh, and yield all to the teachings of
the word and Spirit, we should be sooner agreed.

13. And if we were once United in the Spirit and Holiness, We should all have
the use and benefit of all the Reconciling, Healing means and Ordinances of
God; which would be an exceeding great advantage to us. The unsanctified have
but the outside, the sound, and shell of Ordinances; but it is the Sanctified
that have the light and life and fruit of them. Every Chapter that you read,
and every Sermon that you hear, will do somewhat toward the healing of our
breaches: It will further our Knowledge and our Love. The Communion of the
Saints in all holy Duties, especially at the Lords Supper, when they partake of
one Christ, will inflame their Love, and humble them for their divisions, and
soder and glue their hearts together, as being all one bread and one body: And
so they will be all as of one heart and soul, Acts 4.32. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Acts
2.42, 43, 44, 46. When we hear of the tender Love of Christ to his weakest
members, how can we choose but love them if we be his Disciples! When we hear
how much, and how freely he has forgiven us, how can we choose but forgive
them! Mat. 18.35. When we have Communion with them in holy worship, as servants
of the same Lord, as Members of the same body, how can we choose but have the
affections of Fellow Members! 1 Cor. 12.26. When we join with them in Prayer,
or holy Conference, and perceive the fragrant odor of their Graces, and the
holy breathings of their souls after God, we cannot choose but Love Christ in
them. As the new Commandment so frequently pressed in the Gospel, is the Law of
Love, ( Ioh. 15.12, 17.) and the New Nature of the Saints is a Disposition of
Love (for this they are taught of God effectually, 1 These. 4.9.) So the
Ordinances do all of them exercise that Love, and engage us to it. We must
leave our gift at the Altar, and go first and be reconciled to our Brother, if
we remember he has any thing against us, Matthew. 5.23, 24. We must pray for
forgiveness, but on condition that we do forgive. Differences and Divisions
that make a breach in Christian Charity, are so insufferable among the Saints,
that they long for healing, and smart as the wounded body does, till the time
of healing; and are pained as a bone out of joint, till it be set again. And as
they cannot bear it themselves (when they are themselves) so the Church cannot
bear it, but is engaged to watch over them, and to set them in joint again; so
that God has hedged in his Servants into one holy Society, that they should
not straggle from him or from each other, and has set Pastors over them for
this very end, to guide them and keep them in holy Unity, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13,
14. Now all these Uniting Healing Ordinances are effectual upon the Sanctified:
for their hearts are open to them, and their New nature is suited to the new
Commandment and work: But to others they are in a manner as Food or Physic to
the dead: They hate the power of them; they break the holy Enclosure of
Discipline, and proudly Rebel against their Guides: and say, Let us break their
bands, and cast away their cores from us, Psalm. 2.3. what must we be Ruled by
such and such? It is but the outside of Sacraments, Praises and Prayers that
they are acquainted with: and these have no such healing force. So that in this
you see the great advantage that we should have for full agreement, if we were
but once agreed in the main, and United by the Sanctifying Spirit.

14. Moreover, if once we were United in the Spirit, and in Holiness, We should
manage all our differences in a holy manner, and be awakened and disposed to
seek after healing in a healing way. It would put us upon enquiring after
Peace, and studying the meetest terms of Peace, till we had found out the way
in which we should accord. The Spirit of Love and Holiness would provoke us, to
begin and seek for Peace with those that will not seek to us, and that seem
averse to it; and to follow after peace, when it flies from us, Heb. 12, 14.
and even to lie down at the feet of men, and deny our honor and worldly
Interest, if it might procure Brotherly love and peace. Whereas a proud
unsanctifyed heart will scorn to stoop, especially to those that are below
them, or have wronged them, and will scorn to ask forgiveness of those that
they have wronged! When you have showed them the plainest word of God for it,
and persuaded them to it with undeniable reasons, you lose your labor, and may
almost as well persuade the fire to be cold. If you will stoop and humble your
self to him, and ask him forgiveness, and give him the honor, or change your
mind and be of his opinion, and say as he says, and do as he would have you,
perhaps you may have some Peace with the most ungodly man. But the servants of
Christ have a spirit of Meekness and Humility and Self-denial; and therefore if
there be fallings out among them, they can humble themselves and seek for
reconciliation. If there be difference in Judgment about any weighty matters,
they will go or send to one another as Brethren, and confer about it in Love
and meekness, and search the Scripture, and seek after Truth, and compare their
evidences, and Pray together for that Light and Love that must Reconcile them:
If they fall out, they can say to one another [ We are Brethren, and must not
Live at a distance, nor suffer any wounds in our Affections, or any breach of
Charity to remain: The Sun must not go down upon our wrath: Come, let us go
together in private, and beg of God that he would repair our Love, and
reconcile us, and prevent such breaches for the time to come.] And thus they
can pray themselves friends again. I am persuaded that one quarter of an hours
fervent Prayer, would do more to quiet our distempered minds, and reconcile us,
if thus we would get together in private, then many hours debates without it.
Now the Spirit of holiness, is a Spirit of Prayer; and therefore disposes the
servants of Christ, as meekly and lovingly to search for Truth, so earnestly to
pray themselves into Agreement.

15. Moreover, were we once United in the Spirit, We should be under the
Promise of Divine assistance, which the unsanctified have no part in. When we
Pray for Light and Peace and Concord, we have a promise to be heard and helped,
at least, in the time and measure as shall be fittest; we have a promise of the
Spirit to be our Teacher, and to lead us into Truth: We have promises for the
maintaining and repairing of our healing Graces, and our Communion-Graces; our
Love to Christ and one another; our Patience and Meekness and the rest. And
this must needs be a great advantage to Unity and Agreement. For God is partly
engaged for it.

16. And if we were United in the Spirit and Agreed in the main, The Great
Truths which we are agreed in would very much direct us, to find out the rest
which yet we differ in. For these have an influence into all the rest; and the
rest are all connext to these, and also linkt and knit together, that we may
find out many by the help of one. All holy Truths do befriend each other; but
especially the Great and Master points which the rest depend upon, and flow
from: There is no way to a right Agreement in other points, but by agreeing
first in these Fundamental Rudiments.

17. Also, if we were once Agreed in Holiness, we should have that continually
within us and before us, that would much take us off from vain contendings, and
from an overzealous minding of sm^ller things. We should have so much to do
with God in holy Duties, and so much to do with our own hearts in searching
them, and watching them, and exciting them, and mending them, reproving and
correcting them, supporting and comforting them by the application of the
Promises, that we should have less time for quarrelling, and less mind of it
then the unsanctifyed have. We should have so many great and practical Truths
to digest and live upon, that lesser and unnecessary matters, which are the
common causes of Contention, would find less room: Or at least, we should allow
each Truth its due proportion of our study and talk and zeal: and so that
lesser would have comparatively so small a share, and be so exceeding seldom
and remissly meddled with, that their would be the less danger of Contentions.

18. Yea, if once we were united in the Spirit, the very forethought of an
Everlasting Union in Heaven, would have a continual influence upon our hearts,
for the healing of our breaches. We should be thinking with our selves [Shall
we not shortly be all of one mind and heart! and all be perfected with the
blessed vision, and Reconciling Light of the face of God! There will then be no
dissension or division, or unbrotherly censures, or separations. And should we
now live so unlike our future life! Shall we now be so unlike to what we must
be for ever! Shall we now cherish those heart-burnings and dissentions, that
must not enter with us into Heaven, but be cast off among the rest of our
miseries, and shut out with the rest of our enemies, and hated for ever by God
and us? Must we there be closed in perfect Love, and be all employed in the
same holy Praise of God and our Redeemer; and does it beseem us now to be
censuring, contending and separating from each other? Thus the belief of the
Life to come, will be a more effectual means with the godly for Agreement, then
any that unsanctified men can use.

19. Moreover, they that have the Spirit of Holiness, have a dear and special
Love to Truth as well as unto Peace. And therefore they have a great advantage
for the receiving of it in all debates: and consequently they are fairer for a
just Agreement. They are friends with the most searching spiritual truths: But
the ungodly have at enmity to all that Truth that would show them their sin and
misery and duty, and make them holy and lead them up from the creature unto
God. And as the Proverb is, He that would not know, cannot understand. When you
deal with a wicked graceless heart, you do not set Reason against Reason (for
it that were all, we should soon have done) but you set Reason against Will and
Passion and Appetite and fleshly Interest: and when you have convinced them,
you are little the nearer prevailing with them. You may as well think to
satisfy a hungry belly with Reasons, or to tame a wild beast with Reasons, or
to humble the Proud, and bring the sensual person to self-denial, by all your
Reasons, For they Love not the Truth, because they Love not the Duty that it
would persuade them to, and because they Love the sin that it would take from
them. There are two sorts of Satan in a wicked man that none but God can
batter, so as to win them: that is, A Proud and Ignorant mind, and a Hard and
sensual Heart. Many a year have I been battering them by the Word of God, from
this place, and yet with many can do no good. But the sanctified heart that
Loves the Truth will meet it, and welcome it, and thankfully entertain it.
Love makes a diligent hearer, and a good scholar, and gives us hope that
informations and debates may be succesful. A godly man is so far from hating
truth and flying from it, that he would give all the riches of the world to
purchase it: He prays and reads and studyeth for it: and therefore has great
advantage to attain it.

20. Moreover, if we were all Agreed in Holiness, and united in the Spirit of
Christ, we should Love the Truth in a Practical manner, and we should know that
every Truth of God has its proper work to do upon the soul; and therefore we
should Love the end of each Truth, better then the Truth it self. And therefore
we could not pretend the Truth against the Ends of Truth. And therefore we
should see to the security of those ends in all our debates and controversies.
We should not make havoc of the Church of Christ, nor easily be guilty of
divisions, nor quench our Love of God and of our Brethren, under pretense of
standing for the Truth; which unsanctified men will easily do. Truth is for
Holiness and Love as its proper end. Ungodly men will tread down Love and
Holiness, or at least disadvantage it and hinder it in the world, for the
exalting of their own conceits, under the name of truth. They will cure the
Church by cutting it in pieces, or by cutting the throat of it, and are
presently dismembering for every sore: But with the godly it is not so.

21. Moreover, the sanctified have a great advantage for Agreement, in that
they have hearts that are subject to the Truth, and will be True to it when
they understand it. Did they but know the right way, they would presently walk
in it. Nothing is so dear to them that should not be forsaken for it, or
sacrificed to it. But the wicked are false to the Truths which they are
acquainted with. They hold it or imprison it in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. and
therefore is wrath revealed against them. They like not to retain God in their
knowledge; and therefore God does often give them up to a reprobate mind, Romans
1.28. They receive not the truth in the love of it that they might be saved: no
wonder therefore if God give them up to strong delusions to believe a lie, that
all they might be damned that believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.10, 11. When they know the Judgment of God, that
they that do such things are worthy of death; yet they do them and have
pleasure in them that do them, Romans 1.32. We may well think that God will
sooner reveal his Truth to them that will obey it, then to them that will but
bury it in the dunghill of a corrupted heart. And that he will rather hold the
candle to his servants that will work by it, then to loyterers that will but
play by it; or thieves, or fornicators, that had rather it were put out; or to
enemies that would do mischief by it, and will throw away the candlesticks (the
Ministers) and put the candle into the thatch. Is there not many an ungodly
person that hears me this day, that is convinced in his conscience that a holy
life is best, and yet will not follow it and obey his conscience? Are there not
convictions at the bottom, that the diligent heavenly Christian whom thou
reproachest, is in a safer condition then thy self? and yet thou will not
imitate such. Can you expect that God should acquaint such with his truth, that
are so false to it?

22. If we were but all Agreed in true Holiness, we should have the great
advantage of a tender conscience, together with an illuminated mind. For
spiritual wisdom, with tenderness of conscience, is a great part of
sanctification. And it is a great advantage in controversies and debates, to be
wise and tende-conscienced: For wisdom makes men able to discern, and a tender
conscience will make them afraid of mistaking and contradicting the truth: and
will keep them from rashness, and unadvisedness, and levity; so that such an
one dare not venture so easily upon new conceits, and will be more suspicious
of himself, and of any thing wherein himself is much concerned. Especially if
he see great probabilities against it, or the judgment of the Universal Church,
or of many wise and godly men against it, and see that its like to have ill
effects; in all such cases a godly man will be tender-conscienced, and
therefore cautelous. But is it so with the ungodly? no: but clean contrary.
None so bold as the blind. Solomon's words describe them exactly, Prove. 14.16.
The fool rages and is confident. If he be in an error, or entangled in any
evil cause or way, you know not what to say to him for his recovery. The less
he knows, the more he despises knowledge, and sets his face against his
Teachers, as if they were but fools to him, and scorns to be Ruled by such as
they whom God has made his Rulers. Will you go to dispute or debate the case
with one of these? why be sure of it, they will put you down and have the day.
It would do a man good to dispute with a wise and learned or sober rational
man, and to be overcome by Reason and by Truth: But no man will have so sure a
conquest against you, as he that has the least of sense or reason. He will go
away and boast that you could not convince him: As if a mad man should boast
that the Physicians could not all of them cure him. An obstreperous proud
selfconceited fellow, will never yield to the clearest reason, nor never be put
down. We have a Proverb, that There Is no gaping against an Oven, especially if
it be hot. If he have passion as well as ignorance, and a tongue, he will have
the best. He that speaks nonsense says nothing while he seems to speak. These
men have the faculty of saying nothing an hour or two together in abundance of
words. And there is no confuting a man that says nothing. Nonsense is
unanswerable, if there be but enough of it. Who would dispute against a pair of
bagpipes, or against a company of boys that whoote at him! If you will make a
match at barking or biteing, a curre will be too hard for you: And if you will
try your skill or strength at kicking, a horse will be too hard for you. And if
you will contend with multitude of words, or by rage and confidence, a fool
will be too hard for you (as you may see by Solomon's descriptions and by daily
experience) But if you will dispute by equal sober Reasoning, it is only a
wiser man by evidence of Truth that can overcome you: And to be thus overcome
is better then to conquer: For you have the better if Truth overcome you; and
you have the worse if you overcome the truth.

So that you may easily perceive what an exceeding hindrance to Unity and Peace
it is to have to do with ungodly persons, that are blind and proud, and
brazen-faced, and of feared consciences, that fear not God, and therefore dare
say anything, as if they could outface the truth, and the God of Truth. But the
sanctified have Illuminated minds, and therefore are the more capable of
further information; and they have tender consciences, and therefore dare not
be unadvised and contentious, and strive against the light; and therefore have
great advantage for Agreement.

23. And if all these Advantages should not yet so far prevail as to bring us
up to a full Agreement, yet if we be but united in the Spirit and a Holy life,
we should be the more easily able to bear with one another under all our lesser
differences, until the time of full Agreement come. We should hold our
differences (as Brethren their diversity of statures and complexions, or at
least as common human frailties) with Love and compassion, and not with hatred
and divisions* We should Lovingly consult together upon Rules or terms on which
we might manage our unavoidable differences, to the least disadvantage to the
cause of Christ and to the common Truths that we all maintain, and to the work
of God for other men's conversion, and to the least advantage to sin and Satan
and the malice of ungodly men. And I think this is a fair Agreement for
Imperfect persons, short of Heaven; to have Unity in the Spirit, and Agreement
in things of greatest weight, and to bear with one another in smaller matters,
and manage our differences with meekness and with Peace.

24. Lastly, If all this be not enough, there is yet more for our
encouragement. 1. If we are but once United in the Spirit, and Agree in an Holy
heart and life, we have the infallible promise of God that we shall shortly all
arrive in Heaven at the place and state of full perfection, where all our
differences will be ended, and we shall be perfectly Agreed in mind and will,
being One in him that is the only Center of Universal Peace and Concord. And
its a great comfort to us in our darkness and differences, that we are in the
sure and ready way to perfect light and Harmony of mind. 2. Yea and till we do
come thither, we are still on the mending hand; and if we do but thrive in
Holiness, we shall certainly thrive in Concord and in Peace. And its a comfort
to a sick man, not only to be certain of a full recovery, but to feel himself
daily on the mending hand. 3. And in the mean time God himself will bear with
all our differences, though not so far as to approve or cherish them, yet so
far as to own us for his children, though we are too often falling out with one
another; and so far as to pity our frailty and infirmity, and to pardon us,
and deal as a Father with us: And if our quarrels cause him to use the rod, it
is but to keep us in quietness afterward; that as we had the taste of the four
fruits of our contentions, so we may after have the quiet fruits of
righteousness.

And thus I have given you in four and twenty particular discoveries, a
sufficient Proof, that A Unity in the Spirit, and an Agreement in Holiness,
has abundant advantages for our further Agreement in lowers things; and such
as all other men are destitute of; and therefore that there is no way possible
for a just, a safe, a durable Agreement, but that we all Agree in a Holy life,
and be United in the sanctifying Spirit of Christ.

BUt perhaps you will Object; If all this be so, whence comes it to pass that
there are so many differences still among those that you call the sanctified?
Do we not see that they are more contentious, and divided into parties, and
make more stir about Religion then any others?

Answ. 1. The differences among the godly, are nothing for number, or
greatness, or weight, in comparison of yours. I have showed you in my Discourse
of the Catholic Church, twenty great and weighty points in which they all
agree together, and in which the ungodly agree not with them. What if they
agree not, whether Church Government should be exercised by the Elders only,
the flock consenting; or by all the flock, the Pastors Guiding? Or whether One
among the Pastors should be of a superior Degree, or of a superior Order, or
whether they should only be of the same Degree and Order, though chosen to
preside and moderate for the time? What if one think that its Necessary to read
the public Prayers out of a Book; and another think its necessary to pray
without book; and a third more truly thinks it is in it self indifferent
whether it be within book or without? with other suchlike differences as these,
which will keep no man out of Heaven. Are these like our differences with
ungodly men? Our differences with you are, Whether Heaven or Eath is chiefly to
be loved and sought after? Whether Grace and Holiness, or sin and carelessness
be the better? whether it be the more sweet and desirable life, to be heavenly
minded and live in the Love and Service of God, and to be much in holy
communion with him, and meditating upon his Law, and upon the Life to come; or
on the contrary, to live to the world and to the flesh? whether it be better to
obey the Word of God, and his Ministers that speak it in his name; or obey our
fleshly desires and the proud conceits of ignorant minds? In a word, our
difference with the ungodly, though they will not confess it and speak out, is
plainly this, whether Heaven or Earth be better? and whether God be God and
shall be our God? and whether Christ be Christ and shall be our Christ? and
whether the Holy Ghost shall be our sanctifier? or whether we shall live after
the flesh and Rule our selves, against the Will and Word of God? and so in
effect, whether God be God, and man be man? and whether we should live as men
or as beasts? and so whether we should choose Salvation or Damnation? If you
could but understand your selves, and the depth of your deceitful hearts, you
would see that here lies the difference. For though some of the unsanctified
have a fair and plausible deportment, and will speak handsomely of the Christian
Religion, because they have had ingenuous Christian education; yet all this is
indeed but little more then formal complement, so far are they from a Heavenly
mind and a heart that is truly set on God, as their careless lives, and carnal
unsavory conference shows, if not their scorns at a state of Holiness. So
that our differences are nothing in comparison of the difference with you.

2. Moreover, the servants of God do mind the matters of Religion more
seriously then others do; and therefore their differences are brought to light,
and made more observable to the world. Their very heart is set upon these
heavenly things, and therefore they cannot make light of the smallest truth of
God; and this may be some occasion of their difference: Whereas the ungodly
differ not about Religion, because they have heartily no Religion to to differ
about: They trouble not themselves about these matters, because they do not
much regard them. And is this a Unity and peace to be desired? I had rather
have the discord of the Saints, then such a concord of the wicked. They are so
careful about their duty that they are afraid of missing it in the least
particular; and this (with their Imperfect light) is the reason of their
disputings about these matters. But you that are careless of your duty, can
easily agree upon a way of sin, or take any thing that comes next to hand. They
honor the Worship of God so much, that they would not have any thing out of
order; but you set so little by it, that you will be of the Religion that the
King is of, let it be what it will be: And its easy to agree in such an ungodly
careless course. Astronomers have many controversies about the positions and
motions of the heavens* and all Philosophers have many controversies about the
matter of their Sciences: when ignorant men have none of their controversies,
because they understand not, and therefore regard not the things that the
learned differ about. And will you think ever the better of Ignorance, or ever
the worse of Learning for this? The controversies of Lawyers, of Historians,
Chronologers, Geographerr, Physicians, and such like, do no never trouble the
brains of the ignorant: But for all that, I had rather be in Controversy with
the Learned, then without such controversy with you. If you scatter a handful
of Gold or Diamonds in the street, perhaps men will scramble for them, and fall
out about them, when swine will trample on them and quietly despise them,
because they do not know their worth: will you therefore think that swine are
happier then men? The Living are vexed with strifes and controversies, about
almost all the matters in the world; when the dead carcasses in the grave lie
still in peace, and are not troubled with any of these differences. And will
you say therefore that the dead corpse is happyer then the living? Sirs, the
case is very plain, if you will see, that thus it is as to the matter in hand.
It is a Death in sin, and compliance with the times and carnal Interest, and a
disesteem of spiritual holy things, that is the cause of the Agreement of the
wicked. But the godly know the worth of the things that you set light by, and
therefore make a greater matter of them then you, and therefore no wonder if
they have more debates and controversies about them.

3. And this also is another Reason of the difference. It is the Interest of
Satan to Divide the servants of Christ, but to Keep his own in Unity and Peace:
and therefore he will do what he can to accomplish it. He knows that a Kingdom
divided cannot stand: And therefore he will do his worst to Divide Christ's
Kingdom, and to keep his own from being divided. By a deceitful Peace it is
that he keeps his servants to him. And by casting among them the matter of
contentions and divisions he hops to get Christ's followers from him. So that
the Devil himself is the promoter of your Unity and Concord, but the destroyer
of ours; and therefore no wonder if you have fewer differences.

4. Besides, the way that ungodly men go in, is so suited to the common
corruption of nature, that it is no wonder if they be all agreed. All the world
can agree to eat and drink and sleep: And therefore all the sensual sinners in
the world may easily agree upon an overloving of meat and drink and sleep, and
so of riches and honors and pleasures. And as its easy, so it is not much
desirable; no more then if you should all agree to cast your selves headlong
into the Sea: when every house is infected with the Plague, there is an
Agreement among them: But had you not rather be one of those that, disagree
from them? But to Agree in a holy heavenly life, is contrary to corrupted
nature; and therefore no marvail if it be more difficult. When a Physician has
an hundred Patients in hand, he may easily get them all to Agree to eat and
drink that which they desire: But if he require them to forbear the things that
they most Love, because they will hurt them, the understanding sort will agree
to him, but so will not the rest. In a rotten house, the fall of one bearer may
occasion the fall of all the house; because their weight inclines them
downward: But if you take up one stone and cast it upward, all the rest of the
stones in the heap, will not fly upward with it. Its easier to draw others
with us down hill, then up the hill.

5. And it is considerable that the differences among the servants of Christ,
are not always from themselves, but from the ungodly enemies that contrive
their dissentions, and set them together by the ears, that they may fish in
troubled waters, and the better attain their wicked ends. It is the envious man
that sows these tares while we are asleep, and casts in this wildfire among
us.

6. Moreover, one of the greatest causes of the troublesome breaches and
divisions in the Church, is because there are so many unsanctified persons
among us, that seem to be of us, and to be truly godly, when it is not so. You
think it is the godly that have these divisions, when the most and worst of all
our Divisions proceed from the ungodly that have an unsound and unrenewed
heart, under the cloak of piety and zeal: For if they were truly gracious
persons, they durst not do as many of them do. 1. They durst not so rashly and
easily venture on novelties as they do, without deliberation and reading and
hearing what can be said on the other side. 2. They durst not so easily make a
division in the Church of Christ. 3. Nor so easily cast a stumblingblock before
the weak; and matter of reproach to our Christian profession before the wicked.
4. Nor durst they so easily reproach and condemn and cast off the unanimous
faithful Ministers of Christ. 5. Nor durst they so easily censure the universal
Church in former ages, as many of them do. 6. Nor durst they sacrifice the
success and honor of the Gospel and the common acknowledged Truths, and the
saving of men's souls thereby, to their private opinions, and ends. 7. Nor durst
they make so great a breach in Charity, nor so arrogantly condemn or slight
their brethren, whose piety and soberness they cannot deny. These with many
other evidences, do let us know that ungodly men crept in among us, are the
causes of most of our most dangerous divisions. And will you lay the blame of
this upon Religion, which the Devil and the secret enemies of Religion do
perform? Its your d^shonour and not ours: For these men are of your party,
though they seem to be of us. Satan knows well enough, that if he have not some
of his followers to be spies in Christ's Army, and to raise mutinies there and
betray the rest, he is like to be the more unsuccesful in his attempts, Was
Judas more a dishonor to Christ, or to the Devil? He was among the followers
of Christ indeed; but he told them beforehand of him, that he was a Devil; and
he never betrayed Christ till Satan had entered into him.

7. Lastly, the Saints themselves are sanctified but in part, and many in a low
degree; and being Imperfect in Holiness, must needs be as Imperfect in holy
Unity and Peace It is not their Holiness that causes their contentions, but
the remnants of their sin. And therefore its but small credit to the way of
sinners. Were we but perfectly rid of the vices which you cherish, and
perfectly separated from the ways that you so much delight in, and had we no
remnants of your disease and sinful nature in us, we should then have perfect
Unity and Peace. Do you think that its long of our Religion, that we disagree?
No: if we were but perfectly Religious we should be perfectly agreed. It is
because we are Holy in no greater a measure, and not because we are Holy at
all. It is not because of the way of Godliness that we have chosen; but because
we walk no faster, and no more carefully in that way. It is our too often
stepping out of it, and not our walking in it, that breaks our Peace with God
and man, and our own consciences. Search all the Scripture, and see where you
can find, that ever God encouraged his servants to divisions. No: but on the
contrary he often and earnestly cries them down, and warns all his followers to
avoid them, and the causers and fomenters of them. There was never Master so
much for Unity as Christ, and never was there a Law or a Religion that did so
much condemn Divisions, and command brotherly Love, and Peace and concord, and
forbearing and forgiving one another, as the Christian Law and Religion does.
And will you yet say that our Divisions are long of our Religion, or of Christ
the author of it? You may as wisely say, that eating is the cause of weakness,
because that some are weak for all their meat. But you will find that none can
live without it. Or you may say as wisely that Physicians are the causes of the
diseases of the world, because they do not cure them all. I tell you there is
none in all the world that have done so much for Unity and Peace, as Christ
has done. No: all the world set together have not done half so much for it as
he. He has preached Peace and Unity, forgiving and forbearing and Loving one
another, yea Loving our enemies; and he has gone before us in the perfect
practice of what he taught. He has offered himself a Sacrifice to the Justice
of his Father, that by his blood he might reconcile us unto God. He is the
great Peacemaker between God and man, between Jews and Gentiles, taking away
the enmity, and becoming himself the Head of our Unity; and giving us One
Spirit, one faith, one baptism, that we might be One in him who is One with the
Father. So that to charge the Center of Unity with our Divisions, and the
Prince of Peace himself with our Discords, or his holy Word or ways with our
Disagreements, is all one as to charge the Sun with Darkness, and to say that
our Lawgivers and Laws are the causes of theft and murder and Adultery, which
condemn them to death that are proved guilty of them. The cause of all our
disagreements and divisions, is, because we are no more Holy then we are, and
because we are no more Religious. So that I may leave it now as a Proved Truth
that we must Unite in the Spirit, and Agree in Holiness of Heart and life, if
ever we will have true Unity and Agreement.

AND now Sirs, you have seen the only way of Unity opened to you: Its plain and
past all doubt before you. If yet you will divide from God and his servants,
and if yet you will be numbered with the straglers or quarrellers, do not say
but Peace was opened and offered to you. Do not say, You could not have Peace,
but that you would not. Do not say any more hereafter, that there were so many
Religions and so many ways that you could not tell which to join with! Never
more pretend the differences of the godly as a cloak for your ungodliness. I
have opened the nakedness of such pretenses. You shall not be able when your
lives are scanned, to look God in the face with such an unreasonable impudent
pretense. Your consciences and the world shall then be witnesses of your shame;
that while you cried out of Sects and heresies, and were offended at the
Divisions of the Church, it was your selves that were the cause of it: It was
you and such as you that were the great Dividers; and that obstinately
proceeded in your Divisions, when the way of Peace was opened to you; and would
not be United in the Spirit to Christ, nor would not Agree in Holiness with his
Church, when you were acquainted that there was no other way to Peace. Would
you but have joined in a firm and everlaling Covenant to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, as your only Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifyer, as members of
the Holy Catholic Church, and have lived in the Communion of the Saints, you
should have received the Forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the just, and
Everlasting Life: But in refusing, and obstinate refusing these, you refused
all your hopes of Blessedness, and wilfully cast your selves on the wrath of
God: and therefore must endure it for ever.

THE last Advice that I have to give, upon the ground of this Doctrine, is, To
all that are United in the Spirit, and Agreed upon an Holy life. I mean to say
but little to you now; but briefly to tender you these two requests.

1. I beseech you Christians but to live as Christians, in that holy Unity as
your principles and profession do engage you to. Has true Christianity and
Holiness such abundance of advantages against division, and yet will you be
guilty of it? Against all these bonds and healing principles and helps, will
you be dividers? Does it not grieve you and even break your hearts, to hear
ungodly persons say that Professors are of so many minds and parties, that they
know not which of them to follow? and that we had never concord since you bore
sway? O do not seek by your contentious ways, to persuade people that Holiness
is a dividing thing, and that Religion does but tend to set the world together
by the ears. Is it not a precious mercy to us of this place, that we have
among us but one Church, and one Religion, and and have not Church against
Church, and Christian against Christian! I charge you from the Lord that you be
thankful for this benefit; and that you look upon divided places, and compare
their case with yours, that if ever dividers come amongst you, the sense of
your felicity in this blessed Unity may cause you to reject them; and that you
do not suffer any Dalilah to rob you of your strength and glory. Were you but
once here in pieces among your selves, what a scorn would you be to all the
ungodly? what sport would it be to them, to hear you disputing against one
another, and reproaching and condemning one another, as bitterly as the wicked
do reproach you all? Do you not pity those places where divisions have made
Religion to be a scorn, and the tender Love and Unity of the Saints is turned
into uncharitable censures and separations? Take warning then that you come not
to the like. If you should, you would be as unexcusable as any People in the
world, because you have tried and tasted so much of the sweetness and benefits
of Unity as you have done: show men by your lives, that Holiness is the most
certain way to Unity, as ever you desire either to propagate Holiness, or to
have any evidence of it in your selves.

2. Judge by this undoubted truth, of any doctrine that shall be offered you,
and of the ways of men and of your selves.

1. Suspect that doctrine that tends to divisions in the Church. If it be not
for Unity, it is not of God, Rom, 16.17. Christ came to heal and reconcile, and
is the Prince of Peace; and therefore sends not his servants on a contrary
errand. He will justify your dividing from the unbelieving world; but he
hates dividing among his servants. He that is for Church-division, is not (in
that) for Christ or you.

2. What ever holiness they may pretend to, adhere not to those men, and think
not too highly of them that are for Divisions among the Churches, or servants
of the Lord. You Will see them repent, or come to shame and confusion at the last.
You fly from Christ, if you fly from Unity.

3. Think not that you have any more of the Spirit or of Holiness, than you
have of Love to the Unity of the Saints. It is the spirit of Satan and not of
Christ that leads you to Church-divisions: It is a counterfeit Holiness that
makes you not desirous of Unity with all the Saints. If you be not first pure
and then peaceable, your wisdom is not from above. As you would all take that
man to be an enemy to Holiness, that is an enemy to Chastity, Temperance or
common honesty; So have you reason to think of him that is an enemy to the
Churches Unity and Peace. Show that you have the Spirit by the Unity of the
Spirit: and show that you are Holy by loving the Union and Communion of the
Saints.

Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
Disputations.

I Have already proved to you in the foregoing Discourse. 1. That the true
Unity of the Church of Christ is a Unity of the Spirit, and that the
unsanctified are the causes of our Divisions. 2. That a Unity in mere
Profession, is but a low and miserable Unity, which will not satisfy nor serve
the turn. 3. That a Unity in the Spirit of Holiness, is a great advantage for
the healing of all our lesser differences, or that we may do well for all those
differences, if we are truly sanctified. I come now to the fourth and last part
of my Discourse, which is to show you, that It is not the will of God that the
Unity of his Church should consist in things indifferent, or in the smaller
matters, or in points of doubtful Disputation. To which end I have chosen this
Text, in which Paul does purposely and plainly lay down this point, in order to
the reconciling of a difference that was then among the Romans; I shall not now
stand to discuss whether the weak that Paul here speaks of, were some
Christians tainted with a Pythagorear* conceit, and guilty of some excessive
Austerities (which some have thought, 1. Because here is no mention of
Circumcision, 2. and because they are said to eat herbs only) or whether it
were some Converts of the Jews, that scrupled the forsaking of their ancient
Ceremonies (which is the common and likelier Exposition.) 1. The person here
spoken of is [ Him that i^ weak in the Faith] that is, who is yet so ignorant
in the Doctrine of ^aith, as not to know that these Ceremonies are abolished,
or these matters are no part of duty, which he places duty in; and
consequently, who is so weak in Conscience as that he dare not omit the
observation of these days and Ceremonies. The Points in which the weakness of
these persons is said to be manifested, are, 1. In their abstaining from flesh,
and eating herbs, 2. In their observation of certain days as Holy.

2. The thing commanded is, that these persons for all their weakness be
Received, that is, 1. Into brotherly internal Charity. 2. Into Christian
external Communion. For it seems, that by reason of this their weakness, there
grew Divisions in the Church. The weak were so selfconceited, as to censure the
strong, because they did not observe their Ceremonies. And the strong were too
contemptuous of the weak, and made light of them as a superstitious people,
unfit for their Communion: Paul chides them both: the weak for censuring the
strong, and the strong for contemning the weak: and commands that for the
future, the weak forbear his judging, and the strong Receive the weak whom they
contemned, and so that they join in inward Love, and external Communion.

3. And he adds this caution, for the manner of their reception and
behavior, that it must not be [ to doubtful Disputations] either to the
censuring of one another, or to unseasonable uncharitable contendings and
disputes, about these smaller things. Three things Paul seems to suppose in
the matter of their controversy. 1. That they were matter of some
Indifferency. 2. That they were small, and of lowest consideration in Religion.
3. That to the weak they were so dark and doubtful, as to be the matter of
Disputes. But for all these, he would have no breach in their Charity or
Communion.

One doubt we must not overp^ss: And that is, How this will stand with what he
says in the Epistle to the Galathians. Here he says [ Let not him that eats
despise him that eats not: One man esteems one day above another: another
esteems every day alike: Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind:]
But there he says [ Ye observe days and months, and times, and years; I am
afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain, Gal. 4.10, 11.]
And of Circumcision, Gal. 5.2, 3. [ Behold I Paul say unto you, If ye be
Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing; for I testify again to every man
that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law.] ^or the
understanding of this you must observe, 1. That there is a great difference
between Circumcision, and the Ceremonies here spoken of. 2. And between the
outward act of Circumcision, and the Sacrament of Circumcision as appointed by
God. 3. And there is a great difference between the using it as necessary to
Justification, and the using the outward part only for some lawful end. 4. And
between the time when the Gospel was but newly revealed, and the time when it
was often and fully declared to the world. 5. And between those that are ignorant
for want of full information, and those that are obstinate after long
instruction. 6. And between those that scruple the omission of such Ceremonies
themselves; and those that would obtrude them as necessary upon others.
Observing these distinctions, you may see the difficulty plainly resolved, as
follows, 1. In this Text, Romans 14. Paul speaks not of Circumcision, but of
meats and days only. For Circumcision engaged men further to Moses Law, then
these single Ceremonies. 2. When Paul says, he was afraid of the Galathians,
because of their observation of days and weeks, and months, he means because
they still adhered to the abrogated Law, after so long and plain Instruction.
3. And though he circumcised Timothy, Acts 16.3. and yet speak against it, Gal.
5.2, 3. the difference of the Cases is exceeding great. For 1. It was but the
outward Circumcision of the flesh that he used with Timothy (as with one that
did not intend by it any engagement to Moses, or necessity of it to
Justification.) But it was the entire Sacrament of Circumcision which was
pretended to continue necessary, by the false Teachers, and which he exhorted
the Galathians to refuse. And Circumcision as a Sacrament, does signify two
principal things. 1. An Engagement to and profession of Faith in the Promised
Seed, as promised and future. 2. An Engagement to Moses Law (for this use it
had after the Law was given.) Now when Christ was come, that man that would
still be Circumcised into, and profess to expect a Messiah yet to come, and
that would engage himself to that Law, which contained the Types of a future
Messiah, and was but a Schoolmaster to lead to Christ, I say that person that
was thus Circumcised (as all were that received it according to the
institution) did plainly deny, that Christ was come, and therefore Christ could
profit them nothing. But yet a man that used but the outward sign to avoid an
impediment to the Gospel (as Paul did in the case of Timothy;) or if it were
erroneously as a mere Custom, as the Abassines now do, might yet be saved by
Christ nevertheless. 2. And when Paul used it, it was as an indifferent thing:
but he condemned it as supposed necessary. 3. When he used it, it was in the
beginning of the publication of the Gospel, that (as Austin speaks) he might
give the Ceremonies an honorable burial: But when he condemned it, it was
after the full Publication of the abolition of the Law, against those that
would have raked it out of the grave again. 4. He bore with it in the weak; but
he condemned it in the wilful. 5. He bore with it in those that scrupled the
forsaking it as they were Jews: but he condemned it in those that would have
laid this yoke as necessary on the Gentiles.

Object. But it seems here that Paul is against the necessary observation of
the Lords day, when he is for esteeming all days alike.

Answ. If you understand the subject of the debate, you will understand his
speech. It is only Jewish Holydays that was the matter in Question, and
therefore of these only is he to be understood. As for the Lords day, its plain
in the New Testament, that Christ did not only rise upon it, and appear to his
Disciples on it, and send down the Holy Ghost upon it* but that the Disciples
presently after Christ's Resurrection, began their Religious Assemblies on it,
and so continued them, by the guidance of the Holy Ghost; and so settled that
day for the use of the Holy Assemblies of the Church, calling it the Lords day,
Ioh. 21.19, 26. Act. 2.1. and 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Rev. 1.10. And it is past all
doubt in the History of the Church, that since the Apostles days till now, the
Church has constantly kept this day as thus established, by the name of the
Lords day: which the Fathers called the Christian Sabbath, as they applied the
name of an Altar to the Table, and of a Sacrifice to the Supper of the Lord: so
that he that will reject the observation of the Lords day, must take on him to
be wiser then the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, and then all the Catholic Church
of Christ, from the beginning, till these contentious persons did arise.

The Text being thus explained, the Doctrine before mentioned is plain in it
before us, viz.

Doctrine. IT is the will of God that the Unity of the Church should not be
laid upon indifferent, small, and doubtful points: but that true Believers who
differ in such things should notwithstanding have inward Charity and outward
Communion with one another, not Censuring, nor despising, nor dividing from
each other upon this account.

In handling this point I shall briefly show you, 1. What I mean by things
indifferent; 2. What I mean by [smaller matters] 3. What by [doubtfull things
or disputations] And then I shall give you the Reasons of it, and then Apply it.

1. For the Explication, 1. By [ things indifferent] I do not mean [things hic
and nunc, indifferent in the use] but [things that are not ordinarily in
themselves either commanded as Duties, or forbidden as sins, but left as
Lawful or Indifferent by the Scriptures, unless as some accident or
circumstance may make them to be good or evil.

2. By [ smaller matters] its none of my intent to persuade you that any thing
that is but an appurtenance to Faith or Piety is Absolutely small: But they are
small in comparison of the far greater things, and so small that many are saved
without them, and they are not of flat necessity to salvation; and the Greater
matters must be preferred before them.

3. By [ things doubtfull] I do not mean such as are not certainly revealed in
the Scripture, nor yet such as perverse Heretical men do raise doubts about
when they are plain in themselves: But I mean such points as are revealed
certainly, but more darkly then the greater points, and therefore cannot be so
clearly known; so that the sum is this, 1. Indifferent things must not be taken
to be Necessary, or sinful, but to be indifferent: 2. Lower and Lesser points
must not be taken to be Greater or Weightier then they are. 3. Points of less
certainty that are more darkly revealed; must not be taken to be more clear and
certain to us, then they are. 4. And it is not on such darker smaller matters
that God has laid our salvation; or that the Churches Unity and Peace
depends.

II. FOr the fuller Demonstration of this, let these Reasons be observed. 1. If
our Unity were laid on these smaller matters, the multitude of them is such,
that we should never Agree in all. The Essentials of Christianity are so few
that all men may well be expected to learn and know and entertain them. But the
smaller points are so many that there is no hope of an universal Agreement in
them all. You know in the Body of man or Beast, the great Master veins that are
the stock of all the rest, are but a few; but follow them further, and you
shall have so many Divisions, and sub-divisions, till you find them to be many
hundreds or thousands. So is it with the Arteries, and with the Nerves. The
Body of a Tree is but one, and the first division perhaps is but into two or
three parts; but follow it to the very ends of the branches, and you may find
many thousands. So is it in Divinity: And therefore if none should be in Unity
with the Church, but those that understand every branch of Christian verity,
what hope of Union could there be?

2. Moreover the smaller points are far less discernable then the greater be:
and therefore there is the less hope that ever the Church should have Unity in
these. The great arms of a Tree are easily discerned, when the extremities of
the branches are very small. The trunks of the masterveins are great and easily
seen, but the points and capillar veins are so small, as hardly to be
perceived. So God in mercy has made very plain those few essential points of
faith that salvation lies on: but if you follow on these generals to all the
particulars and appurtenances, you shall find them run so small as well as so
many, as that it is impossible that Unity should consist in these.

3. Furthermore, if our Unity were laid on these, Religion would be for none
but the learned, and (as the Ancients ordinarily argue against the Heathens
that cavilled at the plainness of the Scripture) God should be then Partial,
and should make a way to Heaven that poor men cannot go. For the poor cannot
possibly attain to so much Learning, and spend so much of their lives in study,
as may bring them to the knowledge of all these lower difficult points.

4. Yea if our Unity or Salvation lay on these, it is certain it would shut us
out all, both from Unity and Salvation: so that there would no two be at Unity
in all the world, and no One be saved. For all men on earth are Ignorant in
many lesser truths, even such as are revealed to us in the Scripture, and we
should endeavor to understand. What man dare affirm that he understands
every word of the Holy Scripture? Did the Pope himself think that he had
attained to this Infallibility, he would ere this have written us an infallible
Commentary. If the best must say with Paul himself, we know but in part, then
sure those smaller doubtful things which all the truly sanctified know not, are
not the matter of the Unity of the Church.

5. I have showed in my Discourse of the Catholic Church, that to shut out all
from the Church and our Communion that differ from us in such lower things, is
utterly against the design of Christ, and the tenor of the Gospel, and very
dishonorable to him and to his Church: God has more mercy then to shut out
the weak: and will you dishonor him so far as to persuade the world, that he
has no such mercy. The design of the Gospel is Grace and Love! How tender was
Christ even of his little ones that believe in him? How compassionate is he to
them in their infirmities? And would you go about to persuade the world that he
has so little of this compassion, as that he will admit none to Heaven, or to
the Communion of his Church but those that attain to Knowledge and Agreement in
all these lesser doubtful Controversies, and indifferent things? The Church is
small enough already; but if you would cut off all, that do not Agree in every
circumstance, you would make it small indeed. This is no better, then under
pretense of Faith and Unity, to un-Church the Church, and damn your selves, and
all the world.

6. The Arguments in the Text are very forcible, verse 3. [ For God has
received him] As if he should say, Dare you despise or cast out him that God
receives? ver. 4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? ver. 10. Why
do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou set at naught thy brother? we
shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ? The Church does not
censure men for small or doubtful things: nor must we condemn those that God
does not condemn.

7. The laying such stress on smaller things, does multiply controversies, and
fill the minds of men with scruples, and ensnare their consciences, and engage
men in parties against each other to the certain breach of Charity, and ruin
of the Peace of the Church, and of their souls. The fire of Contention will
never go out for want of fuel, if unnecessary things be made necessary, and
small things pretended to be great, and uncertain things pretended to be
certain. Abundance of vice will be daily set and kept at work, upon this
borrowed stock.

8. And what a world of precious Time will be wasted by this means, while men
are Studying and Reading to maintain their own opinions; and when they must
waste their hours when they are together, in Conferences and
wrangling-Disputations, to the discomposing of their own and others minds, and
certain troubling the Church of God! Oh what use have we for those precious
hours, for surer, greater, and more needful things?

9. The things that our salvation and the Churches Peace are indeed laid upon,
are so great, so necessary, so pleasant, and so profitable, that it leaves us
the more without excuse, to waste our time in things unnecessary. We have our
great Creator to know and honor: we have the mystery of Redemption to search
into and admire: we have the Nature, and Life, and Death, and Resurrection, and
Ascension, and Glorification, and Intercession of Christ to study and believe;
and all the Love and Wisdom of God, the Mercy, and the Holiness, and Justice
that was revealed in him: we have Judgment to prepare for; and all the Graces
of the Spirit of Christ to be received, or cherished, increased and exercised
in our Souls. We have a Hell to escape, and a Heaven to obtain, and the foreseen
glory of it to feed upon, for the strengthening and delighting of our Souls: we
have many particular duties of Holiness and Righteousness to attend: And in the
midst of all this great employment, should we make more work and trouble to our
selves, and that about unnecessary things?

10. These unnecessary or lower things, when once they are advanced above their
rank, do undermine and wrong the greater matters, which they pretended to
befriend. They divert the thoughts and speeches from them, and take up the
affections, and will not be contented with their due proportion: but are, as
the Proverb is, like a Beggar on horseback, that will never light. If men be
but set upon Ceremonies, or private opinions of their own, they are upon it in
all companies; and you shall sometimes have almost nothing else from them. And
that is not all; but the Interest of their unnecessary, or lower points, is
ordinarily set up against the Interest of that Body of Christian Verities which
we are all agreed in; so that they can be contented that Christianity lose much
advantage in the greater points, that their cause may be advantaged. If this
were not so, we should not have had ceremonies and formalities have cast out
such abundance of excellent Preachers heretofore: Nor private Opinions have set
so many against the labors of faithful Ministers, as, to our grief and shame,
we have lately seen: And the mischief is, that unnecessary things made
necessary, do so involve the Imposers interest with their own, that they think
they are Necessitated to drive them on, and see their Impositions obeyed, or
else their wisdom or authority is (...).

^1. And thus they directly lead men to persecution, and occasion those that
must needs have their wills, to Lord it over Gods heritage, (1 Pet. 5.3.) when
the desire of being the Churches God, has prevailed so far with any of its
members, as to set them upon a course of Law-giving and domineering, and
bringing others into a conformity to their wills; they look upon all men as
sinners that disobey them, and think that their power will warrant them to
force ^^edience to their commands, or (...) to deprive the Church of her
Pastors. Many a Congregation have I known change Preachers for Ceremonies; when
as if Gods Will and Word in Necessary things to men's Salvation, had but been
preferred to the will and word of the Bishops, about things called Indifferent
by themselves, the case had been altered; and they would rather have let the
ignorant have been without a Ceremony then a Sermon. It is the unhappy fate of
almost all that are set upon unnecessary things, that they cannot endure that
others should have the liberty of differing from them. It is not enough to them
to enjoy the freedom of their own Consciences, about meats, or holydaies, or
gestures or vestures, or other formalities, unless all others be compelled to
do as they do. When they are but moved to comply with others, though plain
Scripture and the practice of the Primitive Cathilick Church be justly alleged
for it, yet it moves them little or nothing. But if others will not comply
with them, they cry out against them as enemies to Unity and Peace; and say, It
is not fit to suffer men to be of so many minds and ways. That is, It is fit
all should be compelled to do as they would have them.

12. And another mischief that follows the making unnecessary things to be
Necessary, is, that it opens a gap to so many more of the same kind, that no
man knows how to stop it, nor when we have Ceremonies and inventions enough:
But upon the same ground that these are brought in to day, the next Pope or
Bishop thinks he may bring another tomorrow; and so we can never tell when we
have all, nor when will be an end.

13. And then in the multitude of things unnecessary, we shall be in danger of
losing the things that are necessary, they will be so buried or obscured in the
crowd: the substance will scarce be perceived for the ceremony.

14. And me thinks it is such height of Pride for mortal men to arrogate such a
power, and to desire and endeavor such a thing, that I wonder how they dare
attempt it. I mean to make universal or unnecessary Laws for the Church in the
matters of faith or worship. Can a man that has one spark of humility left in
him, desire that his will may be a Law to all others, in doubtful or
indifferent things? and proceed so far as to desire that none may have Liberty
in the Church that are not of his opinion, or will not be ruled by him, in
things indifferent or of no necessity! Surely a man of any humility would think
with himself, Am not I also imperfect in knowledge? and may I not be mistaken?
what is my judgment that it should be a Law to the Church, and that I should
be so highly conceited and confident of it, as to turn out godly Ministers or
people from the Church or worship of God, for not conforming themselves to my
opinion in things of such a low indifferent nature! He that would be the
Lawgiver to the Church, and suffer none but those of his own opinion in such
points, would be the Lord of the Church, which can know the voice of none but
Christ, and owneth no other Lord but him.

15. And the sin is the greater because they have so little Interest or
pretense to lead them to these usurpations: They must have their will though it
get them nothing. Who made them Lawgivers to the Church of Christ? Cannot they
allow Christ this part of the Sovereignty, to make Laws for his Church? And
cannot they be content with a Ministerial power, to proclaim and promote the
Laws of Christ, and according to these to guide his Church?

16. And hereby men are drawn to a humane kind of Religion: And they do more
properly believe, obey and worship these Imposers then Jesus Christ: when they
must fetch the very matter of their Religion, not from the Bible, but the
Canons or Decrees of men, their conscience, obedience and reward will be
according thereunto.

17. And hereby the adversaries of the Church have occasion to insult over us,
and think our Differences to be more then indeed they are. When the Unity of
the Church is laid upon things Indifferent or of smalest moment, there will
presently be disagreements, and these will be the enemies matter of reproach.
It is this that makes the Papists tell us of our differences among our selves,
because we have made them seem something to them, when they are next to
nothing. O say they, where is your Church of England now? why! what is the
matter? Is the Church of England dead? Or is any thing taken down that was
essential to the Church of England! was a Prelacy ruling by a lay-Chancelor
over many hundred Parishes, chosen and Governing without the body of the
Clergy, Essential to the Church of England? I am confident the most of the
sober godly Ministers in England, are for the Apostolical primitive Episcopacy
still. Was the Book of Canons, or the Book of Common Prayer, or the Ceremonies
Essential to the Church of England? Sure they were not; And if so, its living
still. But if any say that these were Essential to it, we may thank them for
the death of it, that made it of such a humane mortal frame, which any Prince
might spurn down at his pleasure. Surely the Church or Churches of Christ in
England, are of a more heavenly durable frame, that may be persecuted, but
hardly destroyed, while the men are living, of whom it does consist.

Hence also it is that the Papists tell us that we have changed all our
worship. And wherein? why we have not the same Baptism that we had; nor the
same administration of the Lords Supper, nor the same public Prayer, nor the
same way of Marrying, Churching, Burying, etc. And what is the difference? Is it
that we say not at every time the very same words? why so you may as well say,
that Paul was mutable, because he wrote not the same words in every one of his
Epistles, nor spoke not the same words in all his Prayers, no not in public.
And so both you and we are mutable, because we preach not the same words every
day in our Sermons. God has bid us Pray; but he has prescribed us no
necessary form of words, but the Lords Prayer. If the difference be that we use
not the Common Prayer Book; does that make a different sort of worship? Is it
not the same sort of worship if we say the same words, or words to the same
sense, either on the Book or off it? If once men lay the Nature of worship and
the Unity of the Church upon things unnecessary, then what changes will seem to
be in our worship, when indeed there is none? Then the Papists may tell us of our
divisions in worship, because one man sits at the singing of Psalms and
another stands; and one reads with spectacles and another without; and one
wears a cap, and another wears none; and one preaches on one Text and
another upon another: But be it known to all the Papists in the world, that our
Religion is not changed at all: Our worship is the same whether within Book or
without. Our Prayers are the same for matter with those in the Common Prayer
Book. And if I should one day use the Common Prayer Book, and another day
forbear it, I should not change the worship of God. To pray is part of his
worship: but whether it be on a Book or off it, is no part at all, but only a
mode, or circumstance, which may be altered as occasion serves. I doubt not
but a Book is fittest for some; but not for all. And do they think that we know
not what adding and chopping and changing they have made with their Mass Book?
Who is it then that has changed their worship? Is it like the same Book that
it was before the changes made by Gregory the great? It was so ordinary a thing
to change the manner and forms of worshp, that private Bishops did it without
any Synods: whence else had the world the forms that are now in use? Tell us
how many of those in the Biblioth. Patrum were made by Apostle, or General
Council, if you can. When Basil the great had set up a new way of singing to
God, and made some other changes in worship, the Clergy of Neocesarea were
offended with him for the novelty, and told him that none of that was used in
Gregory's days: To whom he answers that neither was their own Letany known in
Gregory's days, (who yet had lived not 140 years before, and was the famous
founder of their Church by miracles.) Basil Epist. 63. And Basil added to the
Clergy of Neocesara. [But how can you tell that these things were not in use
in Gregory's days, when you have kept nothing unchanged which he was used to?]
And that you may see his mind in this, he adds [ But I pardon all these things,
(though God will examine all:) Only let the principal things be kept safe.] If
we had changed the Sacraments as the Papists have done, viz. a Commemorative
Sacrifice into a Real Sacrifice of Christ himself; the Sacramental Body and
blood of Christ into the Real Body and blood; the administration of it in both
kinds, into one kind alone, defrauding the people of the cup; the Communion
into a private Mass, the people only looking on the Priest, when he receives
alone himself, etc. I say, had we made such changes as these, they might have
called us changelings indeed, and have told us of novelties in the worship of
God.

18. Moreover this laying so much upon lower or unnecessary things, does
impoverish the soul, and make it low and empty and formal, according to the
matter that it has to work upon. As the great unquestionable Truths of God,
are they that sanctify and elevate the soul, and leave their Image on it; so
will contending about private opinions, or laying out our zeal in ceremonies
and shaddows, depress the soul and famish it, and turn our Religion into a
shadow. We find by sad experience that people are so prone to turn all
Religion into mere words and shows and customary formalityes, that when we have
done our best, we cannot cure them of this mortal sin: God is a Spirit, and
will have such worshippers as worship him in spirit and in truth, John 4.23. We
have little need to cherish this disease of hypocrisy and seeming histrionical
outside Religiousness, when we see so many perish by it after all that we can
do for their deliverance.

19. And this making a Religion of unnecessary things, or laying the Churches
Unity thereon, is a dangerous snare to delude the Ignorant and ungodly, and
make them believe that they are godly people, and in the way to Heaven as well
as others. I use not this or any Argument against the profitable use of any
forms in order to the understanding of the matter; nor against the due
circumstantiating of the worship of God: But if profitable forms, and Gods own
Ordinances are somewhat liable to this abuse, we cannot devise how to increase
the danger, and quite enthral these miserable souls more certainly then by
multiplying unnecessary formalityes, and placing Religion and Unity in them.
For they that are most ignorant, and empty of the Love and fear of God, and the
bitterest enemies to a Heavenly life, will presently set in with these
formalities, and make themselves a Religion of these; and then they will take
themselves as godly as the best. You shall never make them believe that they
are ungodly. They think the difference lies but in the way and manner of
serving God: You serve him one way, and they another; but yet they serve him as
well as you: Yea they will overdo in these Indifferent things, that they may
make up that which is wanting in true godliness; and then they will think that
they are better and righter then you. Thus did the Heathens cry out against the
ancient Christians with a Tollite impios, away with the ungodly; and killed
them and cast them to wild beast to be torn by them, because they would not
worship their Idols. And so many ungodly wretches now that will not be
persuaded to a Holy life, will yet cry dow others as impious because they
observe not all the Ceremonies which they observe. When we have used all the
means we can to bring them to the study of the Scripture, and to meditate in
the Law of the Lord, and to holy conference, and servent prayer; to hatred of
sin, the contempt of the world, the mortifying of the flesh, to the Love of God
above all, to a thankful admiration of the Love of Christ, and the great
mystery of Redemption, to the believing, delightful forethoughts of everlasting
life, and preparation for it, etc. I say, when we have done all to bring them
to this which is godlyness indeed, we lose our labor, and leave them as we
find them. They cannot away with so precise a life: But yet a Religion they
will have instead of it, to deceive their souls, and quiet them in the way to
Hell. For instance, I must speak it with grief of heart, that I meet with no
small number among us that know not who Christ is; some say he is God and not
man; some say, he is man and not God; some say he was made both God and man at
once: some say he is neither God nor man, but a Spirit: some say, he is not
God, but the Son of God, and has the power of God given him: Abundance say
that he is God only and not man, now he is in Heaven, though he was both on
earth: and very many know not what Christianity is, nor wherein the Christian
Religion does consist. And yet all these persons, that are Heathens rather then
Christians, are the most zealous Keepers of Christmas (as it is called,) and
the bitterest condemners of those that do not; and so do make themselves
believe that they are Christians as well as others. The same persons that know
not who Christ is, nor what it is to be a Christian, are so much for kneeling
at the taking of the Lords Supper, that they dare not be so unreverent as to
sit or stand; but will rather never receive at all: (nor are they fit till they
change in a greater matter then the gesture:) And yet, poor souls, they think
themselves to be very Religious, and more Reverent then others, and that here
lies the difference between them. It would grieve the heart of a considerate
man, to see a multitude of miserable sinners, to live in wickedness, in
cursing, swearing, drunkenness, filthiness, neglect of God and a holy life,
drowned in worldly-mindedness, and as regardless of the life to come as if they
thought they should die like the beasts: and even hating those that will not be
ungodly as well as they; and yet as hot for Ceremonies, and Holydays, and
kneeling at the Sacrament, and the Common Prayer Book, as if they were more
devout then others and it seems they have made themselves believe in good
earnest that they are true Christians and Godly men, because in the depth of
their ungodliness they can make a stir against those that will not be of their
mind, and use these Ceremonies as well as they.

If any of you say, that I am now speaking against your opinions or Ceremonies
themselves, as if I could not give you leave to use them, you will but show
your selves mistaking hearers, and false reporters. No, it is the laying too
much stress on these matters, and making Indifferent things seem Necessary, as
if Gods Worship, or the Unity of the Church lay on them, which I speak against:
And therefore I must needs say, that both sides may be guilty of this sin:
Principally the Imposers of them, that would have all men forced to do as they
do; and next them there may be too much guilt in those that make indifferent
things seem evil, or lesser evils to be much greater then they are, and so
would make a Religion of avoiding what others make it their Religion to
observe. And whether your Religion lie in being for or against these points in
question (such as the Apostle speaks of in my Text) is no great difference: For
the Religion of both will prove but a mere shadow: yea an over hot opposing of
such Middle things, does teach those that are for them to believe that they are
matters of very great moment, or else they think you would not make so great a
matter of them. And then when you have taught them by your fierce opposition,
to make a Great matter of them; and custom and their party has taught them to
think their way is best; both these set together do delude their souls, and
make them think that because of their Formalities, they are godly men, in the
depths of their ignorance, ungodliness and misery.

20. Lastly, observe how we sin against the sad experience of the Church in all
Ages, by laying our Religion or Unity upon these smaller or unnecessary things.
What has distracted the Church so much as contendings about their Ceremonies
and Orders, and precedence and superiority! Heresies I know have done their
part (especially the Arrians:) but smaller matters have had two great a hand in
it: what plentiful evidence could I give you of this? The lamentable divisions
of the Christian world about Easter day, which the first General Council was
fain to meet about and decide, is too sad an Instance. But, alas, the present
Age it self has given us too sad and plenteous proofs of it. By a heap of
Ceremonies, and unnecessary things, the Roman Church has almost drowned both
the Doctrine, Worship and Discipline of Christ, and miserably torn the Church
in pieces, and so continues to do. And what work this mistake has made in
England, I have no mind to tell you, while our smart and sufferings tell you
of it more plainly then is fit for me to do. Indifferent things have shut out
that which was better then Indifferent. Consider well these twenty Reasons, and
then judge whether the Religion or Unity of the Church should be placed in
unnecessary things. The imposing of them I shall speak of by it self.

Use. FRom the Text and Doctrine explained and confirmed, we may see these
following Consectaries arise.

1. Hence we see the tender mercy of God to them that are sincere in the Faith,
though weak. If their understandings be dark, and their judgments in lesser
things mistaken, and their Consciences therein erroneous; yet if they be but
true Believers, and right in the main, and willing to know the mind of God and
to obey it, God would not have them excluded from the Communion of the Saints,
but rather received with charity and compassion; and would have the stranger
bear with their infirmities ( Romans 15.1.) He will not himself reject them; and
therefore he would not have them rejected or despised by his Servants.

Use 2. Hence also we may see, that God will bear more, and so must his Church,
with smaller Errors, then with the uncharitable or dividing management of those
errors. Though men should err about meats or days or such like matters, we
must yet receive them and love them as Believers: But yet if they will hereupon
despise, or censure one another to the breach of Charity, and trouble of the
Church, for this they must be sharply rebuked, as Paul here does.

Use 3. Hence also you may learn, How far men should desire and enjoy a Liberty
in matters of Religion, and how far the Magistrate should interpose with force,
and how far not. A liberty to live in sin, or to subvert the Gospel, and the
souls of others, the Magistrate should give to none: But a Toleration in things
of a lower nature, that hazardeth not men's souls, nor the Unity of the Church,
should be granted to the weak. Can we be bound with Charity to receive them,
and yet to provoke the Magistrate to punish them, and deal severelyer with them
then we! This may not be desired.

Use 4. Hence also you may see what an enemy Popery is to the Unity of the
Church, and how impossible it is that the Church should have Unity upon their
terms: when they have composed a Religion of so many Ceremonies, and
unnecessary things, and new devised Articles and Sacraments; and none must be a
Catholic Christian with them that will not be of th^s ^^^^gion, and vow or
practice all their Novelties. So far are they (...) practicing the Doctrine of
my Tex^, that they set themselves in op^osition to it, and place their Relig^on
and the Unity of their Church in such things as Paul here requires us not so
much as to judge one another in; or in worse then these. A Catholic Unity is
impossible: on their terms.

Use 5. To conclude, I advise all that are unfeigned friends to the Unity of
the Church, to practice the wholesome Doctrine of this Text. If you have Zeal,
there is sin enough in your selves and others to lay i^ out upon: Bear not with
Infidelity, Sensuality, Impenitency or any ungodly course. If men be not so
much as weak Believers, and seem not Saints at least of the lower form, receive
not these into your Communion; but leave them under your common compassionate
charity. If you can prove that God receives them not, then do not you Receive
them. But as you are Christians, take heed of cutting off or despising the
Members of Christ; and of giving a Bill of divorce to any soul that is truly
espoused to him: You have Drunkards, and Railers, and notorious ungodly ones
enough to exercise all your Zeal, if you join both head and heart and hand
against them: And can you find in your hearts to fall upon one another for
indifferent things, or smaller matters, which the Unity of the Church does not
consist in? I speak to both sides impartially; and I beseech you so understand
me. What if thy weak Brother pray upon a Book, dare thou therefore despise
him? and what if thy Brother pray without Book, dare thou therefore judge
him? Nay dare thou desire that none but such should have liberty to Preach or
Worship in the Church? What if thy weak Brother dare not receive the Sacrament
unless he Kneel in the act of receiving it? dare thou therefore despise him?
And what if thy Brother on the other side, do rather take it in another
gesture, because he is sure that Christ and his Apostles sinned not in so
doing, and because he finds that our Kneeling is contrary to the practice of
the ancient Church (yea ad hominem, I may say) contrary to General Councils,
yea to the last Canon of the first General Council it self, which even the
Canonists say that no Provincial Council, or Bishops can repeal (with many
other reasons;) dare you therefore judge him, because he dare not imitate you
rather then Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Church for many hundred
years? If any imagine that I go against this necessary Toleration my self,
because all here receive the Sacrament sitting; I answer, Let them prove that
ever I refused one person merely because they would take it Kneeling, if they
can. If you say, Why then are not all admitted to take it Kneeling? I answer,
Soft and fair; There are greater matters then Kneeling in the way. Do but first
let go your vicious courses, and agree with us in a holy life, and turn
unfeignedly to God, and live in the Church Order that he has plainly
commanded; and then, if I cannot give you satisfaction, you shall have liberty
to take it in the gesture that you desire, so be it you will grant me my
liberty as I grant you yours.

One instance more, Tomorrow is the day called Christmas day, and many days
called Holy days do follow it; If you will but Read and Mark this Chapter, Romans
14. I am persuaded it may prevent a great deal of sin, that many of you on both
sides may be guilty of. Is it not a wonder that after so large and plain a
decision by the Holy Ghost, as here you find, there should yet be any
controversy among us about this Case? Do you take the word of God for your
Rule or not? If you do, why then does it not Rule you, and end the difference?
Do you not read the Apostl^s words, ver. 14. [ One man esteems one day above
another: another esteems every day alike: Let every man be fully persuaded in
his own mind.] If you were Papists that would say the Scripture is obscure, and
therefore you must have a General Council, you could scarce devise how a
Council should speak more plain then this. But nothing will serve some men, but
their own wills. Dare you on the one side, despise your weak Brother now for
esteeming ^hese days above the rest? Why perhaps it is to God that he esteems
it: and the ancient custom of the Church, and practice of many godly persons,
do persuade him that it is right: And dare you on the other side condemn or
reproach them that make not this difference of days as you do? If we are
contented that you have your Liberty (which truly I would not deprive you of,
if it were in my power) cannot you be contented that we have ours? There are
three opinions about these Holy days. 1. Some think the observance of them a
necessary Religious Duty. 2. Some think the very outward observance to be an
intolerable sin. 3. Some know that both these extremes are erroneous, and
therefore they take the thing in it self to be indifferent, but as
circumstances or accidents may make it Good or Evil: And these are in the
right. They that are in the Middle can bear with others, but the other cannot
bear with them, nor with each other. There is no proof that ever I saw, that
the Church observed any of these days, of many hundred years after Christ. For
the Clement, the Dionysius, the Cyprian that are cited for it, are known to be
spurious. And it is unlikely that none of these would have been mentioned as
well as the Lords day, if they had been then observed, when there was so much
ado about the time of Easter day. Yea it is certain that of diverse hundred
years after Christ, it was not agreed on, which was the day of Christ's
Nativity; some thought it was on January 6. and therefore called it the
Epiphany, or Appearance: And of old both the birth day and Circumcision of
Christ were supposed to be on that same day, that is, on the sixth of January.
Caessianus witnesses that the Egyptians were of that mind: Collat. l. 10. c.
11. And Epiphanius witnesses the same of the Greek and Asian and Syrian
Churches. Epiphanius himself and N^zianzen, and many others were of this mind,
that it was on January 6. and that thence it was called the Epiphanis. And
Chrys^stom in Hom. in Natal. D^m. tells us that it was but ten years before he
wrote it, that the Romans had persuaded the Church of Constantinople to change
the day to December 25. And yet the Countries about Jerusalem held to the 6. of
January, as Causabon has showed, Exercit. 2. cap. 4. p. 170, 171. and cap. 11.
p. 186, 187. Yea indeed the Day of Christ's Nativity is yet unknown, as if God
had kept us ignorant of purpose: Many very learned men, as Broughton, Helvicus,
Scaliger, Beroaldus, think that the day was about Autumn in the beginning of
October: Calvisius, Paraeus, and many more are for other times then December
25. and Iac. Cappellus and many others still go the old way for January 6. And
Th. Lydiat out of Clem. Alexandr. is for May 20. Scultetus, Clopenburgius and
many others do show that indeed the time is utterly uncertain. And no wonder if
the day be uncertain when the very year is so uncertain, that there is no
probability of ever comeing to a full agreement about it among the Learned in
Chronology till the last comeing of Christ agree them. Our late most Learned
Chronologer (Bishop Usher) was confident that we were about four years too late
in our common account, as in his Annals may be seen. And what man can reveal
the things that God has purposely concealed? For my part, I dare not judge men
for keeping or not keeping such days as these. But if any will make it a
necessary thing to the Universal Church, I must resist that usurpation; as Paul
that had Circumcised Timothy, did cry down circumcision when some would have
obtruded it as a necessary thing. And for this I have an Argument that
sustaineth my Religion it self even the sufficiency of the Holy Scripture. If
this be not the Law of God, then farewell Christianity: If it be his Law, it is
sufficient in its kind, and to its ends, which is 1. To determine of all things
that were then fit to be determined of: 2. And to determine of all that the
Universal Church in all times after must be bound to. There is no Universal
Lawgiver but Christ. If this day be of Necessity, it was so then as well as
now, and it is so to one Country as well as another: for there is the same
reason for it in one age and place as in another. And therefore if Scripture be
not a sufficient Rule for Universal Duties of Religion, then we are utterly at
a loss; and as Popery will come first in, so Infidelity is likely to come next.
I doubt not but pro re nata, upon emergent occasions, Church Governors may
appoin^ Religious Anniversary solemni^^es. For the occasion of these being 1.
To some one place or Pro^^^ce only: 2. And not existent (...) Scripture times;
it did not bel^^^ to the Universal Law to determine of them. But in cas^s that
equally belong to the Universal Church, and where the Reason and occa^^on was
existent in the Apostles days as well as now, if there we have not their
determination, no others can come after them and make it universally Necessary.
And indeed neither General Councils nor Apostolic Tradition can be pleaded for
the Necessity. And sure I am that the one day in seven, even the Lord's Day, of
his own appointment, which the Universal Church has constantly observed, is a
Festival for the commemoration of the whole work of Redemption, and therefore
of the Birth of Christ, though especially of the Resurrection: And therefore we
are not without a Day for this use.

I speak not all this to condemn any that use these days; but to excuse those
that use them not, and by telling you a few of those many reasons which they
have to give for themselves, to persuade you both to lay by the opinion of
Necessity, and to forbear condemning those that differ from you, and be content
that they have their liberty, as we are freely content that you have yours; and
Lay not the Unity and Peace of the Church upon such things as these, when the
Holy Ghost has so plainly decided the case. And I could heartily wish that the
Lords own day were not most wilfully neglected by many that are most forward
for other Holy Days. Its a fearful self-delusion of ungodly people that no
means can bring them to a New, a Holy and Heavenly life; and yet they will make
themselves believe that they are Religious, by pleading for forms, and days
and ceremonies. Alas poor soul, if thy eyes were but opened, thou would see
that thou have other kind of matters first to look after! It would grieve one
to hear a man contending for Kneeling and Holidays, and Prayer-books, that is
in a state of unregeneracy, and a stranger to sanctification, and under the
dominion of his sins, and under the curse and wrath of God. Get first a new and
holy Nature; make sure of the pardon of sin, and of Peace with God, and then
the discourse of lower matters will be more seasonable and more savoury.

Is it not a shameful self-condemning to keep Holy Days for the dead Saints,
and to hate and rail against the Living? Do you know what kind of men those
were that are called Saints, and Holy Days were kept in remembrance of them?
They were such as those that now are hated by the world, and took the course in
a holy and diligent care of their salvation, as these do, and therefore were
hated by the world, as the godly now are; and when wicked men had put them to
death, the godly that survived would keep a day in remembrance of their
Martyrdom, to encourage others to constancy for Christ. And also because the
unruly multitude were so set upon their pleasure, that they kept the Idols
festivals for their sport sake; therefore some Pastors of the Church did think
it better to let them have Festivals for the Saints to take their pleasure in,
to turn them off from the Idols festivals. So Gregory Nyssen tells us of
Gregory Thaumaturgus in his Oration of his life, that he made Holy Days for
his neighbors of Neocesarea, when the Roman fury had Martyred many; and he
used this as a pious wile to draw the licencious Vulgar from the Idols
festivals, by letting them play on the Martyrs days, till they could be drawn
up to a holy observation of them. Whether the course were right or wrong, by
this you may see the Original of such days. And Gregory the great of Rome,
would for this very end, have all the Heathens Festivals turned into Christian
Festivals. But if any of you will hate a Saint, and refuse the Communion of
Saints, and will not imitate them in Holiness, and yet will keep Holy Days for
them that are dead, Christ himself has given you your doom, Matthew. 23.29, 30,
31, 32, 33. which I desire you to read.

Well Sirs, I have said enough, if enough will serve, to prove that the Unity
of the Church must not be laid on things Indifferent, nor upon low or doubtful
points; but it must be a Unity in the Spirit of Sanctification. It is in the
few, the great, the certain and the Necessary points, that we must all agree in
if ever we will agree, and compassionately tolerate the differences that are
tolerable.

If after all this, there be any so Proud, and selfish, and ungodly, and
unmerciful, that they will set up their own Conceits and Wills against the
plain Commands of God, the long and sad experience of the world, and against
the Peace of their Brethren, and the Unity of the Church, and will have no
Agreement unless all others will be conformed to their Wills, I shall now say
no more to such, but that These are not the sons of Peace, nor the living
compassionate members of the Church, but self-idolizers that God is engaged to
pull down: And it is not by such as these that the Church must be healed and
repaired: But it is by them that are sensible of their own infirmities, and
compassionate to others, that are of a Christian Catholic Spirit, and have
Catholic Principles and Affections, and see such a beauty in the Image of
Christ, that they can heartily Love a gracious person, notwithstanding his many
tolerable infirmities, and think themselves more unworthy to be tolerated by
others, then such as I have described to be tolerated by them.

Preached December 24. 1657.
FINIS.

