THE Lawfulness and Expediency OF Church-Musick ASSERTED, IN A SERMON Preached
at St. Brides-Church, Upon the 22d. of November, 1693. BEING The Anniversary
Meeting of Gentlemen, Lovers of MUSIC.

By RALPH BATTLE, Sub-Dean of Their Majesty's Chapel-Royal.

Published at the Request of the Stewards.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for John Carr, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in
Fleetstreet, 1694.5

Imprimatur.

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Jan. 16. 1693/4.
Psalm 100. Ver. 1, 2. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye Lands.

Serve the Lord with Gladness; come before his Presence with Singing.


WE have in these Words a Direction how to behave our selves in the public
Worship of God; and I have made Choice of them at this time to justify the
Practice of our own Church in her laudable Use of Music, both Vocal and
Instrumental, in her solemn Assembles. Which these two Expressions of making a
joyful Noise unto the Lord, and coming before his Presence with Singing, may
be taken to import. Or if the former be not so very plain here for Instruments
of Music, as the latter is for Singing, yet we need not doubt, but it was
intended, because mention is made of them in so many other Psalms of David, and
particularly in the last Psalm. That none may therefore henceforth go about to
separate those two things which agree so very well together, I will assert the
Lawfulness, yea the Fitness and great Expediency of both Vocal and Instrumental
Music in the Church, during the solemn Worship of God there. But because some
have been heretofore scandalized at it, and others may perhaps still remain
scrupulous about it, I will,

First, Speak a few Words in proving, that what was the Custom of Holy Men of
Old, and what is recommended, to us by the Sacred Scriptures, and what was so
early in Use in the Christian Church, must needs be lawful notwithstanding all
the Objections or Cavils that have been brought to the contrary.

Secondly, I will also endeavor to show, that this Practice is not only barely
lawful, but also highly advantageous, and greatly available toward the more
magnificent and solemn Worship of God.

That Music has in it a natural Propriety to excite and heighten Devotion,
will in some measure appear from the very Customs of the Heathen who did always
use it in their Religious Rites. Now even these had some Light, together with
their Darkness, and were in the Right concerning a Religious Worship to be paid
somewhere, though in the wrong as to its object, and did well to make their
Religious Entercourses appear august and solemn, though they were ignorant of
the Statutes and Ordinances of the God of Israel. Now Homer one of the
ancientest Heathen Writers, gives us an account that the Greeks celebrated the
Praises of their Gods and Heroes upon the Harp. Others tell us, how the
Phrygians worshipped Cybelle with the Drum; and the Egyptians, Isis with the
Timbrel: And the third Chapter of Daniel enforms us, that the Cornet, Flute,
Harp, Sackbut, Psaltery, Dulcimer, and all kinds of Music were used (amonst
those Eastern Nations) in the Worship of their Idols. The Latins had also
their Tibicines or Players upon Wind-Musick, upon whom they set a great Value,
and granted to them many Privileges, because they were assistant at their holy
Rites. Now although these Examples alone would not be thoroughly material to our
Purpose, yet when in the Sacred Scriptures we also find Holy men in the Church
of God recommending, approving and practicing these things, we may safely from
thence conclude, that even these Customs in the Heathen were not any Corruption
of their Hearts, or Delusion of Satan's, but a Remnant of that natural Light,
and natural Religion, which was still left in them, and taught them to imitate
what by divine Impulse and Inspiration was at first taught the Children of God,
and afterward by the Ordinance of his Prophets and religious Kings was
continued and established amongst them.

The first mention that is made of this thing in the Scripture upon a Religious
account, is before the Law was given from Mount Sinai, when Miriam the
Prophetess the Sister of Aaron (to celebrate the Deliverance out of Egypt) took
a Timbrel in her hand, and went forth with her women with Timbrels to accompany
the Song of Moses, Exodus 15. 20. After that we read in 1 Samuel 10. 5. of a
Company of Prophets who were met by Saul, coming down from the high place with
a Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp before them, while they
prophesied, and sang praises to God. In Conclusion, we read in 1 Chronicles. 15. 16.
That David the King appointed singers with Instruments of Music to welcome home
the Ark at its return from the Philistines; that he also composed a Psalm upon
that occasion, and left there before the Ark of the covenant of the Lord, Asaph
and his brethren to minister before the Ark continually, as every days work
required, as we read 1 Chronicles. 16. 37. And this was the first establishment of
the thing that we read of. This Custom when afterward in the Reigns of evil
Kings it had been neglected, Hezekiah in his good Reign restored, as we find in
2 Chronicles. 29. 25. And he set the Levites in the house of the Lord, with Cymbals,
with Psalteries, and with Harps, according to the commandment of David, and of
Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, for so was the commandment of the
Lord by his Prophets. To proceed yet on, Isaiah an inspired man and a Prophet,
sung to his well beloved, a song of his beloved touching his vineyard, Isaiah
5. 1. The three Children sang a Hymn of Praise when they were cast into the
fiery Furnace, and had that great Miracle wrought for their Deliverance. The
Prophet Habakkuk in lofty Strains composed in just Measure, and fitted for the
Skill of Music, assuaged the public Grief, foretelling the acceptable day of
the Lord, and the complete triumphs of Christ's passion. Yea all the Prophets,
says St. Ambrose, cantaverunt spiritualibus modulis, etc. they sang forth the
Oracles of divine Redemption, in spiritual Hymns, and in melancholy Dirges
lamented the hard-heartedness of their own Countrymen the Jews. In the New
Testament we read that our Savior sang a Hymn with his Disciples a little
before his Passion, Matthew. 26. 30. And even in his highest Agony upon the
Cross, he recited a part of one of the Psalms of David, Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Paul and Silas sang in Prison at Midnight, Acts
16. 25. And the Visions of S. John do represent the Manners of the Church; and
even in Heaven they sing the Song of Moses and of the Lamb, Rev. 15. 3. All
Antiquity does agree in this matter, acquainting us that this was the constant
practice of the Primitive Christians, Profane Authors, together with Sacred,
jointly attesting it. Of the first kind we have Pliny the younger, who when he
had enquired into the Error of the Christians (as he calls it) he takes notice
of no other Prayers that they had, but a Verse or Hymn to Christ, directed as
to God. The Author of Philopatridis also observes that the Christians sang
Hymns, etiam tota nocte, even all night long. Amongst the Ancient Fathers of
the Church we have Justin Martyr mentioning their Hymns; and Clemens
Alexandrinus calls them (...), their Daily Liturgies: and a Cloud of Witnesses
might be brought for the confirmation of this thing. The Cathemerina of
Prudentius, the Odes of Nazianzen, the Psalms of Athanasius and Apollinarius,
and the Hymns of Synesius, all yet extant, are so many standing proofs of this
matter, and do sufficiently declare how much the Devotion of the Ancient
Christians did consist in Harmony: They sang together in the Church, and they
sang there also alternately; for so Philo mentions them singing with a
Praecentor, and the People answering the extremes or ends; and Pliny also joins
with him to this effect. They sang at home in the Family, and abroad in the
Field at their daily Labor; they sang in Prison and under Persecution, yea and
many times, moved with the Spirit of God, they sang forth Hymns of Praise even
at the Stake, and amidst the Flames of Martyrdom.

So that for the first of these, Vocal Music, I suppose there can be no
Objection raised against it, or any doubt but that it was ever used in the
Christian as well as the Jewish Church: but there lies an exception which some
have framed against Instrumental Music, because we do not read that that was
in use so early amongst the Primitive Christians; and Justin mentions no other
Music used among them but the (...), the bare singing with the Voice,
unaccompanied with any Musical Instruments. Now as to this Exception let these
two things be considered.

First, That if it were thus for a time amongst the Primitive Christians, yet
is it not any good Argument for its Perpetuity, any more than that because the
upper Rooms and the subterraneous Caverns were the places where the persecuted
Christians did use to meet, therefore also these are still to be used rather
than the Churches, now the Persecution is (by God's Mercy) ceased, in a great
part of the World: And Kings and Queens are become the nursing Fathers and
nursing Mothers to the Church. If it were so for a Season we may and ought to
look upon it as the necessity of the first Christians, rather than their
Choice, and that they had not wherewithal to be at the charge of these Aids
and Ornaments to their Religious Worship, rather than that they withheld the
Expense, because they thought it unlawful or unbecoming their Assemblies. For
no sooner did the Church begin to flourish, but they grew into use and esteem:
And we read of St. Ambrose, who lived about the latter end of the fourth
Century, soon after the time of Constantine, and who it is also said composed
the Te Deum, the same Hymn of Praise which we still retain in our Liturgy
directed to the glorious Trinity, that he joined Instruments of Music with the
public Service in the Cathedral Church of Milan, where he was then Bishop:
Which Example of his was so well approved of, that by degrees it became the
general Practice of other Churches thereabouts, and has since obtained in
almost all the Christian World besides.

Secondly, Others have referred this to another Cause, namely, that as
Inspiration in singing Psalms, (which was doubtless an extraordinary Gift
common to the Primitive Christians) began to cease, Instruments and Skill were
brought in in its Room, even as Learning and ordinary means took place instead
of extraordinary Gifts: And this also might be another reason why Instrumental
Music was not so much in use at first, as it was afterward. Now both these
things together, if one of them alone be not sufficient, I hope may pass for a
good answer to that Exception that has been taken by some from that passage in
Justin, or any other of a like kind (if any such be found) in the most ancient
Fathers.

To this I may add farther, that the New Testament is not without some Texts
which seem to point out this thing, as in Rev. 14. 2. where the voice of
harpers harping with their harps is mentioned; which place is ordinarily
expounded of public Worship in the Church. And again in the Epistle of St.
Paul to the Ephesians. 5. 19. the Apostle there speaking of Psalms and Hymns and
Spiritual Songs, adds in the Conclusion of the Verse the word (...) to the word
(...); and as the former word signifies only singing, so this latter does
properly denote the use of the Psaltery. But notwithstanding all these things,
we find the Annotation which in the Geneva Bibles is affixed to the third Verse
of the 150. Psalm runs thus; David makes mention of those Instruments which by
God's Commandment were appointed in the old Law, but under Christ the use
thereof is abolished in the Church. Now this indeed is very peremptorily said,
but without offering us any proof of the thing. However I will examine an
Objection which is most commonly brought by those men who side with the men of
Geneva in this matter, and endeavor to show you its Defects. Now the Objection
is, that Instrumental Music is a part of the Ceremonial Law of Moses which
vanished with Christ: But it is a great mistake in any who look upon this as a
thing of this nature; for had it really been such, it would either have been a
Type of Christ, or at least it would have been of Moses his Institution, and
yet it was neither the one nor the other. Not a Type, because its
representation cannot be set forth; not of Moses his Institution, because in
his time it bore no part in the Sanctuary. We read indeed of Trumpets upon
Mount Sinai, which were to assemble the People together: And for the like use
they were appointed unto Moses, as we read Numb. 10. 2. for the calling of the
Assembly, and the journeying of the Camps, but they went no farther in his
Days. So that this Objection if it were of any Force, should rather be against
our Bells that call us to Church, than our Organs or other Instruments that
accompany our Psalms and Anthems when we are there. And yet I have not heard
that any are offended with the former, and I hope there is as little cause why
they should be so with the latter. For in short it was not Moses but David who
first applied Instruments of Music to Religious Purposes, as I have before
showed, and this he might do partly out of a Sense of Natural Religion, and
also farther as we may piously believe, (he being an inspired Man and a
Prophet) by the Spirit of God: And his example is the first of the kind which
our own Church does follow, and which we look upon as Authentic in the case,
and a sufficient Pattern for our Imitation: And although I do not see but why
even a Jewish Ceremony or Custom if it were either ornamental or significant,
or any way properly and naturally subservient to Religious Uses, (for instance,
Sackcloth and Ashes, or the like) might be assumed and adopted into the
Christian Service, if our Governors of the Church thought it fitting, they
having a power left them to do all things for Decency, though they are not tied
to the necessity of any thing in these matters as the Jews were, and which is
indeed the very formal Difference between Jewish and Christian Ceremonies: Yet
that none may be offended in this particular, the Church has determined nothing
in the case, but left it to be taken as a voluntary and free Thing, and as it
comes recommended from Holy David, a man after God's own Heart. If the
Authority of the Geneva Divines may yet sway with some, let me only by way of
Balance to it, give you the Authority of the Assembly-Divines in this case,
and I hope this may go at least as far as the other: Now they have given us
this different sense of these matters in their Exposition of the last Psalm of
David, David (say they) exhorts men the better to stir up their Joy to praise
God with Musical Instruments, and if Musical Instruments (as is granted) had
that power then, how have they changed their nature since? To this I will only
add farther the opinion of Mr. Baxter, a considerable man esteemed amongst
those of the Separation from us in this Nation, let his Authority prevail where
it can, most of his Arguments I verily think are unanswerable. And thus he has
set them down in his Cases of Conscience, annexed to his Christian Directory.
As,

First, God set up Instruments of Music in his Service, long after Moses's
Ceremonial Law by David, Solomon, etc.

Secondly, It Is not an instituted Ceremony merely, but a natural help to the
Mind's Alacrity; and (under this argument) he adds, as it is lawful to use the
comfortable Help of Spectacles in reading the Bible, so is it of Music to
exhilerate the Soul toward God.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ joined with the Jews that used it, and never spoke a
word against it.

Fourthly, No Scripture forbids it, and therefore it is not unlawful.

Fifthly, Nothing can be said against it, but what may be said against Tunes
and Melody of Voice; and whereas some say that they find it to do them Harm,
yet all wise Men say, they find it to do them good: and why should the
experience of some prejudiced self-conceited Persons, or of a half man that
knows not what Melody is, be set against the experience of all others, and
deprive them of such Helps and Mercies as these People say they find no benefit
by?

Thus far, and more to this effect is said by him upon this Subject; which now
leads me to the

Second thing I proposed, viz. The advantages that do redound from hence, and
how it is highly conducing toward the more magnificent and solemn Worship of
God.

Musical Harmony, whether by Voice or Instrument, but especially by both
together, is so pleasing and agreeable to that part of man which is most
Divine, that some Philosophers have called the Soul Harmony; all have agreed it
to have a complete Share of Harmony in it. Hence it is that Melody is a thing
which delights all Ages, and becomes all States of Life; it is as seasonable in
Sorrow, as in Joy; as suitable an attendant on public Actions, as diverting in
private Recreations; as capable to raise Devotion, as to procure Delight; and
as subservient to the ends of Religion, as conducive to the Pleasure of
Society. The reason hereof according to the judicious Mr. Hooker is, An
admirable Faculty which is in Music, to express and represent to the Mind more
inwardly than any other sensible thing, the Rising and Falling, the Turns and
Varieties of all Passions whereunto the Soul is Subject: Yea and so to imitate
them, that whether it resemble the same State we are in or a contrary; we are
not more contentedly confirmed by the one, than changed and led away by the
other: Hence it is, that some sorts of Harmony are apt to move and stir our
Affections, others to draw us to a grave and sober Mediocrity, and there is
that will carry us into Ecstasies, filling the Mind with a heavenly joy; so that
although we should lay aside the subject matter of the Psalm or Hymn, yet even
the very Harmony of Sounds being carried from the Ear to the spiritual
Faculties of the Soul, is by a native power greatly available to bring to a
perfect temper whatsoever is there troubled; apt as well to quicken the
Spirits, as to allay that which is too eager, sovereign against melancholy and
despair, forcible to draw forth Tears of Devotion, and able both to move and
moderate all Affections. Boethius tells us this is wrought by virtue of the
answerableness of the Notes in Music to those in Nature: And therefore a well
composed Harmony, shall have even a natural Efficacy to work changes for the
better in humane Affections, to enliven and stir up those that are dull, and to
compose and pacify those which are irregular: So that not only the Psalms of
the Church, but even the Voluntaries, being suitably framed, may have a good
effect upon the Mind, and even influence and dispose it to sober and Religious
purposes. Let me also give you a few Eulogies hereof from the ancient Fathers
of the Church, who found the Benefits of it in their Religious Exercises, and
have thus commended it to us. First, Justin Martyr, says of the single or plain
Song which only was in use in his time. That it stirs up the Mind with a
certain Pleasure unto an ardent Desire of that which is celebrated in the Song,
that it allays the Desires and Affections of the Flesh, that it drives away
evil Thoughts, and makes the Mind pregnant and apt to bring forth holy and
Divine Fruits; that it makes the generous Contenders in Piety Valiant and
Strong in Adversity, and brings a Medicine and Remedy to all the evil Accidents
of our Life: He also adds, that St. Paul in his spiritual Armory, calls this
the Sword of the Spirit, for it is all of it the Word of God that is celebrated
in the Mind, in the Song, and in the Verse; it drives away evil Spirits, and
the pious mind is by the Songs of the Church perfected in virtue. The next that
I shall mention is St. Basil, and he also speaks after this manner. Whereas the
Holy Spirit saw that Mankind was difficultly drawn unto Virtue, and that
Righteousness was the less accounted of by reason of the proneness of our
affections to that which delights; it pleased the wisdom of the same Spirit,
to borrow from melody that pleasure which mingled with Heavenly Mysteries,
should convey as it were by stealth the treasure of Good things into men's
Minds. Oh the wise contrivance of that Heavenly Teacher! who has by his skill
found out a way, that doing those things wherein we delight, we might also meet
with those things whereby we profit.St. Augustine also in his Confessions joins
in this matter, and says, I am induced to approve of the Custom of Singing in
the Church, that through the Delight of the Ear the Minds of the infirm may
raise themselves to a pious Affection. And speaking of himself, he tells us,
that he has often wept piously being thereunto moved by the sweet Harmony in
the Church. The last of this kind that I shall mention, is that of St.
Chrysostom in his Homily upon the 41st. Psalm, who there speaks to this effect,
Nothing raises the Mind so much, and affects it being raised, and frees it from
the earth, and sets it loose from the Bonds of the Body, and fills it with the
love of Wisdom, and makes it despise the things of this World, as a divine Hymn
harmonically composed. And that Music is thus apt to move the Mind to pious
Dispositions, and raise it up to a pitch above it self, and in some measure as
it were to inspire it divinely, at least to fit it for such Inspiration, we may
gather from the Customs of the Prophets of Old, (already mentioned) of whom we
read that while they prophesied, they came down from the high Place with a
Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp before them: and the Spirit of
the Lord came also upon Saul who met them, and he became a new man, and
prophesied with them, 1 Samuel 10. 5. 6. Another wonderful effect we read of
that Music had upon him was, that when an evil Spirit from the Lord was upon
him, whether it were a deep Melancholy that he was fallen into, which might be
excited and heightened by the Devil's Suggestion, as most Interpreters think; or
whether it were an actual Possession of Satan's, as some of the Jewish Rabbis
would have it; yet when David played skilfully upon the Harp it departed from
him. The manner of this Cure is also variously adjudged by Expositors, some
thinking it a Hymn or Religious Psalm that David sang, and that thereby the
Devil was the more effectually chased away from Saul; others attributing it
only to the Notes of Music, and their natural Efficacy in the subduing of all
black Melancholy and Despair; all Anger, Malice and Envy, or the like foul
Passions whereby the Mind can become overwhelmed, or enraged and cast down into
a condition truly Diabolical; whatever were the root of the Malady, or whatever
might be the true cause of the Remedy, we find the Cure was effectually wrought
by the Harp of David. I forbear to mention some other wondrous effects of
Music related by the Ancients, as Plutarch, Pythagoras, etc. Because they are
not so proper to be considered upon a Religious Account; but the foregoing ones
are abundantly sufficient to let us see that there is something in Music that
has a great Propriety to Religious Purposes: And therefore as Holy David first
composed Godly Psalms, in number and measure, (he being admirably skilled in
divine Poesy) and was moreover the Author of adding Melody, both Vocal and
Instrumental, for the raising up of men's Hearts, and moving their Affections
toward God; so likewise the Church of Christ does at this day retain it as an
Ornament to God's Service, and a help to her own Devotion.

And thus much also as to my Second Particular, the Expediency as well as
Lawfulness of this Practice.

But after I have said all in Vindicating of this Custom, we do not condemn any
other foreign Churches as guilty of any material Defect if they do not receive
it, nor while we say it may, do we assert that it must be used; or although it
be even expedient, yet it is not altogether necessary; but this may be truly
said of it, that it is an agreeable attendant and a Suitable Ornament to
Religious Services; though no part of the Substance thereof: but it is to be
placed in the Classis of those things which by Divines are called Evangelical
Councels, or Precepts of Perfection: things, which when they are seasonably,
and decently, and reverently used are apt to raise men's Hearts and Affections
to greater Degrees of Piety, and to produce larger Portion of Zeal and Devotion
in our spiritual Exercises. Thus kneeling down in Prayer, setting apart
festival Solemnities, making Oblations, building of Temples and beautifying
them, and the like, are things that have a tendency in Nature, or (at least) by
universal Custom to increase Religion as well as to adorn it; to raise holy
Thoughts and pious Dispositions within, by suitable Aids and Ornaments from
without; making the aimiableness of God's Tabernacles excite the Ardency of our
Thanksgivings there, and the beauty of Holiness conduce to (or at least concur
with) the Spirit of Prayer, and therefore when this is superinduced by the
Piety of Christian Governors, we maintain against all Opposers the Lawfulness
and Decency, yea the fitness and great expediency of it in the Church of Christ.

Finally, whatsoever accidental Abuses may creep in amidst the use of these
laudable things, we earnestly dissuade and disallow, advising all Persons to be
very careful and circumspect in the use thereof, lest their Minds should
stray, and it might happen to them as it did sometimes to St. Augustine, who in
his Confessions laments his Inadvertency in this point, owning, that when the
Music affected him more than the Subject Matter of the Psalm or Hymn, he was
greatly to be blamed.

Indeed the Heart is the best Psalmist, and the inward Affection of the Soul is
the best Music in God's ear, and it is purely for the sake of this, that the
other is used. We also disapprove of all other Defaults of a like kind; that
is, wherever the use of Edification is lessened or lost, which may happen
either when the words are not to be understood by the Hearers, or when they are
not suited to the true Christian Temper of Prayer and Praise, or when the Airs
of our Anthems and Hymns are not grave and solemn, and befitting the House of
God, rather than the House of Rimmon. But on the other hand, these Faults being
prevented (as God be thanked due care is taken in our own Church that they
should be) the Efficacy of Music is truly admirable, and does mightily edify,
because it does most powerfully excite the Passions and Affections; the very
heart and Soul toward God. By this our Minds may be raised and spiritualized
in their flights toward Heaven, our Devotions quickened and enflamed with a
greater Zeal and Fervency in our Religious Addresses, and when the Fire is thus
kindled within, we shall become the more fit and ready to speak with our
Tongues, and to begin here upon Earth, that which is to be a part of our
eternal Employment in Heaven; namely, To sing Hallelujahs to the Praise and
Glory of God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to whom, let us ascribe
all Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

