THE NONCONFORMISTS PLEA for PEACE: OR An Account of their Judgment. In certain
things in which they are misunderstood: written to reconcile and pacify such
as by mistaking them hinder Love and Concord.

Exhort. in the Liturgy before the Communion.

If any of you be -- an hinderer, or slanderer of God's Word, -- or be in
malice or envy, -- Repent of your sins, or else come not to the holy Table,
lest after the taking of that Sacrament, the Devil enter into you as he did
into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquities, and bring you to destruction
both of body and soul.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Beni. Alsop at the Angel and Bible over against the
Stocks-Market. 1679.

To the Reverend Conforming Clergy.
Reverend Fathers and Brethren,
IT is now seventeen years since near two thousand Ministers of Christ were by
Law forbidden the exercise of their Office, unless they did conform to
Subscriptions, Covenants, Declarations and Practices, which we durst not do,
because we feared God: Foreseeing what this would do to the destroying of Love
and Concord, and of men's sou^s, weakening the Land, encouraging Popery, Heresy
and Schism, we did our best betime by Reason, and submissive petitioning the
Bishops, to have prevented it; but in vain: We never made one motion for
Presbytery, or against Liturgies, nor to abate any of the Bishops Wealth, or
Honor, nor any thing as to Church Government, but Arch Bishop Ushers Model of
the Primitive way: And we thankfully accepted of much less, expressed in His
Majesty's Gracious Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs* which, we hoped,
would have ended all our discords. The Reasons of the Great Change, and New
Impositions, it is God, and not we, that must have an account of from the
Convocation, etc. and of the consequents. Since then, as we foresaw, contrary
interests have increased contrariety: The Laws against our Preaching to more
than four, the Penalties of forty pound a Sermon, and long imprisonment in
common Gaols, and driving us five miles from Corporations, and places where we
lately preached, and the reasons given are not unknown to you: Many Books are
written, and Sermons preached, earnestly pressing Magistrates to execute these
Laws against us: And though, when demanded, we gave in a Catalogue of diverse
things in the old Impositions, which we under^ook to prove to be great sins;
and in our Petition for Peace, protested that nothing but avoiding sin should
hinder our Conformity, and we had never call or leave to give our reasons
against the New Conformity; I my self have been reported to my Superiors, to
be one that confesses the Lawfulness of all, save the renouncing of a
rebellious Covenant: And while the Law and Canons imprison, and excommunicate
us ipso fact^, if we do but give the reasons of our Nonconformity; and I have
offered to Reverend Bishops and others, to beg leave to do it on my knees, and
nothing more grieved me, than that I might not so endeavor to save men from
the damning sins of Hating, false accusing, and ruining their Brethren, and
sacrilegious hindering the Preaching of Gods Word; yet have I been called on to
tell them what it is that we would have, and told that our Superiors judge us
not sincere, but mere factious Schismatics, that will neither Conform, nor
tell them why we do not* Vehement Letters of accusation are sent me: Many Books
charge us with heinous Schism, even as wilfully done against our consciences:
Yea that Covetousness and Pride, and not Conscience, cause our Nonconformity;
that we are the worst men alive, and unfit for humane society, etc. while we
are made their scorn, and many want bread, and many of us preach for nothing,
save the spiritual benefits and rewards. And those of us that have bread, know
of so many that have families, and nothing but alms to maintain them, that we
are glad to give them all that our necessities can spare: And we suppose our
accusers would not think that if they chose beggary and scorn, or lived only on
men's charity, it would prove them to be covetous or proud. I have read the
Books of Bishop Morley, Mr. S^ileman, Mr. Fulwood, Mr. Durel, Mr. Fowlis, Mr.
Falkener, Mr. Nanfen, Dr. Borem^^, Dr. Parker, Dr. Tomkins, the Friendly
Debate, Dr. Ashton, Mr. Hollingworth, Dr. Good, Mr. Hinkley, the Counterminer,
Mr. L'Estrange, Mr. Long, and many more. And as my flesh is no more in love
with poverty and scorn than yours, nor was I more incapable of such a lot as
yours; so I here testify that no man is more inexcusable than I, that have
dwelt so long in pain, so near the grave, if I have been so mad as to silence
my self, and chose a Gaol among malefactors (where I have lain) and bitter
accusations and prosecutions, for any thing of this world that I could hope
for, or for any thing less than my salvation. And either I am an utter stranger
to my self, or else I was willing to know the Truth: and Liberty and Wealth is
liker to be a byas, than that which the Law decrees against us. But if I be so
unhappy as to be incapable of understanding the lawfulness of all that is made
necessary to the Ministry, you should better think of it before you beg the
ruin of all that are as ignorant as I* Had you told us how to come to your
measure of knowledge, we would thank you: When I asked Bishop Morley such a
question, he advised me to read Bilson and Hooker, where I found more than I
approved for resisting or restraining Kings: and had long before read them and
Saravia, Bishop Downam, Spalatensis, Petavius, Sancta Clara, Dr. Hammond, and
abundance more for Prelacy, etc. He is not worthy the name of a man that would
not know that truth, which makes both for his temporal and eternal welfare

Under these accusations my conscience urged me to acquaint the accusing Clergy
with our Case, believing it be uncharitable to impute all their false report to
Malignity, or Diabolism, but that it was STRANGENESS to our Case, while wrath
and cross interest kept them from hearing us: But my prudent friends persuaded
me silently to leave all to God, assuring me it would but more exasperate, till
they called us themselves to speak. Twice we were since invited to a Trial for
Concord, and both times came to an Agreement with the moderate and eminent
Persons that we treated with: But it was buried in privacy; and still we are
called on, to give the reasons of our Dissent.

Having long forborne for fear of offending them that require it, at last I have
here adventured, not so far as to urge the Case, but only to state it, and tell
you barely what it is that I dare not do: If I find that you can bear this, if
I have leave from God and man, I shall venture on more, and give you my
reasons: This unarmed Account is easily trampled on. I doubt not but it will
meet with such usage as I have had already: But I must say, that if such as the
Counterminer will say that to fear such sin as I have here named, by one that
is not willing to be damned, is Treason, Rebellion, Schism, Faction, Pride,
Obstinacy; this will not pass with me for convincing Argument, on which I may
venture my salvation. Jul Scaliger exercit. tells us, that in France our
Bicott, the Learned Schoolman, was envied by another for his Auditors in
Philosophy, and his crafty adversary told the King, that Bicott was a
Peripatetick, and Aristotle was against Monarchy: There needed no more, and
Bicott was cast down.

As for them that think that to name the late Wars is a Confutation of
Nonconformists, as if they knew not that they were raised on both sides by
Conformists (Heylin in Lauds Life will tell them who.) I now only repeat,
[Silence all that had a hand in those Wars (except the Conformists) and no
more, and I and thousands will give you thanks:] I plead not for my self: The
years are past in which I might have better served the Church, had I been
thought tolerable. I am almost incapable now of your kindness, or of any great
hurt that you can do me. A torrent of reproaching scornful words may ease some
men's minds, and serve some men's ends, but will not satisfy my conscience, nor
heal the Land. I write not this as accusing Conformists, or the Lawmakers, but
as answering their loud and long accusations and demands. If telling what I
fear, seem a telling what others are guilty of, it is a consequent which I
cannot avoid; but to avoid it and such like, have seventeen years been herein
silent. So far am I from desiring the weakening of the Church, that I had not
written this, but to prevent it. Though I with Saint Martin renounce communion
with Ithacius and Idacius, I go not so far as he in separating from the Synods
of Bishops; nor will I separate from any Christians, further than they separate
from Christ, or expel me: Church Order I love; Church Tyranny and Schism I love
not: I am for more Bishops, and not for fewer: If Parish-Oratories, or Chapels
were made Parish-Churches, at least in each Corporation anciently called (...):
Yea if the Parish-Ministers might be Pastors, Episcopigregis, and not forced by
strangers to excommunicate, absolve and receive to communion against their
knowledge and consciences, nor to profess, promise or practice sin against God,
nor omit their known Ministerial duty, far be it from me to be against
Conformity. I doubt not but he that will preserve Religion here in its due
advantages, must endeavor to preserve the Soundness, Concord and Honor of the
Parish-Churches. And as the truly wise and honest Judge Hale has said to me,
It must be a new Act of Uniformity that must heal us, if ever we be healed. I
am of the mind of old Mr. Dod, who, for the peoples sake, thanked God that
there were so many worthy Conformists, and for Truth and Conscience sake,
thanked God that there were so many Nonconformists. I love and honor the
Reverend, solid, worthy Preachers which I hear in most Churches in London,
where I come; and I endeavor to have all others honor them: And though I am
by the Canon ipso facto excommunicate, they shall put me out from them before I
will depart. But for the Church, and Kingdom, and their Consciences sake, I beg
of the Clergy, that before they any more render odious those whom they never
heard, and urge Rulers to execute the Laws against them, that is, to confine,
imprison, excommunicate, silence and undo them, they would be sure what manner
of spirit they are of; and that this is acceptable to God, and profitable to
the Land, or to themselves, and that which the Churches Experience commends.
My honest friend, whom I once persuaded from Anabaptistry, writing against
Separation, says, that when he saw here^a leg, and there an arm in the way, it
was time for him to stop. But in Church History I have had a sadder sight, even
the carcasses of thousands, streams of blood, and turnults in the chief Cities
and Churches of the world, the Crowns of Emperors and Kings, the loss of the
Eastern Empire, the generation of the Papacy, the reproach of Christianity,
and that by Clergie-Domination, and Contention, striving who should be Greatest
and seem wisest. Some say, If we take in a few moderate men like you, what the
better are we? Ans. More than you dream of, are far better than I: I hope few
are worse; Bishop Morley bid Ab uno disce omnes: Shall London have no clocks
unless they will all strike at once? shall none be tolerated but the perfect?
Are you such your selves? Do you differ in nothing? how then shall we have
Communion with you when we differ in all the things here described? Pardon me
for saying, I think that Mr. Tombs has said more like truth for Anabaptistry,
the late Hungarian for Polygamy, many for drunkenness, stealing and lying, in
cases of necessity, than ever I yet read for the lawfulness of all that I have
here described. And what is it that some men cannot copiously and confidently
talk for? And what wretched Reasons be they that have hindered Englands unity
and peace? And how fully has Romans 14. and 15. and our Common interest and
notorious experience confuted them! I have long wondered what powerful cause it
is, that with such men and so many, could so long prevail against such evidence
and light. If you will not hear, those will whom God will use to the healing of
his Churches: and blessed are the Peacemakers for (though you call them
otherwise) they shall be called the Children of God. I have prefixed the words
of some as our admonition; and I have written with this a fuller Treatise of
the only true terms of the Concord of all Christian Churches, and of the false
terms which they never will unite in, but are the causes of Schism. I commitall
with my self living and dying, to him that is the Lord of the dead and living,
and will shortly judge us all in righteousness. Come Lord Jesus; and prepare us
for thy Coming.

Amen.
THE CONTENTS.
1. THE Reasons of this writing and the sense of the word CHURCH.

2. The various opinions of such as we have to do with.

3. What Churches we hold to be instituted of God and what not*

4. What Princes and Pastors may do in such matters.

5. What separation and what assembling or gathering Churches is unlawful and
what lawful.

6. Matters of fact to be known preparatory to our case.

7. Matters required of us for Conformity, and first of ^ay-men.

8. Secondly, Matters imposed on Ministers: And I. Of Assent, Consent,
Approbation, and Canonical subscription, that nothing is contrary to the Word
of God.

II. 9. The second Part of the Matter of Conformity: Reordination.

III. 10. The third Part of the Matter of Conformity; of swearing or
Covenanting never to endeavor any alteration of Church Government.

VI. 11. The fourth part of the Matter; to declare that neither I nor any other
person is obliged by the vow to endeavor any such alteration of Church
Government.

V. 12. The fifth Part of the Matter; The Declaration and Oath (as not
understood) of not resisting any Commissioned.

VI. 13. The sixth Part of the Matter: To cease preaching and administering
Sacraments till we conform (at least not to preach to more than a family and
four persons.)

VII. 14. The seventh Part Consequential, Not to come within five miles of any
City or Corporation which sends Burgesses to Parliament, or of any place
where we have preached to more than aforesaid since the Act of oblivion.

15. The Adjuncts, and the other Matters agreed on which affright the
Nonconformists

16. The case and practice of the Ministers since they were silenced.

Additions occasioned by Mr. L. Fresh Suit, and some others, about National
Churches.
THE Question stated 3, etc. Whether we are obliged by or to the Jewish
National Polity? 5, etc. or by scripture to a National limitation of them?

Whether a National Church-form be lawful, 30, etc?

Whether it be a prudential desirable form 38, etc?

The resolution of this by a short history of Prelacie and Councils. 39, etc.

Obj. From the necessity of Appeals, 40, etc.

Obj. Shall all gather Churches that will. ib.

Obj. The Apostles have successors. ib.

Q. Whether the King or who is the National Church Head 41. 42, etc?

A Christian Kingdom what 43?

Q. Must real holiness in the judgment of rational Charity be required in all
Church members. 1?

Q. What Covenanting is necessary to particular Church relation? 5, etc. The
spirit makes Ministrs, how?

I. The Epistle of an African Council (in Cyprian Ep. 68. p. 200.) to Felix a
Presbyter and the Laity at Legio and Asturica; and to Laelius the Deacon and
the Laity at Emerita, concerning their Bishops Bafilides and Martial, worthy to
be read as to our present controversies.

II. The Letter of Rob. Grosthead, the good Bishop of Lincoln to Pope Innocent
containing the reason of his Nonconformity* and showing that hindering preaching
is the greatest sin next Divelism and Antichristianism: Out of Mat. Part An.
1253. p. 871. 872.

III. An extract from Bishop Saunderson de juramento.

SECT. I.
The Reasons of this writing, and the sense of the word [CHURCH.]
IT was the saying of acute and holy Augustine (though we call him not with
Fromondus Omnisc^um) [that no man ought to be patient under an accusation of
Heresy.] He means by Patience, a silent neglect of his own Just Vindication:
Not that we must be like Hectoring Duellers, that would kill or hurt others in
revenge, or in a sinful way of Vindication: But by silence, those that slander
men may be encouraged in their sin to their own destruction, and those that
value the slandered persons may be tempted to think too well of Heresy for
their sakes: And the honor of God, and his Truth, and our own good names, so
far as they are serviceable, are none of them to be disregarded. We have with
grieved souls beheld the Land of our Nativity distracted by Divisions; and
much, if not most about Religion, (we wish it were not against Religion, by
some that indeed have no true Religion:) Teachers against Teachers, in
Discourses, Sermons, Books, rendering each other despicable, and unlovely, and
some calling out aloud to Rulers to draw the Sword against their Brethren; so
learnedly and industriously pleading the Cause against each other with the
Laity, high and low, as if the destroying of their Love, and kindling Wrath and
Hatred, were the Evangelical necessary work; and without this zeal, and skill,
and diligence hard to be accomplished. No wonder then if we have people against
people, families divided, and all confounded; and this grievous Schism carried
on, by crying out against each other as Schismatics, and implacably causing it
while we loudly inveigh against it. The case is lamentable, that distraction
should be thus expressed and promoted; and when God has warned us by the
mischiefs of an odious Civil War, and has tried us again with peace with all
Nations about us, when most of them are involved in grievous Wars, that yet we
will not give peace to one another, but live as if Peace were the Plague which
we most desire to escape.

Yet as it is the good providence of God, that the Names of Wisdom, Godliness,
Truth, Justice, Mercy, Honesty and Virtue, are all still honorable even among
those that hate and oppose them; and the names of Folly, Ungodliness, Lying,
Unjustice, Unmercifulness, Dishonesty and Vice, are all dishonorable where the
things themselves are followed and prevail; so Love, Peace and Concord, are
names that are by most commended; when if most were for the things indeed, we
were in a hopeful way of recovery: And Malice, Schism and Discord, are cried
down by those, whom no entreaty will prevail with to forbear them, or to accept
any remedy against them.

Yet we are thus far prepared for peace, that if we be not false Hypocrites, if
we did but know which is the true way of Love, Peace and Concord we would
follow it: And if we knew what is Schism indeed, we would avoid it. And its
pity that men that think themselves wise should yet not know the way of Love
and Peace: Especially that the Learned Preachers of the Gospel of Love and
Peace, should still be the incendiaries, and stir up the Laity that would be
more peaceable, against each other. And that after so many Volumes of History
have these thirteen hundred years at least, asperst the Clergy with the
reproach of being the contentious troublers of the world. And yet must we
despair of a cure of so odious a disease?

The thing that Books, Sermons, and Discourses, cry out against those called
Non Conformists for, is Humorous, Obstinate Schism, and Disobedience, in
Preaching, when forbidders, and keeping up Assemblies not allowed, and
gathering Churches out of Churches, and separating from the Parish-Communion,
and Church of England. If we can find out the Schismatic, we hope he will be
condemned by us all. But that the Cause may be heard at least in some part,
before it is judged, we that publish this, here give an account of our own
judgment, and those that we are best acquainted with, how far we hold it lawful
or unlawful to gather Churches, or to separate from Churches, or to differ from
what is established by Authority: But the Application to our particular Case,
and our Arguments thereabout, we must not here presume to publish.

They that accuse others as Schismatics, and Separatists, for deserting
Churches, or gathering Churches out of Churches, and will not tell us what they
mean by the word Church, nor give us leave to tell them what we mean, but judge
in confusion, and despise explication, and necessary distinction, are men that
we can neither be edified by, nor edify, in this way.

SECT. II.
The Various Opinions of such us we have to do with.
Sect. I. BEcause men will judge of such Causes according to their several
Principles, and Presuppositions, we must take notice of some of the diverse
Principles of those whose censure we must expect: (Though not of inconsiderable
Sects.)

Sect. II. And 1. Some say that no humane Form of Church Government, and of
Churches, as governed, is of God's Institution (or as they say, Jure Divino,)
but that it is left to humane prudence.

Sect. III. 2. Some hold only an Universal Church (governed by a Pope, say some
of them, or by a General Council while sitting, and a Pope in the Intervals,
say others, or by a Pope and Council agreeing while it sits, and a Pope in the
Intervals, say others) to be Jure Divino, and all particular. Church-Forms as
subordinate, left to the prudence of this Universal Governor as Supreme; as
Inferior Officers in Kingdoms are made by the King.

Sect. IV. 3. Some hold that this Universal Church-Form, and also Diocesan, and
no other, are instituted of God.

Sect. V. 4. Some hold that the Universal, Patriarchal Metropolitical (or
Provincial) Diocesan, and Parochial, are jure divino, or instituted by Christ
and his Apostles.

Sect. VI. 5. Some hold that only Diocesan Churches, and Metropolitical or
Provincial, are jure divino, and not the universal: And of these some take
Diocesan Churches, for those only that contain many fixed Assemblies, and some
for such as have one Bishop, whether over one Congregation, or over multitudes.
Says the very learned Dr. Hamond, in 1 Timothy 3. [The Church of the living God,
was every such regular Assembly of Christians under a Bishop (such as Timothy
was) an Oeconomus set over them by Christ: Such again every larger circuit
under the Metropolitan, who as Timothy had (...), Ordination and Jurisdiction
over the whole Province. And such all the particular Churches of the whole
world, considered together under the Supreme Head Christ Jesus, dispensing them
all by himself, and administering them severally, not by any one Oeconomus, but
by the several Bishops as inferior Heads of Unity to the several Bodies, so
constituted by the several Apostles in their plantations, each of them having
an (...), a several distinct Commission from Christ immediately and subordinate
to none, but the supreme Donor or Plenipotentiary. He here supposes (as he
elsewhere shows) that de facto, Episcopal Churches were in Scripture-times
but single Congregations; but that after it was otherwise: And whether then the
New Form of Congregations were jure divino, when they became but Parts of a
Bishops Church, we leave to the Readers conjecture; as also of the New Form of
a Diocesan Church.

Sect. VII. 6. Some hold that National Churches, that is, Christian Kingdoms,
as governed by the Sovereign, Secular Power, are instituted by God, and that
all Church-Forms else within that Kingdom, are jure humano, at the pleasure of
the King, so be it that worshiping-Assemblies be kept up, and Bishops and
Priests placed as it shall please the King.

Sect. VIII. 7. Some think that Diocesans (or Bishops whether over one
Congregation or many) are instituted by God (and some say also Archbishops;)
and that these have power by consent or contract among themselves, to make
Patriarchal and National Churches: And so that these National and Patriarchal
Churches are jure divino mediato, but jure humano immediato, and are rather
made by the consent of Bishops, than by Kings: And so under Heathen Kings the
Churches may be National.

Sect. IX. 8. Some think that Parochial Churches (consisting of Christians
distinguished by the circuit of ground) and combinations of these into Synods
less and greater, Classical, National, are jure divino, and no other lawful.

Sect. X. 9. Some think that only Parochial Churches ordinarily, and single
Congregations of any Neighbor Christians, when Parish Order cannot be
observed, are jure divino.

Sect. XI. 10. And some think that only such single Congregations of
Christians, with their Chosen Pastors, without any necessary respect to Parish
bounds, are properly called Churches of Divine Institution, though these
Churches may and should hold such associations, as correspondence and mutual
help require.

Sect. XII. There being so many sorts of Churches in the world, (as Universal,
National, Patriarchal, Provincial, or Metropolitical, Diocesan, Classical,
Parochial, Congregational) it is hard to give a just decision of the question,
From which of these, and when it is a sin to separate; till it be first known
which of these is Divine, and which of Humane Institution, and which Humane
Churches are necessary, which lawful, and which sinful. And it must be known of
which the question is. And while there is so signal a diversity of Judgment,
about the several Forms, the nature of Schism will be hardlier opened.

SECT. III.
What Churches we hold to be instituted by God, and what not.
Sect. I. OUR own Judgment we shall plainly express in this following Order: 1.
We shall show what Church we judge to be of God's Institution, and what not. 2.
What about Churches the Magistrates or Pastors may institute by God's Authority
or allowance: And what they may not institute. 3. In what cases it is lawful to
gather Churches where Churches are: In what cases it is lawful to separate from
Churches; and in what cases neither of these last is lawful.

Sect. II. 1. All Christians are agreed that Christ is the Author of the
Universal Church, (considered both as Baptized, or Externally covenanting and
professing, called Visible, and as Regenera^e and sincerely Covenanting, called
Mystical) as it is Headed by Christ himself, and called his Body, and his
special Kingdom.

Sect. III. 2. We doubt not but Christ has instituted the Office of the sacred
Ministry, to be under him as the Teacher, Ruler, and High Priest of the Church,
in Teaching, Guiding, and Worshipping: And that he has instituted holy
Assemblies and Societies for these things to be exercised in: And that [a
Society of Neighbor Christians associated with such a Pastor or Pastors, for
personal Communion herein, even in such Doctrine, Discipline and Wo^s^^p] is a
Church-Form of Divine Institution.

Sect. IV. If they be not [Christians] by Baptism, or visible Profession, they
be not visible Materials for a Church.

If they be not [Neighbours] that is, within reach of each other, so as to be
capable of such Communion, they are not matter that has the necessary
extrinsecal disposition.

If they be not [associated] explicitly or implicitly, by some signification
of Consent, they may be an accidental Assembly, but not a proper Christian
Church.

If they be not associated [for this holy Communion] they may be a Civil
Society, but not a Church.

If they be not associated [for Personal Communion] at some due seasons, but
only for Communion at distance by Delegates, Messengers or Letters, they are
not a Particular Church of this species now defined, though they may be members
of larger associations, National, Diocesan, etc.

If they are not associate with one or more Pastors, they may be a Community of
Christians, but not a Political Church, which we now define.

If they are not joined with a Pastor that has all the foresaid Powers, of
Teaching, Ruling by the Word and Keys, and going before them in Worship; and if
they consent not to his relation as such, they may make a School, or an
Oratory, but not a proper particular Church simpliciter, so called [but only a
Church secundum quid, or as to some part;] for an Essential part is wanting.
But it is not the defect of Exercise that unchurcheth them, while there is the
Power, and that consented to (for Men cannot be Pastors or Churches against
their wills.)

Sect. V. 3. As all Christians grant that the Apostles had a general Commission
to call Infidels to Christ, and to plant Churches with their particular Pastors
as aforesaid, and to take care that their Pastor and they do the duties, (not
compelling them by their Sword, but by the Word,) so we are far from denying
that yet some Ministers of Christ may, and should seek the conversion of
Infidels, and plant Churches of the converted, ordaining Pastors over them by
their consent, and taking due care by their grave advise that such Churches
walk in the obedience of Christ, as far as they can procure it; And such
Seniors which have so planted these Churches and Pastors by Gods blessing on
their labors, should be much reverenced by the Churches which they have
planted, and their just advise, exhortations and admonitions should be heard by
the People and the Pastors whom they ordained, and all their juniors: And
though the Apostles have no successors in their extraordinaries, yet that some
should in this ordinary work succeed them, we deny not, because 1. We find that
it is a work still necessary to be done: 2. And others as well as Apostles did
it in those times; as Silas, Luke, Apollo, Timothy, Titus, etc. and since, all
such as have planted the Gospel among Infidels. 3. Because Christ promised to
be with them that did this work to the end of the world, Mat. 28. 21. But
whether such men be of a different office or order from the junior Pastors;
whether any true Presbyter that has ability, opportunity and invitation, may
not do the same work with Infidels; and by his success, and seniority may not
so ordain Pastors over the Churches which he gathered; and have an answerable
right to reverence and regard from those that he so planteth, and ordains;
are controversies which we presume not now to decide.

And we cannot prove that this makes a distinct form of a Church, no not in
the Apostles time and case: For we cannot prove that they distributed the
Countries into Provinces or Dioceses peculiar to each Apostle; and had any
Churches which they supposed to be peculiarly under this or that Apostles
Government so as that any of the rest might not with Apostolical power have
come, resided, preached and governed in the same: No Scripture tells us of such
limits and Provinces. Nay, the Scripture tells us, that many of them were as
Apostles at once in the same places: As at Jerusalem often. Paul and John had
Apostolical power at Ephesus: Peter and Paul (as is commonly held) at Rome: And
its probable that as Christ sent forth his disciples by two and two, so the
Apostles went in company, as Paul and Barnabas did: so that such appropriate
settlement of Provincial or Diocesan Churches, we cannot see proved; though
such a General Ministry is easily proved; and we doubt not but by consent they
might have distributed their Provinces, had they seen cause, and that actually
they did so distribute their labors as their work and ends required: But if
they had become proper Provincial Bishops over several Districts or Provinces,
it seems strange to us that no history tells us which were the twelve or
thirteen Provinces, and how limited; and that they continued not longer; and
that instead of three Patriarchs first, and four after, and five next, we had
not twelve or thirteen Apostles or Patriarchs seated over all the world, with
their known divisions; And that men seek not now to reduce the Churches to this
Primitive State, rather than to the said Imperial Constitution; and rather to
subject us all to the Apostolical Seats, than to five Patriarchs in the
dominions of another Prince, and now mostly subject to an Infidel. Yea it is
strange to us that the first Seat (Rome) should derive its pretended power from
two Apostles (as if our Church might have two Bishops) and the second
(Alexandria) from Saint Mark, who was no Apostle, and the third (Antioch) from
the same Apostle that Rome did, (as if one Bishop might have two such
Dioceses,) and the fourth (Jerusalem) from St. James, commonly said to be no
Apostle; and the last (which became the second or the first) from no Apostle,
nor make any such pretense; if thirteen Apostolic Provinces were then known.

But we easily acknowledge, that as Apostles having planted many Churches staid
a while in each, when they had settled it, and some time visited it again; so
they are by some historians called the first Bishops of those Churches, being
indeed the transient Governors of them: In which sense one Church might at
once have two or many Bishops, and one Bishop many Churches, and he be Bishop
of one Church this week, who was Bishop of another where he came the next.

Sect. VI. Christian Community, (prepared to be a Polity) and a Christian
family, and a Christian Kingdom, we doubt not may all prove their Divine Right;
And if any will call these Churches, let us agree of the definition, and we
will not strive about the name.

Sect. VII. We know not of any proof that ever was produced, that many Churches
of the first Rank, must (of duty) make one fixed greater compound Church, by
Association, whether Classical, Diocesan, Provincial, Patriarchal, or National:
and that God has instituted any such Form: And we find the greatest defenders
of Prelacy, affirming that Classes, Provincial, Patriarchal, and National
Churches, are but humane institutions; of which more anon.

Sect. VIII. We find no proof that ever God determined the Churches should
necessarily be individuated by Parish-bounds or limits of ground; and that men
in the same limits might not have diverse Bishops, and be of diverse particular
Churches.

Sect. IX. We never saw any satisfactory proof that ever Christ or his Apostles
did institute any particular Church (taken in a Political sense as organized,
and not merely for a Community) without a Bishop or Pastor, who had the power
of Teaching them, Ruling them by the Word and Power of the Church-Keys, and
leading them in public Worship.

Sect. X. Nor did we ever see it proved, that any one Church of this first Rank
(which was not an Association of Churches) consisted in Scripturetimes of many
(much less many score or hundred) such fixed Churches or Congregations: Or that
any one Bishop of the first Rank (that was not an Apostle, or a Bishop of
Bishops) of whom we now speak not, had more than one of such fixed Societies or
Churches under him: Or might have more stated members of his Church, than were
capable of Personal Communion, and mutual assistance at due seasons, in holy
Doctrine, Discipline and Worship: Though we doubt not but as now, there are
many Chapels in some Parishes, where the aged, weak, children, and all in soul
weather, or by other hindrances may hear, and pray, and occasionally
communicate, whose proximity and relation to the Parish-Churches do make them
capable of Personal Communion in due seasons with the whole Parish (at least
per vices) in those Churches, and in their conversation: And as a single
Congregation may prudently in persecution, or foul weather, meet oft-times in
several houses; so the great Church of Jerusalem (though it cannot be proved a
quarter so big as some of our Parishes) might in those times when they had no
Temples, hold their public Meetings often at the same time in diverse houses; and
yet be capable of Personal Communion, as it is before described.

Sect. II. It is not inconsiderable to our confirmation, that so worthy a man
as Dr. Hamond does over and over, in his Dissertations against Blondell, and in
his Learned Annotations on the new Testament, assert all the matter of fact
which we are pleading for, viz. That the word [Presbyter] and [Pastor] in the
New Testament is ever taken for a Bishop: That it belonged to the Bishops
office to be the Preacher to his Church, to visit all the Sick, to take care of
all the Poor, and to take Charge of the Churches stock, to administer the
Sacrament, etc. And (as he says on Acts 11. 6.) That although this Title of
(...), Elders, have been also extended to a second order in the Church, and is
now only in use for them, under the name of Presbyters, yet in the
Scripturetime it belonged principally, if not alone, to Bishops, there being NO
EVIDENCE that any of that second Order were then instituted, though soon after
before the writing of Ignatius's Epistles, there were such instituted in all
Churches.]

Sect. XII. By this it follows, that 1. the office of a subject Presbyter
that was no Bishop was not in being (that can be proved) in Scripture-times. 2.
That no Bishop had more than one worshipping assembly at once: For all
Christians assembled for worship on the Lords days, and their worship still
included somewhat which none but a Minister of Christ might do, and when there
was no other Minister in being but Bishops, and a Bishop can be but in one
place at once, a Bishop could have but one assembly. Though for our parts we
think that we have just reason to believe, that Churches then had more
Ministers than one, when we read how Paul was put to restrain and regulate
their public officiating at Corinth, 1 Cor. 14.

Sect. XIII. And it further confirms us, that the said Doctor tells us, that
for ought he knows, the most of the Church then were of his mind: And
Franciscus a sancta clara de Episcop tells us, that this opinion came from
Scot^^: And Petavius, that Learned Jesuit, was the man that brought it in, in
our times, viz. That the Apostles placed only Bishops with Deacons in the
Churches, and that it is only these Bishops that are called Presbyters in
Scripture. So that the Matter of fact, for the whole Scripture-times, is
granted us by all these learned men.

Sect. XIV. It being the Divine Institution of the Office of this second Order
of Presbyters, which we are unsatisfied about; and these Reverend men
confessing that de facto they were not in being (as can be proved by any
evidence) in Scripture-times, and those times extending to about the hundredth
or ninety ninth year after Christ's Nativity (when St. John wrote the
Revelation) we must confess that we know not how that Order or Office can be
proved then to be of God's institution. 1. As to the Efficient; who should do
it as the certain authorized Instruments of God. 2. Or how it shall be
certainly proved to us to be of God, when Scripture tells it not to us; and
what Records of it are infallible; And whether such pretended proofs of
Tradition as a supplement to Scripture, be not that which the Papacy is built
on, and will not serve their turn as well as this.

Sect. XV. And whereas it is said that the Bishops made in Scripture-times had
authority given them to make afterward that second Office or Order of
Presbyters: 1. We cannot but marvel then that in such great Churches, as that
at Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, etc. they should never use their Power in all
the Scripturetimes. And when they had so many Elders at Jerusalem, so many
Prophets and Teachers at Antioch and Corinth, that Paul was fain to restrain
their exercises, and bid them prophecy but One by One; and one said, I am of
Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, etc. there should yet in that age be none
found meet for Bishops to ordain to this second sort of Presbyters, as well
asmen to make Deacons of.

2. But we never yet saw the proof produced, that indeed the Bishops had power
given them to institute this other Species of Elders. Sure it belonged to the
Founders of the Churches (Christ and his Apostles) to institute the Species of
Ecclesiastical Officers, though the Bishops might make the Individuals
afterward. And where is the proof that the Apostles did institute it? If
Ecclesiastical generation imitate natural, the Bishops would beget but their
like: men beget men; so Physicians make Physicians, and so Bishops may beget
Bishops: But he that says they could morally first beget this other Species,
must prove it.

Sect XVI. When Presbyters were first distinct from Bishops, we see no proof
that it was as a distinct Office or Order in specie, and not only as a distinct
degree and privilege of men in the same Office: Nor has the Church of Rome it
self thought meet to determine this as de fide but suffers its Doctors to
hold the contrary.

Sect. XVII. It much confirms us in our judgment, that no mere Bishop then
had more Churches than one (as before described) when we find that Ignatius
(whose authority Dr. Hamond Dissert. cont* Blondel: Lays so much of the cause
upon, and whom Bishop Pierson has lately so industriously vindicated) does
expressly make ONE ALTAR, and ONE BISHOP with the Presbyters and Deacons, to be
the note of a Church Unity and Individuation. And that by one Altar is meant
one Table of Communion, or place where that Table stood, is past doubt with the
judicious and impartial. Whence learned Mr. Joseph Mede does argue as certain
that then a Bishops Church was no other than such as usually communicated in
one place. Yea, says Ignatius, the Bishop must take notice and account of each
person, even of Man-servants and Maids (that they come to the Church). And this
was the Bishop of a Seat, that after was Patriarchal: Such Bishops we do not
oppose.

Sect. XVIII. We find proof thar ordinarily Churches were first planted in
Cities (there being not then in the Villages Christians enough to make
Churches:) But we find no proof that when there are Christians enough to
constitute Churches, they may not be planted in Villages also: Nor yet that
there may not be more Churches than one in the same City: For so Grotius says,
There were even then when Christians were comparatively but few, and that they
were as the Jewish Synagogues in this respect. And Dr. Hamond largely asserteth
that Peter had a Church of Jews, and Paul another of Gentiles at Rome, and that
so it was in other Cities.

Sect. XIX. Much less is it by Divine Institution, that Bishops, and their
Churches or Seats, be only in such as we now call Cities, which by their
privileges are distinct from other great Towns and Corporations, whenas the
word (...) then signified a great Town or Corporation, such as our Market Towns
and Corporations now are.

Sect. XX. But it is the Law of God that all things about Churches and
Church Affairs which he has left to humane prudence, should be done according
to such general Rules as he has prescribed for their regulation.

SECT. IV
What Princes and Pastors may do in such matters.
I. THese foresaid General Laws of God, do both give the Rulers their Power for
determining things committed to them, and also limit their power therein.

II. These General Laws are, that All things be done to Edification, (the
circumstances fitted to the End, the Glory of God, and the Public Good, the
promoting of Truth and Godliness;) that all be done in Love, to the promoting
of Love and Unity; and that all be done in Order and Decently, and as may avoid
offense or scandal to all, both those without, and those within. Gal. 6. 15,
16. Phil. 3. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 14. 3, 5, 12. 26. 17. Romans 14. 19. and 15. 2. 1
Cor. 10. 23. Ephesians. 4, 12, 16, 19. 2 Cor. 12. 19. and 6. 3. and 11. 7. 1 Cor.
8. 13.

III. Therefore no Rulers, Civil or Ecclesiastical, have their power to
scandalize and destroy, but only to edify, being the Ministers of God for
good, Romans 13. 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10.

IV. The great Dispute is (handled excellently against the Papists for Kings by
Bishop Bilson of Christian Obedience, Bishop Andrews Tortura Torti, Bishop
Buckeridge, Spalatensis, and many more) whether the Kings of Christian Kingdoms
have not the same power about Churchmatters, as the Kings of Israel and Judah
had (David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc.) which cannot be answered by an
only Yea or Nay, without a more particular consideration of the compared Cases.

V. We suppose it certain that Christian Kings have no lesser power than the
Kings of Israel, except 1. What any such King had as a Prophet, or in peculiar,
by an extraordinary grant. 2. And what alteration is made by alteration of
Church-offices, Laws, and Worship, which may make a difference; of which
hereafter.

VI. And 1. It must be remembered that God then reserved the Legislation to
himself, which he exercised by Revelation, and by special Prophets: And so the
Prophet Moses delivered them that Law, which no King had power to abrogate,
suspend, or alter by adding or diminishing, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Jos. 1. But they had
a mandatory power, and of making some subordinate Bylaws, as Cities and
Corporations have from and under the King.

VII. 2. Yea great and special Mandates were often sent from God by Prophets,
against which the Kings of Israel had no power.

VIII. 3. The Executive or Judicial Power was divided: part was in the Kings
and Magistrates; and part was in the Priests and Levites, which the King could
not usurp himself (as appears in Uzziahs offering Incense,) nor yet forbid
the Priests to use it, according to God's Law; nor change or abrogate their
Office. For he and they were subject to God's Laws.

IX. 4. God himself settled the High Priesthood on the line of Aaron, and all
the Priesthood on the Tribe of Levi; and it was not in the power of the King to
alter it.

X. 5. God stated the High Priesthood on the Priests during life, Numb. 35. 25,
28. Jos. 20, 6, etc. which Law the Kings had no power to violate.

XI. 6. There are more particular Laws made by God for the duty of the Priests,
describing their office and work, than for any other particular case, as many
hundred Texts will tell us: And none of these Laws might be altered, or
suspended by the Kings of Israel: Nor those by which God stated some of the
Judicial Power in the Congregation, Number. 35. 12. to 26.

XII. 7. Solomon's putting out Abiathar, and putting in Zadok, is not contrary
to any of this: For (supposing the words 1 King. 2, 35. to be not only a
history of the bare matter of fact, but a justification of it de jure.) 1. It
poseth learned men to resolve how Zadok and Abiathar are often said to be both
High Priests before, and Zadok still put before Abiathar. 2. It is certain that
Zadok had the right both of Inheritance and especial Promise, Numb. 25. 11, 12,
13. 1 Chronicles. 6. 3, 4, etc. And what Solomon did was that the word of the Lord
might be fulfilled. How the possession came into the hands of the line of
Ithamar, Expositors cannot find: It is like it was by occasion of the
confusions of their often Captivity and Anarchy in the interspace of the Judges.
3. Even the Priests were the King's subjects, and might be punished for their
crimes, so it were according to God's Laws. And if Abiathar forfeited his life,
he forfeited his Office.

XIII. 8. The Priesthood then depended not on the institution or will of the
King or People: He might not put out a lawful Priest, that had not forfeited
his Life or Office: He might not have put any one in his place that had not
right from God, or that was unqualified: He might not have forbid the Priests
the work appointed them by God: But yet if he had injurio^sl^ deposed one
Abiathar, and put in a Zadok, the loss had been little to the Church: But if he
had deposed so great a number of the Priests and Levites, as that a great part
of God's commanded work must needs thereby have been lest undone, and Religion
so far destroyed, or had as Jeroboam, put of the basest of the people (or
incapable persons) into the Priesthood, the loss had been greater, and the
thing unwarrantable, and such as he had not power from God to do.

XIV. And the quality of Moses Law and its Works, as different from the Laws of
Christ, and the Works thereof, must be considered, that we may discern the
difference of the Cases. A man that did attempt to draw the people to Idolatry,
was then to be put to death; yea, the City to be destroyed that concealed him,
Deuteronomy. chapter ^3 so were they that blasphemed, and such as committed other heinous
crimes against Religion; yea those that would not enter into, or renew their
Covenant with God, were by Asa's command to be put to death: But Christ will
have men's Atheism, Irreligiousness, Idolatry and I^fidelity, cured by the
Preaching of the Truth, which therefore requires that the Preachers for number
and qualification be answerable to their work: especially seeing they are
things so mysterious and supernaturally revealed, which men are to believe: And
the works of Moses's Law lay very much in ceremony and outward actions, which a
man of mean qualifications might easily do: But the great work of the Gospel is
to bring Life and Immortality to light, and to Preach Christ, by whom came
Grace and Truth, and more notably than the Law of Moses did, to call men to
Mortification, Self-denial, Cross-bearing, contempt of the World, by Faith and
Hope and Love of a better World, and to bring them to a heavenly mind and life:
And men's salvation is laid on this. If it were but to offer Sacrifices, and do
over the task of outward Ceremonies, a Mass-Priests qualifications might serve
the turn: And if it were but to put men to death that will not be Jews, and
take their Covenant, and that draw any from their Religion, neither so many nor
so excellent Ministers were necessary: But we are under a better Covenant, even
a Law of Love which is more eminently become the first and last, the great and
new Commandment, and the regent Principle in Souls and Churches; and the number
and quality of the Preachers of it must be answerable.

XV. As Moses was God's ministerial Lawgiver to the Israelites, and was
faithful in all his trust; so Christ is the great Prophet like unto him, as
typified by him, whom God has raised up to his Church, whom they that hear
not, shall be cut off by God, and from that Church as he has appointed: The
Legislation Universal is now the work of Christ by himself, and by the Holy
Ghost, which he promised and gave for that use to his Apostles, that they might
infallibly understand his will, and remember what he had commanded them to
teach the world.

XVI. Kings or Pastors may not now alter or suspend any of these Laws of
Christ, any more than the Jewish Kings or Priests might alter or suspend the
Laws of Moses.

XVII. Christ has instituted a Ministry to be for ever stablished in the
world, to Preach his Gospel, to convert volunteers unto Faith and Holiness, and
to gather by Baptism all Consenters into his Covenant and Church, and to teach
them all that he has commanded them. And this none have power to overthrow.

XVIII. He has stated on the Pastors of such Churches, the Power before
described, of Teaching Assemblies and particular persons, of leading them in
public Worship, and Sacraments, and of judging by the power of the Keys, whom
to receive into their communion by Baptism, and profession of Faith, and whom
to admonish, and for obstinate impenitence to reject: And this Institution none
may alter.

XIX. He has instituted ordinary Assemblies, and stated particular Churches,
as is aforesaid, for these holy exercises, and forbad all Christians to forsake
them; and he and his Apostles have appointed and separated the Lord's day
hereunto. None therefore may abrogate or suspend these Laws. All this is
proved, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. and 16. 19. and 18. 18, 19. Joh. 20. 23. Luke 12.
37, 38. Mat. 21. 36. and 22. 4, 5, etc. and 24. 45, 46. Heb. 10. 25, 26, Act.
11. 26. 1 Cor. 11. Ephesians. 4. 4. to 17. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 17, 24. Tit.
1. 5, 6, etc. 1 Timothy 3. Act. 14. 23. Act. 20. 1 Cor. 16. 1, etc.

XX. Christ's Laws empower and oblige the Bishops or senior Pastors to Ordain
others for this Ministerial service of the Church, and so to propagate their
order to the end of the world: By which Ordination, 1. They are Judges of the
persons qualifications, whether he be such as Christ's Laws admit into his
Ministry. 2. And they solemnly invest him in the office. But the Power with
which they ministerially invest him (delivering him possession as Christ
appointed) resulteth directly from the Law or Donation of Christ; As the power
of a Mayor from the Charter of the King, and not from the Electors or
Investers. None therefore have power given them by Christ, to hinder such
Ordination and Propagation of such a Ministry, Act. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5.

XXI. So exceeding great are the benefits and privileges of being members of
Christ, and his Church universal and particular, that no unwilling person is
immediately capable of it: Nor is it possible ex natura rei, for any (adult)
person that consents not to be a Christian, or a Member of any particular
Church. He cannot be a just Communicant against his will; nor pray and praise
God with the Church; nor take a man for his Pastor, or use him as a Pastor,
against his will: And God has laid men's salvation or damnation on the choice
or refusal of their wills. Therefore no man can be the Bishop or Pastor of a
Church, either de jure, or truly de facto, against the Church or Peoples will,
or without their consent. And as the Nature of the thing proves this, so does
the sacred Scripture, Act. 14. 23. and 2. 37, 38. 1 John 1. 7. Mat. 28. 19.

And so does the judgment and practice of Christ's Church, for many hundred
years; which is so fully proved by Blondell, de jure plebis, and confessed by
the Papists themselves, and so express in all antiquity, that we need not add
the proof. Therefore no power may change this Law of Nature, and of Christ; nor
can they by any Law, Mandate, Choice, Ordination, Institution, Imposition, or
other act, make any man a real Pastor to that People that consent not to the
relation. Nor are they any true particular Churches, where Pastor and People do
not consent. No more than the relation of Husband and Wife, Master and Servant,
Tutor and Scholars, can be without consent.

XXII. Christ and his Spirit have commanded his Ministers to preach the Word,
to be instant in season and out of season; to reprove, rebuke and exhort, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. And having put their hand to Christ's Plough, not to look back;
and none has power to alter this Law of Christ, or to suspend it. His
Ministers by his Authority preached against the will of Princes for above three
hundred years; and since then against the wills of erroneous Princes who
professed Christianity.

XXIII. If Church History be not to be believed, the pleas thence used for
Prelacy must cease: If it be to be believed, God has wrought miracles to
justify those that would not cease Preaching, when Princes, yea
Christian-Princes, have forbidden them: And the Church has honored their
fidelity herein: The case of Athanasius, Basil, Meletius, and abundance more,
evince the later: And for the former, we will now instance but in the case of
the Bishops of Africa, whose tongues were cut out by the King's command; and
they spoke freely by miracle after they were cut out; as is testified by Aeneas
Gaze^, and by Victor Uticensis, who saw and spoke with, and heard the persons
when this miracle was wrought upon them; and by Procopius.

XXIV. It will be objected that Constantius, Valeus, Gensericus, Hunnericus,
etc were Arrians, and the later conquering Usurpers.

Answ. 1. Even Heathen Emperors and Kings are our Governors, though they want
due aptitude to their duty (as also do many wicked Christian Princes:) And we
owe them obedience when their Laws or Mandates are not against the Laws of God.
We must not say as Bellarmine, that Christians should not tolerate such
Princes, and that the ancient Christians suffered for want of Power to resist.
2. Let the Emperors called Arrians be made no worse than they were: Some were
for Concord and Toleration of both Parties, and so are more suspected than
proved to be Arrians: And Arrians themselves, (though unexcusably erroneous)
were not like the Socinians, that utterly deny Christ's Deity: They subscribed
to all the Nicene Creed, save the the word [(...)] They would say that Christ
was [Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten not made, etc.] They
thought that as the Sunbeams or Light are its immediate emanation, but not its
substance (as commonly Philosophers say they are not, how true we say not) so
Christ was an immediate emanation from the Father, before and above Angels, by
whom all things else were made. And how dangerously Justin, and most of the
ancientest Doctors before the Nicene Council speak hereabout, and how certainly
Eusebius and other great Bishops were Arrians, and how lamentably the Council
at Ariminum endeavored an uniting Reconciliation, by laying by the word
[(...)] And even old Osius by their cruelty yielded to them; as Liberius
subscribed to them, we need not send any men to Philostorgius nor Sondius for
proof, it being so largely proved by D^* Petavius de Trinitate, who fully
cites their dangerous words.

And if the heterodoxies of the Prince shall be made the reason of the Subjects
disobeying him, in a matter lawful in it self (as some that we speak to now
suppose) we shall hardly know where to stop, nor what bounds to set the
Subjects when they are made Judges of the Princes Errors; and what examination
of cognizance of it, they must have.

3. Constantine that banished Athanasius (who kept in while he could against
the Emperors will) is not proved an Arrian: Nor Valentinian, who commanded
Ambrose, (not to cease Prenching himself, nor to forsake his Church, nor to
subscribe to Arrianism, but only) to tolerate the Arrians to meet in one spare
Church, which was in Millan, as an act of moderation: But Ambrose resolutely
disobeyed the Emperor (we justify not the manner) because he thought that
God's Law made it his office as Bishop, so to do.

4. And as to Gensericus and Hunnericus's Usurpation, it was then ordinary with
the Bishops even of Rome, to submit to men that had no better title; and alas,
how few of many of the old Roman Emperors had any better (at least, at first.)

XXV. We doubt not at all but that Kings are the Governors of Bishops, and
Churches, by coercive power, as truly as of Physicians, or other Professions:
And though they have no Authority to abrogate or suspend the Laws of Christ,
yet they have a Power of Legislation, under Christ, as Corporations for Bylaws
have under them: which power is only about those things which God has left to
their determination; and not either above Christ, against Christ, or in
coordination with Christ, but only in such subordination to him, and to his
Laws.

XXVI. How far Rulers have power (or not) to command things indifferent, and
how far things scandalous and evil by accident, some of us have opened already
distinctly, and need not here repeat.

XXVII. And we have there showed, that as they may regulate Physicians by
General and Cautionary Laws, but not overthrow their Calling on that pretense,
by prescribing to the Physician all the Medicines which he shall use, to this
or that Patient, at this or that time, etc. so they may make such General and
Cautionary Laws, circa sacra, 1. As shall drive Bishops and Pastors on to do
their certain duties: 2. And as shall duly restrain them from sin and doing
hurt: 3. And they may punish them by the sword or force, for such crimes as
deserve that punishment. And a King of England may depose, or put to death a
traitorous Bishop, Priest or Deacon, as lawfully as Solomon deposed Abiathar.

XXVIII. And as we have there said, we suppose that there are some
circumstances of the Ministers work, which it belongs to his own office to
determine of, and are a true part of his Ministerial works: But there are
others, which it is meet should be universally determined of, for the Concord
of all the Churches in a Kingdom. These the Pastors and Churches by consent may
agree in without a Law, it Kings leave it to them. And Kings (by the advice of
such as best understand Church Cases) may well by their own Laws make such
determinations. As for instance in what Scripture Translations, what Versions
and Metres of Psalms, the Churches shall agree. Much more may they determine of
the Public Maintenance of Ministers, and the Temples and such other extrinsick
accidents.

XXIX. Princes and Rulers may forbid Atheists, Infidels, Heretics and
Malignant opposers of necessary truth and godlyness, and all that preach
rebellion and sedition, that propagate such wicked Doctrine, and may punish
them if they do it. And may hinder the incorrigible* and all that provedly or
notoriously are such whose Preaching will do more hurt to men than good, from
exercising the Ministry or Preaching in their jurisdiction or Dominions: For
such have not any power from Christ so to Preach, but serve the Enemy of Christ
and man.

XXX. Princes and Rulers may for order sake distribute their Christian Kingdoms
into Parishes, which shall be the ordinary bounds of particular Churches: And
such distribution is very congruous to the Ends of the Ministry and Churches,
and conduces to orderly settlement and peace: And experience has showed us
that such Parish Churches where the Pastors are faithful and fit, may live as
Christians should do to their mutual comfort in Piety, Love and Peace: And
such Parish-order we desire.

XXXI. But no Rulers may hence conclude, 1. that Parishes are distributed by
God immediately, or that he has commanded such a distribution as a thing of
absolute necessity to a Church; But the General Rules of order, and
Edification do ordinarily in Christian Kingdoms require it. 2 Nor may any make
a Parish, as such to be a Church; and all to be Church members that are in the
Parish, as such: for Atheists, Infidels, Heretics, and Impenitent Rebels may
live in the Parish; and many that consent not to be members of that or any
Church: And not only in worse lands but in Ireland and in England, (as part of
Lancashire,) the far greatest part of the Parishioners are Papists, (who
renounce the Protestant Churches) in some places.

XXXII. Neither dwelling in the Parish, nor the Law of the Land, makes any
Christian a member of that Parish Church, without or before his own consent:
But proximity is part of his extrinsick aptitude and the law of man or command
of his Prince may make it his duty to consent, and thereby to become a member
when greater Reasons mollify not that obligation.

XXXIII. Parish Bounds and such other humane distributions for convenience, may
be altered by men; and they bind not against any of Christ's own Laws and
predeterminations; nor when any changes turn them against the good ends for
which they are made; of which more afterward, when we speak of separation.

XXXIIII. And about these humane Church-Laws the general Case must be well
considered, how far they are obligatory to conscience, and in what cases they
cease to bind. Sayrus, Fragoso and other the most Learned and Moderate Casuists
of the Papists, ordinarily conclude, that Humane Laws bind not, when they are
not for the Common good. We had rather say, that when they are notoriously
against the Laws of Christ, or against the Common good, or are made by
usurpation without authority thereto, they bind not to formal obedience in that
particular, (though sometime other reasons, especially the honor of our
Rulers, may bind us to material obedience, when the matter is indifferent; and
though still our subjection and loyalty must be maintained. But of this before,
and more largely by one of us, Christian directory, Part. 4. Chap. 3. Tit. 3.
etc. The Council of Toletum. 1355 decreed that their decrees shall bind none ad
culpam but only ad poenam see Bin. Inoc. 6th.

Sect. XXXV. Kings and Magistrates should see that their Kingdoms be well
provided of public Preachers and Catechists, to convert Infidels and Impious
men where there are such, and to prepare such for Baptism, and Church
privileges and Communion, as are not yet Baptized, but are Catechumens: And
they may by due means compel the ignorant to hear and learn what Christianity
is, though not to become Christians (for that is impossible) nor to prosess
that which is not true, nor to take Church Priviledges, to which they have no
right, and of which at present they are incapable. But they may grant those
rewards and civil Privileges to Christians and Churches for their
encouragement, which they are not bound to give to others, and which may make a
moving difference, without unrighteous constraint.

XXXVI. Christ and his Apostles having (as is aforesaid) settled the Right of
Ordination on the Senior Pastors or Bishops and the Right of Consenting in the
People, (and this continued long even under Christian Emperors) Princes or
Patrons may not deprive either party of their Right, but preserving such
Rights, they may 1. Offer meet Pastors to the Ordainers and Consenters to be
accepted, when there is just cause for their interposition: 2. They may hinder
both Ordainers and People from introducing intolerable men: 3. They may, when
a Peoples Ignorance, Faction or Wilfulness makes them refuse all that are
truly fit for them, urge them to accept the best; and may possess such of the
Temples, and Public Maintenance, and make it consequently to become the
Peoples duty to consent, as is aforesaid; so also when they are divided.

XXXVII. Princes ought to be Preservers of Peace and Charity among the
Churches; and to hinder Preachers from unrighteous and uncharitable reviling
each other, and their unpeaceable controversies and contentions.

XXXVIII. Christ himself has instituted the Baptismal Covenant to be the Title
of Visible Members of his Church, and the Symbol by which they shall be
notified: And he has commanded all the baptized as Christians, to Love each
other as themselves; and though weak in the faith, to receive one another, as
Christ receives us, but not to doubtful disputations; and so far as they have
obtained to walk by the same rule, of Love, and Peace, and not to despise or
judge each other for tolerable differences (much less to hate, revile, or
destroy each other;) and it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and the Apostles, to
lay no greater burden on the Churches, even of the Ceremonies which God had
once commanded, but Necessary things, Act. 15. 28. And these terms of
Church-Union and Concord which Christ has made, no mortal man has power to
abrogate. All things therefore of inferior nature, though Verities and Good,
must be no otherwise imposed by Rulers, than as may stand with these universal
Laws of Christ, which are the true way to prevent Church-Schisms.

XXXIX. Princes by their Laws, or Pastors by consent where Princes leave it to
them, may so associate many particular Churches for orderly correspondencie and
concord, and appoint such times and places for Synods, and such orders in them,
as are agreeable to Gods aforesaid general Laws, of doing all in Love, to
Edification and in order; And how far, if Rulers should miss this general
Rule, they are yet to be obeyed, we have opened elsewhere.

XL. As we have there also said that Princes may make their own Officers to
execute their Magistratical Power circa sacra (which we acknowledge in our King
in our Oath of Supremacy;) and if such be called, Eclesiastical, and their
Courts and Laws so called also, that ambiguous name does not intimate them to
be of the same species as Christ's ordained Ecclesiastical Ministers, or as his
Churches and Laws are; so now we add that if Princes shall authorize any
particular Bishops or Pastors to exercise any such visiting, conventing,
ordering, moderating, admonishing, or governing power as it belongs to the
Prince to give, not contrary to Christ's Laws, or the duties by him commanded,
and privileges by him granted to particular Churches, we judge that Subjects
should obey all such, even for conscience sake: However, our consideration of
Christ's decision of his disciples controversy, who should be the greatest and
our certain knowledge how necessary, Love, and Lowliness, and how pernicious,
wrath and Lordly-Pride are in those that must win souls to Christ, and imitate
him in bearing (not making) the cross, together with the sad history of the
Churches distractions and corruption by Clergy-Pride and Worldliness (lamented
by Nazianzene, Basil, Hilary Pictavus, Socrates, Sozomen, Isidore Pelusiot,
Bernard, and multitudes more, yea by some Popes themselves) these and other
reasons we say do make us wish, that the Clergy had never been trusted with
the sword, or any degree of forcing power, or secular pomp; yet if Princes
judge otherwise, we must obediently submit to all their Officers.

XLI. It seems by the phrase of His Majesty's Declaration about
Ecclesiastical affairs 1660, in which (after consultation with his Reverend
Bishops) the Pastoral way of Persuasion, reproofs and admonitions are granted
to the Presbyters that a distinction is intended between this Pastoral and the
Prelatical Government, And we must, with very great concern, profess that if
the Churches of the lowest sort (Parochial) be but indeed made true Churches,
such as Christ by his Apostles instituted, and not only Parts of a Diocesan
Church as if that were the lowest ra^k; And if these particular Churches have
but Pastors that have the power of the Keys in those Churches, and all that the
scripture makes essential to the Offic^r which was then set over every such
particular Church; And if the Discipline instituted by Christ himself, be but
made possible and seasible in such Parochial Churches, yea if we that were
trusted by our calling with the mysteries of God, may not be forced our selves,
to administer the Sacraments against our own knowledge and consciences, and
against our consciences and knowledge of men's cases to pronounce men absolved,
or excommunicate upon other men's decrees, or to pronounce the notoriously
wicked to be saved, and to deny worthy Christians the seal of Christ's Covenant,
nor their infants their visible Christianity by baptism; we say, might we but
have this much, we should be so far from using the Controversy about the
Divine Kight of Episc^pacy as a distinct Order from Presbyters, to any schism,
or injury to the Church, that we should thankf^lly contribute our best
endeavors to the concord, safety, peace and prosperity thereof. And might we
but also be freed from Swearing, Subscribing, Declaring, and Covenanting
unnecessary things (which we take not to be true) against our consciences, and
from some few unnecessary Practices which we cannot justify, we should
joyfully serve the Church in our public Ministry, though it were in poverty
and rags. But of so great a mercy experience has made our hopes from men to be
very small: And the reason of the thing makes our hopes as small of the
happiness of the Church of England, till God shall unite us on these necessary
terms.

SECT. VI.
3. What Separation, and what Gathering of Assemblies or Churches is unlawful,
and what lawful.
I. THough some men's abuse of the word [Schism] and calling men's duty to God by
that name, has proved a great temptation to many, to take it but for a word of
Passion, or of no certain or odious signification (even as the Papists abuse of
the word [Heresie] and [Heretick] has been to others) yet the evil of true
Shism and the odium that God lays on it in the Scripture, should move all
Christians, to fear the thing and use the name with the disgrace that it truly
imports (without misapplication,) and to avoid all guilt of so great a sin.

II. There are several sorts and degrees of Schism, which greatly differ from
each other Its one thing to divide from a Church, and another to cause
divisions or factions in it. Its one thing to divide our selves from it, and
another to cause others to divide. Its one thing to draw men away by words, and
another to drive them away by laws or execution, by unjust excommunication or
by violent persecution. Its one thing to tempt away or drive away a single
person, or a few; and another thing to draw or drive away multitudes. Its one
thing to separate from the Universal-Church, and another from a particular
Church, or a few only. Its one thing to separate from the species of particular
Churches, and another from some individuals only. Its one thing to separate
from the Churches of Christ's institution, and another to separate only from
those of men's institution. Its one thing to separate from such as men make
lawfully, and another from such only as they make without authority, and
sinfully. And here separating from one whose sinful constitution is traitorous
against Christ's prerogative (as the Papal Universal Usurpation) much differs
from separating from one whose constitution though sinful, is of no such
perniciousness.

It is one thing to deny total Communion, and another to separate but secundum
quid for some act or part; And that is either a great and necessary part or
some small or indifferent thing or ceremony. It is one thing to separate
Locally by bodily absence, and another mentally by Schismatic principles. It
is one thing to separate from a Church as accusing it to be no Church of
Christ, and another to separate from it only as a true Church but so Corrupted
as not to be Communicated with. Its one thing to judge its Communion absolutely
unlawful, and another only to forsake it for a better which is preferred: Its
one thing to depart wilfully, and another to be unwillingly cast out. Its one
thing to depart rashly and in have, and another to depart after due patience,
when reformation appears hopeless. It is one thing to remove upon religious
reasons, and another upon Civil or Domestical, or Corporal.

It is easy for a confounded head to pass over all such distinctions, and with
unjust and confounding censures to reproach others as Schismatics in the dark,
before he knows what schism is, being guilty of Schism in his very
accusations. But sober Christians must be discerners, and know that confusion
is an Enemy to truth and love and justice.

III. I The Union of the Church Universal is in the seven things mentioned by
Paul Ephesians. 4. 3. 4, 5. 6. viz. One Body, One Spirit (of faith and Love) One Hope
(of Glory) One Lord, One faith (or Creed,) One Baptismal Covenant, One God and
Father of all. He that separateth from this Church directly, is an Apostate;
Uisibly, if from its Essential profession, and invisibly if only from the
inward sincerity of faith, consent and Love. This is damning separation. And if
he separate but from some one Essential article of faith or duty, it is that
which is most usually and strictly called Heresy; of which we are now to speak
no further.

IV. 2. To make Factions, Parties, Contentions, and Mutinies in a true Church
of Christ, or in any Community of Christians, yea or but in families, in the
Universal Church is a great sin, in all that are the true culpable Causes of
it, and are not only the involuntary occasions by unavoidable accidents.

V. 3. To separate from all the particular Churches in the world, as if they
were no true Political Churches of Christ (as those called Seekers do, who say
that the Ministry, Scripture and Churches, are lost in the wilderness,) is a
very heinous sin, though such as do so, renounce not their Baptism, or the
Church Universal.

VI. 4. To separate from most, or many Churches by so unchurching them, is far
worse than to separate from few or one; it being a greater wrong to Christ and
men.

VII. 5. To separate from one upon a reason that is known to be common to all,
or most, or many, is virtually to separate from all, or most, or many.

VIII. 6 To separate from a true Church, accusing it to be no true Church, is a
greater injury and sin (caeteris paribu^) than to separate from it only on an
unjust accusation or culpability consistent with a true Church: Because the
charge is more odious and injurious, and tends more to destroy Love.

IX. 7. To accuse a Church (its Doctrine, Ministry Worship or Discipline)
falsely, as guilty of such corruption which makes it unlawful for any
Christians to have communion with it, or falsely to pretend such faults for his
own and others separation from it, is a great sin, though not so great as to
unchurch it.

X. 8. To hold that every Error in the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, Pastors
or People of that Church, yea though settled and continued, and foreknown, not
forced on us to consent to or practice, is sufficient cause to make Communion
with the Church unlawful, is to hold a principle which would infer separation
from all the known Churches in this world.

XI. 9. To draw others to such separation by such false accusations or
opinions, is worse than to do it silently ones self; and the more the worse.

XII. 10. The more such accusations strike at the heart of Christian Love,
which is the life of holy Societies, and of Holiness it self; and the more they
draw men from Piety, and to hate, and abuse, and wrong each other, the greater
is the sin.

XIII. 11. When men erroneously and causlesly gather separated Members from
true Churches where they should continue, into Antichurches, or Societies,
where their business is to make others unjustly odious that differ from them;
this is to gather Schismatical Societies: And if they pretend themselves wiser
than the Generality of the true Orthodox Churches in the world, and so separate
from them, they were for this called Heretics at first: But if it be but upon
a quarrel with some particular neighbor Church or Pastor it was called a
Schism.

XIV. 12. If any proud, or passionate, or erroneous person do, as Diotrephes,
cast out the brethren undeservedly, by unjust suspensions, silencings, or
excommunications, it is tyrannical Schism, what better name soever cloak it.

XV. 13. If any should make sinful terms of Communion, by Laws, or Mandates,
imposing things forbidden by God, on those that will have Communion with them,
and expelling those that will not so sin, this were heinous Schism: And the
further those Laws extend, and the more Ministers or People are cast out by
them, the greater is the Schism.

XVI. 14. If any should not only excommunicate such persons for not complying
with them in sin, but also prosecute them with mulcts, imprisonments,
banishments, or other prosecution, to force them to transgress, this were yet
more heinously aggravated Schism.

XVII. 15. All those would be deeply guilty of such Schism who by talk,
writing, or preaching, justify it, and cry it up, and draw others into the
guilt, and reproach the Innocent as Schismatics, for not offending God.

XVIII. 16. If any should corrupt such a Church, or its Doctrine, Worship, or
Discipline in the very Essentials by setting up forbidden Officers, and
Worship, or casting out the Officers, Worship or Discipline instituted by
Christ, and then prosecute others for not communicating with them; this would
be yet the more heinous Schism.

XIX. 17. If either of the last named sorts, would not be content with men's
Communion with them, but would also silence and prosecute such as will not own,
justify, and consent to all that they do, by subscriptions, declarations,
covenants, promises, or oaths; this would yet be a more aggravated Schism.

XX. 18. If the men that do this should be mere obtruders and usurpers, that
have no true Pastoral power over those whom they persecute (as the Pope over
other Kingdoms and Churches) this were yet more aggravated schism.

XXI. 19. If such Usurpers will claim a dominion or Monarchy over all the
world, and unchurch, degrade and unchristen all that will not be their
Subjects, or will impose sinful terms of Union upon all the Christian World,
and declare all Heretics or Schismatics, that receive them not, and so cast
out most of the Christians on Earth, and all the sounder Churches, this is one
of the most heinous sorts of Schism, that the mind of man can think of. Which
is the grand Schism of the Roman Papacy, worse than all their interior Schisms
when they had many Popes at once.

XXII. 20. If such shall send agents and emissaries into the Dominions of
Christians Princes or States, to draw the Subjects to that Schism, and make
them believe that Princes are by right the Subjects of the Pope, and that men
shall be damned if they will not take him for the Bishop or Vice-christ of all
the World and keep up a rich and numerous Clergy in Christian Kingdoms for
this use, and make Decrees to exterminate or burn Christians, and to depose
temporal Lords that will not obey them and execute their laws, This is to
maintain and prosecute a Schism against Religious and Civil peace, by open
hostility to Princes and People, and to mankind.

XXIII. 21. If, because the Roman Emperors and Clergy settled five Patriarchs
in the Roman Empire, of which the Roman Bishop was the first, and by Councils
called General of that Empire, did make Church Laws to bind the Subjects, any
therefore will teach that these Patriarchs, (and the Pope as Principi^m
unitatis) must be Rulers in the dominions of other Princes, and that such
Councils must govern them by their Decrees and that the Universal Church must
be united in any one mortal head, whether Personal or Collective (such as
General Councils,) and so would bring Christian Princes and people under the
Laws and Government of foreigners, and brand those as Schismatics that will
not fall in with such an Universal Church Policy, This were also a very
heinous sort of Schism. For the Universal Church never did, nor will be united
on such terms; And therefore to make such terms of its unity, is to make an
Engine to divide it, and tear it all into pieces.

XXIV. 22. If any will confine the Power or Exercise of the Church Keys into
so few hands as shall make the Exercise of Christ's Discipline impossible (as by
laying that work on one, which multitudes are too few to do;) or shall make
Churches so great, and Pastors so few, as that the most of the people must
needs be without true Pastoral oversight, teaching and public worship, and
then will forbid those people to Commit the Care of their souls to any others
that will be Pastors indeed, and so would compel them to be without Christ's
ordinances, true Church Communion and Pastoral help, This would be
Schismatical, and much worse.

XXV. 23. If any Pastors will deny Baptism, which is their investiture in the
Christian Church, to the Adult that refuse to receive the transient Image of
the Crucifix (or any thing equal to it) as a Dedicating means to consecrate
them to God, and to signify their Covenant Engagement to Christ, and as a
badge and symbol of the Christian Religion, it seems to us to be
Schismatic, when Christ himself instituted Baptism without such a
Covenanting Image, to be the test and bond of his Churches unity: But if those
Pastors hold Baptism necessary also to salvation, and yet will so deny it to
such, this seems a great aggravation. The same we say of such Pastors as
reject from Baptism and the Church, the Infants of true Christians on the
aforesaid account: As also of those that reject them from Baptism, because the
Parents will not offer them to it, unless they may themselves be the
Covenanters in their own Childrens names, and the Express dedicaters of them to
God, and because they either cannot get credible Godfathers, or will not put
others to promise the Christian Education of their children, who they have no
reason to believe do at all intend it, or will ever do it, we can excuse no
such rejection of Christian Infants from Christ's Church, from Schism.

XXVI. 24. If some Christians be of opinion that Christ's example binds them
to receive the Lords Supper in a Table gesture, or that the tradition of the
Universal Church and the Canon 20th of the Nicene Council is obligatory to
them, which forbad men to adore Kneeling on any Lords day in the year, or on
any week day between Easter and Whitsuntide (which no other General Council
revoked, but continued till mere usage by degrees wore it out, says Dr. Heylin
of the Sabbath, above 1000 years after Christ.) Or if the said persons should
think that to receive Kneeling were such a scandalous appearance of the Papists
Bread-worship, as the bowing before an Image forbidden by the 2d. Commandment
was a scandalous appearance of Idol-worship, though these persons did in this
mistake, we could not excuse our selves from Schism, if we should therefore
refuse them Sacramental-Communion: Nor if we should Assent and Consent to the
rejection of men for so small an error, seeing Christ's Spirit, Romans 14. 1,
etc. commanded both Pastors and People to receive him that is weak in the
says, but not to doubtful disputations; and to live in Love and Union with
those that have greater weaknesses than this.

XXVII. 25. It may be Schismatical to cast men out of the Church for that which
yet may be Schismatical in the person so ejected: If he depart from the Church
though Schismatically only in some accident, circumstance, or some one act or
thing of no necessity to communion or salvation; we think he may not be
excommunicated, e. g. for not paying Fees at the Chancellours Court, or such
like. For as God departs not from sinners first, or further than they depart
from him; so we humbly conceive the Church should imitate him; remembering how
Christ that came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them, rebuked the Sons
of Thunder that would have had him destroy those that refused to receive him,
telling them, That they knew not what manner of spirit they were of.

On the other side, it may be Schism to separate from a Church that has some
Schismatical Principles, Practices, and Persons, if those be not such or so
great as to necessitate our departure from them: For alas, it is too few
Churches that are so happy as to have nothing, and do nothing which is
Schismatical.

XXVIII. 26. Gathering New Churches by way of Separation from others, or
gathering Assemblies without the consent of the lawful Pastors, who had the
charge of the People of those Assemblies, is a sin and Schism in all these
Cases following.

1. In general, when the Laws, Practices, or Persons of the Church which they
separate from, give them no sufficient cause of a departure.

2. In general, when in the judgment of true reason, according to the notable
evidence of the case, the said Assemblies are like to do more hurt than good.

3. When such Assemblies are gathered in opposition to some Truth which the
Separaters would thereby disown (e. g. Infant Baptism, the lawfulness of
Set-forms of Praise or Prayer, or any sound Doctrine;) or for the profession
and propagation of some Heresy or Error (as Antinomianism, Popery, etc.)

4. When such Churches are gathered by men that have no true Fitness and
Calling for the Sacred Ministry, or the work which they undertake.

5. When they are gathered by the pride of the Ministers, that would thereby
unduly set up themselves, and draw away Disciples after them; or by their
covetousness, seeking not the good of the Flock, but the Fleece; not them, but
theirs; not serving the Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies: Or when gathered, by
the Pride of the People, that unjustly think those that they separate from, men
unworthy of their Communion, and say to them, Come not near to us, we are
holier than you, Isa. 65. 5.

6. When they are gathered by a quarrelsom Passion, falling out with the
Pastors and People whom they separate from. The parting of Paul and Barnabas
had some evil in it.

7. When they are gathered to encourage and strengthen a sinful Faction or
Party, or when men separate from others for fear of being censured by such a
party, as Peter did withdraw from the Gentile Christians, lest he should
displease the erroneous jews Gal. 2.

8. When it is done out of a proud overvaluing of men's own opinions, or some
odd singularity, whereby men cannot bear those that are not of their mind, or
whereby they would fain be be more conspicuous as more Orthodox and wise than
others.

9. When it is done mistakingly to set up some wrong course of Church
Government or worship (As that the People may have the Power of the Keys, or
of examining and judging all admitted members, or that Papal Government or the
mass may be introduced enthusiastical disorderly talking by pretended
inspiration, by ignorant uncalled men, or to introduce such traditions and
superstitions, as the Papists use, etc.)

10. When it is done upon a false conceit that a man's presence with any Church
that has known error or saults in doctrines or worship, is a guilty approving
of them, and therefore that they must separate from all such.

11. When they separate out of an unruliness of spirit, because they will not
be governed by their lawful Pastors in lawful things, as time, place, order,
etc. or because a Minor part in elections is overvoted by the major part, and
cannot have their wills.

12. When they separate out of a profaneness of mind, not enduring the power
of the Preachers doctrine, or the holiness and discipline of the Church, but
would be licentious, while they would be called Religious. All these are
unlawful separations, and assemblings.

^. Yet that which is unlawful as to the Principle, End and Manner, secundum
quid, is not always unlawful simply, and in the thing it self, for a proud,
covetous turbulent person may sinfully do a Lawful thing.

XXIX. 27. When Pastors by concord, or Magistrates by Laws have settled Lawful
Circumstances or Accidents of Church Order or Worship, or Discipline, though
they be in particular but humane Institutions, it is Sinful disobedience to
violate them without necessary reason. e. g. Parochial Order, Associations,
Times, Places, Ministers, Maintenance, Scripture-Translations, etc.

XXX. 28. When able faithful Pastors are lawfully set over the Assemblies, by
just Election and Ordination, if any will causelessly, and without right silence
them, and command the people to desert them, and to take others for their
Pastors in their stead, of whom they have no such knowledge as may encourage
them to such a change, we cannot defend this from the charge of Schism, which
puts a Congregation on so hard a means of Concord, as to judge whether they are
bound to that Pastor that was set over them as Christ appointed, or must
renounce him and take the other when they are Commanded. So Cyprian in the case
of Novatian says that he could be no Bishop because another was rightful
Bishop before.

XXXI. 29. In England it belongs 1. to the Patron to present, 2. to the
Bishop to ordain and institute and therefore to approve and invest 3. to the
people jure divino to be free Consenters, 4. and to the Magistrate to protect
and to judge who shall be protected or tolerated under him: If now these four
parties be for four Ministers or for three, or two several men, and cannot
agree in one, the culpable dissenters will be the causes of the Schism.

XXXII. 30. If a Church have more Presbyters than one, and will be for one way
of worship, discipline or doctrine and another for another, (as at Frankford,
Dr. Cox. Mr. Horn and others were for the Liturgy, and others against it) so
that the people cannot possibly accord, it is the culpable party, which ever it
be, that must answer for the Schism. So much of enumerated Schisms.

XXXIII. On the Negative, we suppose that none of these following are Schisms
in a culpable sense.

1. All are agreed that it is no Schism for the Christian Church to separate
from the ancient Jewish, or from the Infidel Heathen World.

XXXIV. 2. All Protestants are agreed that it is no Schism to deny obedience to
the Roman Pope; nor to deny that communion with them, which they will not have
without obedience: To separate from other Churches, is to deny them mere
Communion; But to separate from the Roman as Papal, is but to deny them
subjection* To deny any other Christian Church to be a true Church is
Schismatical, if they have the Essentials of a Church: But to deny the Papal
Church or Monarchy to be a true Church of Christ's institution, is true, just
and necessary, though they be Christians; because we mean only the Papal Church
form, as it is an Universal Ecclesiastical Monarchy of the whole Christian
world, which no other Church but that does claim.

XXXV. 3. It is no Schism to deny Subjection to Pope, Councils or Patriarchs,
of other Kingdom^, or to any foreign Power by what names or titles soever called.

XXXVI. 4. It is no Schism to deny that Christ has any such Visible Church on
Earth as is one by Union with any Universal Head, Personal or Collective,
besides himself.

XXXVII. 5. It is no Schism to Preach, and gather Churches, and elect and
ordain Pastors and Assemble for God's Worship, against the Laws and will of
Heathen, Nahometan, or Infidel Princes that forbid it. For thus did the
Christians for 300 years. And if there be the same cause and need, it is no
more Schism to do it against the Laws and will of a Christian Prince. Because,
1. Christ's Laws are equally obligatory; 2. Souls equally precious. 3. The
Gospel and Gods worship equally necessary, 4. And his Christianity enableth him
not to do more hurt than a Pagan may do, but more good. If therefore either out
of Ungodly enmity to his own profession, or for fear of displeasing his wicked
or Insidel Subjects, he should forbid Christian Churches, he is not to be
therein obeyed.

XXXVIII. 6. If a Prince, Heathen, Infidel or Christian, forbid Gods Commanded
worship, and any Commanded part of the Pastors office, (as in Papists Kingdoms
Prayer in a known tongue, and the Cup in the Lords Supper is forbidden, and as
they say, all preaching save the reading of Liturgies and Homilies is forbidden
in Moscovie, and as the use of the Keys is elsewhere forbidden;) It is no
Schism to disobey such Laws, (what Prudence may pro hic and nunc require of any
single person we now determine not.)

XXXIX. 7. If any Prince would turn his Kingdom, or a whole Province, Diocese
or County into One only Church and thereby overthrow all the first order of
Churches of Christ's institution, which are associated for Personal present
Communion, allowing them no Pastors that have the power of the Keys, and all
essential to their office; though he should allow Parochial Oratories or
Chapels, which should be no true Churches, but Parts of a Church, It were no
Schism to gather Churches within such a Church against the Laws of such a
Prince. Many write that there is but One Bishop in Abassia (though some say
that others have Episcopal power under him:) some that read the old Canons,
which confine Bishops to Cities, and take not the word as then it was taken,
for any great Town or Corporation, but for such privileged Towns only as are
called Cities in England, hence gather that as the King may disfranchise Cities
and reduce them to ten, two or one in a Kingdom, he may by consequence do so by
Churches that have Bishops; which if it be spoken but of Episcopi Episcoporum
we resist not; But if of Episcopi Gregis of the first Order of Churches called
[Particular] we suppose that out of such a Kingdom-Church Provincial or
Diocesan-Church, it is no Schism to gather particular Parochial Churches though
forbidden. And the same reason will prove that if in a lesser circuit, the same
things be done though in a lower degree, viz, were it but three, four or ten
particular Churches of the largest size capable of Personal Communions turned
into one which is capable only of distant Communion per alios it is lawful to
gather particular Churches out of that larger sort of Church. If the Bishop of
Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, Cesarea, Heraclea, Carthage, etc. should have put
down the Bishops of ten, twenty, an hundred or many hundred Churches about
them, and set up only Oratories and Catechists in their stead making them all
but part of their own Churches, it would have been lawful to have gathered
Churches in their Churches: For God never made them proper Judges whether
Christ should have Churches according to his laws, nor whether God should be
worshipped, and souls be saved, or his own nstitutions of Churches be observed.

XL. 8. If Bishops would ordain Presbyters by limiting words, restraining them
from any Essential or Integral Part of the Office or Power as instituted by
Christ, and yet profess that they ordain them to the Office which Christ has
instituted, it is no Schism for those Presbyters afterward to claim (and
execute in season) all the power which by Christ's institution belongs to
their Office, though against the Bishops Wills. Because the Bishops are not the
Authors or Donors of the Office Power, but only the Ministerial Deliverers and
Investers; And therefore it is Christ and not they, that must describe it.

XLI. 9 No Prince or Prelate has power from Christ to set over, or impose upon
any Church or Christian people, any person as a Pastor who through Ignorance,
Heresy, Malignant opposition to piety, or utter defect of Ministerial ability,
is incapable of the Office or unfit to be trusted by the people with the
Pastoral care and conduct of their souls. Nor is it Schism in them to refuse
to commit their souls to such, nor to choose and use better; when they may do
it, without greater hurt to others then their gain will compensate.

XLII. 10. Princes or other Magistrates are not appointed by God to be the
ordinary Electters and Imposers of Pastors on all the Churches; and the people
bound to consent to whomsoever they elect. But Christ has given the Bishops
the power of free ordaining, and the people the power of free consenting, and
made Magistrates the Go^ernours of them that have this power. Even as he has
not given power to Princes to choose Wives or Husbands, Servants or Masters,
Tutors or Pupils, Physicians or Patients, for all their Subjects, but has
antecedently given such Subjects power to choose for themselves, and to Princes
to be civil Rulers of such as have this Choice, by which Governing Power they
may regulate their Choice in subordination to Christ's Universal Laws, and may
punish them for gross misdoing: Therefore it is no Schism for Pastors to
ordain, or People to choose the Overseers of their souls, without or against a
Magistrates will or command as such (submitting to his Government.)

XLIII. 11. When faithful Pastors truly ordained and elected, or consented to,
are in possession, if a lawful Magistrate cast them out (not only of the
Temples and Tithes, but also of their Pastoral Relation and Oversight, and put
others in their places of untried and suspected parts and fidelity; 1. The
Princes imposition makes not such the true Pastors of that Church before and
without the Peoples consent: 2. Nor will it always bind the People to consent,
and to forsake their former Pastors, nor prove them Schismatics because they
do it not.

For 1. God in Nature and Scripture has given them that consenting power
antecedent to the Princes determination, which none can take from them. As he
has in nature given men the Choice (or Consent at least) with what Physician
they will trust their lives: God has not put all sick men's lives so far in the
Princes power as to bind them to trust and use whomsoever he shall choose: For
men are nearest to themselves, and their lives are at their own wills in the
first instance, before they are at another: And men's souls and everlasting
happiness are preciouser to them than their lives, and it is first under God
their own wills by which they shall live or die; though all their friends
should do their best to make them willing of what is best.

2. They are supposed related duly to their tried Pastors, in the bond of
fidelity, which they may not unnecessarily violate.

3. Otherwise one Roman Emperor might have undone all the Churches and Souls in
the Empire in a great degree; by imposing on them insufficient, heretical, or
malignant Pastors: Where it must be noted, 1. That God does ordinarily work on
souls according to the quality of the means: To say that He can do otherwise,
is impertinent, while we see that he does not, nor has promised it. We see
that Heathens and Infidels are not converted without Preachers; We see that
Heretical Preachers make Heretics, and Schismatical ones make Schismatics,
and ignorant ones leave the people ignorant: In several Countries the people
are Greeks, Papists, Lutherans, etc. as they are taught. We see that one clear,
convincing, experienced, serious Preacher, turns more souls among us from
ignorance, error, fleshly lust, and worldly wicked hearts and lives, than
abundance of raw young Readers or Preachers, that ignorantly say over a dry
prepared speech in a Schoolboys mode and tone. It is not every Preacher of
whom it can be said as Dr. Ames does of old Mr. Midsley, a Nonconformist of
Lancashire, That he was the means of converting many thousand souls, (from
Popery, Ignorance, and a wicked life: Nor whose labors are blessed, as Mr. Dods,
Mr. John Rogers, Mr. Thomas Hookers (Nonconformists) or Mr. William Fenners (a
Conformist) and such others were. Even as we see by experience that a few
skilful, prudent, experienced Physicians cure more than abundance of young
beginners, who too often kill more than they cure. We see that the Abassian,
Armenian, Greek, and most Popish Countries are lamentably ignorant (and usually
proportionably vicious) for want of a learned, pious, skilful, and laborious
Ministry, History tells us, that the Kingdom of Nubia forsook Christianity for
want of competent Teachers: The industry of the Jesuits and Friars in China,
Japan, Congo, and other Countries, tells us how much they laid on the
diligent use of means. Jos. Acosta tells us how much the West Indies suffer in
Religion by the ignorance and wickedness of the Priests. How barbarous and sad
a state the Empire of Moscovy is in for want of able, faithful Pastors, while
the Emperors put down Preaching, and confine them to Liturgies and Homilies,
as is affirmed commonly without contradiction. How miserable a state the Roman
Church; yea, the Papacy was in, in the ninth and tenth Ages, even Baronius,
Genebrard, and the greatest flatterers of the Pope lament; and this for want of
able, faithful Pastors and Teachers among them.

2. No man has his power to destruction, but to edification. The bonum
Publicum is the end of Government: Therefore it is not Schism in Subjects, not
to cast their souls on notorious peril of damnation, in obedience to any mortal
man.

3. Every man, (especially experienced Christians) have more sense and
knowledge of what is profitable and congruous to them, than standers by have,
how learned soever: As ignorance makes a few, short, plain, often repeated
words, in a familiar style, more profitable to low-bred persons, than an
accurate learned Discourse would be; so men's several tempers and vices makes
that matter and manner of Preaching profitable to them, which to others seems
otherwise: And as a nice Lady must not tie her family of laboring persons, to
the matter and measure of her diet, nor revile them as gluttons or fools if
they like it not; no more must learned men confine plain people to wordy
Orations, (whether Learned or Pedantick) and say, This is best for them: Much
less must they silence causlesly such Teachers as truly profit them, or tie
them to Homilies or Liturgies only, and say, Here is as much as is necessary to
salvation: Nor is it any Schism in the people, if they refuse to be so confined
by them, and denied such helps to their salvation as God has sent them, and
made their due.

4. Order is an excellent means of edification, and of preserving Truth,
Charity and Peace: But it is but a Means to the Ends of the things Ordered, and
the public good: Therefore if Order should be made the advantage of Heresy,
Church-Tyranny or Iniquity, and be turned against the good of Church and Souls,
(as it is in the Policy of the Roman Church, and in well ordered Armies of
Rebels, or such as have unlawful wars) this would make it no Schism or sin ^o
break such order. These notices interposed, we add, 4. That it has been the
Judgment of the most honored Ages of the Church, that it is no Schism in the
forementioned Cases, to cleave to the faithful Pastors that were duly ordained
and consented to, and to refuse subjection to such as lawful Princes have
imposed in their steads.

1. That even in the Jewish State the Kings had not the Election of all the
Priests and Levites (much less the Prophets) is before proved; though they had
the Government of them according to God's Laws.

2. That the Apostles sent by Christ performed their Office against the will of
the Roman and Jewish Rulers, is not denied.

3. And because some think that this was proper only to Apostles or men sent
immediately by Christ, we add, that it is not denied that this was the case of
others in that Age: As Timothy, (who is charged before God and Angels to Preach
in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.) Titus, Apollo, Silas, and such
others; and of all the settled Elders of the Churches, Act. 14. v. 23. Tit. 1.
5. 2 These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 17, etc.

4. And it is not denied that this was the case of all the ordinary Pastors for
the first three hundred years, under the unbelieving Emperors. And as is
aforesaid, even these were Governors of the Christian Pastors and Churches
(who are commanded Romans 13. to obey them.) and they wanted not Governing power,
though in part they wanted aptitude to use it well; so that Christians were to
obey even Heathen Governors in lawful things.

5. And it is undeniable that this was the judgment and case of the Fathers and
People of the Church under the Christian Emper ours that were Arrians, or
favored the Arrians: And as is aforesaid, the Arrians would have subscribed to
all the Nicene Creed, (that Christ is Light of Light, God of God, very God of
very God, begotten, not made, till they came to that one word (...). Yea,
Eusebius subscribed to that also, and to the whole, who yet (notwithstanding
Socrates's charitable excuse) is by his own Epistle from that Council to his
People, plainly proved to be an Arrian, as Petavius has fully manifested: And
yet how the Churches of the East did commonly cleave to their Pastors when
Constantius and Valens ejected them; and how they resolutely refused the
imposed Bishops, some as Arrians, and some but as suspected, saying, We have
lawful Bishops already, and how stiffly they refused to forbear their forbidden
Meetings, and Public Worship with their former Pastors, Churchhistory puts us
out of doubt.

Athanasius often stayed with his flock till banished by violence by Constantine,
Constantius and Valens:

Eustathius Bishop of Antioch did the like yea came to the Imperial City
Constantinople, and there lived in secret to confirm the People and presumed to
ordain a Patriarch of that City chosen against the Emperors will: For when
Eudoxius was dead, the orthodox people chose Evagrius, a man of their own
judgment, and refused Demophilus, Socr. l. 4. c. 13. Both the consecrator and
the consecrated Bishop stayed with them till the Emperor sent soldiers from
Nicomedia to master the people, and banished them both into several Countries,
and at once put fourscore Priests to death (burning them in a ship at Sea,) to
whom the people adhered, who came to petition him for justice and forbearance.
Says Socr. cap. 14. When the Emperor at Edessa gave the Lieutenant a blow
with his fist because he had not scattered the Conventicles, as he had charged
him, the Lieutenant, for all this great disgrace, set himself, though
unwillingly to obey the Emperors wrath and displeasure; but gave notice
secretly of it to the people (for it was far from his mind to fall a murdering
so many godly Citizens,) that none should show his face in the Temple, that
none should be found raising of any Conventicle: But not one made account of
his advice, nor regarded his threats, for the day following all flocked in
great companies to the Temple. Then follows the mention of a woman that with
her little Child hastened through the crowd to the meeting hoping to die with
the rest. The citizens of Cyzicum banished Eunomius from their City, whom
Eudoxius had preferred to that Bishopric, not so much for his Errors as for
his arrogant and insolent manner of Preaching, with Logical tricks and sophisms
which they could not bear, and so they drove him to Constantinople where he
laid by his Bishops Office Id. c. 7.

And when Eleusius repenting of his sin in a forced subscribing to the Ariminum
faith would have had them have chosen another Bishop, they would have or
acknowledge no other but him; being the undoubted Chusers of their own Bishop
Ib. c. 7.

The City of Antioch sell into two parties of the Orthodox, besides the
Arrians, and chose two Bishops Paulinus and Meletirs; Though it was then
contrary to the Canons that one City should have two Bishops, none questioned
the peoples right to choose, nor denied either of them to be true Bishops: And
though the Emperor forbore Paulinus for his rare parts and virtues, and
banished only Meletius, the people would not obey his Orders, but still
assembled as before.

We are not ignorant what tumults popular Elections of Bishops have often caused:
But two things all acquainted with antiquity know which much serve to
counterballance this objection: 1. That where Emperors and Synods of Bishops
have made themselves the Electors, the tumults or confusions, or at least the
consequent evils were not less but greater: 2. And when they did thus assume
the Election (which was for the most part but in a few great seats and not of
ordinary Bishops) still they suppose a necessity of the peoples consent. When
the Emperor chose the Patriarchs, what one Emperor did another undid: And the
peoples dissent undid it sooner: and the Ruling Bishops so often disagreed, that
their synods and Churches were lamentably militant. By the favor of the
Emperor, Dioscorus was the strongest at Ephesus having the Soldiers and
Rulers on his side, and by them the Major Vote of the Bishops: But it was more
Theodosius and his Officers that carried it than equity; even to the condemning
of Eusebius and such others, and the beating of Fl^vianus the Patriarch of
Constable. unto death: And when by the Emperor and prevailing Bishops will, new
Bishops were placed (Anat^l^us at Constable. Maximus at Antioch, Nonus at Edessa,
Athanasius for Savinian etc,) says Liberatus in Breviaro cap. 12 schisma
factum est inter eos quale antea nunquam contigerat. Aegypti, Thraces and
Palestini Episcopi Dioscorum sequebantur, Orientales, Ponticis and Asiani
Sanctae Memoriae Flavianum: Quod Schisma Permansit usque ad obitum Theodosii
Principis. But when Martian was made Emperor, all was undon again: that went
for Heresy, which before went for the right belief, Dioscorus was banished,
Proterius was chosen; and how chosen: says Liberatus c. 14. ut cum omnium
civium volunt ate eligerint ordinandum Episcopum, sacris ob hoc literis
praecedentibus, ad Theodorum tun^ Augustalem collecti sunt ergo Nobiles
Civitatis, ut eum qui esset vita and sermon Pontificatu dignus, eligerint: Hoc
enim and Imperialibus sanctionibus jubebatur, N. B. Yet all this quieted not
the people because Diosc^rus was still by the most taken for their true Bishop;
so that Proterius was fain to live under the guard of Soldiers among them:
Timothy Aelurus, and Peter Moggus keeping separate Congregations, would not
communicate with Proterius; and no sooner did they hear of Martians death, but
the people in tumult murdered Proterius in the Church, mangled him, cast out,
and burnt his carcass, and scattered his ashes in the wind, and made Timothy
Aelurus their Bishop: And thenceforward Alexandria had two Bishops: And both
sides petitioning the new Emperor Leo to be for them, he commanded (upon
examination) his General to cast out Timothy, and alium decreto populi qui
Synodum Calced. vindicaret, inthronizare, This St^la the Captain performs,
and another Timothy Salophaciolus is chosen: But when after Leo's death
Basiliscus usurped the Empire against Zeno, this Timothy is cast out again, and
the other restored; and other Bisops changed accordingly in opposition to the
Council of Calcedon. And no sooner was Zeno restored, but all was returned back
again, and Aelurus poisoned himself to escape worse: Yet did his Party make
Peter Moggus their Bishop; and the Emperor commanded Anthimius to cast him
out, and set up Timothy Saloph. again: But while the Emperors chose who should
have the Public Authority and Temples, they left the people to join in the
choice, and the Dissenters kept up their own Bishops and Schism. And thus the
matter went on uncured: And very ordinarily it was the Pulcheria's, Theodora's,
Eudoxia's, and such other women, the Empresses, that by Historians are said to
dispose of these matters, and make such Patriarchs and Bishops: And these
courses still increased Schisms: Of the Joannites at Constantinople we spoke
before. What a calamitous Schism was that at Alexandria between the Party that
held Christ's body incorruptible, called by the other the Phantasiastae, and
those that held it corruptible called the corrupticolae, one part taking
Gaianus for the Bishop, and the other Theodosius; and the secular power,
setting up one, the Soldiers and the city sought it out. abundance on both
sides being slain, and yet the Soldiers had the worst, and Theophilus was
forced away.

In Justinians time when Paulus an Orthodox man was made Patriarch, he could
not hold his seat without such plots, as occasioned Rhodo the Augustalis to
murder Psoius the Deacon, which cost Rhodo and Arsenius their lives, and Paulus
his contemptuous deposition, by the Emperors justice. Should we but run over
the history of other great Churches, especially Rome, Constantinople, Antioch,
Ephesus, Cesa^ea, alas how sadly would it show that neither Emperors nor
synods assuming the power did end such Schisms, but increase them, where the
Bishoprics were so great as to seem a very desirable prey: But where they were
small and poor^, there was far greater peace and quietness, though the people
commonly had their choice, and every where their consent was judged necessary;
the proofs of which might fill a Volume. See in Synodo Romano quarto sub
Symmacho (in Binnio Vol. 2. p. 288.) etc. the claim of Odoacer that no Bishop
of Rome should be made without the consent of the King of Italy; And the
Bishops speeches against it. Even in the days of Gregor. 1. Romans You may see
how things went, by the constant tradition of the Church; Epist. 22. (in Bin.
Vol. 2. p. 759. recitat) [natalem Salonitanae Ecclesiae scatrem and coepiscopum
nostrum ob^^sse discurrens in partibus istis sama vulgavit: Q^od si verum esti
experientia tua om^i instantia omnique solicitudine CLERUM and POPULUM ejusdem
Civitatis admonere festinet, quatenus uno consensu ad ordinandum sibi debeant
eligere Sacerdotem; factoque in personam quae suerit clecta decreto, ad nos
transmittere studebis, ut cum nostro consensu sicut priscis suit temporibus
ordinetur. Illud prae omnibus tibi curae sit ut in hac electione nec datio
quibusque modis interveniat praemiorum, nec quarumlibet personarum patrocinia
convalescant; nam si quorundam patrocinio fuerit quisquam Electus, Volunt
atibus eor^m cum fuerit ordinatus obedire, reverentia exigente compellitur --
Talem ergo te admonente personam debent eligere, quae nullius incongruae
voluntati deserviat, sed vita and moribus decorata, tanto ordine digna valeat
inveniri. And at the Council Paris. 3. in the days of Pope John 3. and K.
Childebert, when Kings were forbidden to make Bishops, it was ordained Can. 8.
that [Nullus civibus invitis ordinetur Episcopus; nisi quem Populi and
Clericorum electio plenissima quasierit voluntate, non principis imperio. And
the Bishops are forbidden to receive him into their number, who is made by
Kings.

At the Council of Calcedon, Act. 12. it was determined, that neither of the
two Bishops of Ephesus, Bassianus, or Stephanus, could be Bishops, because not
duly elected, but a third to be chosen. See also for the peoples unanimous
Election of their Bishop Greg. 1. Epist. 65. in Bin. Vol. 2. p. 890.

We need not bid the Learned enquire whether Gregory Naeoces. Basil, Ambrose,
Martin, Damasus, (and so of the rest) ordinarily were Bishops without the
consent of the people over whom they were placed: And though sometimes the
peoples choice have (many hundred years only after Christ's time, but not in the
Primitive Church) been restrained, so was not their consenting voice denied.

I have translated and adjoined the Epistle of Cyprian and an Africane Council
with him (where were then the best ordered Churches in the World; as far as I
can learn) in which they counsel the Churches of Basilides and Martial to
forsake them because they were Libellatiks in persecution, proving from
Scripture that incapable persons cannot be Pastors, and that such scandalous
sinners and bad men were incapable persons (forma non recipitur in matcriam
indispositam;) charging it upon their consciences as from Gods word; showing
them that else they will be Guilty of their sins because the chief power is in
the people both of choosing the worthy, and forsaking the unworthy. And yet
these two Bishops lived beyond the Seas in another Country, and the Bishops of
their own Country and the Bishop of Rome had dealt more gently with them, and
adjudged Communion to them. And the Africans pretended to no authority over
them, but by Counsel told them of Gods own Law, which no man had power to
invalidate. They charge the people as heinous sinners if they forsake not a
wicked unmeet Bishop or Pastor. what Libellaticks were I supposed the reader to
know (viz, such as to save their lives in persecution, had permitted another to
put their names by subscription to a false profession that favored idolatry or
infidelity)

Obj. 1. But Cyprian and the African Councils were mistaken in the point of
Rebaptizing those baptized by Heretics; and so they might be here.)

Ans. 1. The Council of Nice decreed the rebaptizing of those that were
baptized by some Heretics, though not by all: And if the Africans did not
confine the word to such, they erred only in not sufficiently distinguishing of
Heretics. 2. If we are excused from receiving the testimony of such Fathers
and Councils as had any Error, or as great an Error as that, you may see what
will follow. 3. We do not cit^ Cyprian and the African Council as infallible,
nor as having more Governing power over us than the present Rulers, but as
being to us (I say to us) of more credit and authority in telling us what is
jure devino than those Bishops or others that now condemn us as Schismatics.

4. C^p^^an and the African Council were not forbidden for this judgment of
theirs to Preach Christ's Gospel, nor cast out of the Churches, no^ sent to
Goals, nor called and used as Rogues and Schismatics, and far worse then
drunkards, adulterers, yea or the atheists and infidels among us. (Nor were the
people that obeyed their Council so used.) But the names of these holy men are
venerable to this day.

Obj. 2. There were then no Christian Magistrates, and therefore the peoples
power must be used in their stead.

Ans. Church power was the same before and after. The Laws of Christ
concerning it altered not. The Pastors were then the Guides of the people by
divine right: And the power of the Keys was no less forcible or effectual as
used by the Bishops and Presbyters, than when the power of the sword was added
to them (if not much more.) And the peoples power of choosing and refusing
Bishops continued many hundred years after Magistrates were Christians,
confirmed even by Popes and Councills.

Obj. 3. This would cast all into confusion, and there would be no Church
Government, if the people be Judges when a Minister is bad, and then man full
him down or forsake him, and choose another.

Answ. This is after further answered. I now only say 1. The people may not
touch his Person, by violence, nor deprive him of his benefice or temple, nor
yet degrade him: As they that change their Physician or Lawyer do no such
thing, but simply choose one that they can trust. No man will win more by my
salvation than I shall, nor would suffer more than I by it if I were damned:
Who is more than I concerned what becomes of my soul? Am I not to have more
care of it than of my estate or health of body? Who can easily believe those
men that send us to goales and ruin us for trusting our souls with such Guides
as to the best of our understandings we think meetest, or at least for avoiding
such as we cannot so far trust, and then tell us that they do it because they
love our souls better than we love our selves, and therefore will not trust
them to our choice. 2. what confusion does it cause that every man now chooses
his own Tutor in philosophy, his own master, his own Lawyer and physician, and
every woman at age her own husband.

3. Does not the Church of England (as is said) allow every man his choice,
when no man is forbidden to forsake any Bishop or Pastor and choose another by
removing his habitation when he pleases? So that all this is but about Parish
bounds, which is confessed to be of humane alterable constitution. And how
ordinarily do many Gentlemen of the Church of England go from their own
Parishes in London? 4. You may see by Philip Nyes printed papers, and Mr. Tombs
his, that even those called Independents and some Anabaptists are for hearing
such Parish-Teachers as their Rulers shall appoint, so they may but commit the
Pastoral care of their souls to such as they can better trust, and have
Sacraments and special Church Communion free.

5. what great confusion does it breed in London that the French and Dutch
Churches thus differ from the rest, and have their proper modes and Government?
Yea or that the Nonconformists by the favor of his Majesty's Licenses had
their choice and several meetings. Let not envy and animosity seign greater
confusion than there is, and the matter will appear much otherwise than it is
represented, even that the discords and confusions were incomparably less (on
that occasion) than they were under the Bishops in the better times of the
Churches, even from An. 400 to 600, of which more in due place.

6. They that will condemn all that has inconveniences, shall condemn all
things in this world: But the Greatest must be noted and avoided first. Shall
the people have any judgment of discerning or not? If yea, the bounds of it
must be showed, and not the thing denied as if it must bring in all confusion.
If Usurpers claim the Crown, the Subjects must judge which is their true King,
and must defend his right. Will you say, If the people be Judges, they may set
up Usurpers, and put down the King? They are but discerners of that which is
before their duty. They have no right to err, nor to alter the Law or right:
But if it be otherwise, they are to be ruled as brutes: And so must not judge
so much as whom they must obey. Is there any Christian that dare say, that
Bishops or Princes are in all things to be obeyed, lest the people be made
Judges? And so that under Heathen, Mohammedan, Papist, Heretical Rulers, they
must be all of their Religion, as to the external professing and practicing
part? None dare for shame say so, save an Infidel. Is not this a greater
confusion or michief than that which is now disputed against: Therefore the
bounds must be set on both sides, which are not difficult to discern: As the
people have property in their limbs, children and liberties, and acquisitions
antecedently to humane Government, which is to order these, and not to destroy
them; so have all men greater interest in the safety of their own souls, which
no man can take from them; no nor is it in their just power to put it into the
hands of others from themselves. If Heretics, blind guides, o^^faithless men,
or insufficient, be made Pastors of the Flocks, and all men commanded to hear
no better, nor trust the Pastoral Conduct of their souls into any wiser or
safer hands, Satan will be more gratified by it, than by the disorder of the
peoples choosing their own spiritual Councillors, Tutors and Physicians. And
when Church Communion is due to none but voluntary accepters, men should not be
used so as to take it still against their wills, and to be as it were crammed
and drencht with sacred Mysteries, and driven to take them against their
consciences and wills from such as they think they cannot communicate with,
without being guilty of their sin: When some Councils have owned Pope
Nicholas's decree, that no man ought to hear the Mass from a fornicating
Priest; much less from men that are far more liable to exceptions.

To this I may add, that as in diverse cases the Canons and Decrees forbad
hearing some Priests, and allowed several Churches in the same ground, so they
seem to give that Pastor a right to the Conduct of the People, who was the
chief Converter of them from Infidelity or Heresy: And hence was the Popes
Controversy with the Greeks about the Bulgarians, and his claim to the Church
of England, and many others, because he said his Missionaries converted them. I
shall specially note here, that the old Canons sent by Adrian to Carolus Mag.
reci^ed by Canisius and Binius, say, [That no one must pray with Heretics or
Schismaticks] and so not with Papist-Bishops that are the greatest Schismatics
by dividing Impositions [That if a Bishop six months after admonition of other
Bishops neglect to make Catholics of the people (multitudes then being
Heathens and Heretics) belonging to his seat, any other shall obtain them that
shall deliver them from their Heresy.] Yet the Bishop is not deposed, but
another Bishop and Church of the new Converts set up in his Precincts, and so a
Church gathered in the Precincts of another Church and Bishop. And so Gregory
Nazianzen did long preach as their Pastor in a small Church in Constantinople,
before he had possession of the Cathedral; the people claiming him for their
prositing by his teaching; and Theodosius gave him the Cathedral as merited by
his success. And in the said old Canons, c. 19. its said, that Dioceses (which
then were every Corporation and the Suburbs or Villages) which want Bishops
receive none without the consent of the Bishop who hitherto held them (so be
it) not proudly: For if he over-hold them, affecting to sit over the people,
and despising his fellow-Bishops, he is not only to be driven from the retained
Dioc se, but also from his own Church. And ex Con. Sard. 2. [A Bishop that by
ambition changes his seat (which was then forbidden by the Canons) shall not
have (so much as) Lay-communion, (no not) at the end (his death.)

Even old Clemens Romanus, ad Corinth. tells them that they ought not to cast
out these Ministers that live unblameably, having been Constituted by the
Apostles or deinceps ab aliis viris celebribus, Cum Consensu Universae
Ecclesiae.

But I find the Roman and Tyrannical spirit much insisting upon this, that the
Christian Religion was but in the shell or Embryo in the Apostles days; and
under Christian Emperors is grown up to the maturity of Papacy, riches, pomp,
and grandeur, and that great power which the Christian Emperors gave the
Patriarchs and prelates of their times. But this Hypothesis must be better
proved before we can receive it: We confess that for extent and number the
Church was there in its minority: But if it was so as to infallibility of
doctrine and perfection of Laws, and exemplary lives, then the Pope is better
than Christ and his Apostles and their contemptible Decretals and firebrand
Councills are better than the sacred scriptures, and their degenerate Clergy
and people better than the ancient holy peaceable Christians, and their
bloodshedders better than the Martyrs, and the Crossmakers better than the
Cross-bearers; which are things that the worldly sort may believe more easily
than mortified and heavenly Christians.

One testimony more we will add for the antiquity, and the estimation of many
that are against us. And that is the Apostolical constitutions, Lib, 8. cap.
4. de ordinationibus, (having said before cap. 2. that Episcopus ignorantia aut
malo animo oppletus, Episcopus non est. sed falsus Episcopus, non a Deo sed ab
hominibus promotus,) they here say that a Bishop must be one that [a cuncto
populo ex optimis quibusque electus est. Quo nominato and placente, populus in
unum Congregatus (not a thousand Churches but one) una cum Presbyteris, atque
Episcopis praesentibus Die Dominico consentiat. Qui vero inter reliquos
princeps Episcopus est, percontetur Presbyteros and populum an ipse sit quem
praeesse petant? and illis annuentibus rursus percontetur an tribuunt ei omnes
testimonium quod dignus sit hoc magno and illustri munere praesidend^? An quae
ad pietatem erga Deum pertinent recte peregerit? An jura adversus homines
servarit? An domum suam resque domesticas recte administraverit, and an vita ei
peromnia honest and laudate act a suerit? cum vero Omnes simul, non secundum
opinionem praejudicatam, sed secundum veritatem testificati suerint, talem esse
eum, tanquam in conspectu j^dicis Dei and Christi, praesente etiam Spiritu
Sancto, atque omnibus sanctis and administratoriis spiritibus, rursus tertio
interrogent, utrum sit dignus Ministerio, ut in ore duo^um vel trium stet omne
verbum: Et cum tertio annuerint, et dignum esse assensi suerint, petatur ab
omnibus ut praebeant signum assensus: Et libenter praebentes audiantur] We urge
not this as of Apostolical authority, but as of great antiquity, and agreeing
with the primitive practice. This course much differs from the ordaining of a
Bishop at an hundred miles distance from his Church; Yea ordaining him, not in
or to a particular Church, but to many hundred Churches when the people neither
know him nor are present, and yet the question's asked as if they were. And as
the people had ever a choosing or a free consenting Voice, so they often received
Bishops and Presbyters who were ordained by such as were outcasts,
Nonconformists, and banished both by Emperors and Synods; as in many more
instances might be proved: As also that they adhered to the Pastors so chosen,
notwithstanding their ejections by the Imperial Power; yea and by such Councils
as they thought to be unjust; as the sad divisions by the displacings,
restorings, and changes of Bishops by the Councils of Constantinople, 1.
Ephesus, 2. and Calcedon, and by the Emperors in those times, do fully prove,
the people following some one, and some another; though fear often prevailed for
conformity with the greater part. (And no wonder when so many Bishops at the
Council of Calcedon professed that for fear they had judged against Flavianus
for Eutichus against their consciences, and even old Osius, and many more at
Ariminum did the like; and when the powers changed, cried, Omnes peccavimus;
and when under Theodosius 2d. so many went one way, who under Martian went
another way, even in point of Heresy.

When Mavia the Saracen Queen chose Moses a Monk to be her Bishop, as the
condition of her peace with the Roman Empire, Moses would not be ordained by
Lucius; not because he was an Arrian, but because he was a persecutor, and
hurtful to other men for Religion, and so he would be ordained Priest by some
that were banished to a certain Mountain, Socr. l. 4. c. 29. When the Emperor
was gone from Antioch (where in person he went to disperse their Meetings, and
yet they held on) the people thrust out Lucius whom he had set up, and set up
Peter again whom the Emperor had banished. But such instances are too many to
be recited. Yea under Orthodox Princes, the people would cleave to their
injured Pastors, though against the Emperors will, as they of Miliane did to
Ambrose; and the Joannites to Chrysostom, who even long after his death
separated from the Bishop, and kept up their separate Meetings against the will
of Prince and Prelates, till milder Bishops instead of persecuting them,
restored Chrysostom's bones and name to honor, and reconciled them. It will
still be objected, as before, that most of these instances were but the peoples
rejection of Arrians: But again, we answer 1. In other instances, they usually
chose their Pastors, and cleaved to them, though prohibited. 2. These Arrians
were such as subscribed the Ariminum Creed, which was so ambiguously compiled,
that abundance that renounced Arius, did think that for obedience and peace
they might put a fair sense on the words, and so subscribe them: And we meet
with persons in our times, that think words imposed on them by Superiors, may
and must endure stretching to a sense as far from their usual acceptance, as
the foresaid words were stretched by the Ariminum Subscribers. 3. They that
never accused and convicted the refused Bishops of Arrianism, yet adhered to
their former Bishops. 4. It seems then that the people are left Judges (as to
the guiding of their own practice) what Bishops to refuse as heterodox, and
whom to own as Orthodox.

And indeed the saying of Cyprian is well known, that [The people have the
greatest power both to choose a worthy Priest, and to refuse or forsake the
unworthy.]

6. All Protestants believe that it is no Schism in France, or other Papist
Countries, to choose Pastors, and meet for the Worship of God, though forbidden
by the Civil and Ecclesiastic Governors of the place.

Obj. That is because that the Princes are Papists.

Ans. A Papist King is to be obeyed in lawful things: what Protestant denies
that?

Obj. But it is because that the Churches and Worship in those Countries is
such as it is not lawful to be present at.

Ans. 1. This Objection grants, that when the commanded Assemblies or Worship
are such as it is not lawful to be present at; 1. The people are discerning
Judges; 2. And may lawfully meet else where under Pastors of their own choice.

2. But let the Question be, (not whether we may be present in their Churches,
but) whether we may set up other Churches, when we are necessarily kept from
those established by Public Power? and it will go far.

7. When the Form of Worship and Concord called the Interim, was by Charles the
5th. imposed on the German Protestants, (being drawn up by Julius Pflug,
Sidonius, and Islebius Agricola, men pretending to moderation, as not imposing
the Mass, etc. the Protestants judged it lawful to gather Assemblies, and keep
up Churches contrary to such an Edict of the Emperor: One half of them held on
their former way, till banishment or other violence hindered them. Melancthon
and the others that thought the things commanded not utterly unlawful,
conformed only to prevent the utter desolation of the Churches; but not in
conscionable obedience to the Emperors Edict, as if it had been any Schism to
do otherwise if they could have been endured: As may be seen in Melancthon's
own words in his Epistles, and elsewhere.

8. The most of Protestants at this day hold, that it is no Schism to keep up
Churches of their several Parties, against their Princes will and prohibition.
Those called Arminians in Belgia so think. Episcopius writes at large, that if
Ministers be forbid to Preach, and People to Assemble (in their case) they must
go on, though they suffer death for it (saving that prudence may direct them
sometime to avoid a present storm.) The Churches under the Duke of Brandenburgh
are generally contrary to his judgment in Religion: And should the Princes of
Saxony, Brunswick, Hassia, etc. or the Kings of Sweden, or Denmark turn
Calvinists, their Clergy would be far from thinking it their duty to cease
their Assemblies of the Lutheran Profession and Worship.

Bishop Andrews is so far from tying all Ministers to the Kings will, that he
says [cohibeat Regem Diaconus, si cum indignus sit idque palam constet,
accedat tamen ad Sacramentum.] i. e. Let (even) a Deacon restrain the King, if
he come to the Sacrament being unworthy, and that be openly manifest.]

Bishop Bilson of subjection p. 399. says, [The Election of Bishops in those
days belonged to the people and not to the Prince: and though Valens by plain
force placed Lucius there, yet might the people Lawfully reject him as no
Bishop and cleave to Peter their right Pastor.] Mark that he lays it not on
his Error, but on his entrance without the peoples Election, and that they
might reject him as no Bishop. We see here the full concurrence of such English
Bishops as were the most Learned and zealous defenders of Episcopacy and
loyalty.

The same Bishop ibid. p. 236. Says more plainly, [Princes have no right to
call or confirm Preachers, but to receive such as be sent of God and give them
Liberty for their Preaching and security for their persons: and if Princes
refuse so to do, Gods laborers must go forward with that which is commanded
them from Heaven; Not by disturbing Princes from their Thrones, nor invading
their Realms as your father does, and defends he may do; but by mildly
submitting themselves to the powers on Earth and meekly suffering* for the
defense of the truth, what they shall inflict.] This is the sum of all that we
here intend. so page 313. he says [we grant that they must rather hazard their
lives than baptize Princes which believe not, or distribute the Lords mysteries
to them that repent not, but give willful and open signification of impiety,
etc.] So Beda Hist. Eccl, l. 2. c. 5. Tells us that Melitus Bishop of London
(with Justus) was banished by the heirs of King Sabba^eth, because he would not
give them the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which they would have had before
they were baptized.

Yet all this is no justification of causeless disobedience to Magistrates that
circumstantiate sacred things according to their Office; nor will it justify
any Schismatical societies: Vespae habent favos, and Marcionitae Ecclesias
says Tertullian.

XLIV. 12. If any persons shall pretend to have the power of Governing the
Churches and Inferior Pastors as their Bishops, * who are obtruded on those
Churches without the Election or consent of the people or Inferior Pastors, and
these Bishops shall by Laws or mandates forbid such Assembling, Preaching or
Worship as otherwise would be Lawful and a duty, It is no Schism to disobey
such Laws or mandates as such; Nor do such disobey their Pastors, they being
truly no Bishops of theirs till they do consent (however in some cases the
advantages of some imposed persons may make it an act of Prudence, and so a
duty to consent, as is aforesaid,) It was no Schism for the people of Antioch,
Alexandria, Cesarea, Constantinople etc* to refuse Ecclesiastical obedience to
the ill Bishops set over them by the Emperor to whom they did not consent; But
the Schism was theirs who complied with the imposed Usurpers. Here it must be
noted, that Church history has constrained all that understand it to confess
(both Papists, Greeks, and Protestants, that the ordination of Bishops and
Presbyters was in the power of the Bishops and the Election in the power of the
people, not only the first 300 years under heathen Emperors, but for many
hundred years after under Christian Emperors and Princes. 2. That this was
taken for their right given them by God. To cite more proofs, for this would
expose us to the readers censure, as unnecessary tediousness: Many Papists
largely prove it; As does David Blondel beyond exception, de jure plebis in
regimine Ecclesiastico, with more. 3. That yet we here plead not for the
necessity of so much as the peoples election as it signifies the first
nomination of the person, but only for the necessity of consent, either
explicitly or implicitly expressed. If the senior Pastors have the first
nomination, or, if it be the Magistrate, or Patrons, as with us, we quarrel not
against it, if the flock do but consent.

Parents may Choose Husbands and Wives for their Children; but they are not such
at all till mutual consent.

XLV. 13. The consent of a few of the Church, is not the consent of the Church;
Nor is it Schism for the Major part to differ from their choice or
determinations (as. such.) In Government, the will of the Sovereign is the
public will; But in contracts, and consent of a Community, where Unity is the
thing intended, and voting the means, the Major part is denominatively the
society, (unless they have made others their trustees or delegates in Electing,
Consenting themselves to what they do,) such societies are not denominated from
the Minor, or a small part, as contradistinct from the rest. If a Diocese have
a thousand, or 600, or 300 Parish Pastors, and a hundred thousand or a million
of people (or 50000 or 20000 as you will suppose) and if only a dozen or twenty
Presbyters, and a thousand people (or none) choose the Bishop, this is not the
Election or consent of the Diocesan Church; Nor is it Schism for 20000 to go
against the votes of 2000.

XLVI. 14. If Bishops that have no better a foundation of their relative power
over that particular flock, shall impose inferior Pastors or Presbyters on the
Parish-Churches; and command the peoples acceptance and obedience, the people
are not bound to accept and obey them by any authority that is in that command
as such: Nor is it Schism to disobey it, no more than it is treason to reject
the Usurper of a Kingdom.

XLVII. 15. whilst such obtruded Parish Pastors have no consent of the flock
(explicit or implicit) that Parish is no Parish Church, in the proper
Political Organized sense, as we now speak of a Church, as constituted by the
Governing and Governed parts, For that which wants an essential part, wants
the Essence, And therefore it is no Schism to pronounce it no such Church, and
to deny it the Communion proper to such a Church. Though yet as the word
[Church] does signify an ungoverned Society in potentia proxima to receive
Government, they may be improperly called a Church as they are in a vacancy.

XLVIII. 16. If they that make a Diocese the lowest proper Church (which has a
Bishop, and none under him) and a Parish to be but a part of the Diocesan
Church, and no proper Church of it self, as having no Episcopus Gregis, shall
accuse those as separating from the Church, who separate not from the Bishop,
and keep to any Parish in the Diocese, they contradict themselves: Though such
forsake many Presbyters and Parishes.

XLIX. 17. If Princes or Prelates shall unjustly silence or depose so great a
number of faithful Pastors or Preachers, as shall leave people destitute of a
necessary Preaching and Pastoral help, it is no Schism, but a great duty, for
such Ministers to preach, and pastorally guide such people; otherwise by the
same reason, one man might put down Christianity in an Empire at his pleasure;
or dissolve the Churches.

L. If it be said, that it is true, if he put down all, but not if he silence
but a minor part. We answer, that the reason is the same to those to whom the
Ministry is necessary, if he put down Ministers to them. The supply of the
Churches, e. g. in one City of a Kingdom, is no supply to the other Cities: And
if a Parish have 10000, or 30000, or 50000, or 60000 souls, its no supply to
all the rest if 3000 of these have the benefit of a Preacher and Pastor. The
same power which may deny a Pastor to ten parts of a Parish, may deny him to
the eleventh part, that is, to all. So if competent Pastors be set over half
the Parishes in a Kingdom, and the other half has incompetent men; or if nine
parts of a Kingdom were competently supplied, and but the tenth part had not
such to whom the people may lawfully commit the Pastoral Care of their souls,
it is no Schism, but a duty for those that are destitute, to get the best
supply they can; and it is no Schism, but a duty, for faithful Ministers,
though forbidden by superiors, to perform their Office to such people that
desire it. Their General Ordination, with the peoples Necessity and Consent
added to God's General Commands to all his Ministers to be faithful and
diligent, are a sufficient obliging Call to such Ministration, without the will
of (prohibiting) Superiors; yea against it.

For 1. Else it were at the will of a man whether souls shall be saved or
damned, (for how shall they believe unless they hear? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher?) and whether Christ shall have a Church; and God be
publicly worshipped, or not.

2. Our Ordination consecrateth us to our Office, during life: And it is
Sacrilege and Covenant Breaking with God to cast it off and alienate our
selves.

3. God has described the Office and the Work in his Word, and charged his
servants to give the children their bread in due season, and adjured them
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at
his appearing, and his Kingdom, to preach the Word, and be instant, in season,
and out of season, etc.

4. The indispensible Law of Nature obliges every man according to his Place
and Calling, his Ability, and his Opportunities, to do his best to propagate
Christ's Gospel, and to save men's souls, as much and more than to seed men's
bodies, and save their lives: But our Calling is to do it as Ministers of
Christ, thereto devoted. And we did not receive this Calling to be altered, or
forborne at the will of man, but to be performed according to the Word of God:
Men being not the Makers of the Office, nor of God's Law under which we execute
it; nor the Donors or Limiters of the Power, but only 1. The Electors of the
Persons that shall receive it; 2. And the Investers of them in it by
Ministerial delivery; 3. And the Governors of us in the exercise of it,
according to God's Laws, by which they may punish us for male administration,
but cannot dissolve the Laws obligation to those that are indeed commanded by
it.

LI. Obj. 2. If there be able Preachers in one part of the Parishes, and the
other part have such as deliver all that is necessary to salvation
intelligibly, it is unlawful to Preach against the will of the Prince or
Prelates in such a Country.

Ans. We deny this unproved assertion. 1. Indeed it will follow that such
persons are justly condemned by God, if they repent not though they had but a
Reader. 2. And that they should be thankful for so much, and gladly accept it
in such Churches when they can have no better, But not 1. that it is in the
power of any man justly to forbid them better, when God provideth it, 2. Nor
that they must obey such a prohibition, as such. (Though prudence may discern
forbearance to be a duty by accident, when the hurt would be greater than the
good.) There is no doctrine objectively of absolute necessity to salvation, but
the doctrine of the Baptismal Covenant which is expounded in the Creed, Lords
prayer and Decalogue. But there is much Doctrinal and active Means necessary to
make men Understand, Believe, Love, and Practice, this necessary Covenant
doctrine. And the doctrine or articles of faith, will save none that do not
Understand, Believe, Love, and Practice it, and that sincerely preferring the
things revealed before all the pleasures, riches and honors of this World. A
Parrot shall not be a Saint for saying the Creed.

LII. These following matters of fact are presupposed to the answer of this
objection, and in them all sober Protestants are (as we suppose) agreed.

1. That this aforesaid sincerity of Faith, Rep^ntance, H^pe, Love, and
Obedience, is made by God of necess^^y to salvation.

2. That as it will not profit a man to win all the World and lose his soul, so
neither will doctrinal formality, or obedience to superiors that hinder sound
Preachers, recompense him for the loss of his soul; And that God would not have
men's Government maintained by men's damnation, nor will the ungodly be the best
members of Church or Kingdoms: Order is a means to save men, and not damn them,
some few Heathens offer to Devils a sacrifice of man's flesh, and blood: But if
a man should offer to God (the Lover, Savior, and Sanctifyer of souls) a
Sacrifice of the souls of thousands, and say, All these are to be kept in
Ignorance and ungodlyness and so to be damned, to please God who will have them
obey their superiors, at that rate; this were a dishonor to God of
unexpressible iniquity and error. Christ that has taught men to seek first
his Kingdom, and to take up the Cross, and to forsake Father and Mother and
Life and all to serve him in the saving of their souls, and had planted
inseparably self love into our natures, surely did not mean so Contra^^ly as
that we must forsake Christ, Heaven, and Salvation, to obey men.

3. That certain experience puts us past doubt, that ignorance, sensuality,
worldliness, profaneness are far more common, and a holy heavenly mind and
life, and all serious Christianity and obedience, far, very far more rare, in
those Kingdoms and Parishes which have no plain, convincing, serious, lively
and exemplary Preachers, than in those that have, although they be baptized,
and have the Creed, Lords prayer and Decalogue in their Liturgy. And yet here
are all things of absolute objective necessity to salvation. What a case the
Moscovites are in, that have only Liturgies and Homilies read, we mentioned
before: And how sad the case is among the Greeks, Armenians, Abassins, and most
Papists, for want of better Preachers. Bishop Usher could say of the Irish,
that more perished by not knowing what we are on both sides agreed in, than by
their Popish Errors; And what a case the Scottish Highlanders, too many of the
Welsh, and most Parishes in England were in, as to serious piety, which had
heretofore but Readers, or Preachers that did less than read a Homily,
experience constrains us to know: as also what difference there is yet to be
seen as to serious faith and godliness, between the fruits of a clear, serious,
holy, diligent Preacher, and of raw youths that say over a pedantik lifeless
speech, and out of the pulpit little differ in speech or life, from Carnal
Worldlings or formal Hypocrites. Though we know that all that profess to be
seriously Religious, are not so, yet none are so that do not profess it as they
have opportunity.

As we are not able to deny this experience of the different fruits of
different Teaching (when all have the Creed;) Nor dare deny the necessity of
serious faith, repentance and holiness to salvation (lest we renounce the
Gospel,) nor yet that no men (much less most men or many thousands) may as an
act of obedience to man, refuse those helps which God provideth them, and
without which few Comparatively are truly converted from a Carnal life and
saved; so therefore we dare not think or say, that humane Laws or orders are
arguments of sufficient weight to move them hereunto.

LIII. Obj. 3. But the hurt of the peoples choosing Teachers and Assemblies
without or against the Rulers will, is greater than the hurt that comes by the
want of better Teachers.

Ans. 1. The peoples choice does hurt by accident, in those Countries, where
the Rulers put down necessary helps, and where the people are Erroneous,
Heretical, and Unruly, and so where the people would choose unsufferable men,
supposing still that no Church is constituted without mutual consent of the
Pastor and the flock and that the Rulers alter not or violate not Christ's Laws
by which he has appointed the ordering of Assemblies; Therefore it is the
Rulers Office to hinder the people from doing mischief, without hindering them
from their duty and from doing well; To Govern them in their work, and not to
forbid it.

2. If the Gospel be hid (from the mind though not from the Ear) it is hid to
them that are lost 2. Cor. 4. 3. And without holiness none shall see God Heb.
12, 14. Christ will come in flaming Fire to render vengeance to them that know
not God and obey not the Gospel, 2. These. 1. 10. 11. All they shall be damned
that obey not the truth but have pleasure in unrighteousness 2. These. 2. 11.
12. They that live after the flesh shall die, and they that have not the spirit
of Christ are none of his, Romans 8. 9. 13. It is not then easy to think of a
greatet hurt, than to forbid men such means, without which experience assures
us that few comparatively are thus enlightened and renewed to God, and with
which more Comparatively are renewed. To say that God can bless to us an
ignorant heartless, Carnal Teacher, is no answer, while experience certifieth
us that Comparatively he does not do it. If the people would choose such
Pastors, Rulers must do their best to change their minds, and to provide better
for them. But that's not the case that we are now speaking to. If people would
run into Sects and Heresies, Rulers may punish and restrain false Teachers that
dangerously corrupt the Christian doctrine and seduce the peoples souls; But
they may not therefore silence the faithful Ministers of Christ, And adhereing
to such Ministers, does not any hurt of it self: Nor any way tend to the
furthering of so much hurt, as the contrary would do.

3. For who knows where to bound his obedience to such silencers as
aforesaid, If a thousand or two thousand faithful Ministers, must cease
Preaching when so forbidden, why not 3000, why not 4000? If half a Kingdom; can
you satisfy the consciences of the other half that they must not do so too,
and so all Christian Kingdoms conform to Moscovie when the Prince commands
it. And if 1000 or 2000 or 3000 Parishes must choose the apparent hazard of
their souls and refuse such helps as experience certifieth us they greatly
need, in obedience to man, why must not the rest of the Parishes do so also?
May I give away the needful helps to my salvation, because others have them,
as if their salvation might satisfy me instead of my own?

4. We acknowledge it a very great Mercy of God, to have a Christian Prince,
and that every Kingdom should be Christian, and that Princes must do what they
can to accomplish it; And that they are the Governors of Pa^tors as well as of
Physicians, (as is aforesaid) and that it is most desirable that the Church
and Kingdom should be commensurate, and none in their Kingdoms reject the
Gospel. and that Pastor or people who will do any thing contrary to this, or
will not further it with all their power are great transgressors. But yet the
old saying is true (owned even by the Papists, vid. Pet. De Marc^, De Eccl.
Constable.) that Ecclesia est in impe rio: And none but prosessed consenters are
Christians: And the Temple is a prison and not a Church as men are there
forcibly driven against their wills, so far is it from saving the souls of any.

Yet constraining the ignorant and Heretical to hear sound Teachers, we are far
from opposing. But when Paul has said [Not a Novice,] If Rulers will silence
better Teachers, and set up Novices, that are unskilful in that great and
sacred work, and never felt that work of faith, love, and heavenlyness, on
their own souls which they must Preach to others, this will do more hurt, than
the peoples choice of better men.

5. Yea if men of such doctrine could once make Princes and people believe,
that the people ought to receive only such Pastors as Princes choose for them,
it may do more harm than all our sects do: For sects cannot cast out religion
at once; Nay usually they perish themselves by their own divisions and shame
before they can ruin the Church. But Princes might change Religion as often as
the Moon changes. And if good Princes were but the tenth part as rare, as they
thought that said [In uno annulo] etc. what then would become of Religion in
the World?

LIVE. And though we profess our great detestation of Church-Schisms, and our
lamentation for the sad case of these Nations, and the Christian world, by
reason of them, believeing that Schism should be odious to all Christians; yet
we are past doubt that aggravating some differences and breaches passionately
by odious names, has been Schismatical, by making the distance seem much
greater than it was, and rendering Dissenters odious to others, and teaching
Adversaries and ignorant persons, to reproach men as guilty of more Schism than
they are guilty of indeed. Among the Papists, if they unite in the Pope, they
pass not for Schismatics or Heretics, who differ in all those many and great
points, which H. Fowlis, Montaltus, the Jesuits Morals, Mr. Clarkson, etc.
ree^^e, viz. about Murder, Adultery, Fornication, King killing, seldom Loving
God, etc. And among us, a man that does but scruple certain Oaths,
Subscriptions, Covenants, Declarations, or a Ceremony, is charged by some with
Schism.

LV. The Distance of Doctrines or Objective Religion must be distinguished from
the passion and peevishness, of subjective distance of men's minds, e. g.
Suppose Grammarians differ about a Criticism (whether Vergilius or Virgilius)
be the truer spelling; and Philosophers differ de vacuo, de definitione spatii,
temporis, etc. de causa motus projectorum, etc. and Divines differ of the
translation of a Text, of the antiquity of the Hebrew points, of the time of
Easter day, of a Ceremony, or Form of Prayer, of the lawfulness of a
Lay-Chancellors use of the Church-Keys; Would not an impartial stranger say,
How concordant and happy are these men, that differ in no greater matters? And
if they all fall together by the ears about such things as these, it is an
aggravated Subjective Schism, and a shame to such wranglers, who deserve the
remedy of scolds: But sure they that peaceably and calmly differ about the
aforesaid things, viz. whether we are bound to Love God once a year? whether
the Pope may excommunicate and depose Kings, that will not extirpate all
Protestants. Whether an excommunicate King may be murdered as no King, etc?
these are far more distant really in point of Religion, than the other.

LVI. And we must lament that we find in Church History, and by too much
experience, that there has been, and is in too many Pastors, such a
selfishness and high esteem of their own judgments, and so little sense of the
common weakness of mankind, and the lowness of our highest degrees of
knowledge, and so little Love to others as to themselves, that by envy and
impatience, they raise or increase Schisms in the Church, by making a causless
outcry against Schism, or making little differences seem great: They that
cannot bear with Persons and Congregations, who in little matters differ from
them, because they prefer some other Teacher before them, and say somewhat
against their opinions or ways, do condemn themselves while they cry down
Schismatics, and seem not to know what manner of spirit they are of: The
Wisdom from above is first pure, and then peaceable, and gentle, and easy to
be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and hypocrisy;
and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by peacemakers: But if there
be envying and strife, it is infernal wisdom, earthly, sensual and devilish,
introducing confusion, and every evil work, whether it be found in Factions,
Contentions, Antichurches and Heretics, or in those that can bear with no
Dissenters, nor receive them that are weak in the faith, but make things
unnecessary, and their own conceits and wills the measure of men's liberties and
their censures. He that would pursue all as Rebels in a Kingdom, who interpret
not every Law alike, would more divide the Kingdom, than all men's different
expositions now do.

LVII. We do with sorrow confess that the discords of the people about choosing
their Bishops, has been a great scandal to Infidels, and a great dishonor to
the Church, and has caused many lamentable Schisms, not only under Christian
Emperors, but Heathen. But it has been greatest about the greatest Prelates,
especially the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, Constantinople, A^^ioch, etc. since
D^masus got that seat by Conquest in the Church, a multitude of Schisms have
fallen out even when Princes challenged the choice. A long time two at once,
sometimes three, and once five or six Popes living that were and had been
Popes. The Schism of the Donatists was so caused by Bishop set up against
Bishop; so was that of the I^anites at Constantinople, and of Dioscorus at
Alexandria, and many more. But it must be noted, 1. That the Electing
Bishops-Priests and Magistrates, have occasioned these Schisms as much, if not
far more than the Electing people have done 2. That yet Princes for many
hundred years after Constantines time, did not think it meet to prevent such
Schisms by depriving the People or Presbyters of their Electing-power (much
less of Consent.) 3. That the Cure must not be by altering Christ's
institution, and the Churches practice continued 600, if not 800 years, and
with most or many to this day; nor by overthrowing the very Constitution of
Churches, and the Law of Nature it self; nor by introducing a greater evil; as
it would be to teach all people to receive all and only such Pastors as Princes
every where shall set over them, and all Ministers of Christ to cease their
Office when men forbid it them.

LVIII. Obj. 4. But if Ministers themselves must be judges, whether a
Magistrate do justly silence them, then none will take themselves to be
silenced justly; and so all Heretics will Preach on. It is the Rulers that
must judge.

Ans. 1. when we hear, and read, how the Papists deceive the ignorant, by
repeating the question, who must be the judge, it grieveth us to find some
Protestants so unskilful in answering it, when the answer is so easy, that when
opened we hope few ^^ber Protestants differ in it. Judgment is Publik or
Private: Publik Judgment is either Antecedent by a Lawgiver judging what shall
be commanded and made the subjects* duty; or consequent by a Judge so strictly
called, Judging of Titles, and Crimes (in order to punishment) according to
law; Private Judgment is either by Arbitrators, or private Censurers, or by
every man's Conscience discerning and judging what is his duty, and what is sin.

1. The Sovereign of the World, is the only Judge, by Legislation what shall be
the duty of all mankind, by the Law which he makes to bind high and low, which
none may alter or suspend. 2. And he is the only fountain of Power to his
Creatures. 3. And he is the only final, absolute, infallible judge.

2. The Sovereigns of Kingdoms and Common wealths, and masters in their
families, are judges antecedently what shall be their Subjects duty, by their
Laws subservient to Gods: And they and their Officers receiving power from them
are the Judges Consequently, by Decision, who shall be punished as Criminal and
who not, and who shall be protected in his propriety or estate, by the sword of
Justice.

3. The true Bishops or Pastors of the Church, are Guides to the people
according to Christ's Laws, in the matters of their Office, and decisive Judges,
who shall be taken in, or put out of Communion, in the respective Churches.

4. Every man's Conscience is that Private discerning Judge of his own Duty and
sin. (Of Arbitrators or Censurers we need not speak.)

This all of us are agreed in: And the question [who shall Judge] is still
urged by some, as if they thought that some man or men must needs in all cases
(of Religion) be taken for such Absolute Judges that what ever they Judge, all
subjects must obey it. And on this pernicious supposition is built the Popes
pretended Infallibility, because they think that religion is fallible (that is,
Gods Law) if the judge (that is an ignorant man, or men) be fallible.

But all Protestants (at least) are agreed, that all men are Gods subjects; and
that all humane Power of Legislation, Judgment and execution is limited; and
that no man may judge against God or his Laws: And that men should know Gods
Laws, and justify them and judge by them, and condemn all that is against
them; But no man has power to condemn or contradict Gods Law it self. No man
has power to judge that there is no God, no Life to come, no Christ, or that
one word of God is false, or to forbid one thing which God commands, or
command one thing which God forbids, no man has power to judge that souls
shall be deprived of such needful Teaching and Sacraments, and public
worshipping of God, as God has provided, and commanded them to use; Nor to
forbid Christ's faithful Ministers causelessly to Preach his word, and worship
him in the Churches, and administer his Sacraments; Nor causelessly to silence,
or punish them for so doing: Therefore in this case our consciences would not
be bound though still we profess that Gods Law binds us not to rebel, or take
up arms against their injuries, but patiently to bear them, and pray for our
persecutors.

LIX. Obj. You say that Rulers may not causelessly silence or punish such: But
still they are judges whether there be cause.

Ans. They are so: For it is about their proper work. But they are Judges
subject to God, to whom they shall answer it if they disobey him. And the
subjects are p^ivate discerning Judges, whether the Laws of men contradict Gods
Laws so far as concerns their obeying or not obeying them.

We must still repeat, that the esse is before the scire; and the Being of the
case and Truth, before the judging of it: either the Preacher deserves
Silencing or not, before you come to judge the case: If he ought to be silent
the Rulers ought ^o judge so, and do well: If not, but he be innocent, or one
that ought not to be forbidden his Office, no man has power from God to judge
contrary and causelessly to forbid him; And his conscience is not formerly bound
by that prohibition; Though he must still keep his Loyalty and subjection, and
his care of the public peace and welfare.

LX. We conclude again, that seeing we meet with none that will say that Rulers
may Judge that we shall not worship God, or that the Gospel shall not be
preached, or that men must obediently forsake Christ, or go to Hell; Nor with
any Christian that will say that without faith and holiness we may be saved, we
dread the consequence of such arguing, as takes this up as the last defense,
that [those people that visibly live in Sensuality, Drunkenness, Fornication,
Coveteousness, Pride, Ungodlyness or Gross Ignorance, are indeed in a safe
condition for salvation, and therefore that Preaching which should bring them
to repentance is not necessary; But that its safer to continue Ignorant and
ungodly, than to join with the Religious for fear of Schism: For we cannot deny
that they that have no other Medium to defend their Assertion, that [the
lifeless unskilful Ministry of Novices, which makes very few seriously
Religious, does more good than the contrary, which has contrary success, if it
be by men forbidden] do too plainly persuade us from our Christianity it self,
that is, from the chiefest evidence of its truth and glory: For if there were
no better Christians in the world, than such unholy persons before described;
and if Christ had not a holy peculiar people, of heavenly minds and lives, and
zealous of good works, we could never prove (or believe) him to be the Christ
that came to save his people from their sins. He is not the Physician whom we
can trust, that does not cure men. And if they will resolve the case into the
question of fact, whether such different Ministers have usually different
success? and serious Christianity be not much more rare under Reading Novices,
and unexperienced lifeless men, than under skilful serious godly Pastors, we
are unable to doubt of it, against all experience.

LXI. Obj. 5. But if every man that is proud and heretical may set up as a
Preacher when he will, and when any people will choose him, Religion will be
corrupted, and the Church confounded.

Answ. True; therefore that must not be: 1. There are some previous
qualifications so essentially necessary to the Ministry, that without them no
man is owned as his Minister by Christ, nor should be by men. 2. The Ordainers
are to be Judges whether men have these qualifications. 3. The people are
discerning Judges which qualified ordained man (or to be ordained) is meet for
them; so far as it is necessary to their mutual Consent. 4. If a Heretic or
other intolerable person must set up a Preacher; or if any turn Heretic, the
Orthodox Churches are (after due admonition) to renounce him as unacceptable of
their communion; that he may be shamed and avoided. 5. If yet he continue
obstinate, and do more harm than good, the Magistrate is Ruler, and must
restrain him, and deny him leave so to Preach in his Dominions; so he do it not
by penalties unsuitable to the offense: (Dis franchising, discountenancing and
shame, do usually more against Heresies than cruelties.) But Necessary Faithful
Teachers may not on these pretenses be cast out.

LXII. 18. If the People conscious of their great Necessity of Pastoral
oversight and help, and of Christ's command to use it, do live in a Parish or
Country where they cannot have it from those that the Magistrate allows,
either because they cannot perform it for them, or because they will not; it is
no Schism for such to seek and use it, from worthy though prohibited men.

We before spoke of the Schisms of Teachers, and now of Hearers. In this case
men may justly thus argue: [Our Necessity requires Pastoral oversight, and
Christ commands us to use it, when we may have it: But from this public
Minister we cannot have it: Therefore we must seek it where we can. That most
men have need of Pastoral oversight, is certain; else Christ would not have
instituted it for them: And every man should be conscious of his own need.

That Christ has commanded us the use of it is certain; 1. In all those Texts
which command the Pastors their general and particular duties to the People, to
Preach and be instant in season and out, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, to comfort
the feeble minded, to visit the sick, to convince the erroneous, to administer
the Sacraments, to pray and worship God publicly with them, etc. 2. In all
those Texts that command the People to hear, submit to, obey, and imitate such
Guides, and use such Ordinances. In several cases the People may possibly be
deprived of this at home, as from the allowed Minister: 1. When public Pastors
are at so great a distance from them, as that such Pastors cannot come to them,
nor they and their families go so far, without such inconvenience and trouble,
as will frustrate the end of their endeavors: As in France where the
Protestants must go twenty miles, or ten, to a Church; which the weak, children
and aged cannot do, nor the rest of the family without such cost and pains, and
loss of time as will deprive them of the benefit.

Obj. But yet the Protestants there do not set up unlicensed Churches.

Ans. That is not as an act of formal obedience, as if they took it to be
unlawful because prohibited; but in prudence, because the persecution, should
they do it, would frustrate their attempt: In such cases the old Christians met
in secret.

2. Where Parishes are so great that the allowed Pastors cannot Preach to half
or a fourth or tenth part of the people; and cannot visit half the sick, and
Baptize, and administer the Lords Supper as is necessary; And have not time, if
the ignorant, and doubting, and troubled persons should come to them for
Counsel, resolution or comfort, to speak duly to one of twenty of them. In a
Parish of 50000 or 30000, or 20000 or 15000 or 10000 souls, how few is it that
one or two Ministers can perform all the Offices to, public and private which
the Gospel requires Pastors to perform.

3. Where the allowed Pastors are so slothful or proud that they will not
condescend to these Offices, of Personal help to many thousands, especially of
the poor.

4. Where they are young raw men, or ignorant of such matters, unable to
counsel people as their necessities require, in order to their salvation; and
perhaps to do it tolerably in a public Sermon.

5. Where they are so profane and malignant, that if poor people come to them
with cases of conscience, or for counsel what they must do to be saved, they
will but deride them as scrupulous and precise, and make them believe that to
be solicitous about salvation, and afraid of sinning, and seriously godly, is
but to be Hypocrites, melancholy or mad; And perhaps bend their Preaching the
same way.

6. When they are Heretical and not to be trusted in point of faith.

7. And when they are so Factious and Schismatical, as that their Preaching and
Conference tends to render other good Christians odious, and stir up men to
hate, persecute, or separate from them, and so to destroy true Love and Concord.

In any of these cases when the people or part of them are deprived of that
Pastoral helps which their necessity requires, and God commands, they may
seek it where they can best have it.

LXIII. In all these cases it is an unsatisfactory Answer to tell them that
Religion is kept up in the land, and that other persons or Parishes have what
they want, or that Order and Obedience must be preferred to their supply, or
that God can save them without a Pastor, etc. For so God can save the Heathen
world without the Gospel Preached if he please: And so you might persuade the
Poor to famish, rather than against Law to beg; because if thousands of them
dye of Famine, yet other people are supplied, and have plenty: Or you might
tell men that they must use no Physician, though they dye for it, if they have
no tolerable one allowed them by the Magistrate, because others have Physicians
though they dye for want of them.

What if the Parish Priest could Baptize but one of many (or not all:) Must the
rest be content to be unbaptized? If not, why must they be content without all
public Preaching and Worshipping of God, and the Lords Supper, and personal
helps of Pastors which they need? Paul thanketh God that he Baptized none of
the Corinthians save some few, and says, that God sent him not to Baptize, but
to Preach the Gospel. And can any man prove then, That if the Parish Minister
cannot or will not Baptize his Children he must get another to do it, yea a
prohibited Minister rather then they should be unbaptized; and yet that if the
Parish Church cannot receive him, or the Pastor cannot or will not do the
Office of a Pastor for him, he must be without Preaching, Worshipping God, and
Pastoral oversight?

LXIV. Yet here we must declare 1. That in such necessity people must caeteris
paribus, first seek their supply in that way that is most for peace, and most
for public good, and least scandalous or dividing, and that is most agreeable
to the Rulers will and honor.

2. That for some short season in which his soul is not apparently hazarded; as
also in the tolerable loss, of some measures of Pastoral help, a man must
submit his own personal advantage to public interest. and may hope that God
will make it up. As also when it tends to his probable greater advantage
afterward, by putting by some present storm: But not statedly, to be without
Christ's instituted ordinances and helps; e. g. Parish Order is desirable and
is the Rulers will: If therefore supply can be had in a neighbor Parish for
them that want it in their own, and by an allowed Minister rather than a
disallowed, it should be chosen, unless the disparity be so great as to weigh
down the contrary inconveniences. And if for a time any be constrained to
another way, they should do it but as an extroardinary necessity for the
present time, till they can be supplied in the allowed Parochial way; and avoid
as much as possibly they can all ways, though lawful, that encourage true
Schisms.

3. And we must profess, that if any Preachers or people, shall out of self
conceitedness, pretend necessity when there is none, their pretense is no
justification of their disorder or disobedience. Magistrates may regulate us in
the Circumstances of those duties, which the Law of Nature or the Gospel do
Command: But if on such pretense of regulating Circumstances, they will violate
or contradict either the Law of Nature, or the Gospel, and destroy the duty it
self, or its end, we are not bound in such cases to obey them, but mu^^
pariently suffer.

LXV. 19. If the Church Laws do exclude those Christians that have right, from
the Communion of the Church, and their Children from Baptism, and do decree
that they shall be excommunicate, and then laid in Gaols, it seems to us no
Schism in those persons, to have no such Communion with that Church which is
denied them by the Laws of the Church; Nor yet to join themselves with another
Church: that will receive them. And as we say of the Papists, that they
unjustly call those men Schismat^^^, whom they first cast out themselves by
unjust excommunication, so may we of any others; Especially when either for
that which is a duty, or for some small mistake which it is not in the persons
power to rectify, no greater than most good Christians are guilty of, the
Church Law says that he shall be excommunicate ipso facto, by which he is cast
out antecedently to any sentence, or no place left for his pardon or
forbearance by the favor of the Ordinary. He that is so cast out, is not the
wilful Sparatist: Nor is he bound to continue without Church Communion, and
Pastoral oversight.

LXVI. 20. If those that live in a Parish where the Incumbent by utter
Insufficiency, Heresy, Usurpation, Malignity or Wickedness, is such as men may
not lawfully own, or commit the Pastoral Conduct and care of their souls to,
shall desire the Pastoral care of the next Parish-Minister, and communion in
that Parish Church, and may not be admitted, but all other Parish-Ministers are
by Canon commanded to refuse them, and to turn them home to their own
Parish Priests and Churches, so that they must either commit their souls to
such incapable persons, and own them as Christ's Ministers, or have none at
all, we dare not charge those persons with Schism, if they commit the care of
their souls to worthy ordained men, though not allowed but prohibited by the
Magistrate: For the reasons before given. Yea if they know that Church-Laws
forbid all other Parish Priests to receive them, we see not that they are first
bound to offer themselves to such as profess obedience to those Laws.

Obj. 1. But some take a mere Reader for incapable that cannot preach, or one
that cannot pray without Book, or a young man that is not able to resolve
doubts, or cases of conscience: but our Canon 57. says, that the Sacraments
are equally effectual, whether they be administered by a Preacher or no Preacher.

Ans. 1. By an incapable person we mean such as is utterly unable to perform
the Pastoral duties which Christ has commanded, and men's souls greatly need
(which among others Dr. Hammond in his Annotat has well described.) If bare
Reading were sufficient Ability, every Boy or Artificer were sufficient that
can read. Bare Reading will encourage no man to take any one for his Physician,
or Lawyer; and soulconduct is a matter of greater importance, and needs as
much skill and honesty.

2. It is not the validity of the Sacrament that is all that is to be looked
at: Quod factum valet saepe fieri non debuit. Men must avoid sin as well as
Nullities in Sacraments: We take it to be a sin to own a man as Christ's
Minister who is none, through utter incapacity: Yet we know that Reading is a
sort of Preaching, and that all Presbyters, where one Church had many, did not
publicly and constantly Preach in the ancient Churches: But they were godly
men capable of other Ministerial Offices to the People, to pray, counsel and
direct them, which must be regarded as well as Sacraments. He that can
administer a Sacrament that is valid, may be unfit for men to take for their
Pastors or Guides.

3. There is a double work of Sacraments to which they may be called Effectual:
one is God's own collation of our Covenant-right to the promised Benefits, viz.
Pardon and Salvation: To this we believe that the Sacrament is effectual to
meet receivers, when it is so delivered as to be no Nullity; and so many
heretofore thought that Baptism delivered by a Layman is effectual, that is,
not Null, but investeth the person in his Covenant Relation; and yet that it is
unlawful for a Layman to administer it, or others to desire it of him: The
other work of the Sacrament is on the Peoples hearts, to which the manner of
administering much contributeth, as experience proves.

Obj. But Sacraments operate not as Lawyers and Physicians do by the skill of
the Minister, but by God's grace and blessing.

Ans. 1. But God's grace uses to work according to the aptitude of means
morally, as constant experience proves: And the word which is used in the
Sacramental administration, must be regarded, and so must other ways of
teaching as well as by Sacraments. 2. And we cannot expect God's blessing* in a
way of sin, when we own one for our Pastor whom we ought not.

Obj. But some take a man to be incapable if he be but a sinner worse than
ordinary, as a drunkard, fornicator, swearer, perjured, a scorner at diligence
in Religion, etc. whereas the Ministers sin depriveth not the people of the
benefit of God's Ordinances.

Ans. 1. He that not knowing the Minister to be such a one, or by true
necessity uses such a one, yea or by ignorance thinks that he should not
avoid him, if he be himself a true Believer, may have God's Covenant sealed to
him by the Sacrament, which such a one delivers: Yea, by an Usurper or mere
Layman that is in possession, and mistaken for a Minister: If a man forge his
Orders, or intrude uncalled, or be an obtruded usurping Bishop, the people
cannot always detect it: Nor do they lose their right to God's Sacraments,
because the man has (unknown to them) no right to administer them: But if they
know such an one, they should not own him as a Minister of Christ, so far as to
trust their souls with him as their Pastor, (at least when they may have a
better.) And he that so withdraws himself from the communion of notorious
wicked Pastors whom he has no power to cast out, not separating causlesly from
others or the Church State, seems to us to have all the following reasons to
excuse him from the guilt of Schism.

1 God has commanded his servants to beware of false or pretended Prophets,
and told us how to know them, by the hurtful fruits of thorns and thistles: And
Paul advises the Galatians, Colossians, etc. earnestly to beware of unsound
Teachers; and the Churches that had those that taught people to eat things
offered to Idols, etc. are threatened: And God commends those that tried false
Apostles, and found them Liars: Therefore the people in such cases as those
have a trying judgment, in order to their practice. And Paul warns the Romans
to mark those that cause divisions and offenses (or scandals) and avoid them as
not serving Jesus Christ but their bellies; and the forenamed crimes are
scandals.

2. God has commanded men to know, love, and imitate godly Pastors, Heb. 13.
7, 17. 24. 1 These. 5* 12, 13. 1 Timothy* 5. 17, etc. And he has given no man power
to set such criminals over them as their Pastors, and so far to deprive them of
the means of salvation as to confine them to them.

3. Though the Apostles charge [with such no not to eat] enable not private men
to exercise Governing discipline on bad Pastors, it seems to us to bind them,
when the case is notorious, to disown them.

4. Cyprians conclusion before mentioned is known, inviting the people to
forsake a bad Pastor, Plebs maximam habet potestatem etc. And he convinces the
people that if they forsake not such they are guilty.

5. The Christian Churches have formerly practiced it.

6. The Law or Canon forbids it to no man in England, to desert men, sobeit
they will but remove their dwelling into another Parish. Which is an extrinsick
Circumstance of humane order.

7. Even Pope Nicolas in his Decretals, says, that [Priests that commit
fornication, cannot have the honor of Priesthood. Yea [Let no man hear Mass of
a Priest whom he certainly knows to have a Concubine or woman introduced] and
we hope we may be herein as clean as Papists. Yea of Popes he says [He that by
money, or the favor of men, or Popular, or Military tumults, is intruded into
the Apostolical seat, without the Concordant and Canonical Election of the
Cardinals, and the following religious Clergy, let him not be taken for a Pope
or Apostolical, but Apostatical] Caran. 2. p. 393. 395.

8. Gildas says of the British wicked Priests, that they were Traitors and not
Ministers of Christ, and that he was not Eximius Christianus, that would call
them Ministers.

9. Isidore Pelusiota in many Epistles to Zosimus, and other wicked Priests,
has much to the like purpose.

10. St. Martin, would not come to the synods of the Bishops about him, nor
Communicate with them at all, because they were some of them, rash, bad men,
and had instigated Maximus to subdue the Priscillian Gnostics by the Sword,
and thereby brought Religious people that were strict, into suspicion of
Priscillianism; but especially he holding that Heresy was not to be so
punished: And when to save some men's lives, he vielded to Maximus once to
Communicate with the Bishops, an Angel in his way corrected him, and his
working of Miracles was diminished by it, and he forbore their Communion after
to the death. Either this history is true or not: If not, when it is written by
his own Disciple and acquaintance, Sulpitius Severus and one of the most Godly
and Learned of all the ancient Historians, and by others; and when Martin is
Canonized for one of the greatest Saints upon supposition that the History of
his Life and Miracles is true, what Church History (even that for Bishops) can
we then believe? But if it be true, then one of the holiest workers of Miracles
since the Apostles, has assured us, that his separation from communion with
these Bishops (though cruel to Heretics, so gross) was confirmed by vision,
and by an Angel from Heaven, and he forbidden their communion for the time to
come. We again mention this, as not yet having heard any answer to it.

11. Our own Canons forbid the people to communicate with Ministers for lesser
faults (as private Preaching, Sacraments, Fasts, Conventicles, or out of their
own Parishes, etc.

12. Moses the Monk aforementioned, is commended by Historians, because he
would not be ordained by Lucius; not because erroneous, but because he had
persecuted others by the countenance of Valens the Emperor: Though his
persecution extended not to the silencing of thousands, or hundreds, or very
many that we read of: And as is aforesaid, he chose to be ordained by banished
men.

13. Especially if men have no obligation to that insufficient, heretical, or
ungodly Priest, but humane, because a Patron presented him, or a Magistrate
imposed him, or because Parish-order (which is a humane thing of mere
convenience) will else seem violated: When as the avoiding of the danger of a
false Pastor, and the guilt of his sin, which by owning him may be incurred,
and escaping the great loss of a faithful Pastor's guidance, when we are
conscious that we greatly need it, are things of greater importance, and of
Moral and Evangelical Divine obligation: In this case we cannot prove it Schism
to avoid a wicked Priest: The Bishops hold it a duty to avoid a Nonconformist
that has not their License: But such a one as is foredescribed, has not
Christ's License, and is a Nonconformist to his Laws.

Again, let it be noted 1. That even under the Jewish Law, Magistrates were not
the chusers of the Priests, but God chose them by settling the Priesthood on one
line. 2. That Christ has by his Spirit in the Apostles altered the Priesthood,
and the way of their calling and entrance under the Gospel. 3. That the Church
near a thousand years was in possession of that way, and many hundred of those
years the possession was universal in all the Churches. 4. That the choosing of
Bishops or Priests by Magistrates or Lay-Patrons was none of that way which
Christ appointed. Therefore seeing it is not the choosing or making, but the
Governing of Bishops or Priests that is committed to Princes, and Christ's Law
is the first by which they must govern, it seems to us that they cannot
oblige the Subjects to take up with wicked Pastors, when better are prohibited,
and are to be had.

LXVII. 21. In those times and Countries where the allowed Bishops are
corrupted by ignorance, heresy, ungodliness or faction, and set themselves to
bring in an unconscionable corrupt sort of Ministers into the Churches, and
will not ordain fit and conscionable men, or by snares divide the Churches, and
cast out the most worthy; and impose sinful conditions on all whom they will
ordain, it seems to us to be no Schism to seek ordination from other Bishops,
and in case of necessity at least, to be ordained by such Presbyters as are
either the sole, or chief, or equal Pastors in Parochial Churches, (especially
in Cities) and to perform the Office of Presbyters without such Bishops
consent. We here suppose such Bishops had themselves been duly elected and
ordained, yet 1. They have their power to edification, and not to destruction.
2. We are more obliged to Christ's interest, and the Churches safety, than to
them. God will have mercy, rather than Sacrifice, and prefers men's salvation
to ceremony or Church Laws. 3. So the O^^^odox forsook the Arrian and other
wicked Bishops: Malignity and wickedness is poison in the Clergy as well as
Heresy and Schism: So as is aforesaid, Moses and Martin disowned the bad
Bishops that were near them; so the Protestants disowned the Papist Bishops;
And Bugenhagius Pomeranus a Presbyter reformed and ordained Bishops in Denmark.
Bishop Usher himself told one of us, that being asked by his Sovereign whether
he found that ever Presbyters ordained Presbyters? he answered, I can show your
Majesty more, even where Presbyters made Bishops, citing the Alexandrian custom
out of Jerome to Evagrius. The Judgment of English Bishops and Divines for the
validity of such Ordination by Presbyters, and of the Ordination in the
Reformed Churches abroad, some of us have proved heretofore at large. 4. Christ
having made a Law which conferreth the Pastoral Power on him that is made a due
Receiver (as the King's Charter does the Power of the Lord Mayor on him that is
duly chosen to it) it follows that no more is absolutely necessary to such
reception of that Power, but that the person be duly qualified, and have
consent and opportunity, and the best investiture which the time and place will
afford: Of which Voetius de desperata causa Papatus, and one of us in a Dispute
of Ordination, have long ago said that which we suppose will never be well
answered. 5. And Grotius de Imperio sum. Potest. circa Sacra (an excellent
Book) has showed, that he that is the sole Pastor of a Church, is in effect a
Bishop. And indeed Dr. Hammond (as is said) in his Disser* and Annotations
asserteth de sacto, that in Scriptures one Bishop without any Presbyter under
him was settled in each Church; so that every Pastor of a particular Church then
was a Bishop (as far as can be proved:) And if that was the Apostolical
institution that every Church have a Bishop, and that there was no sole Pastor
(at least) but Bishops, then he that is ordained the Pastor, (at least sole or
chief) of a particular Church is ordained a Bishop: The reason is, because his
Office and Power follows the Law and Charter of Christ that made it, and not
of the investing Ministerial Ordainer if he would alter it, or pronounce it
otherwise.

LXVI. 22. Not to obey Lay-Chancellours where they govern the Church by the
power of the Keys, decreeing Excommunications and Absolutions, and performing
the work of Exploration and Admonition belonging to Bishops in order thereto,
we take to be no Schism; nor to refuse subscribing or swearing to such a
Government.

LXVII. 23. Not sacrilegiously to desert the sacred Ministry when vowed and
consecrated thereto, is no Schism.

LXVIII. 24. Where such sins are made the Condition of Ministration by men in
power, as that all the whole Ministry of a Kingdom are bound in conscience to
deny consent and conformity thereto, it is the duty of all the Ministry in
primo instante, to forbear their Ministerial Office or none; for the reason is
the same to all: For example; If ten or twenty untrue or unrighteous forbidden
things, must be subscribed, declared, covenanted, or sworn, or as many sins
practiced; yea were it but one, no doubt but the whole Ministry is bound to
deny Conformity to any one such thing. Now if all these must forbear or lay
down their Office, because forbidden by men to exercise it then it is in the
power of a Prince to cast out Christianity when he pleases, and to deny God
all Public Worship; and we must ask leave of Rulers that Christ may be Christ,
and souls may be saved; as if the Keys of Heaven and Hell were theirs. None
that we write for, Protestants or Papists, will assert this.

But if All must not lay down their Ministry, why must a thousand or two
thousand do it rather than all the rest? We suppose it will be said, that if a
thousand should refuse Conformity, all might continue their forbidden Ministry;
but if two thousand only of ten thousand should deny Conformity, these two
thousand must lay down, because the rest are a competent supply to the Churches.

Answ. But these be but unproved words. 1. How shall we be sure that other men's
sinning will absolve the two thousand innocent from their duty? If in the first
Instant it be confessedly the equal duty of all, how will the weakness and sin
of one part change the obligation of all the rest? 2. If the Churches be
somehow supplied by men's sin, will it follow that truth and righteousness in
sounder blameless men will not mend their supply? but must be cast out by
others sin? 3. And where can the wit of man ever set bounds to such power of
sinners? It will here be granted us, that if the most in France conform to
Popery, it will not disoblige all others from the exercise of their Ministry:
And who then can say, what those untruths and sins are which a weak and erring
Ministry may be guilty of, which shall serve to disoblige the rest? No man here
can set us any certain measure. 4. Would it have an honest sound if it should
be said to the people, The greater part of the Ministers by sin (yea gross
deliberate sin unrepented of) have procured the liberty of their Ministry; and
they are enough for you, and therefore you must hear none of those that refused
so to sin, and are cast out, e. g. suppose it were the subscribing of the
Covenant against P^elaey that were made the Condition of our Preaching here by
Law: Or subscribing to the Divine Right of unordained Elders and their power in
Presbyterian-Classes: If most of the Ministers take that Covenant, does that
prove that all the rest if forbidden to Preach must be silent? This were an
easy way to introduce any Error, by forbidding any but the defenders of it to
Preach? If Julian might not thus have put down the Gospel, nor Valens have put
down the Homoousians (as they called the Orthodox,) nor the Papists so put down
the Protestants, why may Calvinists or Lutherans so put down one another? As if
I were bound to be a Minister only till other men will sin!

Obj. But suppose that the sin be on the silenced Ministers part, and the other
be in the truth.

Ans. 1. Then the silenced Ministers are not guiltless of the Schism. 2. But if
it be so* if their error be in a small and difficult matter, not deserving
silencing (as theirs Romans 15. about meats and days etc) it may be far greater
Schism in the silencers, then in them.

Obj. But suppose it a doubtful case, and one party take consenting to be a
sin, and the other part and the greater take it to be none, If you may preach
on because you think that you are in the right, then no Heretic should be
silenced.

Ans. This was answered before 1. If men will still thus confound the scire and
the esse, or put the scire before the esse, they may go on in error, and no
reason can silence them. The thing is realy first true or false, before it is
known or thought so to be; If it be true, then he that thinks it false is the
delinquent. If it be a sin, it is not men's taking it for no sin, that will make
it so, nor disoblige the orthodox from their Ministry. But if it be no sin that
is Commanded the Nonconsenters are in the fault. And if it be a Heresy which
they stand for, may be s^lenced.

And yet we will not deny, but if the generality of the Ministry obtain their
liberty by some small tolerable sin or error and the sounder part be few and
unnecessary in that Country, ^rudence obliges them to go to some other place
that needs them, and never to exercise their Ministry where in true reason
it is like to do more hurt than good.

LXIX. 25. Where under any of the foresaid unjust prohibitions the silenced
Ministers and people shall gather no distinct Churches, but only Auditories or
Chapels as parts of the Parish Churches, and that only where there is (through
the bigness of the Parish, or distance from the Parish Church, or paucity, or
insufficiency, or unfaithfulness of Parish Priests a true necessity, not
unchurching or separating from the Parish Church, but owning it and holding
Communion with it, and promoting the reputation of the true Parish* Minister
and Communion, and persuading others to the like, we cannot see that this is
any Schism; but rather their practice who fire and divide men's minds by envious
clamours against the innocent, and proudly calling others Schismatics.

LXX. 26. We have greatly lamented the true Schismatical disposition of some
religiously affected persons, who make their singularities or little
differences, the occasions of unchristening; unchurching or degrading those
that are wiser than themselves, and running away from one another on pretense
of discipline, and avoiding sin. But yet we hold that gentle forbearing
tolerable differences, even in distinct Churches, guilty of Schism, so they be
kept from unpeaceable reviling of others, is a meeter way to avoid the
mischiefs, than with prison, sword or fire to exasperate them. It is noted that
Nestorius the Heretic was the first sharp persecutor of the Novatians: But
most of the better Bishops tolerated them, as did the Emperors: And two
prudent gentle Bishops of Constantinople, Atticus and Proclus, reduced the
Joannites, and lenified other divided Parties, which the flercer men had made
and kept up by their violence.

SECT. VII.
Some Matters of Fact preparatory to the true Application of what is before
laid down.
WE must crave that justice of the Reader as to note, that hither to we have
spoken but of the Doctrinal part about Schism, not applying it to England or
any others: Nor shall we now any otherwise apply it, than to lay down some
little part of the Matters of Fact, which the Nonconformists are considering to
help others to apply it without mistake, as they shall see cause.

We intend not, in this, the determination of the points in matter of right;
nor do we here tell men (unless on the by in the stating of some few
questions,) what it is that we account good or evil, much less do we here give
the proofs or reasons of our Cause: That is the thing for which we greatly
desire the allowance of our Superiors; But must not unnecessarily presume to
do it, lest we displease them; though we hear that some of them take us as not
sincere, for keeping up a difference, and giving no more reasons of it: The
thing which we so greatly desire leave to do, but dare not be so bold yet as to
venture by it to displease them, who condemn us for not doing it, lest their
anger would be sharper to us if we do it: so great is our difficulty between
this Soylla and Charybdis.

But we hope we may adventure to open some part of the Matter of Fact, which
Conformity and Nonconformity are concerned in, that so men may conjecture at
the Case themselves; which will be no reflection on the Government (barely to
tell what they command,) nor a challenging any of our Superiors to a
disputation, nor a charging them as faulty that cannot bear it.

1. Matters of Fact to be foreknown, to the true understanding of the Cause.
1. THE root of the difference between the Old Nonconformists and the
Conformists, was that one sort thought they should stick to the mere Scripture
Rule and simplicity, and go far from all additions which were found invented or
abused by the Papists, in Doctrine, Worship and Government; and the other side
thought that they should show more reverence to the customs of the ancient
Church, and retain that which was not forbidden in the Scripture, which was
introduced before the ripeness of the Papacy, or before the year 600 at least,
and which was found lawful in the Roman Church, and common to them with the
Greek, that we might not seem singular, odd and humorous, or to go further from
the Papists than reason and necessity drove us. And the Laity seemed no where
so sensible of the difference, as between the way of Ceremony, and
unceremonious simplicity, and the way of our many short Liturgick Prayers and
Offices, and the way of free-praying from the present sense and habits of the
speaker; while pacificators thought both seasonably good.

2. The sad eruption of this difference among the Exiles at Frankford while Dr.
Cox and Mr. Horn and their party, strove for the English Liturgy, and the
other party strove against it for the freer way, is at large reported in a book
called the troubles at Frankford.

3. Queen Elizabeth and King James discountenancing and suppressing the
Nonconformists, they attempted in Northamtonshire and Warwickshire a little
while to have set and kept up private Churches and governed them in the
Presbyterian way; But that attempt was soon broken and frustrate by the
industry of Bishop Whitguift and Banctoft: And the Nonconformists lived
according to their various opportunities: some of them conformed: some were by
connivence permitted in peculiars and small impropriate places, or Chapels
that had little maintenance, in the public Ministry, which kept them from
gathering secret Churches: some of them had this liberty a great part of their
lives, as Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Dod, Mr. Hering, Mr. Paget, Mr. Midsley senior
and junior, Mr. Langley, Mr. Slater, and Mr. Ash at Bremicham Mr. Tailor, Mr.
Pateman, Mr. Paul Bayne, Mr. Fox of Tewksbury, John Fox, and many more. Some
had this liberty all their lives, as Mr. Knewstubs, Dr. Chadderton, Dr.
Reignolds Dr. Humphrey, Mr. Perkins, Mr. John Ball, Mr. Barnet, Mr. Geeree, Mr.
Root, Mr. Atkins Mr. Gilpin, John Rogers and many others: some were fain to
shift up and down by hiding themselves, and by flight, and these preached
sometimes secretly in the houses where they were, and sometime publicly for a
day and away, where they could be admitted: so did Mr. Parker, Mr. Bradshaw,
Mr. Nicols, Mr. Brightman, Mr. Brumskil, Mr. Humphrey Fen, Mr. Sutchff, Mr.
Thomas, and many more; and after their silencing Mr* Cotton, Mr. Hooker, and
many more that went to America, Mr. Cartwright was permitted in the Hospital at
Warwick, Mr. Harvey, and Mr. Hind at Bunbery in Cheshire, and many more kept in
(having small maintenance) being in peculiar or privileged places: Mr.
Rathband, Mr. Angier, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gee, Mr. Hancock, and many others often
silenced, had after liberty by fits. Mr. Bowrne of Manchester, Mr. Broxholm in
Darbyshire Mr. Cooper of Huntingtonshire (at Elton) and many others suffered
more, and labored more privately. Dr. Ames was invited to Franekera, some were
further alienated from the English Prelacie, and separated from their Churches,
and some of them called Brownists, were so hot at home, that they were put to
death; Mr. Ainsworth, Johnson, Robinson and others fled beyond seas, and there
gathered Churches of those that followed them; and broke by divisions among
themselves. The old Nonconformists being most dead, and the later gone most to
America, we cannot learn that in 1640 there were many more Nonconformist
Ministers in England, than there be Counties, if so many.

4. The Conformists shortly fell into dissension among themselves, especially
about three things, Arminianism (as it was called) and Conciliation with the
Church of Rome, and Prerogative: Dr. Heylin in the Life of ArchBishop Laud does
fully open all these differences, and tells us that Archbishop Abbot was the
Head of one party, and in point of Antiarminianism even Archbishop Whitgist
before him, with Whitaker and others had made the Lambeth Articles, driven the
Arminians from Cambridge: King James had discountenanced them in Holland, and
sent six Divines to the Synod of Dort, who owned and helped to form those
Articles: And he tells us that Bishop Laud had no Bishops on his side but
Bishop Neale, Bishop Buckeridge, Bishop Corbet, and Bishop Howson, and after
Bishop Mountague, and thought it not safe to trust his Cause to a Convocation;
the major part called then The Church of England, 1. Cried down Arminianism as
dangerous Doctrine; 2. Cried down any nearer approach to the Papists, and the
Toleration of them; 3. And were much for the Law against absoluteness in the
King; and Dr. Heylins and Rushworth's Collect. will tell you the full story of
Manwaring and Sibthorp, and Archbishop Abbots refusing to license Sibthorp's
Book, and the Consequents of all. Thus these two Parties grew into jealousies,
the Old Churchmen accusing the New on these three accounts, and the New ones
striving, as Dr. Heylin describes them, to get into power and overturn the Old.

5. In this contention the Parliaments also involved themselves and the
Majority still clave to the Majority of the Bishops and Clergy (then called the
Church of England:) And in all or most Parliaments cried up Religion, Law and
Propriety and the Liberty of Subjects, and cried down Arminianism, Monopolies,
Connivence and Favoring of Papists, and their increase thereby; expressing by
Speeches, and Remonstrances, their jealousies in all these points, till they
were dissolved.

6. The writings of Bishop Jewel, and much more Bishop Bilson, and most of all
Mr. Richard Hooker, and such as were of their mind, show us what Principles
there, and then were by the Laiety that followed them, received. We will not
recite their words, lest our intent be misunderstood; neither Bishop Bilsons
instances in what cases Kings may be resisted by arms Nor Mr. Hookers that
makes Legislation the natural right of the Body politic, and governing power
to be thence derived, to depend upon the Body, and to return to it by
escheats, when heirs fail, and that the King is singulis Major and universis
Minor, etc. (His eighth Book was in print long before Bishop Gauden published
it, who yet vindicateth it to be Hookers own.)

7. In 1637, 1638, 1639. A. Bishop Land useing more severity against dissenters
than had been used of late before, and the visitations more enquiring after
private fasts and meetings and going out of men's own Parishes to hear, and such
like, and also the Book for sports on the Lords days being necessarily to be
read by all the Conformable Ministers in the Churches, and Altars, Railes and
Bowing toward them being brought in, and in many places afternoon Sermons and
Lectures put down, the minds of men before filled with the aforementioned
jealousies, were made much more jealous than before. And after the imprisonment
of some, the stigmatizing of some, and the removal of many beyond the Seas,
and the death of more, the Nonconformable Ministers were reduced to the paucity
before mentioned; but the minds of many people were more alienated from the
later set of Bishops, and the old sort of Conformists more jealous of them, and
more afraid of Popery, etc. than before.

8. The new Liturgy then imposed on the Scots, with the other changes there
attempted, the designs charged on the Marq. of Hamilton, the fear of the Lords
losing the Tyths, etc. which Dr. Heylin mentions as the causes or occasions
of their arming there, with the progress thereof, and their entering into
England, and the advantage thence taken by some English Lords, to advise the
King to call a Parliament once and again, and the discontents and proceedings
of that Parliament against the two Ministers of the King; for former things
with such other matters we had rather the reader took from others, than from
us. We are unwilling to be the mentioners of any more than concerns our
present cause, and the things are very commonly known.

9. On the 23. of October, 1641. The Irish suddenly rose, and murdered no less
than two hundred thousand persons, and Dublin narrowly escaped them, of which
we refer the Reader to the examinations published by Dr. Henry Jones, since a
Bishop in Ireland, and to the history of Sir John Temple, and to the Earl of
Orery's Answer to Mr. Welsh.

10. The dreadfulness of this Massacre (so far exceeding the French) and the
news sent over that the Irish said that they had the Kings Commission and the
foregoing jealousies of the people and the Parliaments Declarations, raised in
multitudes of the people a fear that the Irish when they had ended their work
there would come over hither and do the like; and that they had partakers in
England of whom we were in danger, and that there was no way of safety but to
adhere to the Parliament for their own defense, or else it would quickly be too
late to complain.

11. In 1642. the lamentable Civil War brake out: At which time as far as ever
we could learn by acquaintance with some of them and report of others,
excepting an inconsiderable number, the Houses of Lords and Commons consisted
of those that had still lived in conformity to the Church of England and the
Episcopal Government and were such Conformists as Dr. Heylin describes
Archbishop Abbot and the Clergy and Parliaments of his times to have been,
Crying out of the danger of a new party, that said they would shake our
Religion, Liberties and Property. And such were they when the War began,
Presbytery being then little known among them.

12. Their fear of being overpowred by the party of whom they seemed to think
themselves in sudden danger, caused some of them to countenance such
Petitionings and clamours of the Londoners, Apprentices, and others, as we
think disorders and provocation of the King.

13. The first open beginning was about the Militia: And whether the Lord
Lieutenants whom the Parliament chose, were not almost all Episcopal
Conformists, we entreat the Reader but to peruse the Catalogue in the ordinance
for that Militia, and to ask any that well knew them (as some of us did many of
them) and he may certainly be satisfied.

14. The same we say 1. Of the far greatest part of the General Officers,
Colonels, Lieutenant-Collonels, and Majors of the Earl of Essex's Army. 2. And
of the Sea-Captains. 3. And of the Major Generals of Brigades, and Counties
through the Land.

15. When the Parliament's Armies were worsted and weakened by the King, and
they found themselves in danger of being overcome, they entreated help from the
Scots, who taking the advantage of their straits, brought in the Covenant as
the Condition of their help; which the Parliament rather accepted than they
would lose them, which at first was imposed on none by force: But (to pass by
all other Considerations) was judged by many wise men, to be an occasion of
division, as making the opposition to Prelacy, to be the terms of the Kingdoms
Unity and Concord, when they might know that the King and a great, if not the
greatest part of the Kingdom, were of the contrary mind, and so it was thought
to be (as the Papal terms of Unity) a means of unavoidable division: But others
thought that because it tied them to no endeavors, but in their Places and
Callings, they might take it.

16. The Assembly of Divines at Westminster were men that had lived in
Conformity, except about eight or nine of them and the Scots: But being such as
thought Conformity lawful in case of deprivation, but the things imposed to be
a snare, which should be removed if it could be lawfully done, they also
received the Covenant, but were divided about the sense of the word [Prelacy,]
many professing their Judgment to be for Moderate Episcopacy; whereupon the
describing additions [Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons] were added. And
upon such a Profession that it disclaimed not all Episcopacy, Mr. Coleman is
said to have given the Covenant to the House of Lords. And they complained of
the Parliament which tied them to meddle with nothing but what they offered to
them.

17. This Covenant and Vow was taken by the Parliament, and by their Garrisons
and Soldiers that would volunrarily take it, as a test whom they would trust;
the rest being had in suspension: And after the wars; by such as were ordained
Ministers, and by the Kings adherents when they made their compositions; so far
was it afterward imposed. But many Ministers and Gentlemen refused it, and so
did Cromwell's Soldiers, and in many Counties few did take it.

18. How far the Parliament was from being Presbyterians, may partly be seen in
the Propositions sent from them by the Earl of Essex to the King at Nottingham,
and partly by their defeating all the desires and endeavors of those that
would have Presbytery settled through the Land: We know of no places but London
and Lancashire where it was commonly taken up, and some little of it at
Coventry, and some few such places. And that was only as a tolerated or
commended thing, without any imposition that ever we knew of: And accordingly
it came to nothing in a short time.

17. Till their new modelling their Army, the Parliament had given out all
Commissions to their Soldiers to fight for [King and Parliament.] But then the
King's name was lest out; which seeming to many thousands an utter change of
the Cause, from that time many did desert them: And thereupon the Party called
Sectaries flowing in to Cromwell, and his Army conquering, the power fell into
their hands, who imprisoned the King, accused and drove away eleven Members of
the Parliament, and afterward imprisoned and excluded the major part of the
remaining House, and with the rest cut off the King, cast down the House of
Lords, pretended a while to set up a Commonwealth (as they called it) imposed
an Engagement to that Commonwealth as established without King and House of
Lords; ordered the sequestration of the Ministers that refused it, and of those
that kept not their days of fasting and thanksgiving, for the Scottish wars
which then they made. After which they cast out with scorn that remnant of the
Commons that had joined with them; and chose themselves some men called a
Parliament, who attempting to put down all Parish-Ministers, Tithes and
Universities (the first put to the Vote, and carried but by a few against them)
they were broke up by delivering up their Commission to Oliver, who was made
Protector, and had the honor designed of saving the Ministry, Tithes and
Universities from the Sectaries; even from that danger into which he had
brought them.

20. From the time of these New Causes and Changes, especially the destroying
the King, violating and casting out the Parliament men, imposing the engagement
etc. the Ministers called Presbyterian in England, some few compliers excepted
(many of whom since Conform) declared themselves against all this, and were
looked upon as enemies; though kindness was offered to reconcile them. Some were
imprisoned, many cast out of their places in the Universities, some sequestered,
and Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons (a Gentleman) beheaded. Mr. Gee with the
Lancashire Ministers, with some of us, wrote against these proceedings of the
then Power: Many Preached against them, so that the sober Religious people of
the land grew commonly disaffected to them: And what the Scots did and how they
were conquered, we need not here relate.

21. The Ministers who were then in possession of the Parish Churches were of
many minds about Church Government. 1. Many were for the old Episcopacy and
Liturgy 2. Many were for a reformed Episcopacy: 3. Many were for Presbytery
(that is, Church Government by Presbyteries, Classes and National assemblies,
of Teaching and of Governing unordained Elders Conjunct, as jure divino) 4.
Some were for that which is called Independency. 5. Some thought that no form
of Church Government was jure divino. 6 But the most of our acquaintance were
peaceable, moderate men that thought several parties had somewhat of the right,
and that the points of difference were so few and small, that they might well
live in peace and love, and that none of the parties was so right as that in
all things they should be followed, and others trod down to set them up: And
many of these were young men that, being at the Schools, had not been engaged
in the first quarrels, and desired not to side with any dividing parties, and
modestly professed that they had not maturity enough to study themselves to any
great confidence in the Controversies.

22. This last sort of men beginning in Worcest:-shire set on foot a work of
reconciling Association, in which the Episcopal, Presbyterians and
Independants, agreed to practice so much of Church Government and Ministration
as they were all agreed in, with mutual Love and assisting concord, and to
forbear one another in the rest, till God should bring us nearer. (And after
they added another Agreement, to Catechize every person in their Parishes old
and young, that would come to them, or receive them thereto; and personally to
instruct and exhort them about the practicals of Religion, and preparation for
death and the life to come) This example was presently followed by the
Ministers in Cumberland and Westmorland, Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, Essex, and
going on in other Counties, till the confusions 1659 interrupted it, and the
return of the Prelacie ended it and many such endeavors.

23. When Oliver was dead, many sorts of Government were set up in one year:
First his son Richard (who having never been in Arms, and being famed to be for
the King, many thought he would have been ready, when he could, to resign the
Kingdom to him, and spoke him fair on that account, and others because they
thought he would quiet the violent, and keep out utter confusion:) After his
ejection the Remnant of the Commons called the Commonwealth was restored. After
this they were cast out again, and a Council of State Chosen by the Army; till
the Kingdom grew to scorn them all, and was weary and ashamed of the
confusions, and revived their designs to restore the King.

24. The first open attempt of united endeavors against the Army, to restore
the King, was by the Cheshire, Lancashire, and Northwales men, under Sr. Georg
Booth (now Lord De lamere) and Sir T^o. Middle^on, who had been commanders for
the Parliament; and was broken by the Armies Conquering them. Mr. Cook, Mr.
Harrison, Mr. Kirby, Mr. Seddan, sent up Prisoners, and in danger of death, and
other Ministers, who since are silenced and ruined by those they helped.

25. But the attempts being renewed, at the same time, the division of the
Opposers (the Army and the Commonwealth Members) shook them all to pieces, and
ruined them, and the new closure of the Old Parliamentarians, and the
Royalists, and the Presbyterians, and other Ministers with the Episcopal,
strengthened them, and restored the King: The Presbyterian Officers and
Soldiers of General Monk's Army concurring with the rest, and Sir Thomas Allen
then Lord Mayor (many London Ministers on their part counselling him thereto)
with the Aldermen and others, inviting General Monk to join with the City
herein against the Opposers; from which very day, the scales were turned, and
all went on without any considerable stop, and the old ejected Members of
Parliament first, and the Council settled protempore after, prepared for His
Majesty's return; and Dr. Gauden, Mr. Calamy, and Mr. B^xter Preaching at the
Fast of the next Parliament, (as their Printed Sermons show) the King the next
morning was voted to return, and to be invited to his Fathers Throne.

26. In preparation for this, some Ministers now silenced, had trcated with
some Gentlemen firm to the King, and with Bishop Usher, Bishop Browrig, Dr.
Hammond, and others, who all encouraged them (though some much more, than
others) by prosessing moderate, healing principles and intentions^: And in
London, and several Counties, the Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen that had
still adhered to the King, professed and published their peaceable desires of
Concord, and resolution against revenge; And Letters were written from France
to diverse here, to take off all the unjust suspicions that some had raised
about the Kings Religion; all which promoted the Concord that accomplished the
Change.

27. Those that saw the marvelous success of this reconciliation and concord,
and knew that the Clergies distance was most likely, if any thing, to hinder
the happy perfection and settlement of a full desired peace, did presently
attempt an agreement among them: And upon the motion of some of the since
silenced Ministers, the Earl of Manchester, and the Earl of Orery mentioning it
to the King, they told us, that it was well pleasing to His Majesty: Whereupon
His Majesty vouchsafing them audience, and great encouragement, several persons
on each side were appointed to treat of the necessary terms of settled Concord
and to yield to each other as far as they could, and offer their mutual
concessions: What was done in this is not now to be mentioned, save that part
of it was published by some body, which declares it, and the first part being
about Church Government and worship, issued in the publication of His Majesty's
Gracious Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, by which all our breaches
seemed at the present to be almost healed, and the House of Commons gave His
MAJESTY Public thanks.

28 At this time the Lord Chancellor as a token of His Majesty's Gracious
favor and acceptance, offered Bishoprics to three that then treated for
Reconciliation, and Deanries to two or three of them. Of the three first, one
did the next day save one refuse it, but in a letter to him professing his
gratitude, and that he was so rejoiced in His Majesty's Gracious Declaration,
that if it might but be settled by Law, he resolved to use his utmost endeavors
to persuade all men to conformity on those terms, and therefore would not
disable himself thereto by taking a Bishopric, and making men think that it
was not for just concord, but his own interest that he wrote or pleaded:
Another of them soon accepted: The third and the two or three that had Deanries
offered them, only suspended till they saw whether His Majesty's Declaration
would live or dye.

29. what was done in the next attempt upon His Majesty's Commission to agree
on such alterations of the Liturgy as were necessary to tender Consciences,
etc. we are to make no further mention of, then is made by the writings given,
in which some body shortly after (in part and with many false printings)
published; An Addition to the Liturgy, A Reply to some former Papers of the
Bishops, and an Earnest Petition to them for the Churches Peace, which were
given in and never answered by them (that we know of) some one printed. And
being in writing required by a Right reverend Bishop then in the Chair, as from
superiors to lay by mere Inconveniences, and to give in those points which we
took to be flat sin, we gave in eight particulars the next day as part; and by
that time but one of our arguments about one of them was half handled, and the
rest of the arguments untouched, and the rest of the Controverted instances not
meddled with, our Commission was expired: And the Bishops argumentation as
Opponents, afterward, on another occasion printed.

30. Shortly after the convocation of the Clergy settled the Liturgy as now it
is settled: The Kings Declaration dyed: The Parliament made the Act of
Uniformity, by which many Ministers for not conforming to that Law were on
August. 24. 1662 ejected and silenced, on severe penalties. About Eighteen
hundred of their names from several Counties were showed Mr. Calamy and others;
and some say about 200 were omitted, and that they were in all above 2000.

31. They that had treated for Reconciliation foresaw what sad divisions were
like to follow, if we were not healed and united; and therefore in their
Petition made a solemn Protestation that nothing but the fear of sin and Gods
displeasure should hinder them from Conformity, deprecating the woeful effects
of the division, which could not possibly be otherwise avoided, than by some
necessary abatements of the Impositions: and fore telling much that has since
come to pass, which common understanding might easily see in the Causes.

32. The persons that were silenced were not of one mind and measure about all
the things imposed on them. 1. Some of them were Episcopal, and for as much as
Richard Hooker writes for, and were against the Covenant (and never took it)
and the Parliaments War, and were for the Liturgy and Ceremonies and had
Conformed had these been all that had been imposed, who yet were cast out of
Fellowships and Ministry: Yea some had suffered for the King, and been ruined
in their patrimony, some imprisoned for him, and some had been in arms for him.
2. Besides these, and other Episcopal Nonconformists, some and very many, and
we think the greatest part of any one, were such disengaged pacificators as we
before mentioned about associations: 3. Some were for the Presbyterian
Government, and 4. Some for that called Independent, which were comparatively
but few.

Also some were (as heretofore Dr. John Reynolds, Dr. Humpbrey, Mr. Perkins,
Mr. Paul Bayn, etc. for some part of Conformity (Kneeling and Lit^rgie, and
some for the Surplice) and against other parts: Many would have come in to all
the old Conformity, had it not been for that one sentence in the
Canon-subscription [Nothing Contrary to the word of God] (which kept out Mr.
Chil^ingworth himself, as is reported, till some dispensation let him in. But
the New Conformity was such as satisfied them all against it. Many purposed to
have yielded to Prelacy, Liturgy and Ceremonies, and gone to the utmost that
Conscience would tolerate, rather than lay by their Ministry. But when they saw
the new Act for Uniformity, their deliberations were at an end.

33. Their interest, honor or somewhat else led many persons of those times,
when they had made the name of Presbyterians odious, to call all the
Nonconformists that were Episcopal or neutral, by the name of Presbyterians,
even those that had declared themselves against the Presbyterian frame, so they
were not Independents. And they continue that practice to serve their ends to
this day.

34. The elder sort of the Nonconformists were ordained by Diocesan Bishops:
The younger sort were ordained by Assemblies of the Parish Pastors of Cities
and Countries, no other ordination being then allowed by those in Power.

35. As to the late Civil Wars which some most lowdly charge on the
Nonconformists, this is the truth, that the several parties charge the
beginning of that war on one another: One party says that the Presbyterians
begun it in England: Another party lay it on the old Church of England men that
followed Archbishop Abbot, and such like: Both these accused Parties laid the
beginning on Archbishop Laud as an Innovator, and those that followed him: And
some think that every side had too much hand in it, and were to be blamed. The
truth is, 1. That more by far of the Nonconformists than of the late sort of
the Prelatists were for the Parliament in those times: 2. That some that were
Sectaries, and some that were hot for the Parliament did conform: 3. That some
few that had been in the King's Army or Cause, and that were sufferers for him,
and were against the Covenant and the Parliaments War, were Nonconformists: 4.
That many more of the old Episcopal Comformists, than of the later sort of them
were for the Parliament: 5. That the Archbishop of York (Williams) who had some
time been Lord Keeper, was one of the Parliaments Commanders in North Wales (as
it is reported without denial.) 6. That most Ministers are dead that were in
that War. 7. That the Westminster Assembly, as is said, came thither almost all
Conformists. 8. That so small is the number of the present silenced Ministers
who had any hand in those Wars, that if no other were ejected and silenced but
they, the case would be judged comparatively very easy, and it would be
thankfully accepted, as has often been told. For most were then youths at
School, and in the Universities, and many lived in the King's quarters and
garrisons, and many other never meddled with Wars at all; it being now about
thirty four, or five years since the War began. 9. That all the Wars that have
been since their opposition to the Parliament and violence done to the person
of the King, were far from being owned by the common sort of the now
Nonconformists, as was said. 10. The Doctrine of Bilson, Hooker, and such like,
containing such Principles as Parliament men then usually professed is before
mentioned, though not fully recited, and is commonly known; and that the main
body of the Parliament, Assembly, Army, Commanders, Lord Lieutenants, M^jor
Generals of Bragades, and Sea-Captains, were professed Conformists of the
Church of England. 11. Lastly, We had hoped that His M^jesties prudence had by
the Act of Oblivion long since ended this part of the Contention; but we find
still some conformable Ministers whom in other respects we much esteem and
love, who (as if Truth, Charity, Justice and Humanity had been forgotten by
them) affirm in print that All the Nonconformists were guilty of the King's
Death; passing over what is aforesaid of the Conformists; and others of them
crying out to Magistrates to execute the Laws on us, by the urged Motive of
their late sequestrations and sufferings: as if they knew not, or would not
have others to know, how few Nonconformists in Parliament or Militia there were
at the beginning of the War in comparison of the Conformists; and how much the
second, third and following Causes, Parties, and Tragedies in that War, were
disliked by the now Episcopal and Presbyterian Nonconformists.

36. The people who now adhere to the Nonconformists, who were at age before
the Wars (whom we that write this were acquainted with) had very hard thoughts
of the Bishops persons, and some of Episcopacy it self, because of the foresaid
silencing of Ministers, and ruining of honest men, about Sunday-sports, Reading
that Book, and other such things, besides Nonconformity: But when the Ministers
that guided them, began to seem more reconciled to the Episcopal Party, and
upon the reports and promises which they had heard, had put them in hope that
the next Bishops would prove more moderate, peaceable and pious, than the
former, and would by experience avoid divisions and persecution, the said
people began to be inclined to more reverent and favorable thoughts of
Episcopacy and the Bishops; and were, upon experience of the late confusions,
in a far fairer way to union and submission to them than before. But when they
saw their Teachers taken from them, and some such set over them against their
wills, who were better known to them than to the obtruders; and when they heard
of about 2000 silenced at once, this so much alienated them from the Bishops,
that it was never since in our power to bring them to so much esteem of them,
and reverence to them, as might have been; but multitudes by this were driven
further from Conformity than the silenced Ministers.

37. The 2000 silenced were not a quarter of the Ministers of England, who were
in possession before the return of the Bishops: so that it is evident, that
above three fourth parts of the Ministers that kept in under the Parliament and
Protector (notwithstanding Covenant, Directory and all) did prove Conformists.

38. The New-altered Liturgy was not printed and published till August 24. or
near it, when the Ministers were to be silenced that subscribed not, and
consented not: so that we must needs suppose that they were but few Ministers
in England in comparison of the rest, who ever saw and read (much less long
considered) that Book before they declared their Assent and Consent to all
things in it. Sure we are, that we that lived in London, who had it at the
first publishing, found the time past, or so short to examine all things in it
with due deliberation, that had it been blameless, we must have been silenced,
unless we had consented upon an implicit faith.

39. Since we were silenced, His Majesty's Declaration for more Liberty in
Religion came out 1673. but soon died: And since then we have been called to
many attempts for Unity, in which we have twice come to an agreement with those
honest, peaceable, pious and learned Divines of the Church of England, who were
appointed to treat of it with us. But that signified nothing as to our healing,
while Reasons unknown to us, or ineffable prevailed.

40. Yet still we have been called on to Tell what we s^^ck at, and what we
desired, and what would satisfy us, (who desire nothing but leave to exercise
the Ministry to which we were ordained) and the Cant still goes on among the
ignorant at least, as if we had never told them to this day; or as if since the
new conformity we had ever been called or had leave to tell them, or as if the
same men would endure us to tell them our case of, dissent and the reasons of
it to this day. But the Judge is at the door.

SECT. VIII.
The Matters of Fact, as to what is required of us, by Laws and Canon, to which
we must conform; And first of Laymen.
I. OF Laymen that will have any Government or Trust in any City or
Corporation, is necessarily required the taking of the following Oath and
Declaration by a Law.

I Swear that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms
against the King: And that I Abhor that Traiterous position that Arms may be
taken by His Authority against his Person, or against those that are
Commissioned by him] And the Declaration is [That there is NO OBLIGATION upon
me or ANY OTHER person, from the Oath Commonly called the solemn League and
Covenant.

1. By this Oath and this Declaration the Government and Trust of all the
Cities and Corporations of England are constituted or qualified.

2. Part of this Vow and Covenant is [against Popery, superstition, and
profaneness and all that is against sound doctrine and Godlyness: that we will
Repent of our sins, unfeignedly, and amend our lives, etc,] which the
Nonconformists take to be Lawful and Necessary things.

3. Thousands of people lived in the Kings Garrisons, or Quarters, and
thousands were then unborn or Children, who never took this Vow or Covenant,
nor ever heard or read it, or know what is in it.

4. The Parliament that imposed it on others took it voluntarily themselves, as
did many thousand more.

5. Many thousands took it that never saw the faces of each other, nor know in
what sense, or with what mind all others took it: The sense being doubtful, all
took it not in on sense: And many thought themselves not bound to take it in
the imposers sense, where the words might bear another; And so, its like,
thought the Royal party of the Nobility and Gentry, who took it at their
composition.

6. It was a Vow to God, as well as a Covenant with men (as the words show.)

7. The Controversy is not, 1. Whether it was Lawfully Imposed, 2. Or whether
it was Lawfully Taken, 3. Or whether it bind as a League, 4. Nor whether it
bind to any unlawful thing (which all renounce) But, 5. Whether as a Vow made
to God, it bind to things necessary (as against Schism, Profaneness, Popery: to
Repent, etc.) to which men were before bound by other obligations. Nor whether
they that took it not be bound by it to repent, etc. but whether no one person
in the three Kingdoms, who took it, be so bound: And that since the Scots drew
his Majesty to seem to own it (which we judge they did unlawfully.)

II. All Parents who will have their Children baptized, must submit them to the
sign of the Cross, as it is after described. And so must all that are to be
baptized at age submit themselves to it.

III. All persons that have Children to be baptized must conform as follows
1. They must procure three persons to be Godfathers and Godmother, who must
personally present the Child to be baptized, and must promise and Vow to God in
the Child's name the duties of the Covenant, and must in the name of the Child
say [that he renounceth the Devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of
the world etc, and that he steadfastly believes all the articles of faith, that
he will he baptized and that he will obediently keep Gods holy will and
Commandments, etc.] Not that they believe, consent etc, but that he (the Child)
does believe, desire, etc. And it is not a mere promise for the future [I will
believe and renounce, etc.] but a profession for the present time [I do believe
steadfastly and I do renounce] And in the Catechism it is said that [Repentance
whereby they forsake sin, and faith whereby they steadfastly believe etc, are
required of persons to be baptized (and not only that have been baptized) And
yet that Infants that cannot do this are to be baptized, because [they promise
them by their sureties,] and it is not said because they profess to do them at
present by their sureties.

2. The Child is baptized upon the undertaking of these persons as sponsors or
Covenanters, whose parts and duties are thus expressed, [To see that this
Infant be taught so soon as he shall be able to learn, what a solemn Vow,
promise and profession he has here made by you; and that he may know these
things the better, ye shall call upon him to hear sermons, and chiefly ye shall
provide that he may learn the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten
Commandments, in the vulgar tongue, and all other things which a Christian
ought to know and believe to his souls health; and that this Child may be
brought up to lead a Godly and a Christian life.]

3. The Conformists here are not agreed themselves, what that subjective
individual Faith, renu^ciation and desire are which the Infant at present
PROFESSES by his sureties: It is not that the Infant does actually believe
himself for the Catechism confesses that he does not. Nor is there any
probability that he does, unless by miracle unknown. And if it be any ones
faith else that the Infant then Professes which is Imputatively his own, it is
not agreed whose faith that is or must be; whether the Godfathers, or the
Churches, and what Churches; whether that Congregations, or the Diocesan
Churches, or the National Churches, or the Universal Church? or whether it must
be the Parents, Adopters or Owners of the Child.

4. Though the Godfathers be not by words to promise their Parts, yet standing
purposely there as undertakers of it, and hearing the Minister expressly tell
them what their PART and DUTY is, their coming and standing in that relation,
is a plain signification of consent, and rendereth them obliged Covenanters or
Sponsors.

5. These sponsors are not obliged to profess that the Child is theirs by
Adoption or any propriety: And so far is any such adopting or owning from their
purposes, that we never in all our lives knew any Godfather or Godmother as
such, (not having before taken the Child as theirs on other reasons) that ever
became a sponsor with such a signified intent.

6. In most Country Parishes that we have known, a great part of the
Communicants, seem Ignorant themselves of what is to be undertaken for the
baptized, (as we judge by our trial where we have lived, and the credible
report of other Pastors:) And too many notoriously live themselves in a course
of life contrary to what is to be undertaken for the Child.

7. In all our lives we never knew one person that undertook this Office of
Godfather or Godmother who beforehand gave the Parents any credible promise or
signification, that they had any purpose at all to perform, what the Church
Charge on them, and they there undertake as their parts and duties.

8. Nor did we ever know one in all our lives that as a Godfather or Godmother
did perform it; viz. [To see themselves that the Child be taught his C^venant
as soon as he is able to learn, and to provide that he be taught all before
recited, his Creed, etc. and all things which a Christian ought to know and
believe to his souls health; and that he b^vir^uo^sly brought up to lead a
godly and a Christian life: But they leave them to the Parents.

9. No man can compel another to be Godfather or Godmother.

10. All such undertakers that we have known have been of some of these
following sorts: 1. Either g^orant persons that knew not, or careless that
considered not what they did: 2. Or persons that mist^^k the sense of the
Church, and thought that they were but the representers of the Parents, and
that what they promised, it was not they* but the Parents that were bound to
perform: 3. Or Nonconformists (in this point) who purposed before hand to be
but the Parents R^p^esentatives, and that the promise and obligation should all
be devolved from them on the Parents, though they knew the Church meant
otherwise; and that they were not bound to the Churches sense; and therefore
their standing to hear [this is your part] was no consent to take it for their
part. And none of all these do answer the Churches sense in their undertaking:
And if we are commonly baptized and made Christians in a way of false Vowing or
Covenanting of such persons, or of ^^lus^^y Equ^vocation, it is not well.

11. We know not where Parents can procure any to undertake this Office as the
Church imposes it, that cred^^ly signify themselves able and willing to
perform^^: we could not do it our selves were we never so desirous: Perhaps
some Rich men might hire others to take their Children into their Care and
Education, as must be promised; but who would do so for the poor? yea for all
the poor of England? And the Nonconformists are not satisfied that it is lawful
to engage any in a perfidious covenanting before God, when beforehand they
have no credible signification of any purpose to perform it. Nay, when the
Parent resolves to educate his own Child, and not to trust him to the
Provision or care of others.

12. The Minister Covenanting [to use the form in the Book of Common Prayer
prescribed in administration of the Sacraments, and no other] Can. 36. No
Parent may speak a word in the name of his own Child, nor to enter him there
into the Covenant of God, nor profess that he offers him to Baptism by virtue
of, and in confidence in the promise [I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed in their Generations;] Nor to promise himself what the Godfathers are to
promise: The words also of the Can. 29. are these; [No Parent shall be urged to
be PRESENT, nor be admitted to answer as Godfather for his own Child: Nor any
Godfather or Godmother shall be suffered to make any other answer or speech
than by the Book of Common Prayer is prescribed in that behalf.

13. It is the Godfathers work also (by the Liturgy) to take care that the
Child be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed by him (in the manner of the
Church of England) as soon as he can say the Creed, Lords Prayer, and ten
Commandments, and be further instructed in the Church Catechism; which
Godfathers use not at all to perform; nor do the Parents use to expect it: Nor
does one Child of a multitude understand what the Baptismal Covenant is, of
many a year after they have learned to say the said Catechism.

14. That the Godfathers stand not there as the Representers of the Parents is
evident (according to the sense of the Church) because the Parent himself is
not suffered to do it, or speak one covenanting word; nor must be urged to be
present; nor are they to speak in the Parents name in any of their
undertakings; Nor is there the least intimation that the Church takes the
Sponsor for the Parents Representative.

15. The Parents are to be admonished not to defer the Baptism of their
Children longer than the first or second Sunday, unless upon a great and
reasonable cause to be approved by the Curate (whether they can get
understanding, credible Godfathers or not:) These are the Matters of Fact.

Here note 1. That there is no Controversy between the Conformists and
Nonconformists, whether Christians Infants should be baptized: 2. Nor whether a
Conformists baptizing be valid: 3. Nor whether the Parents presence be
absolutely necessary, and another may not speak in his name: 4. Nor whether
Adopters, or any Proprieters may not covenant for the Child: 5. Nor whether the
old Sponsors be lawful, who 1. Witnessed the credibility of the Parent; 2. And
undertook the Christian Education of the Child, if the Parents should either
die or apostatize: The Nonconformists are against no such Sponsors, though they
think that their Children have right to Baptism without such. 6. Nor do they
deny that Baptism in the Parish* Churches is valid and lawful as to the Parents
and Godfathers, if they do but agree on the Nonconformists way, that the
Sponsors shall but represent the Parents, and that they be not bound by the
contrary judgment of the Authors of the Liturgy to the contrary. But the
questions are 1. Whether a Christians Child, whose Parents have no way
forfeited their credit, have not right to Baptism, without other Godfathers. 2.
Whether the Parent should not solemnly enter his own Child into the Covenant of
God (as well as in times of Circumcision.) And whether any Parent should be
forbidden it, viz. to appear and speak as the Representer of the Child, or
Undertaker for him, and Promiser of his Education. 3. Whether that Child must
profess by another, that He Himself Believes, Renounceth, Repents and
Desires Baptism: And it be not rather to be prosessed that he is the seed of a
Believing, Penitent Parent, whose Will is as his Will, and is under God's
Promise [I will he thy God, and the God of thy seed.] 4. Whether a Christian
Parent may consent to the persidious undertaking of any Godfathers, who give
him not the least reason to believe that they intend that provision for the
Children which they undertake: Or else may let his Child be unbaptized till he
can get such a credible Undertaker; which is never like to be with most, or
many. 5. Whether the Children of Heathens, or Infidels, or Atheists, have right
to Baptism upon the presentation of any Godfather, who never adopteth them, or
takes them for his own, nor gives any credible notice that he really
intends to educate those Children as pro forma he seems to undertake: Or
whether such Children are truly said to believe, because the Godfather, or
Minister, or Congregation, or Diocese, or Nation, or Catholic Church believe.

III. The Nonconformists are not of one mind about receiving the Lords Supper
Kneeling; Many judge it Lawful, though neither necessary nor most eligible were
they free; some judge it also most eligible: And some judge it, as things
stand, unlawful: Their reasons are.

1. In doubtful cases duty lies on the surest side: But this to them is a
doubtful case on one side, and to imitate Christ's institution by such sitting
as men use to do at meat, is certainly Lawful.

2. Because they think this Kneeling violateth the reasons of the second
Commandment, being used where, by whole Countries of Papists round about us,
and many among us it signifies Bread-Worship or Idolatry by the same Action at
the same season used. For they suppose that the second Commandment forbids
Images, as being External, Corporal, Idolatry, and Symbolizing scandalously
with Idolators though the mind intend the worshipping of the true God alone. And
such they think this kneeling is, and that it encourages the Papists (as is
instanced in a story in the Life of Bishop Hall.)

3. Because they think that the Tradition and Custom of the Catholic Church
and the C^nons of the greatest General Councils not repealed by any other (as
Nic. 1. Can. 20. and Can. Trull. etc,) are of stronger obligation than the
Canons of our Convocation. And those Canons, Customs and tradition prohibit
all Adoration by Gen^flection on any Lords day in the year, and on any week day
else between Easter and Whits^^tide; And this custom continued 1000 years as the
Tradition of the Universal Church; and was never repealed but charged by
degrees by contrary practice: They that think not that they are bound by these
Canons or Customs at all, yet think that they are enough to nullify a contrary
Canon of a lower power; or ad hominem may excu^e them. Yea the Constitutions
called the Apostles, seem to Command all the people to receive the Sacrament
standing and to go for it Lib. 2. Cap. 57. Having prescribed the order of
worship (that after the old Scriptures read, they sing a Psalm and then read
the Acts and Epistles and the Gospels, and then that the Presbyters one by one
exhort the people first and the Bishop last (for in those time every Church
that had an Altar had a Bishop) he concludes [Postea vero fiat sacrificium,
cuncto populo Stante and silent^o precant^, and oblatione facta, quisque ordo
sco^ sim corpus Domini and preciosum sanguinem sumat, accedentes ordine cum
pudore and reverentia ut ad corpus Regis. I^em mulieres operto capite, ut
ordiaem earum decet, acc dant that is [After let the sacrifice be made, all the
people standing and praying in silence: And the oblation being mad^ let every
order apart take the body of Christ and his precious bl^od: Coming to it in
order with modesty and reverence as to the body of the King. And let the women
approach with covered heads as becomes their order.]

For such reasons as these set together, some Nonconformists, (Lay and Clergy)
take this Kne^ling (while Papists about us by the same gesture adore the Bread)
to be unlawful, who yet profess as great Reverence to Christ and the Eucharist
as any others.

But other Nonconformists say that they can answer all these arguments. But
that they truly render the scruples of the dissenters tolerable, and the
persons unmeet to be therefore excommunicate.

2. By the Canon and Rubric, no one of these dissenters must be admitted to
the holy Communion, Can. 27. Says [No Minister when he celebrateth the
Communion shall wittingly administer the same to any, but to such as kneel,
under pain of suspension*] And the Ministers Covenant to use no form of
administering the Sacraments but according to the Liturgy.

V. The Rubric after Confirmation says [There shall none be admitted to the
holy Communion, till such time as he be confirmed, or be Ready and Desirous to
be confirmed. So that desire of Confirmation in the English way, is made a
necessary Condition of Communion.

2. The public owning of the Baptismal Covenant, is that which the
Nonconformists are so far from being against, that they take it with a serious
Confirmation thereupon to be the meet way of transition from the Infant state
of Church Membership, into that of the Adult: and the most Congruous means of
uniting dissenters about Church discipline, and of preventing Anabaptistry that
can be found out. But many sober Christians are unsatisfied with the English
way of Confirmation, 1. Because they find it so like to that Confirmation which
the Papists have made a Sacrament, and which very many Beyond Sea Protestants
have written against: vide Dallaeum de confirmat. 2* Because it is made the
proper work of a Diocesan, and wholly denied to the Parochial Pastors; And
because those Diocesans know not ordinarily whether the persons be meet or
unmeet to be confirmed, being strangers to them; for how can they know all the
persons, men, women and such Children of so many Parishes as a Diocese does
contain: (some Diocesses having above a thousand Parishes others many hundred:
One above 100 miles in Length, and others, very great)? Its true, that the
Minister of the Parish is bid to Catechize them, and to bring or send in
writing the names of such as he thinks fit for Confirmation. But 1. This is not
ordinarily done: but Children in our time have used to run together to a bishop
when he came into the Country on that work, without the Ministers Certificate
or Godfathers; and none, that ever we knew of, that came for Confirmation in
this manner, was refused: And as the Bishop never saw or knew one of the
multitude whom he Confirms, so he takes not time so far to examine them as
to give him rational satisfaction of their fitness: Nor indeed can he possibly
do it for one of a multitude of so large Diocesses, when most great Parishes
are too big for a present Minister who is acquainted with them better than a
strange Diocesan can be: How can a man that has so many other employments as
Diocesans have find leisure, were he never so willing, to examine so many
hundred thousands as are in this Diocese? or so many score thousands as are in
many others? 3. And as the Ministers rarely certify according to the Canon, so
the Bishop is not tied to take his consent, but may thus impose confirmed
persons on his Communion, though he know them to be never so ignorant or
unmeet. 4 And it is Children that are thus to be confirmed, who rarely ever
come so young to own with any tolerable understanding and seriousness, their
Baptismal Covenant. Few of us by experience can say, that we did it of many
years after that we had learned the Lords Prayer etc. 5. And no other
qualification is necessary, but that he learn the Creed, Lords-Prayer,
Decalogue, and Church Catech^sm, the bare words of which are learnt by rote by
multitudes of Children, who understand little or nothing of what they say: We
do not find, that if persons stay unconfirmed till they are adult, that any
Heresy or wickedness of life, is a bar to their confirmation; much less are
they required to bring any testimony, that they live according to their
B^ptismal Covenant. 6. And as far as we can learn, it is but a very small part
of this Kingdom in comparison of the rest, that ever were confirmed. 7. Nor
know we many Ministers that ever examined their people generally, whether they
were ready and willing to be confirmed.

VI. The Nonconformable Laity are ejected from the Communion of the Church, and
their Children (that are disposed of by them) from Baptism* Christendom and
Christian burial, if not from salvation, as far as in the Church lies; and
those that affirm themselves to be Nonconformists are by the Church Laws
excommunicated ipso facto, though they should desire Communion.

2. That no Minister is to admit them to the Sacramental Communion is before
showed from Can. 27. And also that their Children are not to be baptized,
unless they will submit them to the dedicating sign of the Cross; no nor to be
buried with Christian Burial (of which more afterward.)

3. If they have a Minister in their own Parish that never preaches, or so bad
as that they dare not commit the Pastoral care of their souls to him, they must
not be admitted to Communion, in any other neighbor Parishes, Can. 28.

That they are ipso facto excommunicated, shall be anon showed.

SECT. IX.
The Matters of Fact that concern the Conformity and Nonconformity of the
Ministers: And 1. of Ass^nt, Consent and Subscription that nothing is contrary
to God's Word.
1. THE Canon to be subscribed (36th) willingly and ex animo is That the Book
of Common Prayer, and of ordaining of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, contains
in it NOTHING CONTRARY TO THE WORD OF GOD; and that he himself will use the
form in the said Book prescribed in public Prayers and Administration of the
Sacraments, and none other.

2. The meaning of this subscription is not agreed of by the Conformists that
take it: As to the first clause, some say that by [Nothing Contrary to the
word] is meant as it is spoken, [Nothing] indeed. Others say by [Nothing] is
meant [Nothing which I have discerned so to be: Or [Nothing, except such
failings as all humane writings are liable to.] And by [Contrary] Some say
[Contrary in the Common sense of the word] is meant: But others say that by
[Contrary] is meant [so far Contrary as should drive us from Communion with the
Church] or [Contrary to any great doctrine or precept of the Word of God. And
the Nonconformists interpret it as the first sort do, according to the usual
and proper meaning of the words.

3. So the later clause, [that he himself will use that form in public prayer
and administration of the Sacraments and none other;] Dr. Heylin and very many
others suppose is meant properly as is spoken viz. That by the form is meant
all the words and orders, and that by public prayer is meant as is spoken, All
public prayer used by a Minister in the public assemblies] And that by [None
other] is meant [neither, wholly nor in part.] But others think that by [Form]
is meant only [the form of words, and not the orders] And that by [none other]
is meant only [No other Book of Common Prayer or set Liturgy.] Or [No other
entire form and order excluding this;] And that it does not mean [No other form
before or after Sermon in the Pulpit, or in some parts of Worship, so it be of
our own Composure:] Nor yet that we may not use sometime some other order than
is prescribed in the Rubricks, viz. 1. Sometime read other Chapters than the
Calender prescribes, because that Liberty is expressed in the Preface to the
second Book of Homilies: 2. Sometimes to give the Sacrament to some that kneel
not: 3. To baptize some without the Cross, etc. (of which more hereafter)
Because the Rubric says only [you shall do thus] but says not [you shall do
no otherwise.] But to this the former sort answer 1. That if any universal
Negative (none other) may be particularly or limitedly interpreted upon our own
surmises, no Laws, Covenants or Promises signify any thing, and no words are
intelligible: 2. That we subscribe strictly to this Article (to use no other
form,) But not so to the Book of Homilies, but only that we take it for wholesome
Doctrine: 3. That if the Rubric for Crossing, Kneeling, etc. exclude not all
other inconsistent forms of administration, it signifies nothing, but leaves
every man to his own will.

4. It is yet a greater doubt with the Conformists themselves, whether these
words be not at least a Covenant that They will use no other printed prescribed
Liturgy. And so some think that it plainly obliges them not to use those
printed Forms which the Archbishops and Bishops have used to draw up and
impose, for several Public Fasts, Thanksgivings, and particular occasions. But
others think that it does not bind them to disobey the Bishops therein: but
that such exceptions were intended though not expressed, or at least had been
inserted if not forgotten.

II. The Act of Uniformity requires that every Minister that officiates [Do
openly and publicly before the Congregation there assembled, declare his
unseigned Assent and Consent to the Use of all things in the Book contained and
prescribed, in these words and no other [I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned
Assent and Consent to all and every thing contained and prescribed, in and by
the Book eat^tuled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments and other R^tes and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use
of the Church of England; together with the Ps^^ter or Psalms of David pointed
as they are to be sung or said in Churches, and the form or m^^^er of making,
ordaining and consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons.] And page 10. [He
shall declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent unto, and Approbation of the
said Book, and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and
Orders therein contained and prescribed according to the form aforesaid.]

2. The Conformists themselves are not agreed of the meaning of these plain
words, One party expounding them as the Nonconformists do, according to the
properest and ordinary use of the words, and the other party otherwise. The
former hold that as many Acts of Parliament Contein more in the body of the Act
than in the Title, and make the means more extensive than the end, so here the
ASSENT and CONSENT to the USE of the Book is the END in the first clause, and
APPROBATION also in the second: And that the Declaring that form of words is
the Means to that end: That Assent signifies Assent to the Truth] and [Consent
and Approbation] relate to the Goodness, rectitude and use] And that this is
not only of the Prayers and other parts which the subscriber is to Read to the
people but as is expressed [of all things (without exception] Contained in and
prescribed by it; particularly* to all the Prayers, Rites, Ceremonies, Forms
and Orders;] without collusion or equivocation.

The other part hold, that all this signifies no more, but that [I Assent that
I may lawfully use, and I Consent to use, so much as belongs to my place, and
that I will not unpeaceably oppose it.] Their argument is, Because [to the
Use,] is mentioned before the Form of words. To which the other answer as
before, that 1. That Approbation is mentioned after as well as Use. 2. That the
Means are larger than the end: As in the Corporation Act, the end is the
preventing of Rebellion; but the Means is Declaring that [There is no
obligation on me or any-other from that Oath.] 3. That without gross violence
Assent can be judged to mean no less than [Assenting that it is true.] 4. That
there is not a'word in the Book which was not intended for some Use: And
therefore, to Assent, Approve and Consent to the Use, is more than merely to
Assent to the Truth: The Preface has its Use; and the Calendar its Use, and
the Rubric its uses, and the rest of the parts their several Uses; But did we
believe it to be false, how could we Approve it, or of what Use would it be? 5.
To put all out of doubt the Parliament Men long ago told us (none Contradicting
it to us) that into another Bill, the house of Lords added a Proviso that the
Declaration in the Act of Uniformity should be understood but as obliging men
to the Use of it; and that the House of Commons refusing, at a Conference about
it, they gave in such Reasons against that sense and proviso to the Lords, upon
which they did acquiesce, and cast it out.

III. By this General Declaration we are obliged to Assent to (as true) to
Approve and to Use these words after the Calender, [Rules to know when the
Moveable Feasts and Holydaies begin. Easter Day (on which the rest depend) is
always the first Sunday after the first full Moon, which happens next after
the one and twentieth day of March.]

2. This Rule is false: As 1. Every Almanac will show: 2. The Table following
to find out Easter Day for ever: 3. And the practice of our Church, that
keeps Easter on another day.

3. To consent to Use this, is to consent to keep Easter Day, contrary to all
Christian Churches, and contrary to another Rule in the same Book; and to
consent to use both Rules, is to consent to keep two Easter-days in one year;
and so of Easter Term.

4. Hereupon some Conformists say, that [Assenting to, Approving of, and
Consenting to All things contained and prescribed.] signifies but [as to
humane, fallible writings, so far as there is no mistake] or [Assenting and
Consenting to be peaceable.] But others say that it is but [to Assent that it
is true where it is not false, and Appr^ve it as good where it is not bad; and
to Consent to use it where I have no cause to the contrary.] And they ask, 1.
Whether this be the usual or proper signification of such words? 2. Whether any
Nonconformists would refuse it in that sense. 3. Whether they will give leave
to the Papists and all other subjects to take the Oath of Allegiance in such a
kind of sense and exposition.

But there is one that has defended this as true, and tells us that by the
[full moon] is not meant that which we call the full moon, or the same that is
meant in the other parts of the Book, but by the full moon is meant [the mean
Conjunction] and [the fourth of April that year 1664. Or [14 days after the
ancient new moon found by the Golden number the 14th day of the Ecclesiastical
Cylclic month] For an old Mass Book says [Post veris aequinoctium Quaere
plenilunium and Dominica proxima sacrum celebra Pascha: Non v^rius inveneris si
mill legas Codices.]

Quest. 1. Are we sure this Mass Book meant not pleniluniam as we do properly?

Quest. 2. And are we sure they erred not that wrote this?

Quest. 3. And yet are you sure what they meant?

Quest. 4. Would you persuade us that our Convocation now borrowed their
Direction from this Mass Book?

Quest. 5. Are you sure that this Mass Book should be our rule herein of
speaking or interpreting?

Quest. 6. And yet not in the Calendar and other passages in our Liturgy?

Quest. 7. Did the the Convocation intend that we should not here understand
[The full moon] properly, nor as in all the rest of the Book?

Quest. 8. If this defender be in the right, was there ever a plainer way made
to bring all men to an Implicit Faith, to believe as the Convocation believes,
even in Calendars, when we know not what they believe themselves. For my part I
must confess that after all this Dr. (Pell they say) has said of another sense
of the word [full Moon] I know not yet what he means. Qu. Whether the
Convocation meant that none should Preach Christ's Gospel that understood not
this strange sense of the [full Moon] that is [no full Moon] and yet would not
by one line expound it to us, to keep us from being cast out and ruined? Or
whether they meant that all men should be forced and taught to subscribe or
declare assent to that which they never understood? when I had never yet the
advantage of speaking with one Bishop or conformable Dr. that understood the
word [full Moon] as this Doctor taught them (whether in good earnest I know
not.) And if our Conformity must be thus performed, by equivocation implicitly,
contrary to the common sense of mankind, we shall yet suspend it, till we know
how much further we have to go, if it be blindfold that we must be led; and
refer all to God our final Judge, whose judgment we are near.

4. We Assent to, Approve of and Consent to, these words in the Preface [we are
fully persuaded in our judgments (and we here profess it to the world) that
the Book as it stood before established by Law; does not contein in it any
thing contrary to the Word of God, or to sound Doctrine, or which a Godly man
may not with a good Conscience Use and submit unto, or which is not fairly
defensible against any that shall oppose the same, etc.] 2. Psalm. 105. 28. The
words in the Liturgy and old Translation are [They were not obedient to his
word] And the new Translation according to the Hebrew is [They rebelled not
against his word] Clear contrary: Therefore the Nonconformists think that one
of them is Contrary to the word of God (and this old Translation is Continued
still in the Church.) 3. In the old Book in the Gospels these texts are thus
translated Romans 12. 2. Epist. to 1. sunday after Epiph. [Be ye changed in your
shape:] The new Translation is [Be transformed by the renewing of your mind]
Phil. 2. 7. Epist. for sunday next before Easter [found in his apparel as a
man:] In the new Translation it is (Was made in the likeness of men.] Gal. 4.
Ep. to 4th sunday in Lent, It is [Mount Sinai is Agar in Arabia and bordereth
on the City which is now called Jerusalem.] In the new Translation it is [For
this Agar was mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is.]
Mathews day Ep. 2. Cor. 4. The old Book has it [We go not out of kind.] The new
is [We faint not.] John. 2. for third Sunday in Lent [When men be drunk] is the
old Books Translation: But the new is [When men have well drunk] Luke 11. for
third Sunday in Lent, the old Book has [When one house does fall upon another]
the new has [A house divided against an house falls.] Luke 1. for the
Annunciation; the old Book says [This is the sixth month which was called
barren] in the new Translation it is [This is the sixth mouth with her who was
called barren. If one of these be God's Word, the Nonconformists think that the
other is contrary to it. 4. In the old Book in the Psalms there are whole
verses left out, which are in the Hebrew Text, and our new Translation* and
diverse translated in a quite different sense the former following the
Septuagint. 5. The Rubric for Christmas day is [Then shall follow the Collect
of the Nativity, which shall be said continually unto New Years day.] And the
Collect for all these several days is [A^mighty God, which have given us thine
only begotten Son to take our Nature upon him, and THIS DAY to be born of a
pure Virgin. So the Collect on Whitsunday is [God which upon this day, etc.]
The Rubric is, [The same Collect to be read Monday and Teesday.] So on
Christmas day, and seven days after [Because thou have given Jesus Christ
thine only Son to be born as on this day for us, etc.] And on Whitsunday, and
six days after [According to whose most true promise the Holy Ghost came down
this day from Heaven.] These things, and such other we must approve in the
foresaid Approbation of all things in the old Common Prayer Book.

V. We must Assent, Approve, and Consent to all the mis-translations in the
present Liturgy, as well as to justify the old Edition: That beforecited Psalm.
105. 28. is in the present Book, and so are the rest of the omissions and
differences in the Psalms before mentioned, which are many. Different
Translations which have all the same sense, may be all called God's Word,
because their sense is so: But where they have different senses, so far one of
them is contrary to God's Word: For God's Word is one and true, and not
contrary to it self. The question is not whether these faulty Translations were
not a good work, and a great mercy to the Church, till we had a better? Nor
whether they may not be lawfully used where there is no better? Yea or where
there is a better, if the Command of Governors, or Concord, make it best for
that time and place. But it is, Whether all the faults of the Translation may
be Assented, Approved and Consented to? We commit some failings and sins every
day, but we may not Approve of them, and profess that we Consent so to do.

2. Some Conformists here think that the Declaration is to be taken properly,
without any force or distorting, and they say that both Translations are
justifiable, because one follows the Hebrew, and the other the Septuagint,
and Christ and his Apostles have justified both by using them. But others of
them hold that this instance proves that by [All things] Assented and
consented to, must be meant only [All things that are not by humane frailty
mistaken, or erroneous] or else, that by Assenting and Approving must be meant
no more than Assenting that they may be Used: And so they consent with the
Nonconformists in the matter, but not in the exposition of the words. And to
the former they say, 1. That there are other mistranslations, besides those
that follow the septuagint. 2. That Christ and the Apostles by citing some
Texts according to the septuagint, do not thereby approve of all the rest; for
they cite others otherwise. 3. That by citing them, they justify not always
the translation, but only the sense so far as it is cited for, it being that
scripture which the people then commonly used.

3. And they say that if this objection should hinder men's Assenting to the
Liturgy, it might as well hinder their Assenting to the Bible in our
translations. And indeed we know no Nonconformist who would declare or
subscribe that he does Assent to, Approve and Consent to all things Contained
in the Bible according to any Translation, but only all things Contained in the
Bible as it was delivered by the sacred writers, and in all Translations so far
as they truly signify or express that to us. But if they might but say, as one
part expounds the Declaration, [We Assent, etc. To all things Contained, etc.
That are not by humane frailty mistaken] they would soon Conform herein.

6. The Calendar in the Common Prayer appoints the public reading of the
Books called Apocrypha beginning September 28. And so Continuing to November
24. Every day of the week, except the proper Lessons interposed. Part of the
Apocrypha to be read are the Book of Tobit, Judith, Bell, and the Dragon etc.

2. Learned Bishops and Divines of the Church of England have written to prove
that these Books are not only Aprocryphal but fabulous, and have manifest
untruths; As that the intralls of a fish will drive away all Devils and keep
them from returning: When Christ says [This kind goes not out but by Fasting
and Prayer] And when the Angel says that He was the son of Ananias of the
tribe of Napthali,] etc.

3. These Books are to be read just in the place and order as the Sacred
Scriptures are; and under the same title of the [First Lesson] Only called
Apocrypha in the Bibles. But 1. It is not appointed that the Priest tell the
people so: 2. If it were, they understand not Commonly what [Apocrypha]
signifies: 3. If they were sometime told it, they forget it; and apply not
that name to every Lesson that they thence hear. 4. It is not denied that the
sounder Books that are Apocrypha may be read in the Church as a Homily may be
with due notice of their difference from the Canonical Books: But the question
is whether not only they, but the Books proved fabulous by many Protestants,
may be there read, and that instead of so much of the holy Scripture then
omitted, and that without any better notice given to the Common people of the
difference. 5. And the chief doubt is, whether this may not only be done, but
also the Calendar as so appointing it, may be Approved of and Consented to by
us all.

7 It has been before opened, that no Parent is permitted to be Godfather to
his own Child; or to speak one word at his baptizing, to enter him into the
Covenant of God, or dedicate him to him, nor to promise in his name, nor to
undertake any part of his Christian education, nor so much as to be urged to be
present. Nor is there a word to intimate that the Godfathers represent the
Parent, or speak in his name or stead, but the contrary is employed. [Though the
Parents are to procure these God fathers. 2. It has also been before showed
how great a Controversy it is, whether Infants Right to Gods promises and
Church state, be not by that Covenant [I will be thy God and the God of thy
seed;] employed in 1. Cor. 7. 14. [els were your Children unclean but now are
they holy.] And so whether Infants have any right upon a Godfathers words
there, who never took them for, his own; if on the Parents account they have no
right. And whether such Godfathers act be truly the Child's in Gods account; 3.
And it was before enquired, In what sense this Godfather does (not promise only
that the Child shall believe at age, but) in the Child's name profess that he
does at present believe: And whether it be not enough [and much more necessary
then the Godfathers faith) that he be the Child of a believing Parent,
dedicating him to God. 4. And it has been showed that Godfathers promise
themselves partly to teach the Child, and partly to provide that he be taught
all that a Christian should learn as necessary to his souls health. 5. And that
these Godfathers never ordinarily, give the Parents the least reason to believe
that they have any purpose to do any such thing as they undertake: Which is
perfidiousness in the weightiest business: And 6. also that (as such) they are
no adopters or owners of the Child. 7. And also how hard it is for any Parents
ever to get better, seeing wiser and better will not undertake it in the
foresaid conformable sense. 8. The sense and use of Godfathers is partly known
by the Practice of Princes and great men, (who must be supposed to know best,
and be most righteous and exemplary) who usually by a Proxy are Godfathers to
the Children of Foreign Princes, or Great men, (perhaps Papists) whom they
never saw nor ever are like to see their Children. 9. Ministers must Assent
Approve of and Consent to, all this exclusion of the Parents, and presentation,
profession, undertaking and promise of the Godfathers, which the Liturgy
mentions; 10. Conformists are not agreed themselves, of the true Office and
undertaking of these Godfathers, nor of the Parents part, nor by whose right it
is that one Child rather than others is to be baptized, and whether any at all
should be refused by whomsoever (that is a Christian) offered thereunto.

8. The Rubric to which we must declare our Assent, Approbation and Consent,
has this Article of faith. [It is certain by Gods Word, that Children which
are baptized, dying before they commit actual sin are undoubtedly saved.] And
the Rubric at Buryal, excepteth all the unbaptized from Christian Burial,
according to the Office.

2. The Canon 68 and 69, suspendeth any Minister who shall refuse or delay to
Christen any Child without exception which is brought to the Church on Sundays
or Holydays to be Christened, according to the Form in the Common Prayer; or if
in case of danger he be desired to do it privately. Neither Rubric nor Canon
here except from Baptism and certainty of salvation, any Children of Turks,
Infidels, Heathens, and Atheists, or those whose Parents renounce Christianity,
and consent not to their Childrens Baptism; so be it any Godfathers as
aforesaid bring them.

3. The Conformists agree not of the sense of this Article of Faith: Some hold
that the word [Children here means not [All Children that are Baptized] but
some such only: But others affirm that this exposition is false, and contrary
to the plain importance of the words, for it is an Indefinite, say they, in re
necessaria, in the sense of the Book. And if the meaning be not [Children that
are Baptized, qua tales] it has no intelligible sense, the certainty of their
Salvation being Asserted as from Scripture, and not any other reason of it
given. But if this be the meaning (as it is) then a quatenus ad omnes valet
consequentia; unless any exception had been added, which is not.

4. Some say that it is implied that Children that had no right to Baptism are
excepted. But others say 1. That ubi lex non distinguit non est distinguendum.
The Church could have excepted if they would. 2. And that quod fieri non debet
factum valet. 3. Yea that all Children have right to Baptism, if any Christians
offer them to it.

5. Some confound the Ministers right to Baptize them, and the Infants right to
be Baptized; And this right as only in foro Ecclesiae, and as in foro Caeli; As
if all Baptized upon any of these rights were undoubtedly saved. But others
distinguish these, and say, 1. That the Minister may have right to Baptize one
if offered, that yet ought not to have been offered; which will not save an
incapable subject: 2. That the Children of Hypocrites have right Coram
Ecclesia, and that their Baptism ascertaineth to them no more than external or
common privileges; 3. And that only the Children of true believers have such a
right coram Deo as certainly saves them. But others say that both the last
sort are saved.

6. Some of them hold that All Infants in the world Baptized or not, are saved
by universal redemption, if they dye before actual sin: And that the Article
therefore affirms it of the Baptized. But others say, this cannot be the
sense: For 1. To say [All baptized] and mean [All unbaptized] or any [not as
Baptized] were not intelligible nor candid. 2. And the Burial Rubric excepting
the unbaptized from that Christian burial, shows the meaning of the Church in
this Article.

7. Also about the [undoubted certainty] they differ; some think that the
subscriber or Declarer does not by these words, profess that he himself is
[undoubtedly certain] of the salvation of all dying Baptized Infants; but only
that the thing is certainly revealed to be so in Gods Word. But others say,
that both objective and subjective (or personal) certainty must needs be meant:
And that it were too hard an imputation to say that the Church commands
uncertain, doubting men to profess that the thing is certain and undoubted of;
for how can they tell that it is so? And if they know it not to be so why
should they declare it to be so? The meaning is not [I declare that the
Convocation says it is certain;] for that were but the part of a crier or
reader: Nor is it I declare that it is certain to others, though not to me.]
For no man knows another certainty; Therefore it must mean that [I am
certain and past doubt by the Word of God] or [I see ascertaining evidence in
Gods Word putting it past doubt.] So that no uncertain or doubting person can
truly thus declare or subscribe.

8. Diverse of those Divines who are furthest from the Nonconformists, hold that
by the Scripture alone we cannot prove that Infants are at all to be Baptized;
and the Jns Baptismi must be proved before the salvation of the Baptized as
such: Others think it hard for that man to be certain by the Word of God that
all Baptized dying Infants are saved, who is not certain by that word that any
Insants should be Baptized.

9. Many of the most rash or self conceited, Ignorant men are readier to
profess [undoubted certainty] than they that are more humble, and know much
more than they. And it is not he that Hith most certainty who is now capable of
the Ministry, but he that dare profess most, whether he have it or not.

10. They that show less Learning, especially less knowledge in the Scripture,
far than many that dare not profess this undoubted certainty, are not like to
be more certain then they in this particular Article of faith.

11. We take it for Arrogance and Fanaticism in the Pope and his Council to
pretend Infallible certainty by a peculiar privilege, in those points in which
they are unstudyed and unlearned, as if they knew them by prophetical
inspiration. And when young unstudyed men have in this point attained to an
[undoubted certainty] which their wiser seniors cannot attain, it behooves them
to convince us of the truth of their Inspiration or special endowments, either
by a proportionable excellency above us in other things, or by some Miracles or
Testimonies from Heaven.

12. There is no one Word of God cited in the Rubric which tells us that It is
certain by the Word of God.

13. Among Christian Divines there are all these various opinions about the
salvation of Infants.

1. Some hold that the Covenant being to the faithful and their seed, and their
children being holy, all the children of sincere Christians are certainly in a
state of salvation, being by the parents intentionally dedicated to God, before
or without Baptism: And that Baptism is but their so lemn investiture in that
state which was theirs by right before.

2. Others think that this right to salvation belongs to the Children of all
professed Christians godly and ungodly,

3 Others think that it belongs to all Infants in the world.

4. Others think that it belongs only to sincere believers Children that are
Baptized.

5. Others, that it belongs to sound and unsound Christians baptized Infants.

6. Others that it belongs to all Baptized Infants whose soever.

7. Others hold that it belongs also to the Children of sincere Adopters or
Proprieters.

8. Others that it belongs to such as even bad Christians adopt or own.

9. Others that they that have sincere Godfathers, though not Proprieters, are
saved.

10. Others that even unfound or hypocritical Christian Godfathers, may suffice
to their salvation.

11. Others that the Ministers or the Churches sincere (or professed) Faith is
hereto sufficient.

12. And others think that only the Elect are saved, of whom some are baptized,
and some unbaptized, but no man knows who they are. Out of all these Opinions
the Convocation has chosen one, as an Article of Faith of undoubted Certainty
by the Word of God.

13. The Nonconformists know of no Word of God which ascertaineth Salvation to
any known determinate Infants, but the great Covenant of Grace, [I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed;] which seed God uses as if they were parts of
the Parents, Exodus 34. 6, 7. and second Commandment: And says to Believers
[Else were your children unclean; but now, etc.

14. Many Divines say, that Faith it self has not evidence; (though we think
that it has evidence of the Truth of the Revelation, though the thing revealed
be not visible or evident in it self:) And more confess that [undoubted
certainty] is not Essential to the saving belief of Christ, and of a life to
come: And that true Faith may be saving, though weak: And that Christ silenced
not his Disciples when he reproved the weakness of their Faith: And that to
doubt of this Article about Infants is not so dangerous as to doubt of Christ
or Heaven.

IX. All Ministers must deny Baptism to those Infants that have no such
Godfathers and Godmothers as aforesaid, though their Parents be true
Christians, and offer them to Baptism. For this is the only order or form of
Baptizing there described, all other is forbidden, and we subscribe to use no
other form in administration of the Sacraments. 2. Yet some Conformists say,
that the Book binds them to do thus, but not to omit it, and baptize no
otherwise. But others of them say, 1. That the Rubric determines that [for
every child to be baptized, there shall be three as Godfathers and Godmothers]
and that the whole Office respects them as Parties, and speaks to them, and
admits no Parent to speak; and that if Assenting to, Approving and
Consenting to this form and Rubric, and subscribing a Covenant to use no other
form, signify not that we will use no other, no words can bind such
equivocators. 3. In the sense of the Liturgy, to put Infants from Baptism, is
to deny them Christendom, membership of Christ, to be children of God, and to
be heirs of Heaven: For the Catechism says, that we are made such in Baptism,
which with the Rubric which denies them Christian burial, and that last
mentioned which affirms the undoubted salvation of the baptized, import a
denying salvation to all that have not such Godfathers, without Parents
sponsion: or at least a denying them [certainty of undoubted salvation] when it
was in the power of the Convocation or Priest to have given them such
certainty. 4. The Conformists do not affirm (that we know of) that any word of
God does institute or command the use of such Godfathers, or the foredescribed
exclusion of the Parents, much less both: And least of all that it makes these
necessary to Christendom and Salvation, yea or Church-reception: But it is used
as a Tradition or Law of men. 5. The Nonconformists therefore dare neither
Assent to, Approve, Consent to, Covenant, or Practice the resusal of the
Children of true Christians from Baptism, the Church and Salvation, on such a
cause as this. 6. The Anabaptists hence are hardened, and say, that if Infants
may be denied Baptism, till they have such Godfathers as God never instituted
they have no right to it at all, and they may deny it them till we prove God's
institution of Godfathers; especially where their title is laid upon such
Godfathers. 7 Some say that It is not the Minister that refuses them, but the
Church which makes the Law: But others say, that it is both the Lawmakers, and
the Minister, unless we could prove that Baptizing and judging whom to Baptize
is none of the Ministers office, no nor the Bishops; but that the Priest is to
baptize all, and only such as the Law or Convocation bids him baptize, as a
mere executioner, and the Bishop also such as he is appointed by the same Law.
That else the same Rule would hold for his Preaching, Praying, etc.

X. The like proofs (which we need not repeat) will show, that no Minister must
baptize any person, Infant or Adult, without the transient Image of a Cross,
and that to this we must assent and consent, and subscribe to baptize in no
other form.

2. And the same reasons aforegiven show how great a penalty this is, as
excluding them from Christendom and Salvation in the Churches judgment, or from
certainty at least.

3. Some Conformists say here also, that they assent only to baptize with the
Cross, but not to baptize no otherwise: But others of them reprove this
exposition from the Rubric, and the aforecited Canonical Subscription, as that
which would leave the Priest at liberty to do almost what he list, when the
Church thinks that they have obliged him, and his Subscription has secured his
Obedience.

4. And some of them say, that it is not the Priest that refuses them, for he
would Baptize them (with the Cross) if the parent sent the Child or the Adult
person came. But we need not strive about the word: The thing we are agreed of,
viz. That the Priest consents not to Baptize them, who dare not receive it
with the use of the Cross: Whether this be to be called a rejecting them, or
denying them Baptism, unless they will be so crossed, we need not call for
extraordinaty accurateness to judge.

5. No Conformists do pretend that this use of this Image of the Cross, is of
divine institution: But all confess that Baptism is of divine institution; and
that Christ has Commanded Math. 28. 19. 20. That they that are discipled
should be Baptized; and that one may be a disciple of Christ, without the Image
of the Cross:

6. Some of the Nonconformists hold their use of the Cross it self here
unlawful: But others that would venture to use it rather than be silenced, yet
fear the guilt of denying Baptism, Christendom and certain salvation (as the
Church judges) to all that dare not receive it, or present their Children to
receive it; believing that murdering natural life is a less hurt than undoing
souls.

7. But Covenanting by deliberate subscription and declaration to do it, how
often soever, they fear more than the actual doing of it rarely; not daring to do
their part to damn the Children of all that are against Baptizing with the
Cross, nor all the unbaptized adult that are of that opinion.

XI. And as they fear rejecting such as will not be so Crossed, from Baptism: so
they much fear the English use of the Cross themselves; and that much more than
Crossing our selves on ordinary occasions, or setting up Crosses on our doors
or Churches or by the high ways; and yet much more than they fear such using
of the Cross as Augustine de Civ. Dei, and other ancients mention, as an open
Indication to Heathens that we are not ashamed of a Crucified Christ: Much less
are they against civil uses of a Cross.

2. The name [Sacrament] signifying primarily any solemnization of a Covenant
by Oath and Ceremony (as the sacramentum militare among the Romans) especially
a Covenant which engages one in a new relation, and more largely any sacred
mystical Ceremony, the question here is whether the Cross be not made (not only
a sacrament in a larger sense, as ordination and Matrimony may be called
sacraments) but even a sacrament of the Covenant of grace, or so very near it
as to have the greatest part of that sacramental nature.

3. The Church Catechism defines a Divine sacrament thus, (An outward and
visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given to us, ordained by Christ
himself as a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us
thereof.

4. That it be ordained by Christ himself is not essential to a sacrament in
genere, but to a sacrament of Gods making in specie as distinct from one that's
made by man; as is evident in the reason of the name.

5. The true nature of this Crossing is known by the Liturgy, 2. And the Canon.
1. The Liturgy appoints it to be used at Baptism, not as a part of our
Baptism, but as a thing added, immediately after the words [I Baptize thee
etc.] even in our Covenanting with God: 2. It thus describes and appoints
it, [we receive this Child into the Congregation of Christ's flock, (here the
Priest shall make a Cross upon the forehead) and do sign him with the sign of
the Cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith
of Christ Crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner, against sin, the
world and the devil: and to continue Christ's faithful servant and soldier unto
his lives end, Amen.

2. The Rubric to which we Assent and Consent, refers us to the 30th Canon,
as giving us the true explication thereof, and the just reasons, etc. The Canon
says [Christians signed their Children therewith when they were Christened, to
dedicate them by that badge to his service, whose benefits bestowed on them in
Baptism the name of the Cross did represent.] The Church of England accounts
it a lawful outward Ceremony, and honorable badge, whereby the Infant is
dedicated to the service of him that dyed on the Cross, as by the words used in
the Common Prayer it may appear.

3. The Liturgy's Preface of Ceremonies says [that they serve to a godly
discipline, and are such as be apt to stir up the dull mind of man, to the
remembrance of his duty to God by some notable and special signification,
whereby he might be edifyed.]

4, We suppose that here 1. The sign is the transient Image of the Cross used
in Gods service. 2. The particular service in which it is used, is our
Baptismal Covenanting with God: 3. The thing signified by the sign it self is
the Cross, and passion of Christ. 4. The thing signified by the Receiving of it
is, that we do as Covenanters profess and oblige our selves not to be ashamed
to confess the faith of Christ Crucified, and manfully to fight under his
banner against sin, the world and the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful
servants and soldiers to our lives end. And that by this we are dedicated to
God; And that we take it as an honorable badge hereof. 5. Note that the
Minister speaks as Gods Officer from him, and does not represent the Child,
nor speak as in his name; that being the part assigned to the Godfathers; And
the thing signified by him in his using this sign is, that he does as Christ's
Minister dedicate him by this sign, to the service of him that dyed on the
Cross, the name whereof represents the benefits bestowed on him in Baptism,
(which are all the benefits of that Covenant) and to oblige him to this end,
not to be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ Crucified, and manfully to
fight under his banner (as aforesaid;) And that this be a badge or symbol of
his Christian profession.

5. The great fear of the Nonconformists is, lest this be a second sacrament of
the Covenant of graee made by man added to Baptism, or at least have most of
the nature and uses of it; And lest Christ will take it as an invasion of his
prerogative so to use it, and to make a new badge or symbol of our
Christianity; As the King would take it ill of one that would without him, make
a badge or symbol for his subjects as subjects, or of the order of the Knights
of the Garter as such. And the rather, because it is the use of an Image,
(though transient) in Gods Worship, and to such high ends.

XII. The Rubric which we must Assent, Approve and consent to, says, that
[There shall none be admitted to the holy Communion, till such time as he be
confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be confirmed,] that is, In the manner
prescribed by the Liturgy. This, as it concerns the Conformity of the
Lay-receiver, is spoken of before. But now as it concerns the Ministers
Assent and Consent. 2. Some that take this for a very useful passage, as it
enableth them to hold back some incapable persons, dare not approve it, and
consent to it, as it denies the Church Communion which Christ gives and
commands, to persons of unblemished uprightness and piety, if they will not
profess themselves willing to be confirmed by our Bishops in the manner before
described; though they are willing to own their Baptismal Covenant; and few in
most places are confirmed.

XIII. The Liturgy says, that [No man should come to the holy Communion but
with a full trust in God's mercy, and a quiet Conscience.] To which we must
declare Assent, Approbation and Consent.

2. The sense of these words remains dubious, whether it speak de necessitate
praecepti, v^l medii: Some think that the meaning is, that it is the Duty of
all that come to the Communion, to have a full trust, and a quiet Conscience:
Others think that the meaning is only, that all should seek these: Others think
that tht meaning is, that they should not come without them. Their reasons are,
1. From the plain signification of the words: [No man should come but with,
etc.] which must differ from [They that come ought to be such] 2. Because the
necessit as praecepti may be affirmed of perfect obedience since our use of
reason: It is every man's duty not to sin at all: And it is every man's duty to
believe, and love God, not only sincerely, but with a stronger Faith and Love;
and its every man's duty to seek after perfection: And yet no man will say that
we should not come to the Communion, but with high degrees of grace, or with
perfection. 3. And the words are not that they should seek it, but that they
should not come without it.

3. The Nonconformists confess that all men ought to have a full Trust, and a
quiet Conscience: But they think that many 1000 good Christians have but a weak
Faith or Trust, and an unquiet Conscience: And that the Eucharist is a
Confirming and Comforting Sacrament, and that those that have a weak Trust, and
unquiet Conscience, should come for strengthening and comfort, and be
encouraged to come.

4. Therefore seeing no entreaty will prevail with the Imposers after so many
years time to explain these, and many other such words, they think that the
usual sense of such words must be the measure of their exposition; and
therefore they dare not profess Assent, and Approbation, and Consent, till they
are better explained to them.

XIV. The Liturgy requires that the Priest deliver the Communion to the people
into their hands, All meekly kneeling.

2. The 27th. Canon says, [No Minister shall wittingly administer the same to
any, but to such as kneel under pain of suspension.

3. The Conformists differ among themselves about the sense of the Liturgy
herein, viz. whether [All kneeling] include a prohibition to deliver it to any
that kneel not: some say No: that it only bids them give it to such as kneel,
but not to deny it others, though the Canon do. Others say, yea that it
requires us to give it to no others. Their reasons are 1. Because else the
precept signified nothing, if men were after it left at liberty. 2. Because
[All] plainly excludes others. 3. Because the Canon being the decrees of the
same Church, expounds the Liturgy; and it is absurd to say that their Rubric
leaves the Minister at Liberty to do that same thing for which the Canon
suspendeth him. 4. Because we must also subscribe that we will use no other
form of administration, but that of the Liturgy; which Reasons we judge to be
cogent.

4. The Nonconformists differ among themselves about kneeling; some taking it
to be sinfully scandalous on the reasons before given; and some taking it for
lawful. But they commonly hold that it is sinful, cruelty and Schism for them
as Ministers to cast any true Christians out of Christ's Church and Communion
of Saints, and to deny them the body and blood of Christ, which he has
commanded his Church to deliver and receive, on so small a reason as this not
kneeling: 1. Considering the three reasons which are before mentioned as the
cause of their doubt. 2. And that the Holy Ghost Romans 14. commands both
Pastors and People to bear with, and receive each other, notwithstanding such
kind of differences: 3. And that good men's judgments in such cases are not in
their own power: 4. And that to tie Communion to such doubtful Circumstances
will certainly cause Schism; and such doings have long distracted Christ's
Churches through the world. 5. And Christ has commanded all his true Disciples
to live in loving concord and communion: But kneelers and not kneelers are his
true Disciples: 6. And men must not be cast out of the Churches Communion even
for gross and heinous sins, unless they add obstinate impenitency. Therefore
they dare not Assent, Approve, Consent to, or Practice, this rejecting of godly
Christians for not kneeling in the act of receiving, from those privileges
which Christ by his testament has given them.

XV. By the Liturgy every Parishioner is to communicate twice a year, and by
the Canon and statute to be compelled so to do: and the Churchwarden to present
them that do not. And those that do not in a certain time, are to be
EXCOMMUNICATED, and after laid in Gaol during life, unless they conform. To the
Liturgies Imposition we must profess Assent, etc.

2. Not every Parishioner (yea in our experience not one of many) has a full
trust in God's Mercy, and a quiet Conscience, without both which they are not
to come.

3. Many good Christians have so great a sense of their sins and unworthiness,
that they dare not communicate till they are fitter: And some are so timorous
and melancholy, that hearing the Liturgy threaten men to be given up to the
Devil, and eat and drink their own damnation, if they eat and drink unworthily,
it would drive them by fear into distraction should they take it, till they
have better thoughts of their title and preparations; so that their dilemma is
sad, when they are either to go to Bedlam, or to the common Gaol.

4. To say that all these doubting and timorous people should be otherwise
minded, and that this is their error, is true, but as impertinent, as it is to
tell all men that they should never sin or all ignorant carnal ungodly men
that they should be wise and godly: But to conclude that men should receive the
sacrament, because they ought to be prepared, though they are not prepared, is
somewhat like telling the sick that they should work and eat, as they ought to
have done if by intemperance they had not disabled themselves.

5. There are many among us who are conscious of Infidelity, Atheism,
Sadduceism and Heresy, and some of many secret heinous sins: some of these in
their hearts deride Christianity and the sacrament; And the other are afraid of
increasing their damnation: But yet do not make known their sin: But it is
notorious that abundance of such there be: And the doubt is whether these
should be compelled to the sacrament thrice a year.

6. The Nonconformists hold, that to deliver a man, that sacrament, is to
deliver him the body and blood of Christ, and therewith a sealed pardon of sin,
and gift of life eternal; And they think that the terms on which these are to
be received, are [wholly devoting our selves to Christ, denying all, and taking
up our Cross and following him. And therefore that to say [Receive the
sacrament, or he in a Gaol] seems much to alter the terms of the Gospel,
which says [If thou can not suffer a Gaol for Christ, thou art unworthy of
him. It is he that can forsake all for Christ, that is fit for the sacrament,
and not he that would not Communicate without the fear of a prison or other
punishment. To give the sacrament, is to give more than all the riches of the
world, which none but volunteers and desirers are fit for.

7. The ancient Churches made delinquents long beg for such great privileges
and gifts, knowing that to give them to those that are unwilling, is to subvert
the Gospel. But they never said [Receive them or go to Gaol.]

8. Were it but granted in England that the great gift of Christ's body and
blood, and holy Communion should be administered and received freely, that is,
only given by and to voluntary agents and receivers, it would heal almost all
the English differences, between Episcopal, Presbyterians and Independents.

9. Yet the Nonconformists are not against the encouraging of Communicants by
special favors, nor the prudent compelling of Ignorant men to hear the truth,
nor the hindering of pernicious heresies moderately. But the foresaid
compulsion of all Parishioners they dare not Approve.

XVI* The Minister according to the Liturgy is himself to give the Eucharist to
many, to whom the Nonconformists dare not give it: For they must give it thrice
a year to all the Parishioners, except such as are proved (to him that has no
power to examine them or witnesses) to be in malice toward others, or to be in
any scandalous sin, and that but for that time, till they are accused and
acquit, or still permitted, viz. 1. They must give it to many that consent not
to be any part of their charge, nor take them for their Pastors, but bid them
deny them the Sacrament if they dare, though they consent not to the relation.
2. They must give it to multitudes of the grossly ignorant, who know not the
essentials of Christianity or the Sacrament, nor will come to them to be
taught: When by fame, yea or personal knowledge, they know them to be such, yet
without proof (nor we think with proof) they cannot refuse them. 3. It is known
that Infidels and deriders of Scripture and man's Immortal state, do swarm more
among us. And yet they must all Communicate till we can bring proof of it
against particular persons: When few men that report it will accuse their
neighbors and prove the accusation for fear of their displeasure: 4. We must
give it to all the ungodly that are dismissed by a Lay-Chancellour after
accusation, 5. We must give it to all that are unwilling to receive it, sobeit
they had rather take it than lie in a Gaol and be undone. 3. On these terms the
Nonconformists dare not Assent, Consent to and Approve the giving of it as is
prescribed. 4. It is confessed that compelled Receiving is not commanded by
Christ, nor was used by the Church, for many hundred years, even after
Emperors were Christians.

XVII. The Liturgy requires Ministers at Burial, to use these words, importing
the salvation of the person: [Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God of his
great mercy, to take to himself the soul of our dear Brother, here departed]
And [We give thee hearty thanks for that it has pleased thee to deliver this
our Brother out of the miseries of this sinful world] And [That we may rest in
him as our hope is this our Brother does.]

2. The Conformists are not agreed of the sense of these words: One sort of
them say, that all these words import not the salvation of the person: But the
rest have more ingenuity, and confess that else the words are not intelligible,
and that such equivocation is not tolerable.

3. Some of them say that these passages are good, supposing Discipline well
exercised; which if it be not, it is not the fault of the Liturgy. But others
consider that 1. We know that Discipline is not so exercised as they suppose:
2. And that these passages are not to be approved and used whether Discipline
be so exercised or not: The meaning is not [I approve of this where Discipline
is well exercised.] 3. It is known that the Bishops will not have every Priest
to be Judge.

4. The Canon (which is the work of the same Church) thus expounds the
Churches meaning; Can. 14. [All Ministers shall observe the Orders, Rites and
Ceremonies prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, as well in reading the holy
Scriptures, and saying of Prayers, as in administration of the Sacraments,
without either diminishing in regard of Preaching, or in any other respect; or
adding any thing in the matter or form thereof.] (This also concerns most of
the cases before instanced in, as Expositions of the Churches meaning.)

5. And Can. 68. its said [No Minister shall refuse or delay to bury any Corpse
that is brought -- in such manner and form as is prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer: And if he shall refuse -- to bury such, except the party
deceased were denounced excommunicated Majori Excommunicatione, for some
grievous and notorious crime, and no man able to testify of his repentance, he
shall be suspended by the Bishop.

6. The new Edition of the Liturgy increases the exceptions thus [The Office
ensuing is not to be used for any that die unbaptized, or excommunicate, or
that have laid violent hands on themselves.]

7. Note 1. That many children of good Christians by surprise die unbaptized:
2. Many godly sober persons are excommunicated for some point of Nonconformity:
3. Some upright Christians in phrensies, melancholies and distractions make
away themselves.

8. Note, That Atheists, Infidels, Sadduces, Blasphemers, Whoremongers, etc.
swarm now among us, and we rarely hear of any one of these multitudes that are
excommunicated; so that they are not excepted.

9. It cannot be denied, that exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis: so that
no other must be excepted.

10. It is known that all England consists of all the Individuals, and all the
people are all England.

11. We commonly Preach that without Faith and Holiness none shall see God; and
that Whoremongers, Drunkards, etc. cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

12. Therefore either we consent to pronounce almost all such to be saved (at a
time when our words take the deepest impression,) or else more exceptions must
be made.

13. Some say that the Excommunicable are included in the Excommunicated; But
the Canon and the express words of the Liturgy, and the Churches* abhorrence
that the Priest shall be Judge, do so notoriously confute this bold assertion,
that by such stretches almost any thing may be said or sworn, and it shall not
be known by authority, when, or how far any Subject is obliged by Covenants or
Oaths.

XVIII. The Liturgy requires [that such ornaments of the Church and of the
Ministers thereof at all times of their Ministration, shall be retained and in
use, as were in this Church of England by the authority of Parliament in the
2d. Tear of Ed. 6.

2. The Canon of the same Church expounds their meaning cap. 58. Thus [every
Minister saying the public prayers or Ministering the Sacraments or other rites
of the Church, shall wear a decent and comely Surplice etc.

3. We suppose in the 2d. of King Ed. 6. The Cope, Alb and other vestments were
in use, which seem forbidden by the Common Prayer Book in the 5th. and 6th. of
Ed. 6.

4. The Conformists agree not of the sense of this Rubric, 1. Whether all
these are hereby reduced or not. 2. Whether it forbid all Ministers to
officiate without a Surplice, or only Command the use of it, without an employed
penalty: But the words, and the forecited Canons show that the Church intended
an exclusion of all that will not use it: And we must subscribe to administer
in no other form.

5. The Nonconformists differ about the Surplice; some taking it to be Lawful,
and others to be unlawful: But they Commonly hold that Preaching Christ's Gospel
is commanded by God, and that Ministers by their ordination are obliged to do
the work of that Office, and that Surplices are not commanded by God; and
therefore, if a man mistakingly should take the use of the Surplice to be
sinful, he should not therefore be ejected and silenced: And therefore they
dare not declare Approbation and Consent to the Rubric or subscribed form in
the Canon which implies this restraint.

XIX. The Damnatory sentences in the Creed called Athanasius's, are to be
Assented, Approved and Consented to.

2. If they referred but to the Doctrine of the Trinity, and not to the
particulars of that explication, it would not be excepted against: But some R.
Reverend Conformists do profess that those sentences are untrue, and not to be
approved.

3. But such think that the Churches meaning is not to require us to Assent or
Approve them as true, but only to Consent to use them: And they prove it,
because the same Church requires us to Read the Books of Tobit, etc. which
have palpable untruths, and not to believe them to be true.

4. But that reason seems null and vain; 1. Because the Apocrypha is no part
of the Book to which we must Profess Assent, Approbation and Consent, nor to
which by the Canon we must ex animo subscribe, that there is nothing in it
contrary to the Word of God. But Athanasius's Creed, with those damnatory
sentences, are part of that Book. Indeed the Liturgy requires us to read those
Apocryphal untruths, but they are no part of the Book: 2. And it being not the
sense of the Liturgy, but of a Statute of Parliament, which we here doubt of,
it seems insufficient, if not impertinent, to tell us what is taken for the
sense of the Church; for the doubt is What is the sense of the Parliament,
which we can no otherwise know but by the plain words, till they will otherwise
declare their meaning.

5. And indeed if the passages in Tobit, which some Reverend Bishops call Lies
(about the Angel's saying that he was the Son of Ananias, of the Tribe of
Napthali, and the fishes driving away all Devils, that they shall never return)
were but to be read, we know not how to approve of that Law, Calendar or
Rubric, that commands such reading of them. But yet that is much less than
the Assent required to Athanasius's Creed; which yet we take (save those
damnatory sentences) to be the best explication of the Mystery of the sacred
Trinity, which in so short a sum is extant in the Church.

XX. The Liturgy says [All Priests and Deacons are to say daily the Morning
and Evening Prayer, either privately or openly, not being let by sickness, or
some other urgent cause. And the Curate that ministers in every Parish Church
or Chapel, being at home, and not being otherwise reasonably hindered, shall say
the same in the Parish Church or Chapel where he ministers, etc.

2. The Conformists agree not of the sense of this; some think that the
ordinary incommodities of such a commanded use, may pass as those hindrances
or urgent causes mentioned in the exceptions: But the more plain and ingenuous
dealers hold, that the urgent causes and hindrances here mentioned, must be
somewhat extraordinary, and not any thing which is the usual case of most
Ministers.

3. Cathedrals and some other Churches have many Priests and Deacons of whom
one only can daily ossiciate in public. And many are Chaplains in such men's
houses as will have other free prayers used. And most Ministers have great and
necessary work to do, which must all be left undone, while the Common Prayer is
said over by them twice a day. They have Sermons to study, many Books to read,
that they may be furnished with necessary knowledge for their work: They have
abundance of ignorant parishioners to instruct, exhort or comfort; They have
the sick to visit, the dead to bury, the Sacraments to administer, families to
govern, instruct and provide for. And many find free prayer from the immediate
sense of their case and wants, to be so profitable to them that they cannot
spare it: All which and more require the the strictest improvement of every
minute of their time: And if the Liturgy be read over by every Priest and
Deacon twice a day, it is certain that much of these aforesaid must be omitted.
And it is a great part of our Christian duty, when two good things come
together, to choose that which hic et nunc is the greater; to choose the lesser
then being a sin.

4. Therefore the Nonconformists dare not Assent, Approve and Consent to the
tying of every Priest and Deacon ordinarily to read over the Liturgy twice
every day. And they are the more averse to such Approbation, by seeing so very
few Conformists, Comparatively, to practice this themselves; which shows that
they take it to be unlawful; seeing it is their judgment that our Rulers must
be obeyed in all things which are lawful to be so done. And if they that make
such declarations of Approbation think it unlawful ordinarily to keep them, we
may doubt whether it be lawful so to make them, as is required of us.

5. If God ask us why we did not teach our families, visit the sick, instruct
ignorant neighbors, study better for to discharge our Ministerial work, that
we might be men of knowledge, and such like, the doubt is whether it will pass
for a good answer to say, we had not time, because we must twice a day read the
Common Prayer.

XXI. Assenting, Approving and Consenting to all things, even to all forms,
orders, etc. includes the order of the Liturgy. Two Rules of the order of
Prayer are commonly acknowledged 1. The nature and order of the matter to be
expressed. 2. The Lords Prayer us a directory delivered by Christ.

2. The Nonconformists that think that for the main there is nothing but good
contained in most of the Prayers of the Liturgy; yet think that they are
greatly disordered and defective; neither formed according to the order of
matter, nor of the Lords Prayer, but like an immethodical Sermon, which is
unsuitable to the high subjects and honorable work of holy worship.

3. They have often offered, whenever it will be well taken, to give in a
Catalogue of the disorders and defects of the Liturgy: Which yet they think it
lawful to use, in obedience, or for unity, or when no better may be used: But
not to approve of such disorder; as we do not approve of the failings of any of
our own duties, though we are daily guilty of them unwillingly.

XXII. The Preface to the Book of Ordination says, that [It is evident to all
men diligently reading holy Scriptures and ancient Authors, that from the
Apostles time there have been these ORDERS in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, as several OFFICES; which are repeated often in the Collects at
Ordination: To this all must Assent and Consent.

2. Some of us are conscious that we have diligently read the holy Scriptures
and ancient Authors, and yet three ORDERS and OFFICES are not evident to us.

3. We have great reason to believe that Calvin, Beza, and many more Reformers,
Blondell, Salmatius, Robert Parker, Gersom, Bucer, Calderwood, Cartwright, John
Reynolds, Ames, Ainsworth, and multitudes of such Protestants, did diligently
read both Scriptures and Ancients: As also Dr. S^illingfleet, Bishop Edw.
Reynolds, and many such, who thought that Scripture instituted no particular
forms of Government: As also Armachanus, and many other Papists, who think that
Bishops and Priests do not differ ordine, but gradu, which the R. Reverend
Archbishop Usher ordinarily professed: We cannot assert that none of these
diligently read Scripture or ancient Authors.

4. But especially when we find that even the ancient Church of England was of
another mind, as is legible in the Canons of Aelfrick to Wulfine in Spelman,
page 573. 576. which conclude that (in the old large sense) there were but
seven Ecclesiastical Orders or Degrees, and that the Bishops and Presbyters are
not two, but one: Hand pluris interest inter Missalem Presbyterum and
Episcopum, quam quod Episcopus constitutus sit ad ordinationes conferendas, and
ad visitandum seu inspiciendum curandumque ea quae ad Deum pertinent, quod
nimiae crederetur multitudini si omnis Presbyter hoc idem faceret. Ambo
siquidem UNUM tenent EUNDEMQUE ORDINEM, quamvis dignior sit illa pars
Episcopi.] 18. Non est alius ORDO constitutus in Ecclesiasticis Ministeriis,
etc. Et Leg. Canuti, p. 551. Pastores vocamus Episcopos and Sacerdotes, quorum
parts sunt eruditione at que doctrina gregem Domini speculari ac desendere,
etc.

5. And Dr. Stillingsleet has proved by sufficient evidence, that the same was
the judgment of Archbishop Cranmer, and other Reformers of the Church of
England. And it is the judgment of some of our Bishops and Conformists now. All
which we speak not to show which side we think to be in the right; but that the
state of the question is, Whether we can assent to this as true, and approve
and consent that it be used, as is appointed, [That it is evident to all men
diligently reading, etc. that de facto there were three ORDERS and Offices from
the Apostles times.

XXIII. The ordering of Priests requires the Bishop to speak to the people at
the Ordination of Priests, calling them [to come forth in the name of God, and
show what crime or impediment they know in the persons to be ordained, etc.] In
imitation of the ancient Churches, when the Congregation over which they were
set, had their voice in his election or reception.

2. The doubt is, whether such a solemn invitation, as in God's name, be not
too vain to be Assented, and Approved, and Consented to, in a Church, where the
people over whom he is set, never use to be present, nor invited to it, nor
have any notice of it, or any call to meddle therein; being usually many miles,
and often many score miles distant; nor any other people called to that work;
and rarely any people there that have any knowledge of the man and his
conversation.

XXIV. The Ordaining of Priests, and the Consecration of Bishops both use these
words as concerning the Office [Receive the Holy Ghost for the Office and work
of a Priest, of a Bishop, etc.]

2. It is not doubted but that the Holy Ghost must set Pastors over the Flocks;
1. By qualifying men for the Office, and making them desirous of it: Both
Grace, Ability and Willingness are of him: 2. By giving the Ordainers a
discerning skill to know whom to ordain: 3. By giving the flock a discerning
and a willing mind. We yet know not of any other Collation of the Holy Ghost,
which Ordination can make. Nor know we that in any of these senses these words
can be well understood: For 1. Grace, Gifts and Willingness, are the dispositio
recipient is presupposed: we see not how it can be lawful to ordain him that
seems not before to have them* what else are they examined about? Nor know we
that God has given any power to the Ordainers now, by the laying on of hands,
to make an ungodly man godly, or an unlearned or ignorant man to be learned or
wise, or a man of ill utterance to have a better tongue, or an unwilling man to
be willing. The Apostles had a miraculous power of giving the Holy Ghost for
extraordinary works, and for abilities suddenly infused; and they did it: we
never knew of any in our age that did it; and therefore suppose that they have
no promise or power so to do. 2. And to give a discerning skill to the
Ordainers; 3. Or to give a discerning or willing mind to the people, are
neither of them a giving the Holy Ghost to the Priest. The doubt is, whether
this be not an abuse of the words which Christ himself or his Apostles used,
and so not to be assented to, approved and consented to.

3. Yet is it not denied, but that Ministerial Authority is given by the
ordainers as Ministers, Deliverers or Investers: But Authority is not the Holy
Ghost so called.

4. Nor is it denied but that as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost do enter into
Covenant with us as Christians in our baptism so do they with Ministers, as
such, in their ordination-covenant: But such a Relation to the Holy Ghost as
the Ministers future helper in his work, cannot well be supposed to be all that
is meant by the words [Receive the Holy Ghost,] both Scripture and common use,
taking them in another sense.

XXV. This Oath in the Consecration of Bishops is to be taken by every Bishop
[In the name of God Amen. I. N. Chosen Bishop of the Church and See of N. do
profess and promise all due reverence and obedience to the Arch Bishop, and to
the Metropolitical Church of N. and to their successors, so help me God
through Jesus Christ.

2. It is not pretended that any such Oaths of obedience were instituted by
Christ or his Apostles; or were used in the Churches for many hundred years,
nor till the Papacy was rising, which was furthered by such Oaths.

3. They that suppose Bishops to be successors of the Apostles, cannot make
them subjects to any other Ecclesiastical Rulers, without asserting that the
Apostles were Governors over one another; which we find not that they do.

4. It was many hundred years before Archbishops had any Governing power over
Bishops, or exacted any obedience from them; being not Episcopi Episcoporum (as
the Carthage Fathers in Cyprian professed.) But were only such as had the first
seats and voices in the Synods.

5. The question therefore is, whether such Oaths, as necessary to a Bishops
consecration, be to be Approved and consented to?

XXVI. An Oath of Canonical obedience also is put upon all that are made
Priests and Deacons: And Priests at their ordination must make this Covenant,
that they [will reverently obey their Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, unto
whom is committed the charge and Government over them.]

2. The ordinary is not only the Bishop, but also the Chancellor, Officials,
Surrogates, Comissaries, Archdeacons, and all that are Judges' in the
Ecclesiastical Courts.

3. to obey them that are thus de facto set over us, is no less than to obey
them in the exercise of that power which is given them as so set over us.

4. The doubt is, whether they that take any of them to be Usurpers of an
Ecclesiastical power, which indeed they have not (and can prove it to be so)
should swear or Covenant obedience to them as such. e. g. It is commonly
confessed by the Conformists that the true power of the Keys, of
excommunication and Absolution is appropriated by Christ to the Clergy: And yet
our Chancellours being lay men, do decretively exercise that power. The
question is, may we swear or Covenant to obey them?

5. And seeing Christ never gave one Presbyter the Government of others, as
Archdeacons, Surrogates, Officials, etc. whether all the rest may swear
obedience to them, or Approve of and consent to the use of such Oaths? And
diverse Councils have condemned it as a dangerous practice for Bishops to tle
subject Presbyters to them by Oaths.

XXVII. Ministers that live among the people have greatest advantage to know
the penitent from the impenitent.

2. But it is the foresaid lay Chancellours, who usually know nothing of them
but by reports, that excommunicate and absolve them. And the Parish-Minister
must (as a crier reads a proclamation or sentence of a Judge) openly read
these excommunications and absolutions.

3. These excommunications must pass according to the Canons, against all that
shall affirm that [there is any thing in the book of Common Prayer r^pugnant to
the Scripture or any of the 39 Articles ^rroneous, or any of the Rites and
Ceremonies such as he may not with a good conscience subscribe to, or that the
Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons and the rest that bear
Office in the Church of England, is repugnant to the word of God, or that any
thing in the form and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests or
Deacons is repugnant to the word of God, etc.]

4. The present doubt is whether a Minister who knows such of his Parish to
be godly, peaceable men, whom the Chancellor decretively excommunicateth, may
both openly read and declare such excommunications and also swear or Covenant
so to do, in obedience to the Ordinary. And whether when he knows that a
wicked impenitent man is absolved, he may pronounce such absolutions.

XXVIII. The Oath of Canonical obedience seems to mean obedience according to
the Canons: And he that Covenanteth to obey his ordinary, must be supposed to
mean no less than [According to the Canon Laws by which he is known to govern,]
and as Government thereby is excercised:

2. And if so, then there are more things in the Canons and present Government,
which the Nonconformists dare not swear or Covenant to obey (besides those
already named,) than we will now stand to enumerate.

XXIX. The Rubric says that [the Minister who repelleth any from the
Sacrament, shall be obliged to give an account of the same to the Ordinary
within 14 days after, at the furthest.

2. If all that by gross ignorance, Atheism, Infidelity, Sadducism, Heresy,
Schism, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Stealing, Malice, etc. are incapable of the
Communion be presented to the Ordinary within 14 days, no charity that is
guided by knowledge of the common state of the people, can think, that in
London Diocese there would be fewer than many score thousands presented at
once. And in other Diocesses many score hundreds at least,

3. Some Ministers dwell a hundred Miles or near from the Bishops. And the
Bishops are diverse of them so much at London or abroad, as that it cannot be
expected that all these must be presented to the Bishop himself, but to the
Chancellours court, as is usual.

4. The Chancellours Court is so far from most Ministers in the Land, and the
prosecuting so many when proof is demanded, will be so chargeable and take up
so much time, as that it will undo many poor Ministers, that have scarce enough
to maintain their families; and it will take up the time which they should use
in the necessary labors for their flocks.

5. The Chancellor is a lay man to whom they must be presented: And the issue
will be but a lay man's excommunicating them, if obstinate; or absolving them:
Which is not justified by the Bishops themselves.

6. At the said Chancellours court things are managed as at a civil judicature:
There is not that endeavor to convince sinners by Scripture, and to draw them
to true Repentance, by humbling evidence, entreaties and prayers for them, as
should be for the saving of a soul from sin: But the charges of the court fees,
and the fears of a prison after excommunication, makes it an unacceptable and
as unlikely means to convert men as the stocks.

7. Therefore for a minister to present all his Parishioners to such courts,
whom he is bound to deny the Sacrament to, were but to make him seem their
greatest and cruellest enemy, and to render him incapable of ever (probably)
profiting them by his Ministry any more; and consequently, greatly to promote
their damnation and make them almost hopeless as to recovery. And if by this
terror they tell the Chancellor that they Repent, how little satisfaction is
that to the Minister, that never saw, himself, any signs of their repentance.

8. The doubt is then, whether the use of this Rubric may be Approved and
Consented to.

9. Especially considering that all the Parish who receive not thrice a year,
(of which Easter must be one for them all) must be presented to the said
ordinary, and also all that come not to Church; By which means diverse Parishes
about London must have some 10000, some 20000, some 30000, some 40000, or
50000, that have no room in the Church, all presented if this Law were executed.

XXX. We have reason to doubt whether the Act of Uniformity it self be not part
of the Books which we must subscribe Assent and Consent to; because it is so
said in the Book it self: The Contents of the Book are first named in general,
and then this Act named among the Contents. Either it is part of the Contents,
or it is not; if it be not, we must not assent and consent to that falsehood
(that it is;) If it be, O far be it from us that believe a God, a Judgment, and
a life to come, and the sacred Scriptures, to Assent and Consent to that Act
with all its penalties, silencing and ruining such as conform not. One of us
that was often with the great, wise, just Lord Chief Justice Hales, has heard
him lamenting the Schisms and discords of the Clergy, seriously say, that
[There was no right way to heal us, but by a New Act of Uniformity.] (And has
his late Writings against laying Concord or Religion upon men's unnecessary
additions.) And the Reporter takes not himself to be wiser than him, nor meet
to Assent and Consent to such a Law, considering the experience of these
seventeen years, and the consequents on men's divided and exasperated minds,
upon the Congregations, upon Ministers and Families, and upon the state and
security of the Christian Religion, and the Protestant Cause, etc. As to them
that say that the Act names the Book as distinct from it self; we answer, 1.
So do the Titles of Acts of Parliament name the Act it self as distinct from
the Title, and yet we suppose that Title part of the Act. 2. The Book names
the Act as part of its Contents, as is aforesaid.

If we should by mistake think some of these passages to be unlawful that are
not, or to have a worse sense than indeed they have, let these things be
considered.

1. We judge as well as we are able; and whatever sense another takes them in,
we that so understand them cannot take them.

2. We judge of the sense by the plain words; the force and stretch is not by
us but by those that conform and contradict our sense.

3. The Lawgivers will not otherwise expound their own words, after 17 years
waiting for it under Compulsive Executions: Certainly if they would have us
understand their words contrary to common use, they would rather tell us so
after seventeen years time, than ruin us, and forbear so easy a means to heal
the Churches.

4. Some of us so highly value the excellent Praelections of Bishop Sanderson
de juramento, and his judgment, against taking and expounding Oaths (and
consequently professions and promises) in a stretched or a doubtful sense, and
his Counsel to refuse them, when the sense is doubtful, if the Rulers or
Imposers will not expound them (though they should bid us take them in our own
sense;) with much more which he has excellently said to such purposes, that we
thankfully acknowledge that he has much helped for to fortify us against the
guilt of perjury, and falsehood, and profaning the holy name of God, and
deceiving our Governors by equivocations and false expositions, and
scandalously tempting others to perjury, lying, or such other sins.

We take an understanding, serious (and if it may be public) owning of the
Baptismal Covenant in age to be of so great moment to the reviting of true
Christianity and the honor of Baptism and cure of Anabaptism, that it greatly
grieveth us that we must despair of its effectual practice, when we meet with
few that seem not to approve it. The words of a very Learned and Great
Conformist Mr Elder field of Baptism page 48. marg. We think worthy our recital.

Upon score of like reason (says he) whereto, and for such after trial, may
have been taken up in the Christian Church, that examination which did sift the
constancy or rather consistency of those that had been taken in young, to their
presumed grounds, that if they wavered they might be known and discharged, or
if they remained constant, they might by imposition of hands receive what the
Commoner name of that Ceremony did import, of their faith (at least a sign of)
Confirmation. Vasquez has from Erasmus (in the Preface to his Paraphrase on
the Gospels) a word of most wholesome grave and prudent advise, that those who
were Baptized young, when they begin to write man, should be examined, an ratum
habeant id quod in Catechismo ipsorum nomine promissum: Quod si ratum non
habeant, ab Ecclisiae jurisdictione liberos manner; in 3. p. Thom. disp. 154.
To. 2. c. 1. sect. 2. If they did then stand to what their sureties promised
for them. If not they should be discarded. Most necessary! and of unimaginable
benefit! Such a scrutiny would shake off thousands of rotten hypocrites, and
purge the Church of many such Inside! believers or professors, upon whose
dirty faces a little holy water was sprinkled when they knew not what it was;
but they no more mind the true sanctification appertaining than the Turks or
Saracens (who shall rise up in judgment against their washed filthiness,) or
than those of whom St. Peter [It is happened to them according to the true
proverb: The dog to his vomit, and the washed swine to wallow in the mire.]
Such discipline of a wakened Reason is that the world groans for; that men
would become Christians. O that the truth of faith, and power of true Christian
belief might be seen in those that knowingly put the neck in Christ's yoke.] So
far he. See also Dr. Patrick of Baptism. And of our selves Mr. Hanmer and
Baxter have written Treatises only on this subject, to show that such true
Confirmation would be the most excellent means to heal most of our enormities
and divisions.

And shall such Jesuits as Vasquez, such moderators as Erasmus, and Protestant
Conformists, and Nonconformists, all thus speak for it, and yet no hope? No
wonder if a word or ceremony that we disagree in, can make our wound so sad as
we have self, when that which we in words agree for, and that not as a thing
indifferent, but so necessary, cannot yet be obtained though we perish. Dead
Images of all good things, is but the last and most effectual means of
destroying the life and real good: Dead shows and Images of good, are
Hypocrisy; sincerity is reality, seriousness and life. We take our Baptism to
be our Christening, or the sum of the Christian Religion: And it is but for
men to do that seriously at Age, which they did in Infancy by others authorized
(or others for them) which is the Conversion which we daily preach: And it
grieveth us to see what multitudes, when aged, never seriously think either
what they did or received in their Infancy; and how many hate such a life as
they have vowed, and yet think that they stand to their Baptismal Covenant. And
till the Pastors of the Church make a serious work of it, to bring all their
Parishes to a serious understanding and consideration of their Baptism, and a
serious owning it, and renewing of that Covenant, we cannot hope that the
people will be serious Christians; or that men will not think that serious
Anabaptists are better than Hypocrites that contemn their Baptism.

SECT. II.
The Second Part of the Matter of Conformity.
THE First Part de facto, being contained in the Canonical Subscription, and
the Declaration, has been opened: The Second Part is the case of Reordination.
Either they that require Episcopal Ordination for all that were otherwise
ordained when Bishops were put out, do intend it a second Ordination or not. If
yea, then it is a thing condemned by the ancient Churches, by the Canons called
the Apostles, etc. and by Gregory M. and others likened to Anabaptistry. If
not, then they take such men's former Ordination to be null, and consequently no
Ministers to be true Ministers that are so ordained, and not by Diocesans; and
consequently all such Churches to be no true Churches (while they take the
Roman Ordination to be valid.) To speak of the consequences of this as to the
nullity of Baptizings and Consecration of the Lords Supper, etc. and of the
taking of God's name in vain in the Office if it prove evil, would be to go
further than the Matter of Fact.

SECT. XI.
The Third Part of Conformity.
THE Third Part of Conformity is the Subscribing against the obligation from
the Vow [To endeavor any change or alteration of Government in the Church,]
with the Oxford Oath [That we will never endeavor any alteration;] and the
Articles for our Prelacy; and the Ordination-promise, and Oath of Canonical
Obedience beforementioned, as to this point together.

2. Even those Nonconformists that are for the lawfulness, yea the need and
desirableness of Bishops, and Archbishops, have so much against this
Subscription, as that to avoid prolixity, we will forbear reciting the
particulars, any further than to tell you, that while a thousand or many
hundred Parish-Churches are all without any particular appropriate Bishops
(great Towns and Villages) when in Ignatius's days the Unity of each Church
was known by having One Altar, and One Bishop, with the Presbyters and Deacons.
And Jerome defines a Church to be Plebs unita Episcopo; and consequently they
are without the Discipline and Pastoral oversight of such Bishops; and while
all these Parishes are in the old sense become No Churches (for ubi Episcopus,
ibi Ecclesia) but only Parts of a Diocesan Church: And while the old form of
Churches, Presbyters and Bishops is thus changed: And while one Bishop has now
more work of Discipline (besides Confirming and all his other work) than an
hundred of the ablest and best men can do; and so such Discipline is
necessarily undone: And while the Case is as if the Bishop of Carthage had put
down six hundred Neighbor-bishops, and become the sole Bishop of all their
Churches; or as if all the Schools in a Diocese have but one Governing
Schoolmaster, who had power to judge what Scholar to receive, or to refuse:
And while the Keys are to be exercised by Laymen, these will be unsatisfying
things.

3. The Conformists are not agreed of the meaning of these Subscriptions and
Oaths; some think that they covenant only to submit to them (though they
dislike them:) But others think that it is also to approve the Government. Some
think that it is only Bishops that they are bound to: But others say, that the
word Ordinary certainly signifies more than Bishops, even Lay-Chancellours.
And that the for^cited Canon expressly names many others, even with an and
catera, [the rest that bear Office] And [any alteration] must needs mean more:
as [any alteration in State] sure ext^nleth to more than not endeavoring to
[change Monarchy or the King himself.] Some say that by [n^t endeavouring] is
m^ant only [not unlawfully endeavouring] but not that all endeavors are
forbidden, viz. not petitioning, speaking when called, etc. Others say that if
exceptions had been allowed, the Law makers would have made us know it, and not
have spoken universally: And that if you expound it of [unlawful endeavours]
you leave all men at liberty to judge what is unlawful, and all Schismatics
will take the Oath or Subscription, because they hold their endeavors to
extirpate Prelacy to be lawful. Some say that one may endeavor in his place
and calling, to take the Church-Keys out of the hands of Lay-Chancellours,
notwithstanding this Subscription and Oath. But others more ingenuously say,
that the very actual Government or Keys being in the hands of Lay-Chancellours,
if it bind us not against endeavoring to change these, it binds us to nothing
that can be understood: And that if Subjects thus take liberty after Universal
Oaths and Promises to make such exceptions, they reproach the Lawmakers, as if
in such tremendous things as these they knew not how to put their Laws in words
intelligible, and of common sense: And they relax all such sacred bonds. Some
say that in [not endeavouring] is excepted [unless the King commission or
command us:] But others say, that if the Lawgivers would have had such
exceptions, they had wit enough to have put them in: And that if you leave it
to men to except from universals, you cannot tell them where to stop: And that
the use of the Oath and Subscription is, that the Church Government be taken
for unalterable.

SECT. XII.
The Fourth Part of Conformity.
IV. THE Fourth Part of Conformity is the Subscription against the obligation
of the Oath called the Solemn Vow and Covenant. Corporations are constituted by
Declaring, that there is no obligation from it to any one without exception:
But Ministers must only subscribe that there is no obligation on me, or on any
other person, from the Oath, -- to endeavor any change or alteration of
Government in the Church.]

2. It is none of the Controversy here, 1. Whether that vow was lawfully
imposed or contrived, 2. Nor whether it were lawfuly taken. 3. Nor whether part
of the matter was unlawful. But supposing all these unlawful, 1. Whether all
alteration of Church Government be unlawful? whether it be not in the power of
the King and Parliament, to set a Bishop in every Market Town: or to take the
use of the Keys from Laymen: or to take down Archdeacons, Officials,
Commissaries. Surrogates, etc? Whether all Reformation be out of the power of
the King, or not to be desired by the people? 2. Whether that which is Lawful
may not be done by the Law makers, and be endeavored by speech in Parliament,
or by petition by the people; Especially if the King Command it? 3. Whether men
be not bound by a Vow to that which is Lawful: much more to that Which is
antecedently a duty?

3. The Conformists are here disagreed among themselves; some say that the Vow
Binds not because it was unlawfully imposed: But other^ better say, that this
proves no more, but that the Imposers could not bind me to take it by any
authority of theirs; And that if I had taken it in secret without imposition, I
had been bound by it: Else no private Vow should bind. Some say that it binds
not because it was sinfully taken: But others truly say that if Oaths bind not
wherever men take them sinfully, no wicked man should ever be bound by Oaths or
Vows, because they usually make them sinfully by an ill end and intention,
wrong motives, or ill principles or manner: Or at least a bad man might choose
whether ever he will be obliged: But all good casuists agree, that if the
matter be lawful the unlawful taking hinders not the obligation. A man that is
Baptized with ill motives or intentions, is yet obliged by his Baptismal Vow.
Some say that it binds not because the matter it self is unlawful. But its
granted that it binds to no unlawful matter: Others therefore truly say that
he that Voweth six things whereof three are sinful, is not disobliged by the
conjunction of these from the other three that are Lawful: Else a Knave may keep
himself disobliged as to all Vows, by putting in some unlawful thing. Some say
that it binds not because we were antecedently bound to all that is good by
other bonds, and therefore not by this. But others truly say, that this is a
most intolerable reason and would nullify our Baptismal Vow, and all our
sacramental Vows renewed; and all Covenants that ever man can make to God of
any duty. For Gods own Laws first bind us to every duty: But for all that our
own Vows, Covenants and promises secondarily bind us also: And a man may have
many obligations to one duty; Yea indeed the Covenanters ordinarily profess
that they think not that a man should Vow any thing to God but what God first
has made his duty. And they are against the Papists for making Religions and
duties to themselves which God never made: And therefore they profess that if
some things in the Covenant were not their duty before, they would not think
that they are bound to it now: And they profess that if they had never taken
that Vow they had been bound to all that by it they are bound to: And therefore
condemning that Vow does no whit secure the Government of the Church (e. g. Lay
Chancellours use of the Keys, or the destruction of discipline) from their
Lawful endeavors to alter it. And they profess that seeing the King has power
to command them Lawful things, if they had Vowed any thing merely Indifferent
it would not have bound them against the Kings Commands; Because it is not in
subjects power, by Vows to withdraw themselves from their obedience to
authority. Some say that the Proclamation of King Charles the first against the
Covenant nulled the obligation. But others truly say, 1. That it could null no
more than the Imposition to take it, and not the obligation when it is taken, in
necessary things: 2. That this is nothing to all them that took it afterward,
and that when Charles II. had (though injuriously) been drawn to declare for
it. Some say that it binds not because men took it unwillingly. But others
truly say, 1. that this would leave it in the power of a bad man to nullify
all Vows and contracts, by saying that he did them unwillingly: 2. That man
has f^ee will and cannot be compelled: And a Vow of a thing Lawful to save
ones life binds: Men must rather die than lie. 3. This would teach Subjects
to say that they take all Oaths of Alegiance to the King unwillingly and
therefore are not bound. 4. Its true that no man that forces another
injuriously to a promise can claim to himself any right from that which was not
free but procured by his own injurious violence or fraud; But God wrongeth
none, and a Vow to God binds though procured by sinful force by men. Some say
that It was only a League and Covenant with men, and not a Vow, and therefore
cease c^ssante occasion, and by the consent of Parliament^, etc. Ans. There
is no place for the belief of this objection to any that knows a Vow
otherwise than by the name: Indeed an Oath that is but an appeal to God, that I
will faithfully perform my Covenant with a man, obliges me not when that man
has discharged me from any obligation to him. But this in question was
primarily a promise or Covenant made to God (which is a Vow,) and a League and
Covenant of men with one another that they will perform it; as is notorious to
any man that reads it with common understanding.

II. The second thing questioned about that Vow (and the main) is, whether
every Minister must or may become the judge of all other men's Consciences and
obligations in three Kingdoms, even of many thousands whom they never saw nor
heard of, and that so far as to absolve or justify them from all obligations
by that Vow to endeavor any Church reformation.

2. It is here supposed 1. That though men ought to take an Oath in the sense
of a Lawful Governor so far as they know it, yet that they are not bound
beyond the plain meaning of the words to the sense of Usurpers: Therefore they
know not but the King and Lords, etc. might take the same words in another
meaning than the obtruders did intend; e. g, to reform according to Gods Word
and the example of the best reformed Churches might signify to them an
opposition to Presbytery.

2 That if men mistake the sense of the Imposers, they are bound to keep an
Oath in the Lawful sense in which they took it. And then how knows every
Minister in what sense every man in the three Kingdoms took it? And how is he
able to say that no one man of them all is obliged by it to endeavor a lawful
and necessary reformation?

3. And as to the former Argument that men were forced to it, many of the Old
Parliament are yet living, and many others, that then forced others to it, and
were not forced to it themselves.

4 And if the present Parliament Men could (upon what compulsion soever) Vow to
reform, e. g. scandalous Ministers, Swearing, Drunkenness, Popery, etc. and
then would command all Ministers on pain of silencing to subscribe that no man
is bound to perform that Vow, this would not do them any service, but involve
each Subscriber in the guilt of a multitudes perfidiousness.

SECT. XIII.
V. The Fifth Part of Conformity.
1. THE The Fifth Part of Conformity is the Subscribing of the said
Declaration, and taking the Oxford Oath, as it concerns Civil Government,
viz. [It is not lawful on any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the
King; and that I do abhor that traitorous position of taking Arms by his
authority against his person, or against those that are commissioned by him.]
in pursuance of that Commission.

2. Here the Question is not of the first Clause, of taking Arms against the
King; but only of the last [against those that are commissioned by him] the
Ministers being mostly ignorant of Law, and not knowing what is called a
Commission, and what seal makes it such: For as they are satisfied that no
true Legal Commission of the King may be resisted, so while the unexpounded
words have no limitation or exception, they dare not think that a Lord
Chancellor or Keeper has power at his pleasure to depose the King, by sealing
Commissions to any to seize on his Forts, Garrisons, Magazines, Treasure,
Navies or Guards; nor yet to destroy the Kingdoms, Cities, Laws and Judgments,
and seize at pleasure on all men's estates or lives. And they dare not swear or
subscribe that which the generality of Learned men, Heathens, Papists and
Protestants, Politicians, Lawyers, and Divines are commonly against, it being
too great presuming on their own wits to say or swear, that almost all the
world are in the wrong (even men in their own profession) and that yet they are
wiser than all these. An Oath therefore being to be taken understandingly,
their not understanding this, causes their refusal; and it pleases not the
Law givers to explain it to them.

3. But though this be a very important business, we are so unwilling to meddle
with matters of our Rulers Power, as being less pertinent to our function, and
the late debates in the House of Lords (as some body has published them) have
said so much in this case, that we think it best to say no more of it.

SECT. XIV.
VI. The Sixth Part of Conformity or Obedience consequently required of
Ministers.
1. THE Sixth part of Obedience required of us consequently is, that till we
can do all aforesaid, We must desert our former flocks, though they desire us
to continue our care of them, and that we give over our preaching the Gospel of
salvation to any but our families, or four more; and that no man not ordained
by Diocesans administer the Lords Supper, etc.]

2. The question is not whether we should give up the Temples and Tithes, and
all public Maintenance when ever it is required of us: Though St. Ambrose
would not obey the Emperor Valentinian, in giving up one Temple which he could
spare, to the Arrians; yet the Nonconformists are of another judgment, and
think them all in the Magistrates power: But it is the Office, Relation and
Work, that they dare not renounce or cease from, without a better discharge.

3. Yet they judge, that where truly there is no necessity of their labors, or
they should do more hurt than good by Preaching, it is their duty, when
forbidden, to forbear: But not because any will say, we are Judges, and it is
so, when notoriously it is not so.

4. But this requires a larger disquisition than we may here stay to make.

SECT. XV.
VII. The Seventh Part of required Obedience.
1. THE Seventh Part of the Obedience required of us, is that we come not
within five miles of any City or Corporation which sends Burgesses to
Parliament, or to any other place whatever, where we have ever preached since
the Act of Oblivion; except on the Rode or summoned.

2. Many Ministers have their friends, houses, and all that they have, in those
forbidden places.

3. The greatest places being most populous have most need of Preachers, many
souls being more precious than few, and the public Teachers that have many
thousands, needing more help than they that have but little charges.

4. Few Ministers are rich enough to be able to sell their houses and goods at
loss (when perhaps none will take them,) and to take houses in other Countries.

5. A great part of the Land is seated so near Corporations, that it is hard to
find a place that is above five miles off them; And some Ministers have
Preached about in so many places, that it is hard to find a place within their
reach, above five miles from the places which they have preached in: And in
such places, it is rare to find empty houses, and Landlords that will let them
on terms which they are capable of: so hard to them is this confinement.

6. They think that men can no more disoblige them from preaching to many in
Cities and Corporations, than to four or five in Villages; seeing the Churches
of old were planted most in Cities, and Christ says not, [forsake all the
souls in Cities if they bid you,] but [When you are persecucuted in one City
fly to another.]

7. Though we live not to eat, we must eat to live; and when Ministers that
have nothing, are like to beg or famish among strangers in poor Villages, and
bigger places do more call for help, and will allow them bread, they think it
no sin to eat bread any more than to give bread to others that are in want.

8. The former Laws send them when they are in beggary, to be kept by the
Parishes where they last lived; and this Law forbids them to come within five
miles of them.

SECT. XVI.
The Adjuncts and other Matters agreed on, which affright the Nonconformists.
I. AS there are some sins far greater, and more terrible to conscience than
others, so aggravating Adjuncts often make them such: And these here seem very
frightful. We are not now charging any others with sin, nor proving the
unlawfulness of what we fear, but expressing the Matter of Fact agreed on,
which does affright us.

I. Both sides agree, that it is a great aggravation of sin to be done by a
Minister of Christ, a person consecrated to holy work, to preach truth and
holiness, and serve at the Altar: For our Doctrine will be the less regarded,
and men will be tempted to follow our bad example, who are bound to be to them
patterns of purity and obedience to God: And Christian and Protestant Religion
is most injured by Ministers sins.

II. It is agreed that our Ministorial sins, which we do as if they were part
of our Office in the public Assemblies, have a special aggravation differing
from men's secret personal crimes.

III. It is agreed that Lying and Perjury are sins of so heinous a nature, as
that they tend to overthrow humane trust and converse, and all Societies, and
deprive Princes of part of the security due to them for their lives and Crowns:
And that in a Preacher of the Gospel they are intolerable, tending to tempt
the hearers to believe nothing that we say.

IV. It is agreed that by assertion to absolve thousands of persons known or
unknown, and justify them, if they should prove guilty of such a crime, and so
to draw on our selves the guilt of many thousand perjuries, would be a sin of
as heinous a nature as most we can imagine.

V. It is agreed by Protestants, that all Oaths, Covenants and Laws, must be
understood according to the plain and usual sense of the words, unless our
Rulers otherwise expound them, and tell us that they mean somewhat else.

VI. It is agreed that though Judges must determine of the sense of Laws, so
far as to decide the cases that are brought to them; yet none can make an
universal obligatory exposition of a Law, to bind the subjects conscience in
understanding it* but the Sovereign and Lawgivers themselves: Else a Judge
might become a Legislator and frustrate the Kings Laws by his expositions. If
Judgments be the expositors and preservers of Common unwritten Laws which are
Customs, it is because it is the Lawmakers or Sovereigns will that it shall be
so.

VII. It is agreed by all Protestants that stretching the words of Laws, Oaths
and Promises to meanings quite differing from the Common use of the words,
without the direction of the Lawmakers to to do, and taking such Oaths or
Covenants with eqnivocations and mental reservations on pretense of Charitable
interpretation, for our own ends and interests, is more suitable to Atheists
than sincere Christians, and would overthrow humane trust, and the end of Laws
and Princes safety, as well as other sorts of perjury. For instance, if one
take the subscribed Declarations that [Its unlawful on any pretense whatsoever
to take Arms against the King and so on] and will thus equivocate, as they say
some do; viz. [It is unlawful] that is, against the Law of the Land but not
against Gods Law; [To take Arms against the King] that is, as King; but says
Sua^ez, and such others, when he is excommunicate by the Pope he is no King;
[On any pretence] that is, say they, [unjust pretence] [by his authority
against his person, and Souldiers] that is, say the equivocaters, [Its well
said that we may not do it by his Authority, but we may do it by the Law of
nature and so by Gods Authority whose Law that is; [against any Commissioned by
him] that is, say they, lawfully commissioned, and we are judges when his
Commissions are unlawful: So [We will not endeavor any alteration of
Government in Church or State] that is say they, 1. Not of Monarchy, or the
King, but we may yet disturb any of his Officers: 2. Not of the Essentials of
Episcopacy; but we may seek to take down their wealth and Lordships, and reduce
them from Diocesans to Parochial or Corporation Bishops: 3. Not by unlawful
means; but we take not that to be unlawful which they do. What good will Oaths
or Covenants taken with such Latitude or Equivocation do? Do they secure any of
the ends of Governments? Rulers should abhor such Equivocations and stretching
Latitudes as these.

VIII. It is agreed on both sides, that if we might go on this supposition,
that our Rulers can require nothing that is unjust or impious, or against the
Law or Common good or their own interest, and therefore that no exposition is
to be put on their Laws or Impositions which is of any such importance, by this
rule any oath or Covenant or promise in the world which Governors shall impose
upon us, may be taken: For we must put a good sense upon them all: And the
sense is the Oath or Covenant.

IX. It is commonly agreed that a man may not deliberately tell one lie to save
his life, or his Ministerial liberty: And that if any one only of all the
things imposed on us be a sin, it is the duty of all the Ministers of England
rather to suffer any thing, or to dye than to Commit it. And that if it be one
man's duty to be silent in such a case, it would be the duty of all the
Ministers in the Land, if the things be sin.

X. And all are agreed that to silence all the Ministers of the Nation, is a
thing that God has not given any man authority to do, because of the necessity
of their Ministry; and consequently not to silence any necessary Ministry at
all.

XI. It is agreed that Satan would fain corrupt States and Churches with the
most heinous sins, to expose them to Gods judgments and the enemies scorn: And
that common Perjury or Perfidiousness is one of those greatest sins: And that
as the Belief of the Truth is the beginning of Christianity, so Satan is a Liar
and the father of Lies: And he that thinks that Satan is endeavoring to
stigmatiz^ Persons, Churches or Kingdoms with his brand of PER should the more
carefully avoid the receiving of that mark.

XII. It is agreed that God has within these fourteen years excercised very
grievous Chastisements on Cities and Corporations, by such a Plague (on London
and many Corporations) and such fires on London, Southwark and many
Corporations) and such increase of Poverty, (though we have more liberty at Sea
and Land for trade, than almost any Nation near us) as that the like has not
been known in our forefathers days: And that if this should be the Voice of
Christ, as a reproof of our perfidiousness, and perjuries, saying (except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish,) it would leave the impenitent without
all just excuse.

XIII. It is agreed by us all, that God will not hold him guiltless who takes
his name in vain; especially by perjury or false Vows or Covenants; And that
for Oaths (broken) the Land may mourn: And that he is the grand enemy of Church
or Kingdoms, who would by such sin bring them under the judgments of God: And,
as Achan, bring in an accursed thing.

XIV. None can deny that it is better to cherish honesty and conscience,
especially about Oaths and Covenants which secure Converse and the lives of
Princes, than to teach men to stretch Conscience in such matters; and to make
every seared Conscience capable of the holy Ministry, preferment and honor;
and a fear of such sin, to be the way to silence and ruin.

XV. we agree that when Jesuits and other Papists have contracted the shame of
equivocation and perfidiousness, Protestants should not partake with them, and
take the shame on their religion,

XVI. It is agreed that when the Scots Covenant is so greatly decryed, and the
violation of the Oaths of Allegiance and other Oaths and Covenants was found
necessary to the killing of the King, and other late confusions and iniquities,
we should not after such warning either ensnare men in unnecessary Oaths and
Covenants, nor harden such men against Repentance, by doing any such thing our
selves, much less by commanding it.

XVII We are agreed that to commit a sin by passion or sudden surprise, is not
so wicked as to do it on deliberation: Nor is the doing it only so bad, as
undertaking to justify it, and encourage others to do the like.

XVIII. We are agreed that God is jealous about holy things, and that wilful
corrupting his Church, worship or discipline, to the disgrace of religion and
encouragement of wickedness is a heinous sin: Especially to Approve such things.

XIX. We are agreed that to make a deliberate Covenant that I will sin against
God, and to subscribe and declare this, is a heinous aggravation of the sin: e.
g. When the high places were kept up in Judea if any had Covenanted to keep
them up, and purposed to transgress, the wilfulness had been the greatness and
dangerous signification of such sinning.

XX. We are agreed that Repentance is Gods condition of forgiveness; and that
for a man to resolve and Covenant to sin and to profess it openly to all the
Church, and that often times, and so to renounce Repentance, is -- alas --

XXI. Most sober Christians are agreed that Christians should be united upon
the terms which Christ himself has made in the baptismal Covenant, and in
their obedience to his Laws; and that Papal Usurpations and imposing of things
unnecessary as necessary to Union, Communion or Ministration, has been the
great cause of Schisms through the Christian world, for about 1000 years at
least: And that they who will still obey such dividing Imposers, do continue
Schisms in the world by encouraging the causes of them.

XXII. We are on both sides agreed, that it were heinous hypocrisy, and
profaneness, if we should make our sacred Ministerial work the pretended
reason for our sinning, and should swear, declare or subscribe that which we
take to be false, and do that which we take to be sin, that we may have leave
to preach against sin in others; and so offer God a Sacrifice of iniquity, and
put a beam into our own eye that we may have leave to Preach against the mote
that is in our brothers eye.

XXIII. We are afraid of making Separatists and Anabaptists and tempting men to
avoid us, as scandalous men.

XXIV. We are afraid lest by such wilful sin, we should by a carnal interest,
to defend what we have once done, be tempted to impenitence, and to persecute
the just.

XXV. We are agreed that they that will run into willful heinous sin, as they
deserve to be forsaken of God, so they cannot expect such a blessing on their
Ministry, as Conscionable upright men may do.

XXVI. It is agreed that the ancient Christian Pasters Preached against the
will of Princes for 300 years; and after that against the will of Christian
Princes (Constartius, Valens, Theodosius Junior, Vaientinian, etc.) And not
only Apostles said, that God was to be obeyed rather than men, but such as
Timothy who was ordained by man, were charged before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ who will judge the living and dead at his appearing and Kingdom, to
preach the Gospel and be instant, in season; etc.

XXVII. We are agreed that the Children of Christians, when they grow up, know
no more of God, of Heaven, of Christ, without teaching, than the Children of
Heathens do: And therefore that the opening and applying the Gospel is needful
in England as well as in America.

XXVIII. It is so far from saving unbelievers or ungodly persons, that they are
the Children of Christians, and in the visible Church. that it makes their
case more miserable; if not worse than that of Sodom and Gomorrah.

XXIX. As of old every single Church had usually many Presbyters and Deasons
with the Bishop, so it is undeniable that many of our Parishes have work enough
for many Ministers, and only want of maintenance is pretended for our present
paucity (with the want of worthy men.)

XXX. It is granted us, that to alienate consecrated persons from the holy
Ministry causlesly, is greater Sacrilege than to alienate consecrated Lands,
Goods or Temples, which are but means to the use of the said Ministry. We are
not here accusing our silencers of this heinous Sacrilege: Their Righteous
Judge and ours, will quickly pass the final sentence: But we dare not, we will
not sacrilegiously silence and alienate our selves, lest we forsake our Lord,
and betray men's souls, and be doomed as the slothful servant that hid his
talent, Mat. 25. and bring down more plagues upon the Land: We fear when we
read 1 These. 2. 15, 16. the signs that wrath was come to the utmost on the
Jews; even their forbidding men to preach the Gospel of salvation, lest we
should contribute to such a dreadful desertion of this Land.

SECT. XVII.
The Case of the Ministers since they were silenced, and their Practice (with
the Peoples.)
WE humbly crave of those narrow Seers, who venture to censure the generality,
for somewhat which they dislike in some persons that are nearest to themselves,
that they would truly understand the case and practice of their Brethren,
before they any further in Sermons and Writings provoke the Magistrate to
execute the Laws upon them, as Schi^maticks, Seditious, or what accusation is
readiest at hand.

I. That the elder sort of the Nonconformists are ordained by Bishops, and most
of the rest by such Pastors of Churches, of Cities, Corporations and other
Parishes associate, as the times then allowed; and that in this Ordination (be
the Ceremonious part right or wrong) they are all by Consent or Covenant
devoted to the sacred Ministry, and that not for a time, as hirelings, but for
life: this is denied by none that we know of.

II. It is known to all Faithful Ministers and others, who converse with the
common sort of men, that a great part of the people of England are ignorant of
the very Essentials of Christianity, and a great part dull and worldly
neglecters of all serious religiousness; and a great part sen^ual, drowned in
filthy fleshly sins: Besides the ignorance, weakness, and unwarrantable
opinions and passions of many that are more seriously religious than the rest.
And that it is a hard work to cure one ignorant, erroneous, vicious soul: And
each one is precious, and not to to be left in sin as desperate; considering
the everlasting consequents.

III. It is certain that most great Parishes, especially in Cities and great
Towns, have more souls which call for Ministerial help, than Conformists and
Nonconformists, if they lovingly joined, are able well to afford necessary help
to.

IV. The Ministers that dwell in Cities or Corporations, when they were cast
out, did quietly surrender Temples and Tithes: But many of their people claimed
the continuance of their Relation and Ministry; and many professed that they
could not trust their souls to the Pastoral guidance and care of many of those
who were placed in the Temples in their stead; and charged the neglect of their
souls on such as refused.

V. The Bills of Mortality show us that the 7 Parishes within the walls of
London are not the seventh part of the whole, including all the outer Parishes:
And of the 97 there were very few Churches left unburned; and there are but few
that are yet built up; and instead of many, there are small Tabernacles, and
instead of others nothing: And the outer Parishes are mostly so great, as that
the Temples will hold but a small part of the people: It is conjectured by the
Inhabitants, that in Martins Parish are about threescore thousand souls, and in
Stepney and Giles's Cripplegate, each about fifty thousand, and in Giles's in
the Fields between 20000 and 30000, and in Clements Danes, Margarets
Westminster, Andrews Holborn, Sepulchers, and the Churches in Southwark, at
Aldgate, White-Chappel, Shoreditch, and diverse others, there are in some six
times the number that can hear in the Temples, in some more, and in others not
much less. And in most Churches the Preachers voice will not extend to above
two thousand, if more can come in. So that take one with another, and it is
conjectured that it is not above the seventh or eight part of the Inhabitants
that can come to hear in the outer Parishes: And if the other six or seven
parts should seek for room in the emptier Churches of other Parished within the
walls, it cannot be supposed that above one part of these six or seven would
find room: So that all set together, there is supposed to be place but for
about the fifth, or fourth part at most, of all the people within and without
the walls: And London is to be denominated rather from three, four or five
parts, than from One of these: And we all agree, that the famousest and
happiest City for Religion in the world should not be left to turn Infidels,
Pagans, Atheists, or to be kept from all public Worship of God. And it must be
considered that the great Parishes where one of twenty cannot hear, are far off
from the Churches that have room; and that such persons cannot easily know
beforehand what Churches have room, and where to seek it: And that those that
have most need, have least desire, and when they cannot be taught near home,
will rather stay at home, or in the streets, or Ale houses, than go far to seek
room in the Alleys of other Churches. And it is known that by this means Papists
have got opportunity of seducing multitudes, and many get them to baptize their
children. And whereas it is said that some may go one day, and some another; it
is answered, 1. That if they did go half the families by turns, still the
greater part would be shut out. 2. It is all, that are bound by God constantly
to hear and worship him. 3. And those that most value it will still crowd in,
and keep out the rest, and will not bargain away their own duties and benefits
for other men's sakes: Nor can Parishes come to agree upon such a bargain.

VI. Experience assures us that men are not usually brought to knowledge,
repentance, faith and holiness, by the Gospel ex opere operato, or as by a
charm; but as an apt moral cause; And that the Preaching of judicious,
convincing, serious, affectionate Ministers has incomparably more success,
than the affected language, or dull reading speeches of injudicious novices or
wordly formalists or hypocrites: God usually works according to the moral
aptitude of the means (though not always.)

VII. It cannot be denied but that the number of raw cold, dry, yea and
scand^lous Ministers, in many Counties of this Kingdom is too great: And the
more ignorant and bad the people are, the abler Ministers, and more diligent do
they need: And those people who feel what profits their Souls, will not take
up with cold, uneffectual teaching, if they can have better.

VIII. He that has no Preacher but a Reader in his parish, is by the Church
Laws forbidden to refuse his Ministry, and all such are forbidden frequent
going to other parishes, communicating in them: what want soever they have at
home.

IX. The Nonconformists that do but affirm any thing in the Liturgy,
Ceremonies, Articles, Government, etc. to be unlawful, and such as they may not
subscribe to, are by the Church Laws excommunicate ipso facto: And all that
dare not take the Sacrament kneeling, are to be denied the Communion of the
Church; And all that dare not submit their Children to be baptized by the
foredescribed undertaking of Godfathers, and to receive the Cross as a
dedicating badg of Christianity, must not have their Children Christened; And
all that dare not commit their souls to the Pastoral Guidance of ignorant
readers, or other men whom they think by their unskilfulness, unsoundness,
aversness to a holy life, strangers to intimate cases of conscience, or
notorious negligence and sloth, or non-residence, to be unmeet for them to
trust themselves to, in so great a matter, in which their salvation is so much
concerned, and so dare not take the Sacrament from such as their Pastors, all
these are forbidden Communion with any other Parish Churches by the Canon, and
all Ministers forbidden to receive them. And if they dare not say that they are
willing to be confirmed (in the English mode) they must no where be admitted to
communion: And being excommunicate, must not be buried according to the
Church-Office when they are dead; so that they are cast out of the Church,
before they Congregate in other Assemblies.

X. In this case the Nonconformists are not agreed what to do: One part and the
far greatest say, 1. We will forbear affirming the unlawfulness of any of the
foresaid impositions, till we are called to speak out: And because the case of
these times calls us often to it, we will do it as privately and modestly as we
can: 2. And though we are excommunicated ipso facto, yet we are not bound our
selves to execute their sentence; but may stay in Communion till they prove the
fact and do the execution on us themselves by refusing us: And this we take to
be the most peaceable way: But others say, That though in some cases for peace
this way may be taken, yet ordinarily we are not bound to seek and expect
Communion with that Church which has already thus excommunicated us;
especially when all the Ministry subscribe and declare their Conformity to the
Church orders, and swear Canonical obedience to the Ordinaries, and are
themselves to be suspended if they give us the Communion: We must not, say
they, strive against their Laws, nor seek that Ministers should be perjured,
false to their promises and professions to admit us to Communion against their
Laws: Nor can any Church that first excommunicateth us, call us Schismatics
for not communicating with them, unless they prove that we give them just cause
to excommunicate us. Here it is supposed that the Reader understands that [to
be excommunicated ipso facto,] is sine sententia, without any need of a Judges
sentence, to be actually excommunicate upon our fact done, so that the bare
proof and notice of the fact is enough to warrant the execution (Though a Judge
may also pass a sentence if he see cause,) vid. Calv. Lexic. Jurid. And others
commonly. There are some others that go further, and think it unlawful to have
Communion with the Parish Churches, because they thus excommunicate us first,
without more cause, and because they take the Pastors to be scandalous by the
foresaid Oaths, Declarations and subscriptions, and those that have not the
peoples consent, to be no true Pastors. But these are herein disowned by the
most; and very few Ministers are of their mind that we know of, though many of
the people much incline to it; especially they that live where the Priests are
ignorant, scandalous, slothful, or malignant; because Pa^l says, [W^^h s^c^,
no not to eat] But others tell them that 1. It is not the Parish-Ministers that
made the excommunicating Laws: 2. And if they sin themselves, it is ignorantly:
3. And we have not a call and opportunity to hear and judge them.

XI. Even those called Independents hold (if Mr. Ph. Nyes Manuscript to that
end may tell us their minds) that it is lawful to hear the public Parish
Ministers, because the Magistrate may set Teachers over the People, and require
them to hear them: Though they hold that the People should choose their
Pastors, and that the Sacraments should be administered and received freely, and
not by force. Yea such Anabaptists as Mr. Tombs (as is visible in his Book)
hold that Communion with the Parish Church is lawful, in the Word* Prayer, and
Lords Supper.

XII. We commonly hold that men unjastly excommunicated, are not thereby
disobliged from public worshipping of God, and living under Pastoral oversight
and Church discipline, nor are bound to endanger their own salvation by
neglecting such duties, and losing such helps and privileges; and therefore
must be of such Churches as they can, if they cannot be of such as they would,
or as are allowed by the Magistrate.

XIII. It is not in the power of our selves to escape such excommunications:
For we are not able to change our own understandings, so far as to hold every
thing before named, to be lawful: Some of us are able to say that we have with
a willingness to see the truth, studied the case of the old Conformity above
forty years, and the case of the New-conformity now above seventeen years, and
read almost all that has been written for them, which we thought might add to
our information, and prayed earnestly that God would not suffer us to err; and
the longer we study it, the more we are confirmed: In this case we suffer
public and private obloquy and reproach, and not only these seventeen years
the loss of all Ministerial Maintenance, but the danger of 40 l. a Sermon, and
imprisonment in common Gaols, and the ruin of our estates and health: And in
reason its as easy to think that they that hold their opinion on such terms,
are like to be as impartial in their studies, as they whose way leads to
preferment, wealth and honor; of which we were capable of a part: We say
therefore again, that to Cons^^m, or prevent the Canons Excommunication ipso
facto, is not in our power. And they that say, God will not condemn men for
that which they were not able to avoid or help, should not do otherwise
themselves.

XIV. When the 1800 or 2000 Ministers were silenced, the far greatest part of
them forbore all public Preaching, and only taught some few in private at such
hours as hindered not the public Assemblies, and many of them lived as private
men.

XV. To this day it is so with many of the Nonconformists: Those that live
where they find small need of their Preaching, or else have no call or
opportunity, and cannot remove their dwellings, do hold no Assemblies, but as
other men content themselves to be Auditors. Those that live where are godly
and peaceable Ministers in Public, who yet need help, do lead the people
constantly to the Parish-Churches, and teach them themselves at other hours,
and help them from house to house: This is ordinary in the Countries, and even
in London, with many Ministers that hold no Assemblies; yea many that were
ejected out of City Parish-Churches.

XVI. Those called Independents do keep up such Churches as they had gathered
before; when none of our present oaths, declarations, subscriptions or
practices were imposed on them; which is not therefore to be taken as new.

XVII. As to the rest, it was the great and terrible Plague in 1665. which made
this change in their Assembling and Ministration. When the public Ministers
forsook the City, and the rich left the poor to misery and death, and people
looked every day for their last; when they that heard a Sermon one day, were
buried the next; when death had awakened the people to Repentance, and a regard
of their everlasting state, diverse Nonconformable Ministers resolved to stay
with them; They begged money out of the Countries for the poor, and relieved
them: They got into the empty Pulpits, and preached to them: And when Preachers
and Hearers looked every day for their last, it is easy to conceive that there
was serious Preaching, and serious Hearing: By this many that died were helped
in their preparations; and through God's great mercies, multitudes that
survived, repented and became the serious seekers of a better world. The men
that did this were mostly unmarried, and could easilier venture their own
lives, than such as had families; and some of them that had families, yet
trusted God, and most did escape. We know but of one (pious Germane Minister
that died of the Plague in the City (and one of another Disease, if not through
want) and two that fled from it in the Country.) And when God had blessed these
men's faithful labors with the conversion of many souls (especially Apprentices
and young people,) the experience so engaged their mutual affections, that the
Ministers resolved that they would live and die in such service as God had so
blessed and preserved them in; and their hearers resolved that they would not
forsake their Teachers: And thus the dreadful Plague began that which so much
now offends men, as a dangerous Schism.

XVIII. And when some men out of excessive caution, were ready to think that
when that Plague was ceased (having killed about an hundred thousand) the
Ministers should lay by that public work, and retire again into secret
corners, God confuted them by his next dreadful judgment, burning down the
City the next year, 1666: So that there were neither Churches to go to, nor
Ministers in the Parishes to Preach, nor rich men to maintain them: And could
any soul that hated not Christ and men's salvation, have wished the
Nonconformists then to desert the miserable people. When they newly came from
under the terror of such a dreadful Plague, and when success and Gods
protection had so greatly encouraged them, and when presently they were
deprived of their worldly treasure, and had not houses, or goods, or money, but
thousands utterly ruined in the world, and crept into holes and lived in
poverty, when it was a wonder that they dyed not by hundreds of famine, and
when such a sight as London in its ruins was before men's eyes, (which he that
saw sure can never forget,) If then men, because that the Bishops or Parliament
forbad them, should have refused to Preach the Gospel of Christ, and to teach
men to lay up a treasure in Heaven, and to comfort such a ruined City, what
excuse would such unfaithful servants have had at the bar of their great Judge?

XIX. These two great and notorious necessities succeeding in those two
dreadful years 1665 1666. calling the Nonconformable Ministers out of their
retirements, and latitant and silent state, resolved them to serve God more
diligently and openly than they had done, whatever it cost them: And many
Country Ministers were awakened to the like by the examples of those in London:
Though yet a great number who are in places of less need, or not called out as
aforesaid, still lie much silent.

XX. WHILE THE DREADFUL FIRE WAS WASTING LONDON and OTHER CORPORATIONS, THE
PARLIAMENT and BISHOPS WERE AT OXFORD MAKING AN OATH TO DRIVE ALL
NONCONFORMISTS ABOVE FIVE MILES FROM ALL CITIES and CORPORATIONS that send
Burgesses to Parliament, and all other places where ever they had Preached
since the act of oblivion. So that, had they obeyed the Laws, London had been
deserted in the Plague and in the ruins, and few people suffered publicly to
worship God: At the mention of which the heart of the writer of this trembles;
especially to think how much further the Bishops went in this then the Synod of
Ithacius and Idacius went, from which Martin separated to the death by Gods
miraculous instruction.

XXI. The Plague, Fire, Poverty, which have seized not only on London, but on
many other Corporations of England, more than other places, and more than has
been known in our forefathers days, make many wish that the Corporation-Oath
and Declaration might be reviewed and that Gods Judgments as a T^empet sounding
REPENT O ENGLAND were heard by all the Corporations of the Land, before we hear
that time is past: And that it might be considered whether either an Unlawful
Imposing, or an Unlawful taking, or the neighborhood of any Unlawful
particulars, can warrant any man to declare that neither he nor any other
person, is obliged by that Vow, to Repent of his sin, or to oppose
profaneness, Popery or Schism, or any thing contrary to sound Doctrine and
Godliness. And to enquire in what Country or age of the world, Christian,
Mohammedan, or Heathen, there was ever such a Law before. It was that age of the
Church in which Hell ruled most on earth, even in the Wars between Pope Gregory
7th. and the Emperor, when the Pope swore them on one side, and the Emperor
on the other; and men swore, and unswore, and forswore, as the powers that they
were under bid them; which made Abbas Ursperg^nsi^; Chron p. 32. say [Ut omnis
homo jam sit perjurus and praedictis facinoribus implicatus, ut vix excusari
possit quin sit in his, sicut pop^lus sic and Sacerdos. And that pleasant man
(who knows his own name) who merrily derideth his adversaries, for gathering
a doubt of our fundamentals from our differences, may more feelingly know one
day that God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain: And may
consider that it was no more precise a man than Cotta in C^cero (de Not. Deor.
l. 1.) that would prove men did not believe that there was a God, because they
durst be perjured; instancing in perjured and ungodly Carbo: It was not a sign
of Schismatics, but of very charitable moderate men, that could hear and
regard such a perjured Ministry, as Urspergensis says was then in the Roman
Church, especially in Germany, where the temptation lay.

XXII. A little after the Plague and Fire, some Nonconformable Ministers about
London, met, to consider whether our actual forbearance to join with the
Parish Churches in the Sacrament, might not tend to deceive men and make them
believe that we were for separation from them, and took their Communion to be
unlawful: And upon the Reasons given in, they agreed that such Communion was
lawful and meet, when it would not do more harm than good: But because at that
time a storm was coming on men, from the Act against Conventicles, and their
judgment was against ruining those that in this were not of their minds (on the
reasons aforesaid) and being credibly informed that their communicating at such
an unseasonable time would not only persuade men that force compelled them, but
also draw them to ruin others that durst not imitate them, they resolved to
delay for a fitter opportunity, because God will have mercy and not sacrifice;
and our Liberty is not always our Duty, nor must be used to other men's
destruction. Thus violence crosses the Authors ends.

XXIII. Shortly after, when such thoughts returned, and many thought it meet to
join in the public Assemblies, the Oxford Oath and Act of Confinement was put
in execution, and drove them all away: For the reasons aforesaid had satisfied
them not to desert the souls in all Cities, Corporations and places where they
had Preached; and so they were fain to hide themselves to avoid six months
imprisonment in the common Gaols (whither some of us were sent;) so that if
they had come to the Parish-Churches, to Common Prayer or Sacraments, they had
exposed themselves to multitudes of witnesses, and so to certain imprisonment:
Except in some odd corners of the Country where they were strangers (about five
miles from Corporations or acquaintance) where their example would have wrought
little on any in the Cities, or that had known them: So that the Oxford Act
most effectually forbad them coming to Church, or holding Communion with any
Parish-Churches within five miles of any such City, Corporation or Village
where they had Preached since the Act of Oblivion: This they could not avoid.

XXIV. Yet many Ministers were afraid of introducing unwarrantable separations,
by avoiding the severities of the Law and Bishops; and many that did retire to
Country-Villages five miles distant, as confined, did there constantly join
with the Parish-Churches in Liturgy and Sacrament: But this being far from
Cities, and not in the sight of the people that were most disaffected to the
Prelates and Liturgy, did little with them; and so they were disabled by the
Bishops or Rulers to do what they desired against other men's extremes.

XXV. Before this, many Ministers had offered thankfully to accept the Liberty
of Preaching in the Parish Churches where the Liturgy is used, and being
present at it: And some to this day that live in the Country, where they can
get so much favor, preach in the Parish-Churches, and join in the Liturgy, and
draw others to it, and go from place to place thus to avoid being taken.

XXVI. Many, seeing how we were thus driven not only from Preaching, but such
Parish-Communion, were tempted to hard thoughts of such affairs, as if it came
from the Papists, who would have equalled, and mass'd us up with themselves.

XXVII. Shortly after this, the Kings Clemency saw cause to make an alteration
and to give us his gracious indulgence by his Licenses for places and persons;
Upon this, Ministers boldly set up Chapels under the Parish Churches; and in
all the time of this their Liberty, when there were witnesses enough, if they
had offended, we remember not that any were ever convict of any word of
seditious or unsound doctrine, or any unpeaceable attempts. But while they had
this leave to Preach themselves, they thought best to take it at the same
convenient hours that the Parish Churches meet at: Other times being so
inconvenient, as that families cannot observe them without hurt. And they could
not Preach, and hear in the Parish-Churches at once.

XXVIII. All this while, though they had the Kings authority for their
Assemblies, some Clergy men ceased not to accuse them of Schism; showing that
it is the want of something else rather than the Kings authority on which they
ground their accusation.

XXIX. Some Nonconformists have these 17 years forborne to baptize or administer
the Lords Supper, or to be Pastors of any Churches, but only Preached
occasionally where the Parishes were so great, that one of ten or twenty had no
room in the Church; and where some of many years had heard no public worship
of God: And they have published to the people that they assembled them not to
separate from the Parish Churches or their worship, but for their mere
necessity, persuading none to come to hear them, but such as cannot come into
the Parish Churches to hear: Yet are they accused for drawing men from the
Church.

XXX. These Ministers in these places have been prosecuted more severely than
the rest, by imprisonments, fines and guards against their meetings; which
induced others to Preach in the City where there seemed less need, because they
found quietness no where else, and because some out of the remoter needy
Parishes might come thither to them.

XXXI. Though they have lost all Ministerial maintenance, and are liable to pay
20 l. the first Sermon, and 40 l. the rest, and 20 l. for the ground for all
that they Preach, besides six months imprisonment in the common goals, and
poverty disableth City and Country to maintain them; and some with Wives and
Children have long lived on little besides brown Rye Bread and Water; and
others, that can live of their own, expend all in the charges of the places and
adjuncts where they Preach for nothing; and some never took any pay, from the
first these 17 years, but patiently serve God and wast their strength under
men's obloquy and reproach; yet are there not wanting persons of the Clergy, who
represent their greatest and dearest services as their greatest sins, and
accuse them as enemies of the Churches peace, and the leaders of Schism, and in
pulpit and print provoke authority to execute the Laws more severely on them;
Though the execution has cost some excellent men their lives already, and they
may know that no execution short of death or utter disablement will make the
most conscionable forsake their duty, and sacrilegiously desert the Office to
which they were dedicated and ordained: (As the late case of the Hungarian
Ministers declares:) And such courses never ended in the honor of those of
the Clergy that procured them: Yea some as going to the bar of God, have
undertaken to prove, that it is through pride and covetousness that we conform
not. And because some Churches called Independent withdraw not their
maintenance from their Pastors, and some few others have maintenance of their
own, or friends that will not see them want, they would make strangers believe
that the common sort of Nonconformists, whose families live in sufferings and
wants, are gainers by their Nonconformity Though themselves that have the most
and richest on their side, would be loath to take up with such maintenance, and
often Preach, how sad a case the Church would be in, if Ministers were left to
the peoples charity: While they live in fullness thus they envy their poor
brethren, who that they may finish their course, would be glad of leave to
labor for nothing, and live on alms, taking Gods favor for their reward.

XXXII. And to complete all, some blush not to accuse them, as the bringers in
of Popery, by desiring Liberty; as if Preaching the Gospel did not do more to
keep out Popery, than the ignorance of untaught people: As if our earnest
requests eighteen years ago, that we might not be mass'd up with the Papists,
nor a door opened to them by our divisions and sufferings, were all forgotten:
As if the Nonconformists were nearer Popery than they that would have the Pope
to be Principium Unitatis to the Universal Church: As if their Printed Morning
Lectures against Popery, and many other Writings, did not sufficiently show
their distance from it: As if the Papists desired the Liberty, rather than the
silencing of the Nonconformists; or desired any thing more than that so many
hundred adversaries to Popery, and all the Protestants of England who adhere to
them, might be cast out, and brought as low as themselves, and put into the
same condition, that they might stand or fall together. Nay, what if on such
necessity they should accept of favor from any Papists that would save them?
If one Party would bring men to such a pass that they must be hanged,
imprisoned, ruined, or worse, unless the favor of the Papists deliver them;
and the other Party had rather be saved by Papists, than be hanged or ruined by
Protestants, which of these were more to be suspected of Popery? especially if
the same men that give us the Alarm that Popery is coming in, undertook the
sole teaching of those by whom they suspect its entrance, and yet would not
abate a needless Oath, or covenant or ceremony to keep it out, or strengthen
the Protestants by the Union, for which we have so long patiently begged and
waited.

XXXIII. The most of our acquaintance take it for their duty to do their best
to keep up the reputation of the public Conformable Ministry, that it may
further Love and Concord, and the success of their labors with the people; and
they profess to take their own Assemblies but as Chapels, and not as distinct,
much less as separated Churches: And those of them who do administer the
Sacraments, and do that which is like the Separatists way, yet do it nor on
their principles, but pro tempore, till God shall give them opportunity to
serve him in the established way (if ever it may be hoped for:) it being
reformed or well ordered Parish-Churches under the Government and countenance
of the Christian Magistrates, which are most agreeable to their desires.

XXXIV. When we go into the Parish-Churches, we find those that have able godly
Ministers usually to be as full as will consist with the peoples hearing the
voice (which in many places will not reach to a great part of the
Congregation:) we find such Preachers, whether Conformable, or Nonconformable,
every where almost crowded after; which shows that it is not mere faction that
moves the hearers; and that worthy men have no cause of discouragement: And if
none of either side be valued much above their worth (for the bare Office sake)
we cannot help it; nor would it be helped if there were no Nonconformists: Some
of us well remembering the time (1632. till 1640.) when we were troubled or
threatened also for going out of our own Parishes to hear worthy, able men that
were very conformable.

XXXV. It is very ordinary with Gentlemen and others that are zealous for the
present Church State in London, to go from their own Parishes, though the Canon
be against it: so that it is not, sure, the breach of the Canon that they stick
at.

XXXVI. We shall never dissuade men from making the strictest Laws to punish
any Nonconformist that shall be proved guilty of Sedition, Disloyalty,
Drunkenness, Fornication, Swearing, and any other immorality; but we know of
none of them that was silenced, ejected, or punished on any such account: Nay,
if they Preach against their Church Government, Liturgy, or Ceremonies, we must
expect that they should be restrained. Our earnest desire is, that the
Magistrate would keep up Peace and Order in the Church, that Popish Clergy men
may not think that it belongs to them alone to do it.

XXXVII. Whereas there is a sort of ignorant or ill meaning men, that still say
[we know not what the Nonconformists would have, and why will they not tell us
what would satisfy them,] While we offer to beg on our Knees for leave to do
it; we humbly entreat them to weary men awake no more with that canting. 1. As
long as the Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical affairs is visible. 2. And
as long as our Reply and our Reformed additions to the Liturgy, and our
Petition for Peace which respected the old Conformity remain unanswered by
those to whom in 1660 we did present them: 3. And till we are once called or
allowed to speak for our selves against the new conformity; a favor which the
justice of old Roman Heathens, yea and splenetick Jews did grant to all that
were accused before they punished them, but since Popery prevailed in the world
is become a thing among them not to be expected. 4. And as long as men know
that Bishop Wilkins and Dr. Burton appointed by the Lord Keeper Bridgman to
treat with some of us of the terms of Union, (saying it was His Majesty's
Pleasure,) did come to a full agreement with us in terminis, which was drawn up
into the form of an Act by no worse a man than that PILLAR OF JUSTICE the
excellent Judge Hale, and the Parliament presently Voted that no such Act
should be brought in and offered. Dear Brethren, God is the father of Lights
and with him is no darkness: Men may be mocked, but God is not mocked: If the
day that will bring works of darkness to light, and finally clear the Innocent,
be not the object of certain faith and hope, let our cause be bad, and let us
as fools be judged such as have forsaken our best hopes: But that it is
otherwise we believe, and therefore appeal to a righteous God from an
unrighteous world.

XXXVIII. What harm our Preaching the doctrine of salvation can do to the
Bishops or people of the Land (while they may punish us for any word that we
speak amiss:) And why we should not rather speak openly (where men may bear
witness of our errors,) than in secret (where men are tempted to too much
boldness:) And what but a spirit of envy, or a carnal interest cross to the
interest of Christ and men's salvation, should grudge at such Preaching, while
we are responsible for all that we say or do amiss, we cannot tell.

XXXIX. Nor can we tell, if our not swearing, or not entering into the Bishops
National Covenant, be as great a crime as our penalties import, why no other
mulct or penalty will serve turn to expiate such crimes, but our ceasing to
preach the Gospel of Salvation, while we are willing to do it under the
strictest Laws of Peace and Order.

XL. It is visible that the Parish-Churches of those Ministers (caeteris
paribus) are fullest of Auditors, who are most willing that the Nonconformists
help them in due time and place, and desire to live with them in Love and
Concord: For all that have the spirit of holy love and peace, do love those
that have the same spirit: And such serious, holy Conformists as Bolton,
Whately, Fenner, Preston, Sibbs, Stoughton, Gouge, and such other, were
formerly as much crowded after as Nonconformists: But it is those that Preach
against holy Love and Concord, and wrangle with the most Religious sort whom
they should encourage, whose Congregations are thinest (usually) through the
tepidity of their followers, and the distaste of others.

XLI. When we read in the Council of Calced. the Egyptian Bishops crying so
long miseremini, miserimini, lying prostrate on the earth, even when they could
say, Non dissentimus, and beging of their fellow Bishops for their lives and
consciences, and their Brethren crying against all [Away with them, They are
Hereticks] while they professed the same Faith; while the men that with such
out-crys were condemning those of their own confession, had newly cried, Omnes
peccavimus, for condemning Flavianus, and the Truth, and saying, that they did
it for fear, and owned that Eutychianism, which yet these Egyptian Bishops now
disowned, it minds us that even Bishops had need to be remembered; that while
the wheel is turning, the upper side should not tempt men to forget what side
will be uppermost shortly and for ever.

Additions: more particularly of National Churches.
1. THere are some worthy persons who plead more specially for National
Churches as of Divine Institution, whose Doctrine calls us to a special
consideration of it. But though some of us have often desired it, we have not
hitherto obtained any satisfaction what they mean by A National Church, or any
true definition which they agree in: Some of them deride us for doubting and
asking the question, and some answer it to the increase of our doubt.

2. It must be presupposed that we speak not of a mere Community that has no
Pastors, but strictly of a Society called by some Political, by others
Organized, constituted of Pastors and People mutually related; which is the
ordinary sense of the word [Church.] And we must premise what being commonly
agreed on, is none of our doubt or question.

3. The question is not whether any, or all Nations and Kingdoms should be
Christians, and so be the Kingdoms of Christ: That Is past doubt. 2. Nor is it
whether in such Kingdoms the King be the Head, as to the power of the sword;
that is, a Christian Civil Governor of a Christian People that are his
Subjects. We daily pray that the Kingdoms of the world may all be Christian;
and we believe that their Kings are the Governors by the sword, of all the
Clergy, as well as others. 3. Nor is the question whether Kings may call all
their Kingdoms into a holy Covenant with God (by lawful means) giving them an
example first themselves. 4. Nor do we contend about an Equivocal Name, whether
a Christian Kingdom, as such, may be called a National Church. 5. No nor
whether a Christian Nation, governed by a Heathen or Mohammedan King, may be
called a Christian Church or Kingdom; or a Protestant Nation ruled by a Papist
King, is to be called a Protestant Kingdom or Church: for this is but about
bare names. 6. Nor do we question whether a Christian King may make such
accidental disparity between the Pastors, as we have before described. 7. Nor
yet whether the Pastors of one Kingdom may associate and hold Synods for Unity
and Counsel, and be named a National Church, as they are such Associations,
obliged to Concord.

4. But our doubts are these; 1. Whether it be in it self specially instituted
by God, that every Kingdom or Nation of Christians shall have [One summam
Potestatem essentialiter Ecclesiasticam, or one Priest-Head, (whether a single
person, or an Aristocracy, or a Common Synod) as a constitutive part of the
National Church. 2. Whether this Priest-Head (whether High Priest, or Council,)
stand in subordination to the King, as part of the same formal Church, as a
General, or a Vicerov, that makes not a distinct Kingdom, (though he may make
a distinct subordinate Society as an Army, City, etc) or is he Head of a
coordinate different species, so as that the same Kingdom shall be two Policies
formally, viz. a Christian Kingdom or Royal Church, and a Priestly Church; each
being supreme in their proper species, and both made coordinate by Christ; and
so they are formally two Churches National. About the Jews the Controversy is
made by Dissenters (e. g. Galaspie, Coleman, Seldom, etc.) exceeding difficult.
3. Whether the very Jewish Church Policy be established by Christ for the
Christian Church, or be repealed? 4 Whether the said Ecclesiastical Head must
be One as the High Priest, or an Aristocracy of many, or a Synod of the whole
Clergy? or whether it be left indifferent which? 5. Or whether God has
ordained such a National Church-form, only by the general Command of doing all
things in Order and Unity and to Edification? 6. Which is the Priestly-Head, or
highest Governor of the Church of England, which is a constitutive part, as a
King in a Kingdom? 7. Who is it that chooses or authorizeth the National
Priestly Head, that we may know when we have a lawful Chief Pastor, and when an
Usurper? 8. Whether the King or he, is to be obeyed in Circumstances, or
matters Ecclesiastical, if they differ, and make contrary Laws? Without the
solution of these questions, the name of a National Church will not be
understood, nor of any practical importance. Our own thoughts of them are as
follows.

5. It is certain, that the Mosaical Law made for the Jews peculiar republic,
as such, is abrogate; not only the Ceremonial part, but all: All that was not
then made for all the world, is ceased; 1. Because the Commonwealth is ceased
for which it was made: 2. The Holy Ghost expressly and frequently determines it
so; even of that Law that was written in stone, as such, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. Heb. 7. 12. 19. Gal. 4. 21, and o. 3. 24. The natural part, and that which
was instituted positively long before for perpetuity, were both of them God's
Laws before Moses's time, and as such, obliged other Nations, and so do still:
The matter written in stone (except some few mutable particulars, as the
seventh day Sabbath, etc.) is such as we are still obliged to, 1. By Nature, 2.
By Christ: But not as it was part of the Jews peculiar Mosaical Law. Much less
does it bind all the world to its Policy.

6. If the Jewish Law, either as such, or as stablished by Christ for his
Kingdom, did bind all the world to this day, then it would bind them to their
Civil Policy, as much at least as to their Ecclesiastical. But few Christians
think that it binds them to their Civil Policy. For if it did, then, 1. All
Nations that have varied from it to this day, have sinned: 2. No diversity of
Governments could be lawful: 3. Then it would perplex men, to be sure, whether
it be the old Mosaical form by Judges, or the later Regal form that binds: 4.
Then such a Civil Council or Sanhedrim as was appointed the Jews, would be a
Divine Establishment, and not variable at the will of Kings or People. Many
other things would follow, which Kings would not easily believe.

7. There may be much more said for the continuance of the Jews civil Policy
than for their Ecclesiastical: For there is much more forbidden of the latter,
than of the former; Though all nations be not bound to their civil policy,
they may set it up if they please; They are not prohibited: For Christ has not
made new Laws for civil states as such; But he has made new Church Laws, and
thereby altered, yea prohibited much of the old.

8. We know no more reason why the Jewish form should bind us, than that which
was before the Jews: and particularily Melchezedeks, who was a King and Priest:
God owned both and commands us neither, at least as in conformity to them.

9. The Holy Ghost says expressly Heb. 7. 11. 12. That perfection was not by
the Levitical Priesthood, and that the Priesthood being changed, there is made
of necessity a change of the Law, which is called, the Law of a carnal
Cammandment, verse 16. and that there is a disanulling of the Commandment
going before for the weakness and unprofitableness of it; for the Law made
nothing perfect, v. 18, 19. the Covenant or Law being not faultless a new one
does succeed it v. 7. 8. 9. 10. The first Tabernacle is not standing which had
their ordinances of divine service and a worldly sanctuary: Heb. 9 1. 8. 11. He
takes away the first Law and Priesthood, that he may establish the second,
Heb. 10. 8, 9 11. 16. 17, etc.

10. Whilst it is agreed on, that the essentials of the work or office of the
Jewish Priests is ceased, (as Heb. 7. and 8, 9, and 10 show,) and their Title
by birth, and the appropriation to one Tribe, etc. it follows that the Jewish
Priesthood is ceased. But yet we confess that Christ, if he had pleased, might
have settled a High Priest and Council like theirs in every nation for his own
work. But if the old form bind us not, we are left only to enquire what new one
is settled by Christ, and whether he have done so or not.

11. We justly maintain against the Anabaptists, that Infants relation to the
Covenant, and the universal Church (as members) was not repealed by Christ,
because it was not founded only on the Law of Moses: which if it had, it were
as such repealed

12. The Holy Ghost by the Apostles Acts 15. has declared to all the Churches
of the Gentiles that they are not bound to keep the Law of Moses, and has
absolved us from all, saving things antecedently, and on other reasons
necessary. verse. 28.

13 If the Jews form of Government be ours, then the High Priest must have the
power of the Sword, or sit in judgment for life or death, as Deuteronomy. 17. 12, 13.
and other places show: But many Papists and Protestants are agreed that the
clergy have no power of the Sword, or force, unless the King make them also
Magistrates.

14. It is a matter of so great importance to the Church to know whom we must
obey, that it is not to be thought that any way is made necessary by Christ,
which he has not made intelligible and certain to be indeed his will:
Especially when the Apostles strove who should be the chief, and two of them
made it their request; and when the Corinthians and others were ready to set up
one before another, and say I am of Cephas, etc.

15. Yea Christ on this occasion expressly forbad them to seek to be one above
another, and told them that though Kings exercise authority, and have
magnifying Titles, with them it should not be so, but their preeminence should
consist, as that of a servant, in humility and service unto others Luke 22.
which will not stand (as we suppose) with establishing the Jewish order.

16. And Paul's reproof of their making a Church head of Cephas, Paul, or
Apollo, or taking them to be other than helps of their faith, (and not Lords of
it) and Ministers by whom they believed, even then when Schisms made it
necessary to have known to whom they must appeal and adhere, if that had been
the way, does further confirm what we say.

17. The argument that some worthy persons bring, from the Prophesies that
Nations should be converted unto Christ; and that the Kingdom should be taken
from the Jews, and given to a Nation that would bring forth the fruits of it
Matthew. 21. 43. and that the Kingdoms of the world are made the Kingdoms of
Christ, and that Egypt and Assyria should be converted and equalled with the
Jews, etc. do ineeed show that there should be Christian Kings and Kingdoms;
which the Apostles were sent to endeavor, Mat. 28. 19. to convert Nations: But
here is nothing, that we can perceive, to prove that these Christian Nations
must have the Jewish Church Policy.

18. Nay contrary, the Church is said to be built on the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. and not of the Mosaical Policy of
Priesthood, Rev. 21. 14. It has twelve foundations.

19. It is said, Zech. 2. 11. Many Nations shall be joined to the Lord, and
shall be my people. So Zech. 8. 22. Isa. 65. 1. Romans 10. 20. Isa. 2. 2. and 55.
5. Hos. 2. 23. Isa. 60. 3. and 49. 22. But not a word in all this, of the old
form of Policy or Priesthood, but Contrarily, that the Law should come out of
Zion, and a new Covenant should be made: And it is certain that so large a
history as we have of Christ's performances, is a far clearer light than
obscure Prophecies; and darker texts must be explained by the plainer, and not
contrarily.

20. We see not how the Synod Act. 15. makes any thing for a National High
Priest or Sanedrim, or any like Policy: For 1. It appears to be no act of
proper National Government, but did bind other Churches as well as those within
the Empire. 2. It was an arbitration at the request of doubting persons; and it
was not the Relation of the Arbitrators to one seat of National Power (as the
Metropolis) that was respected, but the quality of the persons sent to, who
would have been equally obeyed had they dwelt in the least Village of another
Land. 1. There were the Apostles that had the promise of the Holy Ghost: 2.
There were many* whom the people must needs more confide in than in one;
especially whose power was questioned by gainsayers. 3. Both Apostles, Elders
and Brethren there were such as had seen, or were near to Christ and his works,
and therefore likeliest to know his mind. 4. They were Jews themselves, and
therefore most impartial Judges in the point that Jewish Teachers troubled them
about, so far as that they might well acquiesce when Jews themselves resolved
them. And when the Apostles were dispersed, we find not any more
Jerusalem-Councils Governing the Imperial Churches.

21. If that Councils Authority were properly National, and arose from the
prerogative of Jerusalem, then 1. All the Apostles, when scattered, would have
been subject to James, the first Bishop of Jerusalem, (thought to be no
Apostle:) 2. Then Jerusalem might have after claimed the Supremacy as of Divine
right, before Alexandria, Antioch or Rome. But it is certain by experience that
the whole Church was of another mind, when Jerusalem had not so much as the
fifth or lowest Patriarchate, till long after by another grant. But if the
Power was not fixed to the place, but the Itinerant Apostles, then it is
nothing to prove any Governing Church over others, as being affixed to such a
place: Nor shall we easily find the Apostles Itinerant Successors in that
power.

22. II. It is certain that Christ chose twelve Apostles (besides Paul) who had
a preeminence before other Ministers; and that he joined with them some
Prophets and Evangelists, appointing them all to gather Churches through the
world, discipling and baptizing Nations, and teaching them all things that he
commanded (a work to be still done, and to which he promised his presence to
the end of the world:) And that these having gathered Converts, set over them
fixed Bishops (or Pastors or Elders) to be their constant Guides, in Teaching,
Public Worship, and Discipline, under Christ the great Prophet, Priest and
King of the Church. And that to the Apostles first, and by them to others, he
gave them the Keys (that is, the Judging Power of reception, and rejection, and
the Official Power of pronouncing God's reception or rejection of them
according to his Word.)

23. There is not the least evidence that these Apostles did affix a Superior
Power over the other Churches to any particular seats, Patriarchal or
Metropolitan, much less National; or that any of them exercised Government over
the rest; or that they themselves did fix themselves as Bishops to any twelve
or thirteen Cities in the world; much less to twelve Kingdoms.

24. There is no notice in Church history of any one National Church Power
(Priest or Synod) settled, asserted or exercised under Heaven, of above three
hundred years. Egypt and Assyria that were prophesied to be Christian Nations,
never were distinct Christian Kingdoms, but parts of the Empire; nor had a
National Church or Head (being but parts of such a Church:) Nay, when Rome got
the National Primacy, it had not such a Priestly Governing Sovereignty as the
Jews High Priest had.

25. Though there was no Christian King for three hundred years (unless he of
Edessa, or Lucius of England, of whom we have little certainty; but it is like
that both were subjects to others) yet if a Supreme Church Power had been
necessary, the Apostles would have before erected it; which they never did: For
even Rome pretends to be by them made the Ruler of the whole world, and not a
mere National Head (which Constantinople claimed, but not as of Apostolical
institution.)

27. The question whether the Jews, had they believed, should have continued
their High Priest and Church Policy, is vain as to our purpose; 1. It being
certain to Christ that they would be dissolved by unbelief: And 2. he having
settled another way, and changed theirs: 3. And if their Priesthood and Law
(except as it typified spiritual things) had stood, yet it would not have bound
the Gentile Christians in other Nations.

28. When Emperors became Christians, they did not set up the Jewish Policy,
nor thought themselves bound to it; no nor any settled Priestly Supremacy for
National Government: For Councils were called but on rare accidents by the
Emperors themselves, and to decide particular cases about Heresies: And the
Pope had but the first voice in such Councils.

29. But if every Nation must have the Jewish Policy, then the whole Empire
must then have one High Priest, and then the Pope has a fair pretense to his
claim of a Divine Institution, as the Church Sovereign of the whole Empire,
which, it is like, was then seven parts in eight of the whole Christian world at
least, (unless Abassia were then generally Christians, as now.) But then his
power would change with the Empire, and fall when it falls.

30. III. But if the question be only whether a National Priestly Sovereignty
be lawful? or whether God's general Rules (for Concord, Order, Edification) do
bind the Churches prudentially to erect such a form? To this they sayas
follows. 1. We will first lay hold on certainties, and not prefer
uncertainties before them. We are sure that such a power of Apostles and
Pastors as is before mentioned, was established; and that the junior Pastors
were as Sons to the seniors, ordained by them: Whether the power of Ordaining
and Governing Ministers was by Apostolical Establishment appropriated to men of
a superior degree in the sacred Ministry, seems to us very dark. 2. We are
past doubt that all particular Churches, by Apostolical order, had Bishops; and
that a Church was, as Hierom says, Plebs Episcopo adunata, and as Ignatius,
the Unity of every Church was notified by this, that to every Church there was
one Altar and one Bishop (at that time) and as Cyprian, Ubi Episcopus, ibi
Ecclesia. 3. And we are satisfied, that every Presbyter is Episcopus Gregis,
whoever claim to be Episcopi Episcoporum (which the Carthage Council in Cyprian
renounced.) 4. And we are satisfied that no Church-superiours have authority to
destroy the particular Church form, Ministry, Doctrine, Worship or Discipline,
which were settled by the Holy Ghost in the Apostles; And that the privileges
and duties of these single particular Churches, being plainest and surest in
Scripture, they must be continued whatever Canons or Commands of any superior
Priests should be against them. 5. Nor can they force any man to sin: 6. Nor
have any Priests a forcing power, by the sword or violence, but only the power
of the Word and Keys, that is, of taking in, or putting out of the Church,
where they have power, and binding men over, on just cause, to the judgment of
God. The power that they have is from Christ, and for him, and not against him;
and for the Churches edisication, and not destruction; and what is pretended
contrary to this, is none. They cannot dispense with the Laws of God, but
preach and execute them. 7. And these things being thus secured, though in our
doubts we dare not swear or subscribe that National, Patriarchal, Provincial,
or Metropolitical Powers are of God's institution; yet we resolve to live in
all Christian peaceableness and submission, when such are over us.

31. And we must profess that when we find how anciently and commonly one
Presbyter in each Church was peculiarly called the Bishop, without whom there
was no (ordinary) ordinations, and against whom in matters of his power none
was to resist, and also how generally the Churches in the Roman Empire
conformed themselves to an imitation of the civil power (as to their limits) in
all the official part (being all subject to the Emperor, who set up no
Ecclesiastical Peer,) we are not so singular or void of reverence to those
Churches, as not by such notices to be much the more inclined to the aforesaid
submission and peaceableness under such a power; nor are we so bold or rash as
to reproach it or condemn the Churches and excellent persons that have
practiced it.

32. Nay we have already said, that securing the state, worship, doctrine and
true discipline of the inferior particular (Parish) Churches, there are some
of us that much incline to think that Archbishops, that is, Bishops that have
some oversight of many Churches with their Pastors, are Lawful successors of
the Apostles in the ordinary part of their work. And such of us have long ago
said, that the Episcopal Government of the Bohemian Waldenses described by
Commenius and Lascitius, is most agreeable to our judgment of any that we know
excercised: Therefore that which we humbly offered for our concord in England
at His Majesty's Restoration, was Archbishop Ushers form of the Primitive
Church Government, not attempting any diminution of the Power, wealth or honor
of the Diocesanes or Archbishops, but only a restoration of the Presbyters to
their proper Officework, and some tolerable discipline to the particular Parish
Churches.

33. But we must ever much difference, so much of Church order and Government
as God himself has instituted, and is purely divine and unchangeable, from
those accidentals which men ordain though according to Gods general Rules: For
these are often various and mutable, and are means to the former, and never to
be used against them. And of these accidentals of Government we say as they
that say no such form is fixed by God. Concord, order and decency and
edification are always necessary, But often times it may be indifferent whether
concord, order and decency be expressed by this accidental way or that. And
that which is most congruous for order, decency, edification and concord in one
Country, Church or time, may be incongruous in another. Therefore if the
question be but how far the giving one Bishop or Pastor power over others, or
making disparity of Cities in conformity to the state, be prudently to be
chosen; we only say, so that Gods establishment be not violated, whatever we
might think best, we presume not herein to give Laws to the Lawgivers, nor to
obtrude our Counsel uncalled, on our superiors, much less seditiously to
oppose their Lawful institutions.

34. But to those that think that Gods foresaid General Laws (of order,
concord, edification) do make such a policy ordinarily necessary in the
Churches, as imitateth the Jews, or the civil form of Government, we humbly
offer to their consideration; 1. If so, then it would have been the matter of
an Universal Law, (with its due exceptions;) And then Christ the only Universal
Lawgiver would have made it: For if he have not made all necessary Universal
Laws, his Laws are imperfect; And then there should be some other Universal
Lawgiver to supply that defect: But there is no other upon earth (whether Pope
or Council,) 2. It is contrary to the nature of undetermined circumstances to
be always the same, and so to be fit matter of such Universal or fixed Laws:
The cases will vary, and then so will the duty; 3. There will be great
diversity of the interest, and ingeny of the Judges of the case in several
Countries and ages: And therefore though some think the said imitation of the
civil state always best, vet others will not.

35. But if such a settlement were certainly best, let it be remembered, 1. That
the Jews had not under the chief High Priest, one in every City or Tribe like
Diocesane Bishops. 2. That their Synagogues had discipline within themselves;
ever where there was but a Village of ten persons, there was a Presbyter that
had the power of judging offenders.

36. What man does prudently set up, man may prudently alter as there is cause.
Greg. Nazianzen earnestly wishes that there were no difference of Place or
seats among the Pastors of the Church. And therefore he neither thought their
Government of each other to be of Divine right, nor of prudential necessity or
use: Else he would have been against it. And the whole Greek Church did, and
still does take the seats of preeminence to be but of man's appointment, or else
they would never have changed them, and set Constantinople so high as they did:
And the Council of Calcedon expressly determines, that Rome was by the fathers
made the chief seat because it was the seat of the Emperor; which was mutable.

37. The Councils in those days were about Popes or Patriarchs, and could
depose them: And yet it is most evident to any man considerately reading such
history, that all the Councils, called before Christian Emperors gave them
more power and conjoined their authority, did meet only for acts of Agreement
and not of Regiment over each other: Many such synods are mentioned by
Eusebius: And the Right Reverend Archbishop Usher declared his judgment so in
general that Councils had but an agreeing power, and not a Regent power over
the particular Bishops. Yet these two things must be supposed, 1. That the
Pastors in a synod are still Rectors of their slocks, and their Canons to them
may be more authoritative than a single Pastors words: 2. That Gods Law binds
us to keep love and concord, and the Agreements of Councils may determine of
the matter in alterable points; and so even absent and present Bishops may,
concordiae gratia, be obliged by Gods Law to keep such canons as are made for
concord, and so they may be the matter of our duty. But seeing the Church for
300 years, judged Councils to have no proper Governing power over particular
Pastors; and Bishops, or Patriarchs singly had ever less power than Councils,
it follows that then a Churches Government of disparity and supraordinate
Bishops like the civil, or like the Jews, was not then taken to be of divine
right, nor then of any right at all.

38. And as to the doubt [whether it began after 300 years to be a prudential
duty or at least most desirable] when we hear what is said on both sides we
think it not easy to judge, either how much in such a case Christ has left to
humane prudence, nor which way the scales of prudence herein will ordinarily
turn. On one side it is said 1. That it is absurd that there should be no
appeals for injured persons to a superior power; 2. And that the dissensions
of the Church else will be remediless, and all will be broken into heresies and
sects; 3. And that Apostolical men of a higher rank than mere Presbyters will
else have no convenient opportunity to exercise their Governing power, if it
be not tied to fixed seats.

39. On the other side they plead; 1. That it is safer for the Church to have
Religion in the power of many Bishops or Pastors, than that one High Priest or
Patriarch should have power to corrupt it, or silence the faithful preachers,
or persecute the people when ever he proves a bad man: Yea they say it must be
rare if he be not bad, seeing it is certain that the most proud and worldly men
(which are the worst) will be the most earnest seekers of rich and honorable
places; and he that seeks will usually find. 2. They say Christ directly
forbad this to his Apostles Luke 22. That which they strove for was it that he
forbad them: But that which they strove for was who should be the chief or
greatest (and not who should tyrannize) 3. They say that all Church history
assures us that there have been more Schisms and scandalous contentions about
the great superior Bishoprics far, than any of the rest: It is a doleful
thing to read the history of the Churches of Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, and Rome: Gregory Nazianzen gives it as the reason, why the
contention at Cesarea was so lamentable, because it was so high an
Archbishopric. The whole Christian world has been scandalized, torn and
distracted by the strife of Bishops of and for the highest seats. Their famous
General Councils which we justly honor for their function and that which they
did well, were shamefully militant: even the first and most honored Council at
Nice, was with great difficulty kept in Peace by the personal presence, wisdom
and authority of Constantine, preaching peace to the preachers of peace,
burning their libels of mutual accusation, and silencing their contentious
wranglings, and constreining them to accord. Nazianzens descriptions of the
ignorance and insolence, and naughtiness of the Clergy, Orat 1. and of the
shameful state of the Bishops, Orat. 32. must make the readers heart to grieve,
The people he describes as contentious at Constantinople yet as endued with
the Love of God, though their zeal wanted knowledge, page, 528. But (the
Courtiers, as whether true to the Emperors he knew not, but for the greatest
part perfidious to God: And the Bishops as fitting on adverse thrones, and
feeding adverse opposite flocks, drawn by them into factions, like the clefts
that Earthquakes make, and the pestilent diseases that infect all about, and
distracting and dividing all the world, separating the East from the West, by
the noise, of meus et tuus, antiquus et novus; nobilior aut ignobilior;
multitudine opulentior aut tenuior; raging like furious horses in battle, and
like madmen casting dust into the air, and under their heads fulfilling their
own contentions and becoming the determiners of wicked ambition and
magnificence, and unrighteousness and absurd Judges of matters: The same men
(says he) are to day of the same throne (or side) and judgment, as we are, if
so our leaders and chief men carry them: To morrow if the wind do but turn,
they are for the contrary seat, and judgment. Names (or votes) follow hatred
or friendship: And which is most grievous, we blush not to say contrary things
to the very same hearers; nor are we constant to our selves, being changed up
and down by contention; you would say we are tossed like the waving Euripus:
Therefore he professes it unseemly for him to join with them, as he would not
leave his studies and peace, to go play with the Lads in the streets, page 524.
The like he has in his Poems de vita sua, page 24, 25, 26, 27. (...), etc.

"Etenim Magistri plebis atque antistites,
"Sancti datores spiritus, and qui thronis
"Fundunt ab alt is verba queis patitur salus,
"Cunctisque pacem jugiter qui praedicant,
"In aede media vocibus clarissimis,
"Tanto surore se petunt sibi invicem
"Tumultuando, contrahendo copias,
"Carpendo sese mutuo lingua effera,
"Saliendo, mentis ut solent sanae impotes
"Praedando quos quis ante praedari queat
"Rabida imperandi dum tenet mente sit is;
"(Quinam ista verbis, and quibus digne eloquar?)
"Orbem universum prorsus ut divulserint,
"Ortumque jam and Hesperum scindit magis
"Ardens simultas, quam loci vel climata;
"Namque illa si non sinis, and media uniunt;
"At hos ligare vinculum nullum potest:
"Non causa, Pietas, (bilis hoc excogitat
"Ad mentiendum prona, sed Lis ob Thronos:
"Quidnam hoc vocarim? Praesules? Non Praesules.
[* Some say that Gregory himself forsook the place; but it was when he saw
that they would put him out: Some say that it was not the same Council that put
him in, but it is an error. When Melecius was dead, more Bishops came from
Egypt and turned the stream. And they named many to suceed him, [to the
Emperour' out of whom he chose an unbaptized Layman Nectarius Niceph. l. 12. c.
15. so that the Emperor then chose the Bishop in that manner.]

Are not these doleful Narratives and Characters of those Primitive Bishops
(even in those happy days of good Theodosius? But all this is yet little to
what the same man says of Bishops in his last Oration de Episcopis, Vol. 2.
too sharp and large to recite. Perhaps it will be said, that it was the
Macedonian or Arrian Bishops that he meant: So one Papist was not ashamed to
answer me, when the whole scope of his writing speaks the contrary, that he
spoke of the Council at Constantinople, and other such, and expressly says in
his Epist. 59. to Sophronius, page 816. si eos inveneritis non ob sidei
doctrinam, sed ob privatas simultates inter se distractos and divulsos, quod
quidem ipse observavi. But some will say that he was wrongfully cast out by
that Council of Constantinople, and he speaks but of that, or that injury
made him satirical by exasperation. But 1. The places cited show that he
speaks not of that Council only: And Epist. 55. Procopio page 814. he says
(refusing to come to a Council) ego si vera scribere oportet hoc apimo sum, ut
Omnem Episcoporum Conventum sugiam: quoniam nullius concilii sinem laetum and
faustum vidi, nec quod depulsionem malorum potius quam accessionem and
incrementum habuerit: pertinaces enim contentiones and dominandi capiditates
(ne me quaeso gravem and molestum existimes haec scribentem) ne ullis quidem
verbis explicari queant, citiusque aliquis improbitatem arcessetur, dum aliis
judicem se praebet, quam ut aliorum improbitatem comprimat.] And that injury
made Gregory injurious is an injurious conjecture, seeing all his endeavors in
these businesses were for piety and peace: And it was partly for his speaking
for the Peace of the Church of Antioch, (which had long had two Bishops,
Paulinus and Meletius, and Flavianus, who had taken an oath not to be their
Bishop while either of them lived, intruded by Perjuries and the Bishops wills)
that this Council turned against Gregory; (and because they chose him not.) And
for peace he quit his place; and many and earnest Epistles he wrote after to
the Civil Magistrates, to keep the Bishops in peace at the next Councils, lest
Religion should be quite shamed and weakened by them. And was not the
contention at the two Councils of Ephesus more stigmatized by Historians than
this that Gregory so lamenteth? when they seemed rather to fight, than
peaceably to seek for Truth; in the latter of which Flavianus received his
deaths hurt, and the history of the better of them between Cyril, and
Nostorius, and Johan. Antiochenus, is sad to read.

The very controversy with its consequence was lamentable when one Council of
Bishops at Constantinople had cast out excellent Gregory; another near cast
out: excellent Chrysostom, his free speech and strict life being not endured,
and chose an old useless man Arsacius; Atticus, and Sisinius that succeeded him
being dead, the people did so dislike all the clergy of Constantinople, that
they would have one like Chrysostom of a Monastery by Antioch; Nestorius a man
of study, retirement, a poor garb, a strict life, abhorring public
contentions, and loving quietness, but of a pievish zeal against dissenters
called heretics, as enemies to the Churches unity and peace; so that he
presently persecuted many of them even the Novatians themselves, and stirred up
the Emperor to root them all out, and by Gods just judgment received such
measure as he had measured. A quarrel arose whether Saint Mary should be called
The Mother or Parent of MAN, or that Parent of GOD: Nestorius, to the end the
controversy, was against both, and would have her called, The Parent of Christ
who was God and man (but not of God:) Some Startled at this; And Cyril of
Alexandria (a man of great parts, spirit and power, the head of a turbulent
people, the first Bishop, says Socrates, that assumed the Sword) wrote Letters
of reproof to him; and Celestine, Bishop of Rome seconded him: yea Cyril
follows it with writing upon writing, to prove that S. Mary must be called
the Parent of God; with so great a number of words, and so many Anathematisms,
as made the noise and slame great, but ambiguity made it seem dangerous to
many; so that it grew to a great and open controversy, whether Nestorius or
Cyril was a damnable Heretic; some so calling one, and some the other; so that
the Emperor Theod. 2. was fain to call a General Council at Ephesus, to
prevent the utter confusion of the Churches: There Nestorius came first, and
once only appeared; and being charged with the Heresy of denying Mary to be
the Parent of God, he told them, that he would not say that God was two or
three months old, and so departed. To Cyrils large writings, he returned a
short Letter, professing, that he was for the distinction of Natures only in
the Unity of Person; but at large proves that Christ's Godhead had no
beginning, that it could not suffer, or die, nor rise again; and therefore that
those things which were said of the Manhood, must not be said of the Godhead,
that it was begotten, dyed, etc. unless they would be Heretics or Pagans. Read
their confession brought into the Council against them by Charysius and their
Anathemata's after; and I think you will see, that the error of Nestorius lay
in his want of skill in speaking, and that one side spoke of a phrase de
abstracto, and the other of the Concrete; and if so, both meant the same thing,
though Cyril was judged to use the most skilful words: Cyril denied not but
that the Deity was not begotten or Crucified, but said that God was begotten
and Crucified, and was passible; Nestorius denied not that he who was God in
one person with the manhood, was begotten, Crucified and passible, but not the
Deity. But Cyril said that the phrase [God was born, Crucified, etc.] was good;
yea necessary, and not (without anathematized heresy) to be denied, because in
one person the titles and actions are communicable: Nestorius said, that it was
wicked to communicate the infirmities of humanity to the Deity, as to say, God
did grow bigger, and was afraid, and was hungry, and needed help from Angels,
and died.) For he thought this phrase applied it to the Deity: (Let any man
that is impartial, judge whether this Controversy were not about words rather
than matter.) Theodoret was a greater Scholar than Nestorius, and he became the
Champion of his Cause, supposing that Locutio formalis est maximo propria; and
therefore that he that says God had a beginning, increase, death, passions,
must be supposed to mean it, qua Deus, as he is God: And so two Saints, St.
Cyril and St. Theodoret, fell at large to prove each other damnable Heretics.
John, Patriarch of Antioch, being far off, was long in coming to the Synod.
Memnon, Bishop of Ephesus, joining with Cyril, before he (...) Bishops came,
beg^n and condemned, and deposed Nostorius as a Heretic. Nestorius let them
all alone, and meddled little himself, alleging that Candidianus Comes for bad
him to appear. But when John of Ant. came, he took Nestorius's part, and
gathered a Council with himself, and Candidianus the Emperors Officer took his
part. John's Council condemned and deposed Cyril and Memnon, as they had done
Nestorius: And thus two Councils at Ephesus sat damning one another. The
Emperor knew not what to do with them, but requires each party to send some
of their Bishops to him: when they came, he permitted them not long to come
nearer than Calcedon, for fear of tumults: while they were there, the people of
Constantinople flocked to them, and most of the people being for Nestorius, and
most of the Courtiers, Clergy and Monks against him, they fell into dissension
to the stoning of some about their Meetings, for Preaching to the People.
Theodoret and his Associates prosecuted it against Cyril, as those that
declared their resolution to die rather than yield to his Heresies (as they
called them) and accused him as if he had been the most proud, unquiet troubler
of the world. The other side answerably accused them of dangerous blasphemy and
heresy. At last the Emperor thought it the best way for peace, to send Johan.
Comes Largitionum with power and commission to depose the Leaders that each
Party had deposed, viz. Nestorius, and Cyril and Memnon: But John wrote an
Epistle to the Emperor, how furious they were against each other, and how
Cyril's Party would not hear the Emperor's Letters, because Nestorius was
there, and how they raged and sell to fighting (a doleful story.) But at last
the Emperor seeing that Cyril had the stronger (and the orthodox) side, and
the Court and Clergy being against Nestorius, and yet being loath to divide Joh.
Antioch. and the Oriental Bishops from the rest, thought it the most healing
way to depose Nestorius alone, and restore Cyril and Memnon, and to charge
(magna cum severitate jubet, says Bin. Notes) Joh. Ant. to be reconciled with
Cyril; and to unite; so that Joh. and Theodoret, and the Oriental Bishops moved
with fear, and desiring peace, sent their Confession to Cyril, and Cyril said,
it was the same that he meant; and so they were suddenly made all Orthodox,
that had not understood it but by the Rod: But Nestorius returned to his
Monastery by Antioch (Chrysostom's place) and there lived four years in great
peace and reputation; but then he was no longer to be there endured, but
banished into foreign Countries, driven about in sufferings, in which he died.
And Theodoret, it seems, was not well reconciled, when, hearing of the death of
Cyril, he wrote to Joh. Antioch. that now there was hope the Churches might
have peace, the great enemy of all peace being gone to the place where such men
cease to trouble, etc. But so great was the rupture thus made, that to this day
it is not healed, great part of the East adhering then to Nestorius, and those
Country-Christians being called Nestorian Heretics and out of the Church by
the Papists to disgrace them, because they will not own their Pope. Nestorius
being thus condemned, Eutyches thought he would be far enough from his Heresy,
and said, that the Union of Christ's two Natures made them to be but one: This
Heresy one Council at Constant. under Flavian, condemned. Another after by the
countenance of the Emperor acquit him: The Emperor Theod. 2. commands a
General Council again at Eph^sus, and makes Dioscorus President; who being
Cyril's Successor, though he had held to his Doctrine against Nestorius* for
the Unitive Predication; and though he professed that the Synod meddled not de
side, but about matter of Justice between Flavian and Eutyches, yet
countenanced by the Emperor, he domineered, and by threatening got all the
General Council save the Popes Legates to subscribe against Flavian, and he was
beaten, and died of the hurt, says Bin. Notes, In hoc tam horrendo Episcoporum
suffragio sola Naviculd Petri incolum^s emergens, salvatur. The whole Council
went against the Pope, and the right: But sure Christ's United Natures are in
several sens^s both two and one; but two in the primary and most proper sense.

Thus you see what unhappiness even this National Government of Bishops in
those good times was liable to. It was by Bishops striving who should be chief
that the Donatists set up against the Catholics, and the very Novat^ans were
not free; much less the Appolinarians, and most others that caused the Schisms
of those times, in which the Bishops were almost ever the chief cause. Even
such worthy men as Theophilus, Alex and Epiphanius could not endure Chrysostom;
such men ejected him once and again, as Th^odoret says he purposely forbeareth
t^ name for reverence of their virtues. And if you come to the fourth Great
General Council at Calcedon you will find the same cause of lamentation, and
that even worthy men in such temptations are frail, when a new Emperor Martian
was on the other side, (the right;) when Dioscorus had professed that he was
neither for transmutation, division, nor confusion of Christ's natures (and
therefore was for distinction;) when the Egyptian Bishops professed their
consent with the Synod, only craying that they might not be put to Anathematize
Dioscorus till they had another Patriarch, but so long to delay; when they
professed that if they did, they were sure to be killed when they came home,
and falling on the Earth cried to their brethren miseremini miseremini spare us
or kill us here; yet they cry out heretics, heretics, away with them, till
the civil Judges rescued them: and how many of these had but lately subscribed
against Flavianus at Ephesus, (and here were in one point for Leo, and in
another against him?) Leo's Epistle which was for their cause against Dioscorus
they cried up; and condemned Dioscorus for excommunicating the Pope; but the
Canon for exalting Constantinople, they maintained against Leo's will, and
contemptuously cried out Qui aliter sentiunt Roman ambulent; he that reads
the clamours at this Council, and how the same Bishops that had lately
subscribed the condemnation of Flavianus with Dioscorus were zealous here on
the other side, and cried out omnes peccavimus, excusing it by their fear of
threatenings and Soldiers, when a poor Christian woman could have suffered
Martyrdom rather than sin; And he that reads how after all this they were so
ready to Anathematize others, and to contemn the prostrate Egyptian Bishops,
will think that he sees the first Council of Constantinople as described by
Nazianzen here exemplified, notwithstanding the honor that is due to them for
their orthodoxness. You see in this much how the great Bishops at the first
five General Councils (Nic. 1. Constable. 1. Ephesians. 1. and 2. And Calced.) did carry
i^. But when they were asunder were they settled, and did they keep the Churches
in concord by these Councils? Let us but, for one instance consider what
followed this excellent Council of Calcedon; 1. Leo the Bishop of Rome approved
it against Dioscorus, but abhorred the 28th Canon, which set up Constantinople
with equal privileges, and that above Alexandria and Antioch: So that the Pope
rested not in this Council. 2. What sedition there was at Alexandria upon the
change made by this Council all the days of Martian, and of the murder of
Proterius presently after, Liberatus in Breviario, and many other tell at
large. 3. In Palestine the Monks that had been at the Council, returned
lamenting that the faith was there betraved, and stird up their fraternity to
rescind the acts: They expelled Juvenal Bishop of Jerusalem; The Empress
Eudocia took their part: They killed Severianus Bishop of Scythopolis: They
compelled men to communicate with them: They murdered Athanasius a Deacon at
Jerusalem for contradicting them, and gave his flesh to dogs; They compelled
Dorotheus the Emperors Lieutenant to join with them, till after 20 months
Juvenal was restored Niceph. l. 15. c. 9. And in many Countries this contention
followed; and the women Eudocia and Pulcheria had no small hand in all, till
Pulcheria procured Eudocias Conversion to approve the Council. 3. When Leo came
to reign, the sedition revived at Alexandria between the murderers of
Proterius: Timothy Elurus made Bishop by the Councils enemies, deposed by Leo,
and Timothy, Salophaciolus put in his place and all was in confusion. The
Egyptian Bishops write to the Emperor against the Eutychians; The Emperor
sends forth his circular letters for the Council; Niceph. l. 15. c. 17. 18. 19.
4. At Antioch, Petrus, C^apheus ambitious of the Bishopric, got into Martyrius
place by Leo's help, and anathematized all that would not say that God was
Crucified and Suffered, and tore that Church in pieces: Martirius, when he
could do no good, forsook them, with these words [Clero rebelli et populo
inobedienti and ecclesiae contaminatae nuncium remitto:] Cnapheus reviled the
Council: Leo for this banished him: Stephanus, a friend of the Council,
succeeded him; him boys killed with sharp quils and cast him into the river
for favoring the Council: And Calendion succeeding him, made them Anathematize
the aforesaid Cnaphous. Leo being dead, dissolute Zeno reigned, Basiliscus
taking advantage of his lewd life, usurped the Empire, and made use of the
Schisms to promote his ends: And first publishes his circular against the
Council of Calcedon; to this says Niceph. l. 16. c. 4. besides the three
Patriarchs no less than five hundred Bishops subscribed, and renounced the
Council. But Acacius of Constantin. and Dav. Columella persuaded Basiliscus
quickly to write clean contrary Letters for the Council, seeing that this was
like to prove the stronger side. And when Zeno was restored, who was for the
Council, the Asian Bishops turned again, and wrote to Acasius to be pardoned,
saying that they subscribed to Basiliscus first Letters, not voluntarily, but
through fear Nceph. l. 16. c. 9. Then things were turned back again; till Zeno
thought it the best way to write his Henoticon or a Conciliatory edict, that
none should be forced to profess themselves either for or against the Council,
perceiving that the Bishops would never come to agreement, either as for it or
against it: But this ended not the divisions; But at Antioch Calendion was cast
out. And Pet. Cnapheus got in again: And at Alexandria between Peter Moggus and
John striving who should hold the place, all was in confusion. Yea the Schism
reached to Rome also; for Moggus at Alexandria Anathematizing the Council, and
persecuting dissenters, The Emperor seeks to reconcile them; Felix at Rome
condemns Acasius at Constantinople, for communicating with Moggus: Acasius
condemns Felix, blotting his name out of the Sacred Albe. Acasius dies, and
the Emperor found it so hard to choose a Patriarch, that should cause no
sedition, that he will have God choose one; and to that end puts a blanck-paper
on the Altar, and another requesting God that an Angel might write there the
name of the Patriarch that should possess the place: The doors are locked, and
forty days fasting and prayer commanded to prevail with God: One Flavitas
bribeth the Key-Keeper, who was the Emperors Lord Chamberlain, and he writes,
Flavitas name in the Paper and seals up the door again, and so there was a
Patriarch chosen by an Angel; but dyed suddenly within four months: But before
he dyed, he joined with Peter of Alexandria by synodal Letters to Anathematize
the Council of Calcedon and yet wrote to the Bishop of Rome that he renounced
Communion with Peter, and he wrote to Peter that he renounced Communion with
the Bishop of Rome. Euphemius succeeded him, and he rased Peter's name out of
the Book, and joined with the Roman Bishop. Peter and Euphemius as Generals
were gathering synodical Armies against each other, and Peter dies. Athanasius
that succeeded him, would fain have reconciled his Church but could not:
Palladius succeeded Peter Cnapheus at Antioch: Both these Patriarchs join
together to curse the Council of Calcedon; They die: John succeeded at
Alexandria and Flavianus at Antioch: These also join to curse the Council,
while the Patriarchs of Rome and Constantinople are for it, and curse them.
Zeno dies, and Anastasius Dicorus is chosen Emperor. He (says Niceph. l. 16.
c. 25) being a man of Peace, and desiring the ceasing of all contention, left
all to their liberty to thank of the Council of Calceaon as they pleased:
Hereupon the Bishops fell into three Parties, some fervent for every word of
the Council; some cursed it; and some were for Zeno's Henoticon, or silence, or
suspension: These renounced communion accordingly with one another; the East
was one way; the West another; and Libya another: Nay, the Eastern Bishops
among themselves; the Western among themselves, and the Lybian among
themselves, renounced communion with each other (Niceph. c. 25) Tanta confusio
meant iumque Caligo (says the Historia^) orbem universum incessit. The Emperor
having resolved to keep peace, and make no change, was forced to fall upon
those of both sides that were most turbulent. At Constantinople he put out
Euphemius (or for dislike of him.) This Emperor, before his inthroning, had
given under his hand to Euphemius, a promise to stand for the Council: He
demanded his writing again; Euphemius denied him, and was cast out: Macedonius
succeeded him: He had the same writing: The Emperor demanded it of him: He
also denied him: The Emperor would have put him out: The people rise up in
sedition, and cried, It is a time of Martyrdom: Let us a^l st^^k to the Bishop:
And they reviled the Emperor, calling him a Manichee, unworthy the Empire. The
Emperor was fain to submit to Macedonius, who sharply rebuked him as the
Churches enemy; but in time he remembered this, and cast out Macedonius, and
burnt the Councils Acts, and put Timothy in his place, who presently pulled
down the Image of Macedonius: The Patriarchs also of Alex. Antioch, and Bishop
of Jerusalem, were all cast out, even those that were against the Council. Pet.
Cnapheus had made one Xena^as a Persian servant and unbaptized, Bishop of
Hierapolis: He was against Images, and brought a troop of Monks to Antioch, to
force Flavianus the Bishop to curse the Council: Flavianus denied it: The
people stuck to the Bishop, and so unanswerably disputed down the Monks, that
so great a multitude of them were slain, as that they threw their bodies into
the River Orontes, to save them labor of burying of them. (Nicep. c. 27.) But
this was not all; another troop of Monks of Caelosrria, that were of Flavianus
side, hearing of the tumult, flockt to Antioch, and made another slaughter as
great as the former (says the Historian.) For this the Emperor banished
Flavianus, whose followers thought his punishment too great after all these
murders. Peter being dead, the Bishops of Alexandria, Egypt and Lybia, fell in
pieces among themselves; each having their separate Conventions: The rest of
the East also separated from the West, because the West would not communicate
with them, unless they would curse Nestorius, Eutyches, Dioscorus, Moggus, and
Acacius. And yet (says Niceph. l. 16. c. ^8.) Qui Germani Dioscori and
Eutychetis sectatores suere, ad maximam paucitatem redacti sunt. Xenaias
brings to Flavian the names of Theodore, Theodorite, Ibas, and others, as
Nestorians, and tells him, if he anothemarize not all these, he is a Nestorian,
whatever he say to the contrary: Flavian was unwilling, but his timorous
fellow-Bishops persuading him, he wrote his curse against them, and sent it to
the Emperor. Xenaias then went further, and required him to curse the Council:
They prevailed with the Isaurian Bishops to consent, and all renounced the
refusers as Nestorians: And thus the Council having (in name) condemned the
Nestorians and Eutychians, the Eutychians called all Nestorians that cursed not
the Council, and got many cast out. After Flavian, Sever^s got in at Antioch:
The first day he cursed the Council (though it is said that he swore to the
Emperor before that he would not) Nicep. c. 29. In Palestine there were
renewed the like confusions about the condemnation of Flavian and Macedonius:
About Antioch Severus Letters frightened many Bishops to curse the Council, and
those that held two Natures: Some Bishops revoked their sentence, and said they
did it for fear: Some stood out: And the Isaurian Bishops, when they repented,
condemned Severus himself, that drove them to subscribe: And some Bishops fled
from their Churches for fear. Cosmas and Severianus sent a condemnation to
Severus: The Emperor hearing of it, sent his Procurator to cast them out of
their Bishoprics for presuming to condemn their Patriarchs. The Procurator
found the people so resolute, that he sent word to the Emperor, that these two
Bishops could not be cast out without bloodshed: The Emperor answered; that
he would not have a drop of blood shed for the business. Helias Bishop of
Jerusalem, found all the other Churches in such confusion, condemning one
another, that he would communicate with none of them but Euphemius at Constable.
Nic^p. c. 32. And that you may see how people then were moved, a Monk or Abbot
Theodosius gathering an Assembly, loudly cried out in the Pulpit, [If any man
equal not the four Councils with the four Evangelests, let him be Anathema.]
This voice of their Captain resolved them all, and they took it as a Law, that
the four Councils should be [sacris libris accensenda] and wrote to the
Emperor certamen se de eis ad sanguinem usque subituros. (This was then the
submission to Princes by the adherents to the Councils of the Bishops. And they
went about to the Cities to bring them to join with them. The Emperor wrote to
Helias to reform this: He rejecting his Letters, Soldiers were sent to compel
them. The Orthodox Monks gathered by the Bishops, tumultuously cast the
Emperors Soldiers out of the Church: (c. 34) After another conflux they
anathematized those that adhered to Severus. The Emperor provoked, sent
Olympius with a band of Soldiers to conquer them. He came and cast out Helias,
and put in John: The Monks gather again, and the Soldiers being gone, they
cause John to engage himself to be against Severus, and stand for the Council,
though unto blood; which, contrary to his word to Olympius, he did. The
Emperor deposed Olympius, and sent another Captain Anastasius, who put the
Bishop in prison, and commanded him to despise the Council; consulting with
another Bishop, he promised to obey him, if he would but let him out of prison
two days before, that it might not seem a forced act: This being done, the
Bishop contrarily to the Congregation in the pulpit, before the Captain cries
out [If any assent to Eutyches and Nestorius (contraries) and Severus and
Soterichus Caesar, let him be Anathema: If any follow not the Opinions of the
four universal Synods, let him be Anathema.] The Captain thus deluded, fled
from the multitude, and was glad to save himself: The Emperor being offended
at this, the Bishops write to him that at Jerusalem, the fountain of Doctrine,
they were not now to learn the Truth, and they would defend the Traditions, if
need be, even to blood.] Nic^p. c. 34.

Timothy Bishop of Constantinople took the manpleasing way, and one while was
for the Calcedon Council, another while he cursed it. Being to choose an Abbat,
the Abbat refused his election, unless he consented to the Council of Calcedon.
Timothy cursed those presently that received not the Council: His Archdeacon
hearing him, reproached him that like Euripus, roled every way: The Emperor
hearing it, rebuked him, and Timot^y washed away the charge and presently cursed
every one that received the Council. Niceph. c. 35. Yet Rome though now under
another King (Theodorick an Arria Goth) had a part in the Schism: Festus a
Roman Senator was sent from Theodorick to the Emperor on an Emb^ssie: Which
when he had done, he desired that Constantinople would keep holy days for
Peter and Paul as Rome did, and he prevailed: And he secretly assured the
Emperor that Anastasius Bishop of Rome would receive the Henoticon (to suspend
the consent to the Calcedon Council) and would subscribe it. But when the
Ambassador came home, the Pope was dead: To make good his word, he got a party
to choose Laurentius Pope, that would do it: The people (that then had the
chief choice) chose Symmachus so there were two Popes: And the sedition
continued three years not without slaughters, rapines and other calamities
(Niceph. c. 35.) till Theodorick an A^rian more righteous than the Popes,
called a synod and confirmed Symmachus: But Laurentius stirred up the people to
sedition and was quite degraded. The Emperor favoring the addition [Qui
Crucifixus est pro nobis] the people seditiously cut off a Monks head and set
it up on a pole inscribing it an enemy to the Trinity: The Emperor overcome
with their confusion and orthodox rebellions, called an assembly and offered to
resign his Crown, desiring them to choose another; which ^note them with such
remorse, that they desired him to reassume his Crown and promised to forbear
sedition: But lie dyed shortly after. But I must not transcribe historical
Volumes. Justin succeeded Anastasius in the Empire, and Justinian him: These
were for the Synod: But Theodora Justinians Wife was against it: Some thought
by compact, that each part might have a head, which was indeed but one (Niceph.
l. 17. c. 7.) Should I tell you in their reigns how the Ecclesiastical war
continued, how Pope Agathon munus imposuit Menae Constant. quod antea nunquam
factum est, Niceph. c. 9; How Menas and the Pope excommunicated one another,
and how Justinian used Vigilius the Pope, etc. it would be over tedious to
tell. I have wrote this much to show you how far the Patriarchal seats conduced
to the Churches peace, and how far the four first Councils of Bishops caused
Christian Love and Concord: No such things can be said of the Arabians, and
Novatian Phrygians and others that had Bishops in the villages: Should I but
now turn to Rome and tell you what was done there, all this Confusion, blood
and misery is but a jest to it: But I have said enough of that in many
treatises against Popery; and particularly of the above 40 years Schism when
they had 2 or 3 Popes at once; and of the above 50 Popes that Baronius and
Genebrard themselves call Apostatical, put in by whores and poison, men not to
be named, save to keep a reckoning of the times; many damned by Councils as
horrid Adulterers, Murderers, Simonists, Heretics, or Infidels: Nor will I
recite how in the many wars between the Popes and Emperors, the Bishops swore,
and unswore, and forswore as the upper side compelled them, as Urspergensis
complains. Nor will I stand to tell you, how the Pope and Patriarch of
Constantinople (to whom adhere those of Antioch, Alexandria and Jerusalem) have
these thousand years almost, divided and distracted the Christian world, by
striving which should be the greatest, when Christ had so fully decided the
case. But what now if after so many hundred years confusion it should prove,
that all this stir was in the dark, and that Nestorius Eutyches, and Dioscorus
were of the same mind except in words: Can the tongue of man then sufficiently
express the Bishops guilt? A rare French Divine and Philosopher David Derodon
has written a Treatise de supposito, copiously proving that Nestorius was
orthodox, and Cyril an heretic, and all the first Ephesin Council that adhered
to him; that Eutyches and Dioscorus taught but the same heresy that Cyril did;
that the Council of Calcedon ignorantly condemned Nestorius and truly
stablished his opinion; and cried up Cyril and damned his doctrine: And he
cites abundant passages out of Cyril where he expressly denies two natures in
Christ, (as Ep. 2. ad success. In Christo duas nature as unit as asserimus: post
unionem vero adempta jam in duas divisione, unam esse credimus naturam filii
incarnati:) And that Nestorius expressly assures that there are two natures and
but one person: The citations are numerous and undeniable. But I think that
Cyril, Eutyches and Dioscorus (who were all of one mind) did mean that the
natures were but one in opposition to division, but not in opposition to
distinction. And that Nestorius said they were two as distinguished but not as
divided, and all this blood, separation and confusion was between men of one
mind, for want of skill in the explication of words, and through worldly
designs. I know some will say, were all these Councils of Bishops such fools in
comparison of you? But can a man deny notorious truth in reverence to Bishops?
If so, which part of the Bishops must I believe if they say the snow is black:
The Arrians, and Eutychians were far the greater number.

And now as the best Philosophers think that experiments de facto must be
premised to the Theory, so we think this touch of history must be considered by
them that think Jewish High Priesthood, or National, Patriarchal or
Metropolitical superiority is the necessary means of the Churches Concord: Let
them compare the dissentions caused by little village Bishops and synods for
mere Concord, yea or by separating heady people, with these which Patriarchall
and Metropolitical seats have caused, and they will appear to be to them but as
a scuffle at Billinsgate to the French Wars: And yet we have instanced but in
the best times of dominion, in comparison of which Councils, Prelates and later
times have been a mere hurricane. In a word, they that think that the mischiefs
of superior seats are greater than the benefits, do appeal to all Church
history, whether they have not been the true and principal causes of the
distractions of the Christian world, and of the long division of the East and
West, and of many civil and grievous wars.

40. And to the objections they say, I. As to Appeals and Government of
Inferiors, 1. That the last appeals have ever been made to General Councils:
And how they went when ever the Prince did but countenance error, (as in the
days of Constantius and Valens, many great Councils that were for the Arrians,
and in Theodosius Juniors time, for the Eutychians etc.) is too sad to think
on. And is it not far more dangerous for many hundred in a Council to bear down
a whole Empire or Kingdom, and raise persecution, and there be no appeal from
them, than for a poor Priest to put a man from the Sacrament in his own Parish
Church? How many Councils have been against Images in Churches, and how many
for them, condemning one another acts? What good will appeals do to such, 2.
In doctrinal cases the consent of many tends to concord: But in cases of
personal practice, are they fit judges to appeal to, that dwell many hundred
miles off, and know none of the persons; suppose a poor man in England is put
from the Communion by a Parish Priest (yea, perhaps an hundred or many hundred
in some parishes) because he finds some to be utterly ignorant some to be
drunkards, fornicators, heretical, etc. If these appeal but to a Diocesan which
dwells 20. miles from some, 40, or 60, or 100 miles from others, the remedy
is worse than the disease: For if the Priest must travel so far, and bring his
witnesses and plead the cause with men that never saw the party before, (where
neighborhood gives a surer knowledge than any such examination of strangers
can do, and a strange Chancellor or Diocesan knows not which witnesses are
most credible) and all this while his Pastoral Charge (perhaps many thousand
souls) must be neglected, while the Minister is prosecuting these appealing
sinners; will not the evil of this be greater than the benefit? But how much
more if every sinner must appeal to a Patriarch many hundred miles off? A sober
mind will be ashamed to think of the process of such a suit. If you say that it
is not in the case of such sinners as these whereof every Parish abounds, that
you would have appeals, at least not to Patriarchs, so far off; I answer, 1.
Then answer your own objection: What remedy shall they have if the Bishop wrong
them? 2. What is the case than that you suppose such supraordinations of power
necessary for? If you say, If Ministers themselves should be excommunicate, It
is answered, That none but Bishops or other superior powers pretend
authoritatively as Rectors to excommunicate Pastors; Therefore this is nothing
to them that are against all such superiority of Pastors; Where none such are,
none such can excommunicate, or be injurious. And if there must be a higher
Bishop to deliver men from the injuries of a lower, who should deliver us from
him, who may injure Kingdoms?

Obj. But it is supposed that Patriarchs are wiser and better men than
Metropolitans, and those than Bishops, and those than Priests: And that a mere
Priest is not to be trusted with the power of the Keys.

Ans. 1. The power of the Keys of his particular Church is essential to his
Office; 2. They that will make Priests of raw lads and naughty fellows, and
then plead that such must not be trusted with the Office which they themselves
ordained them to, do condemn themselves by such allegations, 3. The old Church
Government was, for every particular Church, no more numerous than our
Parishes, to have a Bishop and Presbyters: And these were thought sufficient to
judge who was fit for their own Communion, 4. Hierom was but a Priest, etc. And
Macedonius, Nestorius, Dioseorus, Timothy Elurus, Peter Moggus, Gregory Alex.
Lucius Al. Joh. Al. Theodosius Al. Eulalius Antioch. Euphronius Ant. Placitus
Ant. Stephanus Ant. Leontius Ant. Eudoxius Ant. Euzoius Ant. all Heretics were
all Patriarchs; and to reckon the enormities of the Roman High Priests, is a
needless work. Is it to be supposed then, that these were better than Priests?
Does Christ say that it is as hard for a rich man to enter into Heaven as for a
Camel to go through a needles eye, and shall we that are Christians say, that
it is to be supposed that the rich clergy are better men than the poor* When
Greg. Nazianz. Says that such great places use to make Bishops worse than they
were before, All history tells us what striving there was for such places? When
Euschius refused Antioch, two Priests were presently at Constantines elbow to
beg that place, and he was fain to mention them (though they were not chosen.)
What a stir did Maximus make at Constantinople, Egypt, and with the Emperor to
have got Gregory's place at Constantinople? And so with others. And is it not a
fleshly, proud and wordly mind (which is the work of the Devil) which is the
importunate seeker? And must we needs appeal to such? 3. But to come nearer,
what need is there of any such appeal or such a Government, if, 1. A Bishop
with-his Presbyters be over every particular Church (associated for personal
Communion in holy doctrine, worship and Conversation?) 2. And if these Churches
associate for mere concord and mutual help (and not for Governing Bishops?) 3.
And if the Magistrate govern them all as he does Philosophers, Physicians, etc.
For 1. If a Bishop of a particular Church deny one the Sacrament or
excommunicate him, he does it justly or unjustly: If justly, the person must
submit: If unjustly, he may be received by a neighbor Bishop who is not bound
to reject those whom upon trial he finds to have been wrongfully
excommunicated: All neighbor Churches must refuse those that are by any one
excommunicated justly; but not all that are wrongfully cast out. Some say that
he that does excommunicate does cast a man out of the whole Church, and
therefore no one else may receive him: But unexplained words must not serve to
confound truth, Souls and Congregations. Every Minister is a Minister in the
Universal Church (as every Physician and Schoolmaster is in and to the Kingdom
(indefinitely not universally) but his work and power are commensurate; his
power being only to and for his work. Therefore the Bishop or Pastor of one
particular Church or Parish, is bound to confine his ordinary labor to them,
though occasionally he may help others. And accordingly his power is to use the
Keys ordinarily for his own Church only, as to the direct effect: though
extraordinarily he may use it in other Churches when called thereto; and by
consequence it may reach further: For few Bishops will think if another Bishop
come into their Diocesses or Parishes and excommunicate diverse of their flocks,
that they and all others are bound to stand to such men's sentence, and to hold
such excommunicate. That which a Pastor does in ordinary Excommunicating, is to
declare (after proof) that This person is by his sin and impenitency made
incapable of Communion with the Church, and therefore to require him to forbear
it, and the people to avoid Communion with him; and to pronounce him unpardoned
before God, till he repent. Now if this be done by one known to be heretical
with whom the other Churches have no Communion, those other Churches are not
bound to deny that man Communion. Nor yet if he offer himself to their
Communion, and they examine the matter, and find him wronged. It is concord in
good, and not in evil, that we are bound to by the command of God: Therefore if
any man be wrongfully put out of this Church, the next may and should receive
him: And what necessity is there then, of going a thousand or an hundred miles
to a Pope, or Patriarch, or Diocesan, to right him? And whoever thought that
there was need of an Universal Physician, or Schoolmaster, or a General Council
of such to receive appeals from Patients and Scholars that are wrongfully
turned out of the Hospital or School?

The Caviller will here tell you of disparities in the cases; but the question
is, whether the disrities be such as alter the reason of the Conclusion. What
man of conscience will be a Physician, Schoolmaster or Pastor, that has not
power to judge whom to receive for his Patient, Scholar, or part of his flock,
but must take all that some other man shall send to him, or command him to
receive, and give them what others command him to give? An Apothecary may do
so, but not a Physician. What if a man had no other scandal, but to say, I will
not take you for my Pastor, nor take my self obliged to answer you, speak with
you, give you any account of my self, nor be questioned by you on any
accusation, must I be constrained to suppose this man to be one of my flock In
despite of his own denial? If the freedom of consent be not mutual, but I must
be constrained to take those for my charge as Christians, that renounce such a
relation, or will not own it; a Pastor is not a free man, nor has any power of
the Church-Keys, but is as an irrational Slave, a Crier, or Executioner, that
must but execute another man's commands.

2. But if there be need of appeals, and our own actions must not be free, why
will not the Synods of Neighbour-Pastors met only for Counsel and Concord (and
not to command the Pastors) suffice for such persons to appeal to? And what if
I turn a servant out of my house, or from his meat, and he may take another
Master when he will, must there be an universal Judge of all family cases, that
shall force me to keep my servant against my will? Is it not enough that I know
why I am unwilling to keep him, who am no way more bound to him than to others,
but by my own consent? What if (as Nazianzen left Sasimis, Constantinople, and
Nazianzum at last) I should give up my whole Charge and Bishopric, and say, I
will be a Pastor to none of them any more, (upon sufficient reasons, as Latimer
did:) Is it not better for the people to take another, than to accuse me at
Rome, or Canterbury, as wronging them?

3. But if all this serve not (neither the sufficiency of Pastors for one
single Parish, nor yet the Counsel of all the Neighbour-Pastors or Bishops,)
what is there more to be done, which the authority of Princes and Magistrates
may not do? All Christians confess (almost) that no Bishops or Pastors, as
such, have from Christ any forcing power over the flocks; that belongs to the
Magistrates only; And they are to keep peace, and force us to our certain duty.
And I would ask the contraryminded, whether if Bishops, Patriarchs and Councils
had no forcing power, but only to excommunicate by the application of Gods
word, and leaving all men to their consciences, would this sort of Government
serve their turn, and keep out Heresies, or maintain order and unity? They say
no, themselves: And next, whether it be not certain, and confessed, that the
Pastors have no other power, but the Magistrates only?

Obj. But shall all men gather Churches, and teach Heresy, and do what they
will?

Answ. 1. The power of Popes, Patriarchs or Councils, did not prevent it, when
there were all the Heresies that fill Epiphanius Volumns: And when the far
greatest part of the Clergy was long Arrian: And when the Nestorians and
Futychians so greatly multiplied after the condemnation of the Councils: And
when the Novatians lived so many years in reputation: and when the Donatists
nor they were not diminished by Prelates or Councils Censures, till the sword
dispersed them. And cannot the Sword be drawn without such as have no power of
it?

3. And as to the last (and greatest) reason, that the Apostles have successors
who must orderly exercise their Government; it is answered 1. The common
doctrine of the Church was, that all Bishops are their Successors so far as
they have successions; and every Church of one Altar had a Bishop in the days
of Ignatius, and long after. 2. The Council of Carthage said, None of us
calls himself Bishop of Bishops. 3. But if any be set as the Bishop of many
Bishops and Churches, so be it they use no violence, but govern volunteers as
all the old Bishops did, and sorbid them nothing commanded of God, nor command
them any thing which God forbids, and destroy not the order, doctrine,
worship or discipline of the lesser particular Churches, we have before said,
that we shall submit to such.

41. IV. As to the question, whether the Government settled by Christ in
National Churches be (as to the Clergy from all parts, Monarchical)
Aristocratical or Democratical, and who must have the summam potestatem? The
disagreement of the persons that we have herein to do with, puts us into utter
despair of any solution. And what good will it do us to believe that some must
be obeyed, if we cannot be certain who it is.

42. V. And to the question, Whether the King be the formal, or only the
accidental Church-head? We find no more agreement. 1. Some think that the King,
as Melchizedek, is a mixed person, secular and Clergy, and has both Offices to
use and communicate, as they say, the Princes before Aaron had. 2. Others say,
that this is not so, but that the Clergy-jurisdiction, distinct from the
Priestly common power, is a branch of the Christian Magistrates power, and so
derived from the King. 3. Others say that the Church, formally, is distinct
from the Civil State, though not always materially: And that the King as King,
is but an Accidental Civil Head, as he is over Physicians and Schoolmasters,
being neither himself; and that the National Church must have a formal
Clergy-head, (Personal or Collective) which shall in suo genere, be the
highest, though under the Magisttates Civil Government, as Physicians are. 4.
The Papists say, that all National Churches are under the Pope as Universal
Pastor, who may alter them as he sees cause. 5. Some moderate men say, that
only Diocesan (and Metropolitical) Churches are jure Divino, and that they are
called National, only improperly from one King, or concording association as ab
accidente, and not properly from any formal Clergy-head.

43. VI. Lastly, which is the formal Head of the Church of England, and so what
that Church is, we are left as much uncertain. 1. If it be only a Civil Head
that denominateth it One, then it is but a Christian Kingdom, which we never
questioned. And Dr. Rich. Cosins, in his Tables of the English Church-Policy,
says [That the King has Administrationem supremam magisque absolutam, quae
dicitur Primatus Regius. And Tho. Crompton in his dedication of it to K. James,
says [Ecclesiastica Jurisdictio plane Regia est, Coronae and dignitatis
vestrae Regiae prima, praecipua, indivisibilis pars: Ecclesiasticae leges
Regiae sunt, neque alibi oriuntur, aut aliunde sustentantur, aut fulciuntur:
penes Ecclesiasticos judices per Archiepiscopos and Episcopos, derivata a Rege
potestate, jurisdictio Ecclesiastica consist it: And yet our Kings and Church
explaining the Oath of Allegiance, declare that the King pretends not to the
Priesthood, or power to administer the Word and Sacraments; but, as Crompton
adds from Constantine, is extra Ecclesiam constitutus a Deo Episcopus; alii
intra Ecclesiam Episcopi. This is plain: If they hold to this, and claim no
power in the English-Policy, but as the Kings Officers, in that part which
belongs to Christian Magistrates, who will oppose them? But this reaches not
to the Keys, Preaching or Sacraments. 2. Some say that the King is partly a
Clergy man, as Melchizedek, and so that he is the formal Head, and might
perform the Priestly Office if he would: But this our Kings have themselves
renounced. 3. Some say that the Archbishop of Canterbury is the formal Head;
but that cannot be, because he is no Governor over the Archbishop of York, or
his Province. 4. Most say that the Convocation is the formal Church-Head, which
makes it One Political Church. But 1. If so, then why says the Canon that the
Convocation [is the true Church of England by Representation] and those
excommunicate that deny it? We enquire after the Church-Head or Governor: And
that which is but the Church it self by representation, is not its Head, unless
the Head and Body be the same, and the Church govern it self, and so it be
Democratical: The governed and Governors, sure, are not the same. 2. And the
Supreme Power is supposed, by those that take Episcopacy for a distinct Order,
to be in the Supreme Order only: But the far greater part of the Convocation
are not of the Supreme Order: Nay, thus the Presbyters should be partly the
chief Governors of the Bishops while they make Canons for them. 3. When we did
but motion that according to Archbishop Ushers form of the Primitive
Episcopacy, Presbyters might join with the Bishops in proper executive
Church Government instead of Lay-Chancellors, and such like, they decryed it as
Presbytery, and call us Presbyterians ever since: And if they say that the
Presbyters have so great a part in the Supreme Government it self, which
obliges all the Nation, how much more would they be themselves Presbyterians,
which they so abhor?

44. Having often said that we desire Christian Kingdoms as the great blessing of
the world, we mean not either that 1. All in a Kingdom should be forced to be
baptized, or profess themselves Christians, whether they are so or not: For
lying will not save men, nor please God; and even the Papists are against this:
2. Nor that all should be supposed to be Christians that are in the Kingdom.
But that the Kings be Christians, and the Laws countenance Christianity, and
the most or ruling part of the Kingdom be Christians, and all just endeavors
used to make all the rest so: The Ancient Churches continued them Catechumens
till they were fit for Baptism; and though they were for Infant Baptism, they
compelled none to be baptized in Infancy, or at Age, but left it to free
choice. They baptized but twice a year ordinarily. They kept many offenders
many years from communion. And if Crabs Roman Council sub silvest be true, they
at Rome admitted not penitents till forty years (understand it as you see
cause:) The true Elibertine Canons kept many out so many years, and many till
death, and many absolutely, as showed that they were far from taking all the
Nation into the Church. And the Christian Emperors compelled none. It was long
before the greatest part of the Empire were Christians. In the days of Valens,
the Bishops were some of them banished into places that had few Christians, if
any. In France it self, even in St. Martin's days, the Christians of his flock
were not the most, but he wrought miracles to convince the Heathens that raged
against Christianity, where he dwelt, etc.

1. There are two appendent Controversies handled by some, that write for
National Churches; which need but a brief solution: The first is, whether it be
not an Independent Error to expect real holiness in Church Members, as
necessary in the judgment of charity? The second, Whether it be not such an
Error to require the bond of a Covenant beside the Baptismal Covenant?

2. To the first we say, that so much is written on this point by one of us in
a Treatise called Disputations of Right to Sacraments, etc. that we think meet
to say no more: The Opponents now confess that it must be saving Faith and
Consent to the Baptismal Covenant that must be professed: And Papists and
Protestants agree with all the Ancient Church, that Baptism puts the true
Consenter into a state of certain pardon and title to life: And God makes not
known lying, a condition of Church Communion: He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved. It is true, that God has not made Ministers
Arbitrary Judges of men's secret thoughts, but has limited them in judging to
take their tongues that profess Faith and Consent to be the Indices of their
minds: But sure the power of the Keys contains a power of judging according
to Christ's Law, who is to be taken into the Church by Baptism, and who not: If
only the seeker be made Judge, it will be a new way of Church Government, and a
bad. And then the question is, 1. Whether he that accepts ones profession
seemingly serious, of Faith and Consent, and that de praesente, is not bound to
hope in charity that such a one does not lie or dissemble? 2. Whether a
baptized person, as such, have no right to our special love which we owe to
those that we hope are true Believers, and sanctified; but only to our common
love and kindness, which belongs to those also that are the heirs of Hell?
Some friends that are gone from extreme to extreme, and in remembrance of their
ancient Schisms, can look but one way with impartial sense, and that have made
their repentance the passage to a greater error and sin, should better bethink
them them what they do. They did well to stand still in the way of Schism, when
they saw here a leg, and there a hand, and there an arm in their way; and who
but a madman indeed would not: But if they have impartially read
Church History, and the works of such Fathers as give us historical notices,
and ever since Constantine made a Bishopric a bait to a proud and worldly
mind; even such as Nazianzen, Basil, Chrysostom, Isidore Pelusiota, Hilary
Pictav. and the over-orthodox disputations of Cyril, and the Epistles of
Theodoret rejoicing at his death, and abundance of such like; had they seen in
the way of Church-pride and tyranny, not here a leg, and there an arm, but here
a hundred carcasses, and there a thousand; here two thousand godly faithful
Preachers silenced, and many thousand dry Vines planted in their rooms, and
there whole Kingdoms interdicted, and their Churches shut up; here Churches and
Kingdoms turned into confusions about a word, or about the interest of
Prolates, striving which should be the Chief, and have their will and rule the
rest; and there hundred thousands murdered in the name of Christ, for obeying
him, and bloody wars managed by the Clergy against Christian Emperors, and
Kings stabbed one after another; and most of the Christian world, Roman, Greek,
Moscovites, Armenians, Abassines, degenerated into doleful ignorance and dead
formality under the Government of great Highpriests, and millions of the
vulgar bred up in ignorance and senslesness of spiritual and eternal things;
this should stop them, (at least from serving the master of such designs) as
much as a leg, or an arm in the way.

3. At least we would entreat them to hate that mistake, which will pretend to
do all this for charity, unity and the Churches good; and to believe that it is
no sign of charity, 1. To believe that charity should not be exercised in
judging that men professing saving faith do speak the truth, and have the faith
that they profess: 2. Nor to teach all Christ's Church, that a baptized Church
member as such is to be looked on but as a man in a state of damnation; and no
man is bound to love him as a true Christian with a special love: 3. And that
to prove that a man is not to be taken for a true Christian, but to be admitted
into Church Communion as one that shall have a greater damnation than heathens,
without a further renovation, is a great act of Charity, Contrary to the
uncharitable narrowness of others. These are too great recesses from
Anabaptistry, but not from real Schism.

3. As for those that will not take the intelligent serious profession of true
Faith, and Covenant-Consent for a credible sign of the sincerity of the
Professor, till they can sufficiently disprove it, but will be the arbitrary
Judges of men's hearts, either as pretended heart-searchers, or by self-devised,
or uncertain signs, not taking up with this Profession, we are no Patrons of
such men's presumption and uncharitableness.

4. There are various degrees of Credibility in men's professions; some give us
so much as is next to certainty; some but small hopes: But yet till we can
disprove them, we are to take their professions as credible in some degree. And
if they prove false, it is they that will have the loss.

5. II. The second case about Church Covenants deserves no longer a
discussion. He that will put any article unnecessary into any such Covenant,
sinfully corrupts the order of the Church: As if he would bind the people to
be Church Governors, or never to depart from that particular Church but by the
consent of the Pastor, or the flock, or any such like: And he mistaketh that
will make a more explicit contract to be more necessary than it is. But it
seems strange to us that any understanding Christian should deny, that
consent is absolutely necessary to the being of an adult member both of the
universal, and each particular Church respectively. What binds a man to
consent is another question, but if he be any member of the Church till he
profess consent; we know not what a Christian or Church member is. An explicit
covenant is necessary to our relation to the Universal Church for it must be
solemnized sacramentally: That we express it by writings or words is not of
necessity to our membership of a particular Church: But consent is necessary;
And mutual consent expressed satisfactorily, is a contract or Covenant: If the
Pastor say all the at consent, hold up your hand, or stand up; or stay here
while the rest depart, etc. these are significations of consent: And if it be
notified that all that appear at the solemn Assemblies, and attend the Pastors
Ministry, shall be taken for Consenters, their presence and attendance is a
profession of Consent indeed, and so a covenanting. But though the most
explicit be not necessary ad esse, no man can give a reason why it should not
be best ad been esse, seeing the most intelligent and plain dealing in the
great things of God, are most suitable to the work, and fittest to attain the
end: why should we not deal openly and above board?

6. It is certain that to be a Christian makes no man a member of any man's
particular flock or charge. And it is certain that none can be such without
consent. And it is certain that the Pastor is not to take every Atheist, Jew,
Infidel, Papist, Heretic, etc. in his Parish for a member of the Universal, or
of that particular Church. Therefore he must know whom to take for such. And it
is certain that the consent must be mutual, so far is the Pastor from being a
slave, and bound to every man's desires, that he is entrusted with the Church
Keys himself.

7. A worthy person on this subject makes these six things sufficient to such
Church relation: 1. That they be baptized Christians; 2. Neighbors bound to
mutual love; 3. And apt to Neighbourly duty; 4. That providence make us such
Neighbors; 5. Scripture Churches took their name from cohabitation: 6. The
command of authority, that so it shall be. Fresh suit. page 260.

Ans. By making these six the sufficient proof of Parish Churches, our friend
unhappily would consequently unchurch them all: For if this were all, certainly
they were none at all. For all these (which he makes more than they are) are
but the dispositio materiae, antecedent to any reception of the form, 1. For
all that he infers or can infer from them all is obligation to consent and
to other duties after consent. But obligation makes not the relation of a
member: All that are obliged to be Christians are not Christians: All that are
obliged to be Pastors are not Pastors: Nor all that are obliged to consent
first and to do the duty of Pastors after: Even as all that are obliged to
consent to be subjects, Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants, Tutors, Scholars,
etc. are not such: If mere obligation serve to one relation, why not to others?
2. Else a man might be a true Pastor unchosen, unordained and against his will.
For he may by his qualifications be obliged to be ordained and to become a
Pastor. 3. And so the people may be the flock of one that was obliged to be
their Pastor, when another is set over them and in possession, because it was
the first that was obliged, and they to choose him: And so utter Confusion will
come in: And if a man can prove that another man's wife and servant was obliged
to be his, he may take them as his indeed. 3. By this rule all the Papists,
Seekers, Quakers, etc. that renounce our Churches, should yet be members of
them, because they live in the Parish, and are commanded to be members: Which
who believes? 4. A member of a Church has right to Communion and Ministerial
vigilancie and help: But so has not every baptized person that is commanded to
be a member, and obeys not that command. If a man say to a Pastor, I will be
none of your flock, or Church, but yet I require you to do the office of a
Pastor to me, though I renounce your relation to me, and the people to use me
as a member of the flock, because I am commanded to be a member, this were a
strange claim. 5. If this did hold, then no man that lives in the Parish could
be a proper separatist, so as to break off himself from that Church, nor become
a member of another, unless he apostatized from Christ: For he would be still
under the Magistrates Command and obligation: But the consequent is absud: Why
do the same men speak so much against schismatical rending men's selves from the
true Churches, and gathering other Churches, if there be no such thing? The
Laws change not, which oblige them. 6. They that are against schism and
singularity, should be against this opinion, because (as it is utterly absurd,
so) it is notoriously contrary to the Judgment of all the Christian world in
all ages to this day, as acquaintance with Church history may fully inform
them. They have ever taken mutual consent between the Pastors and the flock to
be necessary to the being of a particular Church; and that whatever they were
obliged to, they were not actually related to each other as Pastor and flock
till they consented: And therefore have noted schismatical Churches in the same
Cities that have been no parts of the Church which they disowned.

8. But it is objected, that this unchurcheth our Parish-Churches, and all the
Churches in the world.

Ans. Not one: But the contrary would. Our Parish Churches are associated by
mutual consent: The Pastor expresses his consent openly at his institution,
induction and officiating: The Flocks show their consent by actual submitting
to his Ministerial Office: They hear him, and communicate ordinarily with him,
and seek Ministerial help from him; though all that are in the Parish do not
so, those do it that are indeed his flock, or Church. They do not perhaps by
word or writing covenant to submit to him as their Pastor, but they do it by
actual signification of consent to the relation. And the Bishops in
Consecration enter into a Covenant to watch over the flock (as do the Priests)
and the Priests promise (if not swear, in England) to obey them: This is a
Covenant.

9. It is objected that this is a disparagement to Baptism, which is the only
Church-making Covenant.

Ans. Baptism only, as such, makes us members of the universal Church; but is
not enough to make us of any Ministers special flock: I am not a member of the
Church of York, Norwich, Bristol, etc. because I am baptized: Nor am I a member
of the Parish Church now where I was baptized. Consent to be a Christian is one
thing, and consent to be a member of this particular Church, and to take this
man more than all the rest about us, for the Guide of my soul, is another.

10. And if a man would say, I will be a member of this Parish Church, and you
shall perform so much of your Office as I desire, and no more; I will hear and
receive the Sacrament but when I please, and I will not admit you to catechize
or instruct any of my family, nor visit the sick, nor will I be responsible to
you for any thing that I hold, or say, or do; nor have any thing to do with
you, but in the Church; is a Minister bound to do his office to men, or take
them for his special flock on these terms? The ancient Churches had abundance
of strict Canons; if the people should have chosen a Bishop, and said We will
obey none of these Canons, nor you but you shall be our Bishop on our terms,
was he bound to have consented, and to have been such a Bishop? This is really
the case of no small part of England, though they say it not openly by words.

11. It is objected that as Apostles, so ordained Ministers have their
authority before the consent of the people and receive it not from them.

Ans. 1. Who ever questioneth it, that is considerate, as to an indefinite
charge in the Church universal? But what is that to the question? Are all the
Ministers in the world bound to be the Pastors of this Parish or Diocese? Our
question is what constituteth the relations between a Pastor and his Particular
flock? Does not the ordainer here say, Take thou Authority to Preach the Word
of God, etc. when thou art thereto lawfully called? Because a man is a Licensed
Physician without me, does it follow that he is my Physician without my
consent? 2. Are all those Church Members that Ministers are authorized to
preach to? Then all the Heathen-world are Church Members. 3. They receive not
authority from the people; but their consent is necessary to make themselves
capable receivers of the relation and right of Church Members. God, and not the
Wife, gives the Husband the superiority; but he is no such Husband to any that
consents not.

12. God has laid men's rights and benefits on their wills, so that no man can
have them against his will. It is a great privilege to have right to communion
with a particular Church, and to this or that faithful Pastors oversight: And
its new Doctrine to say, that unwilling persons have this right, because they
are willing of something else, viz. to be members of the Church universal.

13. We conclude therefore that both extremes here are false; 1. That men can
be adult members of a particular Church that consent not, or taken for such
that no way signify their consent, and that it is not useful ad been esse,
that this consent be intelligent and express, and that the Offices consented to
be truly understood. 2. That a written, or verbal covenant is of absolute
necessity; or that men should tie themselves to any thing doubtful, or
unnecessary, but only to the relation and duties of members (as of the
universal so) of that particular Church. Both these extremes we do renounce.
Mr. Zachary Cawdry, a Conformist, has showed in a particular Treatise for
Church covenanting, how far he is from the mind of those Objectors; for he
would have the people engaged by covenant to their Bishops and Priests.

14. To conclude, though we renounce fanatic Enthusiasts, yet serious
consideration makes some of us think, that too little notice is taken of the
HOLY GHOST setting Pastors over the flocks, which the Scripture mentions: And
though none on pretense of the Spirit must reject order or ordination, nor make
themselves the sole Judges of their own sufficiency; yet 1. The due
qualification of men with wisdom, faith, love, and heavenly zeal, and ability,
is the most excellent part of our Calling to the Ministry. 2. Ex quovis ligno
non fit Mercurius; without necessary fitness no man is a true Pastor having not
dispositionem rec^ptivam: And without eminent fitness, few are eminently
serviceable. 3. Experience assures us, that though the Office has
supernumeraries, yet of worthy men God never yet raised up supernumeraries, but
the scarcity is lamentably great. 4. All therefore that are duly qualified, and
have opportunity, should be chosen, ordained, accepted, and accept the Call, if
not offer themselves, iu case they cannot otherwise enter. 5. The Ordainer does
but ministerially invest him with the power, whom the Spirit of God has
qualified for it, by the inward Call. 6. In case the Ordainers by envy, or
malignity, or faction, refuse such, where there is true Necessity, and
Opportunity, we conceive that mutual consent of the people and themselves, may
suffice to the orderly admittance into the Office, much more if the Magistrate
also consent: Of which see Voetius de desparata Causa Papatus, and a Dispute of
Ordination, by R. B.

Three Venerable Monitors TO NONCONFORMISTS.
I. An Epistle of an African Council, (in Cyprian 68. p. 200.) to Faelix a
Presbyter, and the Laity at Legio and Asturica: And to Laelius the Deacon, and
the Laity at Emerita, concerning their Bishops Basilides and Martial who were
Libellaticks When persecution was hot, some that would not offer Incense at
Idols Altars, nor renounce Christ, yet to save their lives did, through fear,
in secret, hire another to subscribe their names to a sinful profession; and
these were called Libellatic^; and it troubled the Churches whether, and when
they should be received to communion upon their repentance.
.
WHen we were met together, most beloved Brethren, we read your Letters, which
for (or ^^) the integrity of your faith, and the fear of God you wrote to us by
our Bishops, Falix and Sabin^^s, signifying that Basilides and Martial being
blotted (or d^fil^a) with Libels of Idolatry, and guilty of heinous crimes,
ought not to exercise the Office of Bishops, and administer the Priesthood of
God: And you desired us to write back to you hereof, and that your necessary
solicitude might be eased either by the comfort, or the help of our judgment
or sentence. But to this your desire, not so much our Connsels as Gods Precepts
give an answer, in (or by) which it is long ago (or already) by the heavenly
voice commanded, and By the Law of God prescribed, who, and what sort of men
must serve at the Altar, and celebrate the Divine Sacrifices. For in Exodus God
speaks to Moses, and warns him, saying, Let the Priests who draw near to
the Lord God be sanctified, lest God forsake them; and when they come near to
minister at the Altar of the Holy, let them not bring themselves into sin, lest
they die. And in Leviticus God commands and says, Let not the man that has
a blemish or vice draw near to offer gifts to God. 2. Which things being
already spoken and manifest to us, it is necessary that our obedience attend to
God's commands: Neither may man's indulgence accept the person, or grant any
thing to any one in such things where God's prescription, intercedeth and
gives a Law. For we must not forget what God by the Propet Esaias says to the
Jews, reproving them, and angry with them, that contemning the commands of God,
they followed the doctrines of men. This people, says he, honors me with
their lips, but their heart is far separated from me; and in vain do they
worship me, teaching the commands and doctrines of men: which the Lord also in
the Gospel repeateth and says, Ye reject the command of God, that you may
establish your own tradition. Having these things before our eyes, and
carefully and religiously considering them, in the Ordinations of Priests, we
ought to choose no Bishops but men unspotted and entire, who holily and worthily
offering the Sacrisices to God, may be heard in the prayers which they make for
the safety of the people of God; seeing it is written, that God hears not a
sinner, but if any man worship God, and do his will, him he hears. 3. For
which reason with full diligence, and sincere trial, those men must be chosen
to the Priesthood, whom it is manifest God does hear. And let not the Lay
people slatter themselves, as if they could be free from the Couragion of the
crime, when they communicate with a sinful Priest, and give their consent to
the unjust and unlawful Episcopacy of their Governor, seeing by the Prophet
Hos^^ God's censure threatens, and says, Their Sacrifices are as the bread of
sorrow; all that eat of it shall be defiled^^ Teaching and showing that all
they do sin who are defiled by the sacrifice of a prophene and unjust Priest;
which we find also manifested in Numbers, where Corah, Dathan and Abiram
challenged to themselves against Aaron the license of sacrificing. The Lord
there by Moses commands that the people be separated from them, lest being
joining to the offenders, they be guilty of their crimes. Be separated, says
he, from the Tents of those obdurate men, and touch nothing which is theirs,
lest ve perish with them in their sins. 4. Wherefore the Lay people, obeying
the Lords commands, and fearing God, must separate themselves (a peccatore
praeposito) from a sinful Prelate (or Pastor) and must not mix themselves at
the sacrifices of a sacrilegious Priest; because they chiefly have the power
either to choose Priests that are worthy, or to refuse those that are unworthy:
Which very thing, we see, descends from Divine Authority, that the Priest,
the Laypeople being present, be chosen under the Eyes of All, and by the
public judgment and testimony be approved worthy and meet: As in Numbers the
Lord commanded Moses saying, Take Aaron thy Brother, and Eleazer his Son, and
set them before all the Congregation on the Mount, and take off Aarons stole,
and put it on Eleazer his Son, and let Aaron die there. God commands that the
Priest be made before all the Congregation; that is, he instructs us, and
shows that the Priestly Ordinations should not be done, but under the
conscience of the assisting people, that the Lay People being present, either
the crimes of bad men may be detected, or the deserts of good men predicated;
that so that Ordination may be just and legitimate, which has been examined by
the judgment and suffrage of All. 5. Which thing is after observed according to
the Divine Magisteries in the Acts of the Apostles, when Peter spoke to the
Lay People about Ordaining a Bishop in the place of Judas, Peter, says the
Text, stood up in the midst of the Disciples, for the multitude was together in
one. And it was not only in the Ordinations of Bishops and Priests, but of
Deacons also, that we note the Apostles to have observed this. Of which also in
their Acts it is written, and the twelve, says tbe Text, called together the
whole Laity of the Disciples, and said to them. And the whole business is
managed thus diligently and cautelously, the whole Laity being convocate, lest
any unworthy person should creep into the Ministry of the Altar, or the place
of Priesthood. For God himself manifests by the Prophet O see, saying, They
have made themselves a King, but not by me; that unworthy men are sometimes
ordained by man's presumption, and that these things are displeasing to God,
which come not of a legitimate and just Ordination. 6. For which cause it is
diligently to be observed and held as of Divine Tradition, and Apostolical
Observation, which is held also with us, and in a manner (or almost) through
all the Provinces, that to the right celebrating of Ordinations, all the next
Bishops of the Province come together to the Lay People to whom the Bishop
(praepositus) is ordained, and that a Bishop be made, the Lay People being
present, who most fully know every man's life, and discern every man's acting by
his conversation; which we see done also with your selves in the Ordination of
our Colleague Sabinus, that by the suffrage of the whole fraternity, and by the
judgment of the Bishops, who at the present met, and who wrote Letters of it to
you, the Episcopacy should be delivered to him, and hands should be laid on him
instead of Basilides. Nor can it rescind the Ordination which was rightly
perfected, that Basilides, after his crimes detected, and his conscience laid
bare by his own confession, going to Rome, deceived our Colleague Stephen, who
lived far off, and was ignorant of the matter of fact, and of the silenced
truth, that he might compass to be unjustly replaced in his Bishopric, from
which he had been justly deposed. 7. The effect of this is, that the offenses
of Basilides are not so much abolished, as cumulate, that to his former sins,
the crime of deceit and circumvention is added. For he is not so much to be
blamed, that was negligently deceived, as he to be execrated that fraudulently
deceived him. But if Basilides can deceive men, he cannot deceive God. For it
is written, God is not mocked. Nor will fallacy profit Martial to keep him who
is involved in great offenses, from a rightful losing of his Bishopric. Seeing
the Apostle warns us, and says, A Bishop must be without crime as the
Steward of God: Wherefore, seeing (as you wrote, beloved brethren, and as
Faelix and Sabinus our Colleagues assevere, and as another Faelix of Caesar
Augusta, an honourer of the Faith, and a defender of the Truth, signifies by
his Letters) Basilides and Martial are contaminated by a wicked Libel of
Idolatry. And Basilides, besides the blot of this Libel, when he lay sick
blasphemed God, and confessed that he blasphemed, and because of the wound of
his conscience voluntarily deposing his Episcopacy, turned himself to a
repentence, begging pardon of God, and being satisfied, if he might but
communicate as a Lay man. And Martial, besides the filthy and dirty feasts of
the Gentiles, and the often frequenting of their Colleges, and the deposing his
Sons in the same College after the manner of the exterior Nations, in profane
Sepulchers, and burying them with aliens, did also by public acts with the
Ducenary Procurator, testify that he obeyed Idolatry: And seeing there are
many other and great offenses in which Basilides and Martial are held guilty;
in vain do such men endeavor to usurp to themselves the Office of Bishops,
when it is manifest that such kind of men may neither be Guides of the Church
of Christ, nor ought to offer Sacrifices to God: Especially when Cornelius also
our Colleague, a pacifick and just Priest, and honored by God's vouchsafement
with Martyrdom, did with us, and all the Bishops settled in the whole world,
decree, that such men be not admitted to Repentance, but that they be
prohibited from Clergy Ordination, and Priestly honor. 8. And let not this
move you, most beloved Brethren, if with some in the last times, their slippery
Faith do nod, and their irreligious fear of God do shake, or pacisick Concord
persevere not: It was foretold that these things would be toward the end of
the world; and by the joyntwitness of the Apostles it was foretold, that the
world declining, and Antichrist drawing near, all good things would fail (or
decay) and evil and adverse things increase (or prosper.) And yet, though it be
in the last times, neither is Evangelical vigor so fallen in the Church of God,
or does the strength of Christian Virtue or Faith so languish, but that there
remains a portion of Priests, which yields not to these ruins of things, and
shipwreck of Faith, but as strong and stable do with observation of fear
maintain the honor of the Divine Majesty, and the Priestly dignity. We
remember and hold, that when the rest did yield and fall, Mathatias did
valiantly defend the Law of God: And that when the Jews failed and departed
from Divine Religion, Elias stood and strove sublimely: That Daniel, neither
deterred by the solitude of a strange Country, nor by the infestation of daily
persecution, did frequently and valiantly give glorious testimonies (or
Martyrdoms) and that the three young men, neither broken with years, nor
threats, did faithfully stand out against the Babylonian fires, and even in
their captivity conquered the conquering King. 9. The number (or party) of
prevaricators or trayors that now rise up in the Church against the Church, and
have begun to spoil both Faith and Verity, shall see it; that yet with the most
there remains a sincere mind, and entire Religion, a soul devoted to none but
their Lord and God; and that other men's perfidiousness does not depress the
Christian Faith to ruin, but does more excite it, and exalt it unto glory.
Even as the blessed Apostle Paul exhorts and says, What if some of them have
fallen from Faith? shall their unbelief make void the says of God? God is
true, and every man a liar: And if every man be a liar, and God only be true,
what else should we, Gods sevants, do, and specially his Priests, but
relinquish the errors and lies of men, and keeping the Lords commands, remain
in the truth of God? 10. Therefore, most beloved brethren, though there have
been some of our Colleagues, who think that the Divine Discipline should be
neglected, and do rashly communicate with Basilides and Martial, that ought not
to trouble our Faith, seeing the Holy Ghost in the Psalms does threaten such,
saying, Thou hatedst Discipline, and have cast my words behind thee: If thou
saw a Thief, thou concurredst with him, and did place thy portion with
Adulterers. It shows that they are made Consorts and partakers of other men's
sins, who have been coupled with the sinners. And Paul the Apostle writes the
same thing, and says [Whisperers, detractors, haters of God, injurious, proud,
boasters of themselves, inventers of evil things; who when they knew the
judgment of God, they understood not that they that do such things are worthy
of death; not only they that do them, but they that consent to them that do
them. He says, that They that do such things are worthy of death. He
manifests and averreth that not only they are worthy of death, and come to
punishment who do the evils, but they also who consent to them that do such
things, who while by unlawful communication they are mingled with bad men, and
sinners, and impenitent persons, they are polluted by the contact of the
guilty; and while they are joined in the fault, they are not separated in the
punishment. Wherefore, most beloved brethren, we both praise and approve the
religious care of our integrity and faith; and as far as we are able by our
Letters, exhort you, that you do not by sacrilegious communion mingle your
selves with profane and blotted Priests (or Bishops;) but in religious fear do
keep entire and sincere the firmness of your Faith. I wish, most dear Brethren,
your continual welfare.

II. A Letter of the famously Learned and Holy Robert Grosthead, Bishop of
Lincoln, to Pope Innocent the fourth, and his Cardinals, containing the reasons
of his Nonconformity to their Commands; Translated out of Matthew. Paris, An.
1253. page 871, 872.
Says M. Paris, In these days when the Lord Pope Innocent the 4th. had
signified by his Apostolic Writings, commanding the Bishop of Lincoln that he
should do somewhat which he took to be unjust, and dissonant to reason, as he
frequently did to him and other English* Prelates; he wrote back to him in
these words [Be it known to your discretion, that I devoutly and reverently,
with filial affection, obey the Apostolical Precepts: And being zealous of the
paternal honor, I am against and resist the things which are against the
Apostolical mandates For I am bound to both by Gods Commands: For the
Apostolic mandates, neither are, nor can be any other, than consonant and
conform to the Apostles Doctrine, and to the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, the Master and Lord of the Apostles, whose type and person the Lord
Pope chiefly bears in the Hierarchy of the Church It must be known that this
Bishop lived in the depth of Popery, and acknowledges the Popes Power, as men
do now the Bishops.
. For our Lord Jesus Christ himself says, He that is not with me, is against
me. But the most Divine Sanctity of the Apostolical Seat, is not, nor cannot
possibly be against him (Jesus Christ) Therefore the tenor of the foresaid
Letter is not consonant to the Apostolic Sanctity; but very much absonant and
discordant: First, because of the super acoumulated Non obstante of that
Letter, and such like, that are dispersed far and wide, not brought in by any
necessity of observing the Law of Nature; whence a deluge of inconstancy,
audaciousness, and procacity, immodesty, lying, deceiving, hardly believing or
trusting any does arise: And from these a deluge of innumerable vices, moving
and troubling the purity of the Ghristian Religion, and the tranquillity of
social humane conversation.

Moreover, next after the sin of Lucifer, which in the later times will be also
the sin of Antichrist the Son of perdition, which the Lord will destroy with
the spirit of his mouth, there neither is, nor can be any other kind of sin so
adverse and contrary to the Apostles and the Evangelical Doctrine, and so
hateful, detestable and abominable to our Lord Jesus Christ himself, as to kill
and destroy souls by defrauding them of the care of the Pastoral Office and
Ministry: Which sin they are by most evident testimonies of Sacred Scripture
known to commit, who being placed in the power of Pastoral Care, do get the
salary of the Pastoral Office and Ministry, from the milk and fleece of the
sheep of Christ, who are to be made alive and saved, but administer not their
dues. For the very not administering of the Pastoral Ministeries, is, by the
Scripture Testimony, the killing and destroying of the Sheep. And that these
two sorts of sins (though with disparity) are the worst, and inestimably
superexceeding every other sort of sin, is manifest by this, in that they are
(though with disparity and dissimilitude) directly contrary to the two said
existent things that are best: For that is the worst thing that is contrary to
the best: And as much as lies in the said sinners. One of these sins is the
destruction of the very Deity, which is superessentially, and supernaturally
Best; the other is the destroying of the Deiformity and Deification, which is
Best Essentially and Naturally by the gracious participations of the beams of
the Deity. And because, as in good things, the Cause of good is better than its
Eflect; so also in evils, the Cause of evil is worse than its Effect. And it is
manifest that the Introducers of such most evil Murderers of this Deiformity
and Deification in the Sheep of Christ, in the Church of God, are worse than
these most evil Murderers themselves, and nearest to Lucifer and Antichrist;
and in this pejority they are gradually the worst, by how much they superexcel,
sw^o were more obliged to exclude and extirpate such destroyers from the Church
of God, by the greater and diviner power, given them by God for Edification,
and not for Destruction. It cannot be therefore that a most holy Apostolic
Seat (to which by our most holy Lord Jesus Christ, all power is given, as the
Apostle witnesses, for Edification, and not for Destruction) should ever
command, bid, or any way endeavor any such thing, or any thing verging toward
such a sin, so odious, detestable and abominable to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
so utterly pernieious to mankind. For this were either a defection, or a
corruption, or an abuse of his evidently most holy and full power, or an utter
elongation from the Throne of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
nearest coassession in the Chair of Pestilence, to the two foresaid Princes of
darkness, and of the pains of Hell. No one that in immaculate and sincere
obedience is subject and faithful to the same Seat, and not by Schism cut off
from the Body of Christ, and the same holy Seat, can obey (such) Mandates or
Precepts, or any endeavors whatever, whencesoever they flow, though it were
from the Supreme Order of Angels Or Anglorum, for its a various Lection.
, but must necessarily with his whole power contradict them and rebel:
Wherefore, Reverend Lords, from the duty of obedience and sidelity, which I owe
to the Parent of the holy Apostolical Seat, and out of the Love of Union in the
Body of Christ with it, I do alone (unice) filially and obediently disobey,
contradict and rebel against the things contained in the foresaid Letter, and
especially as is before touched, they most evidently verge toward the sin
which is most abominable to our Lord Jesus Christ, and most pernicious to
mankind, and are altogether adverse to the sanctity of the Apostolical Seat,
and are contrary to the Catholic Faith. Nor may your discretion therefore
determine any thing hard against me, because all my contradiction and action in
this Cause is not indeed contradiction or rebellion, but a filial honoring of
Gods command due to a Father, and of you. Briefly recollecting all; I say, that
the holiness of the Apostolic Seat can do (or has power to do) nothing but
that which tends to edification, and not to destruction But a Papist will
say, who shall be Judge? As if all men were not to be discerning Judges of
truth and duty.
: For this is the plenitude of power, to have power, to do all to Edification.
But these that they call [Provisions] are not for Edification, but for most
manifest Destruction: Therefore the Apostolic Seat cannot accept them, because
flesh and blood, which shall not possess the Kingdom of God, has revealed
them, a ^^ not the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is in Heaven.

III. Bishop Sanderson in his Oxford Praelections de Juramento, says, as
follows, (The Reader is desired to see his whole words, that he say not they
are mangled, or any thing omitted which he would have had put in; and to
consider how far the case of Oaths, and Covenants, Promises or Professions is
the same.)
PAge 30, 31. 1. Simplicity above all things beseeineth an Oath: That is, The
nature and obligation of an Oath is such, that whoever shall bind himself by so
sacred a bond to do any thing, he may be altogether held by the Religion of an
Oath, and seriously from his heart intend, and as much as in him lies,
diligently endeavor faithfully to do all that which he has promised to do,
without all craft, fraud, or ill deceit or dissimulation. (See the rest there)

Page 32, 33, 34. Contrary to this simplicity of an Oath, are two sorts of
simulation; one as to the foregoing part, which is either antecedent or
concomitant with the act of swearing: of which, though the former be the
worser, yet neither of them is free from perjury. David seems to comprehend
both in Psalm. 15. and 24. [He that swears not deceitfully, that is, with a
mind to deceive -- And He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not] that
is, who when he has bound himself by an Oath, will rather, even to his own
great loss, perform that which he incommodiously swore, than for any temporal
commodity violate his faith. -- These things the greater part of men now in
being, seem to me not to think of, or not seriously; who fear not to swear
without any ambage prolixly, and in the very words, whatsoever is proposed to
them, by such as have power to do them hurt: Yea and think themselves the only
wise men, and disdainfully deride their simplicity and vain fear, who, lest
they hurt their consciences, forsooth, do seek a knot in a rush, and vex (or
solicit) the forms prescribed by such as can proscribe them: And they securely
free themselves from all crime and fear of Perjury, and think they have well
cared for themselves and their consciences, if when they swear, like the
Jesuits, they can but any how defend themselves, by tacit equivocations, or
mental reservations, or subtle forced interpretations, and quite allen from the
words: Or else after they have sworn, can find out some artificial evasion, as
a hole to get out by, as the (...), by which so to defraud the Oath, that
taking the words, yet the sense may be eluded by some Sophism, and all the
force of it wholly be enervated. The old Christians received not this Theology:
The sounder Heathens received not this Moral Philosophy: Much otherwise out of
them, says Augustine [ They are perjured who keeping the words; deceive the
expectation of them that they swear to] And otherwise, says Cicero, [ That is
to be kept which is so sworn as the mind of the Imposen conceived it should be
done.] Read the proofs, p. 34, etc. 1. From many Texts of Scripture: 2. From
God's own example: 3. From the nature of Truth: 4. From the end of an Oath, p.
38. which is the confirmation of a doubtful matter; that is, that of things
otherwise uncertain and depending on humane credit, there should be had such
certainty as humane affairs require. For an Oath was instituted by God, by
force of the Light of Natue, for a remedy of humane defects about Truth; that
among mortals it should be Truths last garrison, as often as all other kinds of
proof do fail. But this end would be wholly overthrown, and there could be no
certain credit among men, if it were free for the swearer, at his own
arbiterment, what he speaks in words to cause belief, by some tacit
ambiguity in swearing, or after he has sworn, by finding out some new, and as
it were, posthumous comment so to disable it, as that it shall lose all its
force, and be utterly ineffectual. If either of these were lawful an Oath
should not be the end of strife, but the beginning, and should rather give
occasion for new contradictions and strifes, than end the old ones. Open but
this window once, and then what can be thought of so false, for the defense
whereof some eff^ge or lurking-hole may not he devised, whereby it may be freed
from being a lie. In the mean time, what perverseness, is it that That should
by dishonest men be turned into an instrument of deceiving, which was
instituted by the most wise God to be a help to credit (or men's belief of one
another?) Verily, unless one will rather use God's sacred institution to
another purpose, than that to which it was instituted (which a godly man will
not easily do) that which is the end of an Oath, the same ought to be the end
of the swearer: And that is, so to make the hearer to believe, that he may
become more certain and secure of the Truth of that which before was doubtful.
But he that dissembleth, studieth to breed a false belief in the hearers, and
so does not only suffer another to be deceived (which yet is contrary to
Charity when he may and ought to hinder it;) but also intends to deceive;
which is not only against all Justice and Honesty, but it is also conjoined
with the greatest wrong to God, and contempt of his name. And verily to me
scarce any other sort of Perjury does more diametrically seem to be against
either the scope of the third Commandment, or the very words (of not taking the
name of God in vain) than that which arises from this dissimulation. For as
the word Vanity does properly and adequately comprehend all that which is any
way false; so in a certain peculiar sort, and most properly, that which is so
false as yet to bear a show of Truth. (See the rest.)

The second which pertains to the interpretation of an Oath, is this, The
Obligation of an Oath is of strict right -- That is of so just an
interpretation of right, that the words of the Law may not be drawn further
than is meet for the sake or favor of any party; nor constrained to serve any
man's fact or commodity. In a word, strict Right, is not here taken so as to
exclude an interpretation tempered with equity, but to exclude an
interpretation of Law (or right) corrupted by favor (or for any ones sake) --
The extremes are A Rigid interpretation, and A Favorable -- A Just
interpretation is the mean between both, which searches after the true and
genuine sense of the Law, without respect at all to persons, out of natural
equity and justice, and from the words themselves, as they agree with equity
and justice. And if this may be plainly made out in the words themselves, that
it is in every case simply to be retained. -- See the rest.

P. 45. When I say that an Oath is of strict right, it is so to be understood,
that the meaning of the Oath, which is plain enough in the words, is always to
be held. But where the sense is doubtful, every one must take great heed, lest
we too much indulge our selves, and our own affections; and lest we grant our
selves too liberal and lax a license of interpreting, that we may the easilier
get our selves out of the bond of the Oath which we are tied by; and lest we
fasten (or seign) any sense on the Oath taken, or on any part of it, for our
own commodity or profits sake, which any other pious and prudent man, of a
freer judgment as not interessed in the cause, would not easily draw from the
very words themselves.

The Reason is twofold; one in respect to others, for fear of scandal, lest any
that is weak, drawn by our example, think he may do that which he sees us do,
though unacquainted with those subtitues, by which only we use to defend our
selves from the crime of Perjury. The other in respect of our selves, for sear
of perjury; which most grievous crime undoubtedly we commit, if that more
benig^ interpretation chance to deceive us, which made us bold to take the
Oath. This reason rests on that general, and most profitable rule, which bids
us [in doubtful cases take the safe^ side:] But it is the safer not to swear,
when the words of the proposed Oath, according to the common and obvious sense
of the words, seem to contain somewhat unlawful in them; rather than by a Lax
Interpretation so to soften them for our own use* that we may the more securely
swear them: Seeing we know that such an Oath may be refused without danger of
perjury, but we know not that it can be taken without danger or fear of it.

P. 46, 47, 197. Yet we must take heed that this strict interpretation turn not
into a Rigid one -- of common right these exceptions and conditions (of
promissory Oaths) are ever understood: [1. If God permit: 2. Saving the Right
of others. And, as far as is lawful; saving the Right of Superiors: 3. Things
standing as they do, or in the same state: As far as I am able, etc.]

P. 49. But if any admit more dubious exceptions* he boldly and rashly removes
God's boundaries of an Oath, and opens a wide door to all kind of Perjury.

P. 193: The third Case is, when one imposes an Oath of an ambiguous sense,
only requiring that those words be sworn, permitting the swearer to understand
the words in what sense he will: I say, it must deservedly be suspected that an
Oath offered on such a condition has some latent ill deceit, and therefore is
to be refused by a pious and prudent man; and to me seems to be disallowed,
for three causes: 1. In respect to the Oath it self, in which Truth is first
required: But a speech of indefinite and ambiguous sense before distinction
made, is no true proposition; yea, no proposition at all; when a proposition,
as Boys know, should signify truth or falsehood without ambiguity. 2. In
respect of him to whom we swear: For the proper end of an Oath is, that he to
whom it is made have some certainty of a thing before uncertain. 3. In respect
to the swearer himself, who if he take an Oath in such condition, prepares
either a scandal for his neighbor, or a snare for himself. For such collusion
cannot be imagined to look any other way, than either to draw others by our
example to take the same Oath (though with a reluctant conscience) which is to
scandalize our neigbour: or that somewhat else he after required of us to be
done by virtue of that Oath, which is either unlawful, or incommodious; which
is to lay a snare for our selves. Let a wise man therefore take heed that he
suffer not himself to be imposed on by these Arts; or lest he so much value the
favor or fear of any other man, as to swallow the bait when he knows that
the hook is under it. Verily, that all may be rightly done when you swear, it
is expedient that all parties be clearly agreed of the sense of the words that
are interessed in the matter; which by the Ancients was called [Liquido jurare]

Scis tamen, and liquido juratus dicere posses.
And in the old form, he that imposed the Oath was wont to say to the swearer
[Qua de ra pe^o liquido jures] (that is, [Of which I require thee to swear
plainly.]

P. 55, 56* The question, Whether this or that Oath be lawful? much differs
from this [Whether this or that Oath bind^] For though it be certain that we
ought not to take the Oath, which we know that we ought not to keep; yet it may
come to pass, and often does, that we ought to perform that which we ought not
to have taken Joshuas Covenant with the Gibeonites, is a most clean example of
this. -- An Oath may be said to be unlawful two ways; either as to the matter
sworn, or as to the Act of swearing. An Oath unlawful as to the matter sworn,
binds not at all. An Oath unlawful in respect to the Act of swearing,
binds, unless otherways hindered.

P. 74, 75. A thing lawful in it self may be unlawful by accident; -- as by the
error of the swearer, or the ill effect of the thing sworn. The third Case is,
When one promises by an Oath to do somewhat perhaps lawful in it self, which
yet he thinks unlawful, or at least seareth lest it be not lawful: As if any
one before these times, admitted to an Ecclesiastical Benefice, had promised to
observe in Public Worship all the Rites commanded by the Ecclesiastical Laws,
as the Surplice, the sign of the Cross at the sacred Font, kneeling in
receiving the Sacrament, and such like, which yet by some light prejudice he
thought were superstitious and Popish. The question is, What obligation there
is in this case? I say, 1. Such an Oath cannot be taken during such error,
without grievous sin. For he sins grievously that sins against his
conscience, though erroneous. For when the Judgment of the Intellect is every
ones nearest Rule of action, the will, if it follow not, that judgment failing
from its Rule, must needs be carried into sin. It Is a common saying, [He that
does against his conscience, builds to Hell.] Verily he that swears what he
thinks unlawful, would swear if it were indeed unlawful; and that becomes
unlawful to him that is lawful to another; as the Apostle judges, Romans 14. 14
-- 2. I say, such an Oath does not bind -- Because an Oath cannot take away a
former obligation, nor induce another obligation contrary to it. But that Oath
which is taken against the dictate of conscience, had a former obligation
arising from that dictate. For the dictate of conscience, whether right or
erroneous, always obliges, at least not to act against it. But a following
Oath cannot remove that obligation, but is it self invalid, and loses its
obliging force. 3. But if the swearer after better taught, do see and correct
his error, the Oath which bound him not before, begins then to bind him:

P. 77. Other Cases there are of things by Accident unlawful, by reason of ill
effects of the thing it self; as it may be a hinderer of a greater good, or a
cause, at least an occasion of evil. -- The fourth Case is, when the thing
sworn seems unlawful, as hindering the effect of some antecedent good, as of
a Vow or Promise made before: As if one that had beforehand bound himself to
some work of Piety or Charity, after take an Oath that hinders the fulfilling
of the former Vow. As if one that vowed to give half his gain weekly to the
poor, shall after swear to give it all to the war: -- This case has no
difficulty; I plainly answer, -- such an Oath is neither lawful nor obligatory,
because that the former obligation, whencesoever contracted, whether by
Covenant or by Vow, or by bare Promise, or by mere Office (or Duty) remains
valid, and puts a bar to every following contrary act. --

(Read, Prael. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. what he says for the obligation, 1. Of
spontaneous Oaths; 2. Of Oaths caused by fraud; 3. Or by fear extorted; 4. Even
of Oaths to Robbers.)

P. 110. 3. He that takes an Oath imposed by one that had no just authority,
but not otherwise vicious, is bound to perform what he swore.

(Read p. 175, etc. what he says at large against equivocation, stretching
reservations, as opening the door to all lying and perjury, and frustrating the
end, of Oaths.)

P. 195. Of the latitude and extent of an Oath, How far the senso is to be
measured by the scope As of Assent and Consent to the Use of the Liturgy, etc.
As when the Cause of the Oath was particular, but the words are general, e. g.
The Popes Usurpation was the Cause of the Oath of the Kings Supremacy; -- But
the words of the Oath so assert the Kings Supremacy, as exclude all others as
well as the Pope, from exercising supreme Power in this Kingdom: Answ. Such an
Oath obliges as to the words themselves in their utmost latitude: The Reason
is, because the intention of the Law, though made on a particular occasion, is
general, to hinder all incommodities of the same kind for the future. -- As
Lawyers fetch not the sense of Laws from the Proem, but from the body of the
Statute, so we must judge of the just interpretation of an Oath, not by the
promised recognition, or other preface, but by the body of the Oath it self.

P. 208. He is always perjured that intends not what he promised: but he is
not always perjured that performs not what he promised. (The bond being
dissolved.)

P. 227. Vows made to God, as a party, cannot be relaxed by man (though men may
give away their own.)

If you swear for the sake of another, as to his honor, obedience, profit, or
other good, the Oath binds not, unless he for whom you swear, take it as
acceptable and firm.

P. 242. Concl. 4. It is a grievous sin to impose an Oath unduly, on another.
As 1. An Oath not stablished by Law or Custom, etc. 2. An Oath that is
repugnant, or in the sense that the words hold forth in the common use of
speaking, seems repugnant to any Oath by him formerly lawfully taken. 3. They
that constrain men to swear to a thing unlawful, as against our duty to God, or
our Superiors, or the Laws of the Kingdom, or against good manners, or that
which is otherwise dishonest, and may not be kept. 4. He who imposes an Oath
of ambiguous sense, or any way captious; to ensnare the conscience, life,
liberty or fortune of his neighbor. 5. He that without necessity, by fear
compels, or by Authority impelleth, or by counsel, example, fraud, or other
artifice or reason induces another to swear, who he knows will swear against
the judgment of his conscience. I would all men in great power would remember
how filthy a character Jeroboam branded his own conscience, fame and name with,
that made Israel to sin: and how greatly they provoke God's great wrath against
themselves, that abuse their power to other men's ruin, which God gave them for
edification, and not for destruction.

P. 243. Concl. 5. An offered Oath is not to be taken with a reluctant or
doubting conscience: 1. Because what is not of faith is sin. 2. Because we must
swear in judgment, which he does not that swears against his consciences
Judgment. 3. Because this is done for some temporal commodity, or to avoid some
loss, or obtain some gain, or to get some man's favor, or such like: But how
unworthy of a Christian is it, to set God behind the World, Heaven behind
Earth, the Soul behind the Body, eternal joy behind temporal gain, the hope of
the life to come behind present ease, inward peace behind outward! 4. Because
he that so swears evidently exposes himself to the danger of Perjury (a most
heinous sin.) For he that for hope or fear of any temporal commodity or
discommodity can be induced to swear that which he ought not, it is scarce
credible but he may by the like hope or fear be drawn from doing what he swore.
And PERJURY was by the very heathens accounted one of those most heinous sins,
which they believed would bring the wrath of the Gods not only on the guilty,
but on their posterity, yea on whole nations, much more is it to be feared of
us, who worship that one true God, who has solemnly professed that he will not
hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. Lest, while which way ever we
look we see such a great and luxuriant crop of Oaths and Perjury even already
white to the Harvest, God the most righteous judge should quickly put in the
sickle, utterly to cut down so perfidious and profane a nation. We have long
felt that our most merciful Father is angry, and that the infinite patience of
God is turned into fury, being infinitely wronged, and (if I may so say)
overcome. It is not easy to say, for which sins this chiefly is, when all sins
are very great. But verily he that will seriously think, since God has begun
to scourge us by a nearer rod, how we have not grieved for these grievous sins
of swearing and perjury, yea how greatly on one side is increased, the
unbridled and unpunished license of swearing and blaspheming, and on the other
side the soul hypocrisy of forswearing on pretense of religion; it can scarce
be, but that of Jeremy will come into his mind, Because of Oaths the land
mourns. These things being to near, Fathers and Brethren, we that are here
and all others that wish well to the public peace of the Kingdom and Church
and the private peace of their own hearts and consciences, must be entreated
that they first carefully beware of the name of God, and the crime of violated
fidelity, and wholly avoid unnecessary Oaths, and constantly refuse those that
are unduely imposed (or offered) by others; and fulfill those faithfully that
are duly and rightly taken by our selves; and then that as much as we are able,
we strenuously restrain the liberty of sinning in others; and that we pray to
our most Good and Great God continually that, being taught by his scourge, and
admonished, and humbled under his mighty hand, we fly to his mercy, acknowledge
his justice, implore his grace, for the pardon of our sins, the amendment of
our lives, and the safety of our souls, by and for the merits of our Lord Jesus
Christ: To whom with the Father, and the Spirit, the Three one-Omnipotent God
be Kingdom, Power, and Glory for ever. Amen.

It Is like Dr. Sanderson had some special eye to the Scots Covenant; but
doubtless he made not any new or singular Doctrine for that end, which will not
hold true in all cases by him described.

Mr. Rich. Hollingworth in a late Plea for the Church of England, vehemently
urging the execution of the Laws against Nonconformists, says Page 71. [1.
Thereby (by Perjury) the conscience of the Minister is debauched, and he
thereby made very unfit to give those instructions, and wholesome counsel to the
people that otherwise he might do: For all wilful sins, especially such a
Notorious one as Perjury, hardens a man's mind, and divests him, till repented
of, of all the necessary and useful influences and assistances of Gods good
spirit, and makes him careless, as of his own, so of the souls of others: And
a man so easily ensnared by such a sin, is easily induced by any temptation to
a neglect of those duties which his Office calls for, and a remiss performance
of those Ordinances which were designed and commanded on purpose to reform and
instruct the people.

And page 73. [They must be accountable at the last day, not only for their own
sin, but for that very sin of Perjury, which the vicious Priest is guilty of:
For he that inviteth a man to a sin, is reckoned as if he had committed the sin
himself.]

What then would become of me, if I undertook to justify the Perjury of
multitudes? -- yea, if also I did by Press and Preaching, earnestly press
Magistrates to execute the Laws upon many hundreds of Christ's Ministers,
because they dare not venture on that which they fear (on such reasons as are
here rendered) to be a participation of many thousand Perjuries, nor on the
heinous sacrilege of deserting their sacred function, and encouraging near two
thousand silenced Ministers to do the like by my example, besides many other
feared sins. If I were the man that for this did plead and beg that they might
be laid in Gaols with rogues, and pay forty pound a sermon and be banished
five miles from all Corporations etc. and all this as necessary to the Church
and as for God, fathering it all on him who is the God of Truth and Love; and
pretending that there is no need of their Ministry, because that I and such as
I, do better perform all that office against ignorance, ungodliness and popery
without them, etc. How could I expect regard when I preached against the sins
of others? Or with what face could I do it? When my sin shall be opened to me,
must I not with Origin after his fall, instead of preaching, shut the book, and
weep, remembering Psalm. 50. 16, 17. and the dreadful third Commandment; and
tremble when I thought of death and judgment? For a Judas in Christ's family
sins at a dearer rate than strangers, and will quickly find his gain too hot
to hold, and those that hired him to be woeful Comforters, who will turn him off
with a [see thou to that.]

Obj. Fewer words might serve.

Ans. Nondum satis dicitur, dum non satis discitur.

Nec paucis dicendum est, quod paucis non discendum est.

[While I long wondered that I could not see what satisfied both all the
Learned Convocation, and the Parliament, for the truth of the Rule in the
Liturgy to find out Easter Day for ever, which is contrary to our Almanacks,
and we must all be silenced (and ruined for Preaching) unless we profess that
we Assent to it, I met with no Conformist that gave me any other satisfaction,
than to refer me to Dr. Pells Book: And meeting him happily, I craved his
information; and the grave, learned, honest Doctor was so far from making me a
Conformist, that he professed the passage now is indefensible.]

I was lately assaulted with this, as the strongest Argument for Conformity
[Deliberate lying is no sin, but a duty when it does no harm but a necessary
good; As by a Physician to save his patient, or to save a man's life much more
to save souls by preaching.

Ans. This case requires a longer answer than I have here room for: Briefly.
1. God best knows: who is wisest and meetest to Govern the world, for the
good of all; and he forbids it. 2. This principle believed would make all men
untrusty to each other, while every man would think he had reason to lie, when
his interest required it; and untrustiness overthrows all humane polities,
societies and converse, and so would do a thousand fold more harm to Kings,
Subjects and all, than the saving of a man's life would compensate. 3. Its
hypocrisy to sin my self that I may preach against sin in others, 4. The
Church of God is against this doctrine, and fathers; And the best casuists have
copiously confuted it, though some Jesuits are more lax, and use to serve
their interest by it.

5. At least, me thinks that where Jesnites lying is cried down, men should not
judge my fearing a lie, a crime that renders me intolerable in the Ministry,
and my preaching without it to deserve a Gaol and utter ruin; and the same to
near 2000 others; the silencing of whom will one day prove no indifferent
thing: And they that think it harmless publicly, Ministerially upon
deliberation to profess a falsehood, may shortly think it a duty to swear it:
But I believe that God will not hold that person, Church or Kingdom guiltless,
which takes his name in vain: see Dr. Hammends Catechism on the 3. Commandment.

FINIS.
ERRATA's
Reader,
THE smaller literary mistakes are left to thy own in genuity, the grosser
errors of the Press, thou art desired thus to correct.

Epist. p. 5. l. 24. for urge, r. argue, p. 10. for prefixed, r. affixed, p.
12. l. 4. for our, r. one, l. 24. r. A Christiau, p. 32. l. 1. for mollify, r.
nullify, p. 50. l. 21. r. one will, p. 53. l. 20. r. communion, p. 63. l. 4.
r. Pontici, p. 64. l. 31. r. Theodosius, p. 73. l. 26. for there, r. then, p.
88. l. 20. r. put not, p. 97. l. 25. r. formally, p. 99. l. 15. for an
acceptable, r. incapable, p. 102. l. 8. r. help, p. 119. l. 1. for considering,
r. concerned in, p. 126. l. 13. r. said they, p. 128. l. 6. for suspension, r.
suspicion, p. 154: l. 5. for his, r. their, p. 157. l. 13. for any, r. an, p.
159. l. 16. dele that, p. 160. l. 30. r. that THIS is, p. 162. l. 26. r. we
must, p. 187. l. 5. r. fame, l. 10. dele more, p. 203. l. 25. r. Hale, p. 205.
from we take, and 206, and 207. are all misplaced, p. 224. l. last, for
swarming, r. swearing, p. 229. l. 21. r. 97. p. 238. for FIRE, r. PLAGUE, p.
265. l. 15. r. would not, l. 24. for about, r. above, p. 269. l. 23. for hoc,
r. hos, p. 272. l. 2. for that, r. the, l. 3. dele the, p. 286. l. 5. for yet,
r. yea, p. 288. l. 28. for assures, r. asserteth, p. 161. l. 18. r.
plenilunium, p. 248. l. 8. for 1660, r. 1661. p. 289. l. 23. r. domination, p.
298. l. 2. r. Regia, p. 333. l. penult. r. premised. Many more are left to the
Readers ingenuity.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for, or sold by Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and
Bible over against the Stocks-Market.
1. THE Complete English Scholar, is Spelling, Reading and Writing; By E.
Young, Schoolmaster of London.

2. Jacobs Ladder: Or The Devout Souls Ascension to Heaven; By Jo* Hall, late
Bishop of Norwich.

3. Divine Consolations against the Fear of Death; By John Gerrard, Author of
the Meditations.

4. Divine Love: Or The willingness of Jesus Christ to save sinners; By V. P.

5. The Nonconformists Plea for Peace: Or An Account of their Judgment; By R.
Baxter.

6. Melius Inquirendum: Or an Answer to the Sober Enquiry.

7. The Ladies Delight.


