THE DEFENSE OF THE Nonconformists Plea for Peace, OR An Account of the Matter
of their NONCONFORMITY, Against Mr. I. Cheney's Answer, Called The Conforming
Nonconformist, And The Nonconforming Conformist. To which is added the Second
Part In Answer to Mr. Cheney's Five Undertakings.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel over against the
Stocks-Market. 1680.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
TOo many of the contentions of this age do tell the world how much the several
parties differ in Piety and Malignity, Humility and Pride, Love and Malice,
Meekness and Cruelty; But I think verily the controversy here managed between
this brother and me, does but tell you how weak and fumbling a thing man's
understanding is here in the flesh, and what great diversity of apprehensions
all men have in many things, who agree in the main; and how diversity of Lights
or appearances, may cause great and confident contrariety of judgments, yea,
and changes in the same person. The difference between Paul and Barnabas, and
Peter and Paul. Gal. 2. tell us how far the best of mortals are from
perfection. Our difference I think is not caused by contrariety of worldly
Interests, (which yet divided even Abraham's family and Lot's, and much worse,
Joseph's brethren from him) For as neither of us have any great matters of
worldly wealth, but our daily bread (which is enough,) so I am persuaded that
he seeks no such thing, and I am sure I cannot if I would, who daily expect
to give up my account, and carry about me a thorn in the flesh, enough to cure
at least the expectation of fleshly and worldly pleasure and prosperity.

Read not therefore these books, as the conflict of enemies, but as the
consultation of unfeigned loving friends who fain would understand the truth:
You see he abhors the silencing or persecuting the ministers of England for
Nonconformity: Yea, and all disaffection on such accounts.

And though I show the great mistakes in his writing, impute them not to the
habitual weakness of his judgment; But 1 to the badness of his cause. 2 To the
newness and crudity of his thoughts about it: For though he has been long a
public conforming Minister, yet it is but lately that he has received the
satisfaction which he here expressed, being before purposed no more to declare
or subscribe what he here defends: And new thoughts are seldom well digested.

I speak this the rather because some say that he is an honest weak man, that
has showed his good will to defend their cause, but was not able to do it as
it will shortly be done by some greater men that are about it. But my opinion
is that his concessions and coming so near the truth does give him so much
advantage against us, that the ablest of them that stand at a greater distance,
are like the more to mar their matter, and assault us with less success than
he.

And I advise his Reader to pardon such slips in the book which I confute, as
concern not much the cause in hand, but are only the oversights of the well
meaning Author. As when page 8. he distributeth the Learned Ministry into
several degrees; of which one is such as have no Learning, and another such as
have a little, etc. It Is easy to know that this was a mere oversight. And in
his supplement page 145. when he says [ God himself does assent and consent to
the use of all the lies and wickednesses of men and devils.] It Is like the
Reader will think that he means by the use, that [men and devils use to lie
and do wickedness,] or act these sins: If so, it were odious blasphemy indeed:
But by conference I have cause to believe that the Author's judgment is sound
in those points; and therefore that it is but an heedless speech, and that he
means no more but that [God consents when lies and wickednesses are
committed that men make good use of them in esse cognito,] as to repent of them
or hate them or take warning to avoid the like; and that God himself will use
them as occasions of some accidental good; as sickness is used to honor the
skill of the Physician: And that the word Assent slipped in because his cause was
in his thoughts. If you say, This is a ridiculous equivocation: To make such
use of the Liturgy in esse cognito as to hate it, or persuade from it, no
enemy will deny; but what is that to using it? To use the Liturgy is to read
and practice it, and so to use lying and wickedness is to lie and do wickedly:
that which you call sin objective in esse cognito is not sin indeed, but the
idea of it: but it is the real Liturgy which we must make a Covenant to use.

Ans. And who can manage an ill cause without somewhat that is too like it? And
who does any thing which needs no repentance or amendment? And who is so wise
as to speak wisely at all times? Let us pity one another, and pray for a
teachable mind, and long for the world of Concord in perfection. O how much
harder is it to justify proud Schismatical silenccers and persecutors of the
just, than to excuse the failings of the weak! and with how great a difference
shall they be shortly judged, as sure as there is a day of judgment to be
expected! Yea, how much easier will it be for Sodom and Gomorrah, for Indians
and Americans at that day, than for those that malignantly oppressed men of
most serious piety, and fought against Christ as by his own pretended
authority, and in his name.

THE CONTENTS OF THE following Book.
CHAP. I. THe occasions and reasons of answering Mr. Ch's. Book. CHAP. II. Of
Reordination, Equally Sinful with Rebaptization in the judgment of Greg. M. 1.
The ordination required, supposed the persons were not ordained before. 3. Mr.
Chey's. exceptions, glosses, etc. removed. 4, 5.
CHAP. III. Of the several orders of ministers. Mr. Ch's. trifling in the
ambiguity of the word Order noted. 2. 3. CHAP. IV. Of the Bishop's Oath to the
Archbishop. CHAP. V. Of the Oath of Canonical Obedience. CHAP. VI. Of the
words Receive ye the Holy Ghost. 5 sorts of mission or commission given by
Christ to his Ministers. CHAP. VII. Mr. C' s 6. section answered. i. e. with
pity: concerning those words to the People. To come forth and make their
exceptions to the person ordained. CHAP. VIII. Of the damnatory clauses in the
Athanasian Creed. CHAP. IX. About the certainty of baptized Infants salvation
made an Article of faith. Mr. C. gives no answer to Mr. B's objections. 1.
Bishop of Ely' s judgment. 3. A case put at the conference at the Savoy, with
Bishop Sanderson' s answer. ibid. Reply to that answer, with Bishop Morley's
return to it, and the removal of that return. ibid.
CHAP. X. About coming to the Sacrament of the Lords supper without a full
trust in Gods mercy, and a quiet conscience. CHAP. XI. Of the use of the
Apocryphal writings as they are imposed by the Calendar and Rubric, to be
approved of and consented to. CHAP. XII. Concerning consenting to the
Imposition of Reading the Liturgy every day. CHAP. XIII. About denying
Christian burial to unbaptized Infants and persons excommunicated. CHAP. XIV.
Touching Confirmation. CHAP. XV. Whether we may declare our Consent that none
should be admitted to the Communion, till he be confirmed, or desirous and
ready to be confirmed? CHAP. XVI. Concerning the sole sponsion of Godfathers
in the Liturgy. CHAP. XVII. Concerning the imposing of kneeling at the Lords
supper. CHAP. XVIII.Of the Cross in baptism. as a Consecrating, dedicating
sign. 1. Reasons against it. ibid. The silence of Christ in this matter. 2. It
seems to accuse Christ's Law of imperfection. 3. Christ commissioned not his
Apostles to institute any new Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace. Whether it be
made a Sacrament. 2. Of Gods prohibition. 12 Deuteronomy. of adding or diminishing. 3.
Mr. C's Argumentum ad hominem considered 4. The ancient Christians practice. 5.
Mr. C's objection removed. 6. The meaning of the second commandment in
forbidding Images. 7. Mr Cheney's concession. 8. A full explication of the
nature of that sign. 9. Answer to the great Bishops notions. 10. Of the
efficacy of Sacraments, from Aquinas. etc. 11. More objections answered, and
cavils removed. 12. etc.
CHAP. XIX. About giving the Sacrament to all parishioners thrice a year. CHAP.
XX. Of accusing those that are refused the communion within 14 days. The true
case of the parish minister's power to suspend his own act, and not give the
Sacrament against his conscience in 22 particulars. 2.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Chancellor's office. Of Mr. C. thirteen parts of discipline.
2. Proved to be defective. 3. Objection answered. 4. What power the parish
minister has in publishing an excommunication. 5.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Surplice. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Rule for finding Easter day.
CHAP. XXIV. Concerning our Assenting, Consenting to, and approving of the many
disorders and defects in the Liturgy. CHAP. XXV. Whether we may assent to the
Preface for justifying all that was in the Book before? CHAP. XXVI. Whether the
Act of Uniformity be any part of the book to which we are required to give our
consent? CHAP. XXVII. About declaring it unlawful to take arms by the Kings
authority against any commissionated by him. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Obligation of
the Covenant handled at large. per tot. CHAP. XXIX. About the exposition of
Oaths and Laws. CHAP. XXX. Several false devices of Mr. Chapter for stretching of
Subscriptions, Covenants, and Professions. The vanity of which is discovered.
CHAP. XXXI. Mr. Cheney' s conclusion evidenced to be a bundle of mistakes and
impertinencies. CHAP. XXXII. A full and clear answer to Mr. Ch's. supplement.
The second part. Mr. Cheney's Five undertakings considered.
1 Quest. Whether it be certain by Gods word that Infants baptized dying before
actual sin be undoubtedly saved? 2 Quest. Whether may unconverted ones within
the Church demand and receive the Lords supper? 3 Quest. Whether a minister may
put from the Sacrament those of his parish who be Christened People, and come to
Church, and join in the public worship, and tender themselves to receive,
being under no sentence of Excommunication? 4 Quest. Whether the common sort of
ungodly Christians are to be cast out of the Church by penal excommunication,
and used as excommunicate ones? 5 Quest. Whether Mr. Baxter's Doctrine and
principles concerning particular Churches be sound and good?
A DEFENSE OF THE NON-CONFORMIST'S Plea for Peace, AGAINST Mr. J. CHENY, THE
Nonconforming Conformist.
CHAP. I.
1. DEar Brother, I have diligently read and considered your Book, and think it
my duty to give a short Account of the Effect.

I have reproved many that blame you for not telling me first of it, and
knowing what I could say to it, before you ventured to publish it; 1. Because
of our true Love and Acquaintance: 2. Because a man should be willing to try
and hear the utmost, before he engage too deep: 3. Because if you mistake, it
is many and heinous sins that you may be guilty of, by hardening multitudes in
impenitency. To which I answer then, 1. I consulted not you before I wrote, and
why then must you needs consult me. 2. A wise man can conjecture what may be
said against him, without asking. 3. You might suspect some hinderance to that
which you judged a necessary duty. 4. You have heard and read what the
Non-Conformists say, as I did what the Conformists say, without any further
consultation.

But I am most impatient with them that suspect your intention and design, and
do hereby profess to them that know you not so well as I do, that I do from my
heart believe you to be a better man than my self, of good judgment in other
things, of greater meekness, patience, humility and self-denial; and do verily
believe that your End was to promote Christian Love and Concord (which was
mine.) And as I wrote to cure men's uncharitable thoughts of the
Non-Conformists; so did you, to cure or prevent men's thinking worse of the
Conformists than they do deserve; an End that is good and necessary.

2. But our measures of understanding are so various, that it is no wonder that
we differ about the means: And therefore lest I should be guilty, 1. Of
deserting the Truth, and Cause of Righteousness. 2. And of the loss of the
Plaster which I made to heal the ulcerated minds of the haters and
reproachers, and silencers of them that deserve it not. 3. And of the sin of
such as be drawn by your Book to that which has the aggravations which I
named, and fear my self, I shall take the freedom of telling you and others, my
thoughts of your performance in your Book.

3. I. I perceive it is not your design to draw any man into so much Conformity
as will procure him allowance in the Public approved Ministry: And then what
the better will the Church be for his change in all the rest, while one point
of Nonconformity will keep him out as well as a hundred? For 1. You profess
that you cannot justify all, though you fain would. 2. You over-pass some in
your defense. 3. You call your self a Nonconforming Conformist. 4. You are
fain to fly from your Country, being an excommunicate man, and to live in a
poor condition among strangers, to keep out of the Goal, to avoid the Writ de
excommunicato capiendo; and yet you lived under the Worthy and Learned Bishop
Pearson, accounted one of the most moderate and best in England. And what good
would so much Conformity do the Church? Can we serve them in a Prison any
better than Non-Conformists may? But let us consider of your Defense it self.

4. II. You would have your Reader have my Book before him, and you profess to
answer it; and yet you profess so far to lay it by your self, as 1. To omit
answering a great part of it, especially which justifies our Preaching and
Assemblies (yea I think you plead for them;) and my large Answer to the Charge
of Schism you seem to approve, which we accept, and so that is no part of our
Controversy.

5. 2. But you also avoid the Defense of the Corporation Declaration, which is
a matter of so great importance to all the Cities and Corporations of England,
as perhaps may prove more considerable than the silencing of a thousand of the
best Preachers among us for Nonconformity. But I blame you not for not doing
more than you are able.

6. 3. But why did you avoid the Order of my Book's Objections? and also the
answering of any chief intimated reasons (while yet I did but intimate some few
disclaiming argumentations?) why do you tell us, that you take them as you
remember them, without the Book, and satisfy your own conscience, while you
seem to answer the Book? And what drew you to begin with Reordination (which
none of the Ancient Non-Conformists are put upon?) But your disclaiming to
defend the Oxford-Oath, and your profession that some part of the Subscriptions
and Declarations by the Law enjoined to Ministers, you never made your self,
does bid us to believe you, that it is to draw men to think mildly of
conscientious Conformists, that you write, if not to judge Conformity lawful,
and a duty in case of silencing, etc.] And I doubt not but you will so far
prevail.

But when you tell us of a Noble man impeached of Treason, that made it his
business only to put by that charge, you may remember that when the Great and
Good Duke of Sommerset had so done, and the shout was made for his being found
not guilty, he was yet (though the King's Uncle and Protector) beheaded as a
Felon: Such a justification does little good. And you say truly [ I am not to
yield to the smallest Sin to save my Life.]

7. I see not how this agrees with what you say, After that Men's weakness and
ignorance may make it their duty of two perceived Sins proposed to them, to
take the safer side, and that is to avoid the greater.] Answ. Doubtless it is a
gross Contradiction to say, It is a duty to choose, or not avoid the least Sin:
For that is no Sin which a Man is not bound to avoid; and undoubtedly when two
Sins are proposed, every Man is bound to avoid both, though not as equal with
equal Zeal: And God never necessitateth Man to choose either, or not to avoid
both: But if our own Badness disable us from avoiding both, we must be most
careful to avoid the greater. I cannot pray without sinful dullness, or
imperfection of Faith: But I must rather avoid a total Omission than imperfect
performance, for all the Faults are eminently in this. No Sin is to be done on
pretense of avoiding a greater Sin: But sometime the avoiding of a great Sin,
may make another thing (e.g. the omission of that which else would have been a
Duty) to be then no Sin, that else would have been a Sin. Negative Commands
bind ad semper.

8. You say, If the Nonconformist err, it is on many accounts a safe Error,
because it is confessedly a refusal to Subscribe and Conform to a number of
things in their own nature indifferent: Rigid Conformists confess them to be
but Trifles comparatively, the Church might be without them and yet do well:
And Moderate Conformists confess them to be burdensome, and the Church might be
and do better without them, or if they were left to each Man's choice and will.
Answ. But if we prove them far from indifferent, Nonconformity will prove a
necessary and great Duty: However, I doubt the Imposers will give you as little
thanks for this description of the Case, as they do us for Nonconformity*
Specially when you add that for this, [ We are thought Seditious, Factious,
Schismatical, worthy to be Silenced, Imprisoned, Anathematized, and used as
Intolerable.] They will not love the Glass that shows them such a Face as you
dislikingly describe.

Especially when you tell them that you [ Are satisfied that it is in it self a
great and dreadful Sin, to Silence the Non-conformists, and do by them as has
been for these many Years.] And [ Blame those loose Conscienced Men, who think
that their Humors, Opinions, Lusts, and proud and imperious Wills, are fit to
be the standard of Unity, Uniformity, and Edification to all the Churches.]
This is but cold pleading for Conformity.

CHAP. II.
1. YOu begin with Reordination. And, 1st. I told you how the Church in all
Ages has commonly abhorred it: The Canons, called the Apostles, depose both
the Ordainer that does it, and the Ordained. Gregory Magnus, equalleth it with
twice Baptism (which perhaps you may think lawful too) you are for it upon
reason Toties quoties. You tell us how loath we should be as to Condemn that
which so many worthy Men held as were the old Conformists: And may not I tell
you that you should be more Cautelous how you contradict all Ages of the
Church, even to this Day.

2. Had you heard as great a Man as I have done, declare that he could not take
them for Ministers, or take the Sacrament of them that had not Episcopal
Ordination; and had you heard my L. Chancellor Hide give such Reasons openly
for Reordination as I did; and had you seen the Writings of so Learned a Bishop
as I have seen, to prove such no Ministers as are Ordained but by Presbyters,
and heard such Men, and so many Argue for it as I have done, you could not have
thought that the judgment of those that impose Reordination, was, or is, that
Men are true Ministers of Christ that are Ordained by Presbyters only? So that
your sense of the Imposition is feigned.

3. It is a known thing that the Church of England is not of your singular
opinion for Reordination: You may as well feign them to be for Rebaptizing:
They all renounce it with our Consent: Therefore they that require Men to be
Ordained by Bishops, must needs hold that they had no true Ordination before;
or else they should be for that which they abhor. So that it is past doubt, you
talk of you know not what, when you make this to be but the singular Opinion of
one Mr. Dodwel, disowned by all; though much in his Book besides, be by most
disowned: And it is not every later Bishop that made the Law, or altered the
Liturgy,

4. You say that [ Ordination once validly done by eminent Presbyters, and
grave substantial Ministers, it does to all intents and purposes make him a
complete Minister.] And elsewhere you maintain the Validity of Presbyters
Ordination: and say, That it is a taking God's Name in vain, when it is done
without urgent Reasons.] I have moved to you, that the present Imposers suppose
the contrary, (and I think, considering how much the King and Parliament left
to the judgment of the Convocation) the present Settlement proves what was the
Convocations judgment, who are the present Church of England's representative.)
They that are against Reordaining, and yet call men to be ordained, certainly
judge them unordained before: And you are to take your Ordination, and speak
the words in the known sense of the Imposers; or else you equivocate: And what
Reasons have you to deceive them? At least it is notorious scandal to seem to
do it in an ill sense. And when you pretend that your Ministry else must be
forsaken, we say, No: It is but to save you from suffering for your
Ministration, as long as you can use it on suffering terms: And you have not
escaped suffering, nor saved your Ministry by Conforming. If you would rather
suffer, than not Preach to Non-Conformists when you had an allowed Church of
Conformists, should not we rather suffer than by our Reordination submit to
that which is the Churches or Laws public professing that we were no Ordained
Ministers of Christ before? when after that we have never the more liberty for
our Ministry, unless we conform to all the rest. I remember three Worthy men
reordained one fourteen, and two seventeen years ago, that had never the more
liberty to Preach.

5. You say that [ Ordination by eminent and Senior Presbyters is Episcopal
Ordination, though not in the vulgar sense. For a Bishop and Presbyter in the
sense of Scripture are the same.] Ans. Remember this when you subscribe to the
distinction of Order. And I believe you cannot name two Bishops in England (if
one) that had a Vote in Parliament and Convocation for making the imposing Laws
that were of your mind: Nor two that will now say, that it is lawful to be
twice ordained Presbyter: And remember 1. That it is the Act of Uniformity that
requires this last Ordination. 2. That the Bishop of London, of Lincoln, of
Hereford, came into their places since; and were none of the Legislators.

6. You say [ If the Presbyters excel those Bishops, Ordination by them is more
excellent than by these.] Ans. And yet can you assert that they are distinct
Orders, when the Power of Ordaining is made the chief part of the Bishops
Order? I that am against you stick at this somewhat more than you, when the Law
and Canon make the Bishop of the Quorum. And as I was ordained by a Bishop; so
I never joined with Presbyters in ordaining any man, nor did venture to lay
hands on any in an Ordination.

CHAP. III.
1. YOur second Section is of our Assent to the words in the Book of Ordination
of the Notoreity of the Antiquity of the three distinct Orders. And 1. You
justify it by telling us that [difference of Holiness, Wisdom, Usefulness may
be said to make different Orders.] But this is too lusory in a serious
business. Words of Art or Science are to be understood according to the use of
the men of that Art or Science: And the many old School Disputes, and
Controversal Writers tell us long ago, how they understood the word [Orders] as
Offices in Specie differing from Degrees in the same Species. In your equivocal
sense you say true, that there are more than three Orders, or threescore: Yea,
in the usual sense of old they had seven Orders, and yet they held Bishops and
Presbyters to be but one of the seven; as I showed you out of Spelman in
Aelfrick's Canons of this Church of England, in the very times of Popery.

2. You say you make it not an Article of your Faith, that this sense of
Episcopacy is evident to all men that diligently read Scripture and Ancient
Writers.] But the question is, Whether you Assent to it, (or more?) If not, how
can you say you do? The Bishop of Hereford in Naked Truth has given you some
reasons of dissent, and Bishop Usher, and many such have done so before him.

3. Whether you hit their sense or not, gather by what I said to your former
Point of Reordaining.

CHAP. IV.
1. YOu next choose to speak of our Assent and Consent to the Bishop's Oath [to
subject himself in obedience to the Archbishop, and to his Seat or
Metropolitan Church, and to his Successors.] And you tell us that all men are
bound to subject themselves one to another: This again is too gross
equivocating. Do you believe that this is the Species of subjection, which is
meant in the Book and Oath?

2. You better tell us, that being Episcopus primae sedis, he may be reverenced
as the Foreman of a Jury.] But is this obeying him, and his Church and
Successors? Is not this also Equivocation? Do they swear Obedience to the
Foreman and his Successors?]

3. Your best answer is, It is enjoined by Authority.] And if it were but
obeying them in Civils, or circa sacra, in matters determinable by the King;
this answer had much in it: B^^ when it is intended to be in the exercise of
the Word, and Keys, and Matters which Christ has predetermined, those
Non-Conformists that are not for the Divine Right of Archbishops, cannot
assent and consent to it: And those of them that are for it, do (with you) hold
that there should be Parochial Bishops, or to every Church; and that those that
you call Diocesans are indeed Archbishops: And they are not for Archbishops
over Archbishops, lest it lead you to a Pope, (as he was in the Empire at
least.)

4. And Successions so often prove unhappy, that we like not setting up one
Church over another to the end of the world, when we cannot justify it at all.
They that are (contrary to the Carthage Fathers) for a Bishop of Bishops, would
yet have him their Ruler but as an Archbishop, as General Officers in an Army
over the Colonels, but not that our Church shall be set over many others; much
less to swear to unknown Successors.

5. And I told you diverse old Councils condemned Bishops swearing inferiors to
them, as the cause of many mischiefs; and sad experience taught them to make
that Canon.

CHAP. V.
1. NExt you speak of the Oath or Covenant of Canonical Obedience: And you 1.
Doubt whether it be an Oath. In the Act of Ordination it is but a Covenant: But
(what they do now) I know not; but heretofore it was also imposed as an Oath.
You tell me of my Concessions: I grant that ^o far as they exercise but such
power as belongs to Officers of the King, we may obey him in covenanting to
obey them. But it is in the exercise of the Keys proper to Christ's special
Officers, that the Book means, which you assent to; even in matters of sacred
Guidance, Excommunication and Absolution. And you say nothing to satisfy 1.
Those that are under obtruded and unlawful Bishops, that come in so contrary to
Christ's and the Old Churches Order, as that the Old Canons decree them to be
no Bishops* 2. Nor to satisfy those that think Chancellors use of the Keys to
be unlawful. 3. Nor those that think that Officials, Surrogates, Commissaries,
Archdeacons, being no Bishops, have no just power but what the King may give
them, and not a superior Power of the Keys (see Dr. Hammond's Explication of
it.)

2. But after you think that none but the Bishop is the Ordinary; but the
Church-Laws and common use contradict you, and call all these, when Judges of
the Court, your Ordinaries.

3. And I told you (which you pass over) that this is condemned by the Decrees
of Ancient Councils as a mischievous thing.

4. You say, It binds us not to obey the Canons, else the Oath of Allegiance
would bind us to it, and all the Statute-Laws.] Answ. This has more seeming
strength than the rest. But 1. If it did hold, it removes but one branch of
the difficulty. 2. And indeed he that swears Obedience to the King, does
swear to obey him according to the Law: And so he that swears Obedience to
the Bishop, may mean more, and include Mandates; but he cannot reasonably mean
less, and exclude the Governing Laws. But yet as we never meant that the King's
Laws are all blameless, or that we will obey them if they command us to sin
against God, but only will show our submission by suffering: So I confess our
Oath to Bishops, as such, can mean no more. But then, were I under a King,
whose very frame of Laws were unlawful, as tending to extirpate Piety, I should
doubt whether I might simply swear to obey him as my Governor. How far the
Canons are more unmeet instruments for true Church Government than our Laws are
for Civil Government, I will not here enquire.

CHAP. VI.
1. YOur fifth Section is about the words [Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.] in
Ordination. 1. Two things you include in the sense: 1. Inward Qualifications.
2. Investiture. But I told you 1. Inward Qualifications are presupposed, and
the person examined accordingly. 2. I never heard or knew of any that received
them by Ordination. 3. By Investiture it is the Ministerial Office that is
given them: To none of this do you answer.

But you say, Christ used the words, and no extraordinary thing then conferred,
etc.] Ans. 1. If Christ intended their after-reception of the Holy Ghost at
Pentecost, it follows not that we must use such words, that can promise or
give no such spirit. 2. There were five several sorts of Mission or Commission
then given to Christ's Ministers.

1. Christ sent out the twelve and seventy temporarily to Preach, do Miracles,
and return; and gifted and blessed them accordingly.

2. He chose twelve as related to the number of the Tribes, and ordained them
stated Apostles to the Jews, or Circumcision; and he qualified them accordingly
by his Spirit.

3. He ordained them Apostles to all the world (indefinitely) and accordingly
renewed their Commission: For this he qualified them with ordinary gifts of his
Spirit initially now at his resurrection, together with their new Commission,
and more fully and miraculously at Pentecost: You know how ignorant the
Apostles were of Christ's Death, Sacrifice, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. till
he was risen: And then Christ opened their understandings in these Articles,
and gave more Faith (and answerably we must conceive other grace was given)
than they had before. This cannot be denied: And is not this giving of the Holy
Ghost more than man must now pretend to imitate?

4. Besides these, there were after-missions of particular Apostles (as Paul
and Barnabas) or particular messages in particular Provinces.

5. And there was the Ordaining of Bishops or Elders as fixed Guides of
particular Churches: And these being ordinary Officers, were ordinarily to be
qualified before they were ordained, and not to receive their Abilities by
their Ordination: And this is the Ordination that we have to do with.

CHAP. VII.
1. YOur sixth Section requires pity, rather than reply: The Church that a
Bishop is ordained to, is many hundred Parishes; the Bishop of Lincoln has
many Counties. You know by whom the Bishops are Chosen, and where Consecrated:
The words were originally used to the Church over which the Bishop was placed.
And is it serious dealing to send word to none of them of your Time, or Place,
and then call to Men in a Church in London, or a private Chapel, to come forth
and speak their Exceptions? If you can prove that this may be Assented and
Consented to, you have a stronger proving Faculty than I have.

CHAP, VIII.
1. I See nothing satisfactory to the Objections which I made about the
Damnatory Passages in Athanasius's Creed. And I had reference much to a
Manuscript, in which Mr. Dodwel is the Objector, and the Bishop of Lincoln
supposed the Answerer; which he does with great Learning and Impartiality. But
to his Argument, That we are not to Assent to the truth of the Passages
excepted against, because we read the Apocrypha, and yet the Church intends
not to bind us to believe some Untruths in it (which he names;) I Answered,
that Athanasius's Creed is part of the Book which we must assent to, but the
Apocrypha is not. I make less my self of this Scruple than the rest, because I
have reason to believe Athanasius meant it well; when I have not the same
assurance of the meaning of the Authors of some late Impositions.

CHAP. IX.
. 1. YOur Sect. 8, about the certainty of Baptized Infants Salvation, being
made here an Article of Faith, I have much more to say against: But you answer
not to any of the strength of my Objections.

1. And how strange is it that you saw a Manuscript of Bishop Usher's, telling
us of [this Clause coming surreptitiously into the Book,] whereas he was Dead
two Years before the Book was altered, or that Clause put in? Indeed, there was
another in that sounded almost like it, which meant no more than that [A
Baptized Child has all that is necessary to Salvation,] supposing his right,
(ex part Ecclesiae) though he die without Confirmation, or the Eucharist,
which were formerly given to Infants: But this never said what the new Article
says.

2. You say, many Conformists say, It is no part of Assent and Consent, because
it is not used as part of the Church Service, and they subscribe to no more.]
Answ. Name not those Conformists, lest you Dishonor them. Do they declare
their Assent to all things contained in the Book, and mean only the Service
which they must say? Or do they [Consent to the use of all,] and take an
Article of Faith to be put in for no use? Entreat them not to take the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, with that Latitude and Exceptiousness.

3. You say, you can Assent to it in a sound sense: And [it's more than you can
prove that all Infants are saved, but all that have right before God are saved,
but not those that have no right before God.

Answ. 1. But you were told that the Church signifies her sense by the Canons,
which forbid the Minister (on Penalty) to refuse any Child, that has
Godfathers, not excepting Pagans, Infidels, Atheists, or Apostates: Why did
you not answer that?

2. A Right before God, signifies either properly to be a Child that is under
the promise of Pardon, in the sense of 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your Children
unclean, but now they are holy.] And of such I am of your mind. Or else it
signifies only one that the Minister has, Coram Deo, a right to Baptize. And
so he has as to any adult Atheist, or Heathen (or his Child) if he deceitfully
profess Christianity. I suppose you speak in the first proper sense.

But if you think that the sense of the Rubric you are mistaken. No one
knows better than Bishop Gunning, and he will tell you otherwise, viz. That
God's merciful Covenant gives us Right to bring any Child in the World to be
Baptized for Salvation, as it gives any Man right to take in an exposed Orphan
into his House. And if the Sponsor were to become Proprietor, and take the
Child for his own (as Abraham Circumcised the Children born in his House) I
would not dispute against it, though I were in doubt: But I have proved to you
that the Liturgy, or Canon, oblige the Sponsor to no such thing, nor are they
to profess it: and you your self suppose the contrary, that the Parent is the
First Covenanter: This Rubric then speaks of any Child, and you limit it to
the Seed of the Faithful, and so Equivocate. At our Conference at the Savoy,
1661. before the Bishops, I put this true Case; [I have in my Parish a professed
Infidel, that derideth openly the Scripture, and the Life to come; but for
fashion says beforehand, I will bring my Child to be Baptized, and say as the
Book requires, and refuse my Child if you dare.] The Reverend Bishop Sanderson
was in the Chair, and answered me, none of them contradicting, That if I
Baptized him according to the Church of England that requires Godfathers, I
need not scruple it. I asked him, By whom that Child had right more than any
other Heathen's Child? Seeing, 1. The Godfather is often as bad as the Parents.
2. And the Godfather takes not the Child as a Proprietor for his own. Bishop
Morley answers, That he knew some that did take them, and Educate them as their
own. I answered, 1. The Canon, or Rubric, require it not. 2. I never knew one
Man yet that did it, or that ever thought that as a Sponsor, he was obliged so
to do. 3. If it were otherwise; Poor Men's Children could get no Godfathers,
and Rich Men would have none. And what is this then to the sense of the Article
in question, that speaks of all Baptized Children? (It being of the Baptized
qua tales, and an indefinite in re necessaria.) You dare profess that of all,
and undoubtedly certain by the Word of God, which you think is -- true but of
those that have right before God. And may not one profess any thing at that
Rate?

Besides, I that know why the old words were changed into these, and by whom it
was brought in, urged and procured, am fully satisfied of the sense of them
that did it, by experience.

Your Exposition of the Doctrine of Baptism here adjoined, is very sound and
good. As to your Catholicon which gets down all, I may cause you to cast it up
anon.

CHAP. X.
1. YOur 9th Section, about not coming to the Sacrament without a full trust in
God's Mercy and a quiet Conscience, tells us what the Imposure should have
said, when I only except against what they have said. The Case is so gross, I
am apt to think they meant as you say; especially when I consider that those
must be Ruined that have not a quiet Conscience, if they will not, or dare not
Communicate. But if well meaning Men put me to assent to words of a contrary
signification in the common use, I had rather approve their good meanings, than
their imposed words, through oversight so expressed.

CHAP. XI.
1. ABout the use of the Apocrypha, you quite mistook the Question: It was not
chiefly whether you may use or read it, but whether you may approve and consent
to the Calendar and Rubric which imposes it, to be read; yea, those Books of
Tobit, Judith, Bell and the Dragon, etc. If you say that you Consent not to the
Calendar and Rubric, I ask, 1. Is it not contained in the Book? 2. Is it of no
use, when the use is named in the Preface? Cannot we thus say any thing
required, and mean what we list by it? Teach not the Papists to take the
imposed Test and Oaths at such a rate as this.

2. You say, It is not on Lords Days. Answ. On the Week Days God must be
Worshipped purely, and according to his Will.

3. You say, It Is more than you can prove that any thing is false. Why did you
not answer the two Instances which I gave out of the Bishop of Lincoln's
excellent Manuscript? And how much may you find in Dr. Io. Reynolds, and many
other Protestants against the Papists?

4. You say, If any thing be Fabulous, it may be read as an instructive
Parable, some cite Aesop' s Fables.] Answ. But dare you consent to the reading
and imposing of Aesop's Fables, or any other, to be read in stead of God's
Word, under the same name of Lessons, so many days in the Public Worship?

CHAP. XII.
YOur 11th Section says no more, but that you see nothing but one may Consent
to the imposed reading of the Liturgy every day to save his Liberty. Ans. 1. I
gave you a reason against Covenanting so to use it every Day, which you answer
not. And. 2. Why took you no notice that it is the Books Imposition of this,
which you must consent to, and not only the Practice? Is not the imposing
Precept [contained in the Book] yea, and is it of no use?

3. And why do so few Conformists so use it?

CHAP. XIII.
1. IN your 12th Section you join several things.

1. About denying Christian Burial to the Unbaptized Infants, and the
Excommunicate, as not signifying their Damnation. But if you take in the
foresaid Rubric Articles that pronounces certain Salvation to them if
Baptized, you may see what is like to be the meaning of the Church here: And
also if you read, how they use to expound their Anathema, or Major
Excommunication; and on what account it is often made. Doctor Heylin tells you,
That the necessity of Baptism was one of Bishop Laud's first Thesis's publicly
maintained in Oxford. You are now Excommucate your self, but not with that
Anathema which is of the hardest signification. But this is little to my
objected Case.

2. But the doubt is about the words, that in sense pronounce all others that
are Buried in England, saved. And you would make us believe that the Rubric,
which excepteth the Excommunicate and the other two sorts only, means also
the excepting of the Excommunicable, or Notorious wicked Men. But by such
stretches what words may not Protestant or Papist take by an Exposition of his
own making? If three sorts excepted limit you not from excepting more; What can
do it? I have tried the sense of the most Leading Man in these Liturgick
Changes that I know, whether he would consent that the words should be further
extended to except the Excommunicable, or Notoriously Flagitious; and he most
contemptuously rejected it, as if it would leave power to every Presbyter to
Damn whom he would (and to Excommunicate Men after Death) without a Bishop.

3. But you will prove your feigned Sense to be right, because the Canon 68.
says, [If the party Deceased were denounced Excommunicate (Majore
Excommunicatione) for some grievous and notorious Crime, and no Man able to
testify of his Repentance, the Prayers are not to be said at his Burial.] Ans.
Could you have more evidently confuted your self? The Church allows you, yea,
requires you to forbear the said Prayers, 1. If it be a notorious Sinner. 2.
Excommunicated. 3. And that (Majore Excommunicatione.) 4. And there be no proof
of his Repentance. And hence you can infer, That the Church meant it also of
Notorious Sinners not Excommunicate. What Alchimy is this? Whereas the Church
is herein specially careful that the Priest may not be the Judge: What need the
Major Excommunication be put in, if it were not meant? The Canon here declares
the Churches Sense more obligingly, than any Bishop can do.

CHAP. XIV.
1. WHat you say of the whole substance of Confirmation referred to the Parish
Pastor, the Ceremony only reserved to the Bishop, is all without Book, and a
mere mistake, as the Bishops will soon tell you, and common experience. Had you
heard what the Bishops at Worcester. House before the King and Lords said
against inserting into the King's Declaration of Ecclesiastical Affairs, that
one word [Consent] viz. the Minister's Consent to the confirming of those of
his Flock, and how it after came in; you would not have talked at this rate of
our Consent.

CHAP. XV.
1. YOur fourteenth Section is of the doubt [Whether we may Declare our Consent
that none should be admitted to the Communion, till he be confirmed, or
desirous and ready to be confirmed?

To this 1. You say of your own head, That Confirmation is not intended for
them that have been already admitted to the Lord's Table;] without any proof,
though clean contrary to your Covenant of Conformity. The words are, That [
None are to be admitted till, etc.] And you say, That by [None] is meant [None
except all that have been so already admitted, that is, most of the
Communicants by far in England, and all that come out of France, Holland,
Scotland, etc.] What a great limitation has this [None?] None except almost
all, or most.

Boccaline tells us of a device at Rome to make a man's throat swallow a
Pompion; and then no doubt any Physician may procure the swallowing of a Pill.

2. But you are persuaded you shall not meet with one person that will not
desire it rather than be put from the Sacrament.

Ans. 1. But it is not your own practice only that you must profess consent to,
but to the Use of the Rubric, as it is a Law to all others: Do you think no
other shall meet with such, because you may not?

2. Remember that the Confirmation in question is little kin to that which I
and Mr. Hanmer have written for: A very Learned Bishop told me lately, that it
is for the giving of the Holy Ghost by Imposition of hands: And (whatever you
feign) it is confined to the Order of Bishops. Do you know what Dallaeus de
Confirmat. has said against it? And that all are against it as with us that
are against Diocesan Prelacy? I know few Non-Conformists in England, that are
for it, or desire it. When I pleaded for it in 1660. hoping to have reduced the
English Confirmation to that which I described in my Treatise of Confirmation,
had you but heard how much the truly Learned, judicious, honest Dr. Wallis said
against it, who is a public Professor in Oxford, a Conformist, and the King's
Chaplain, you would not think that you shall never meet with any that will not
desire it, etc.

3. I think most of England are unconfirmed; if they desire it, what keeps
them from it?

4. They may not desire it, and yet not be kept from the Sacrament: For he that
receives it not of you, or any Conformists, may receive it of others: And all
the Conformists that ever I saw deliver the Sacrament, give it to the
unconfirmed, and never ask them whether they desire it. And yet you must
covenant not to give it to any such as desire not Confirmation and Consent that
this be imposed on all others.

3. But you say, Such a remote possibility shall not keep you from Conformity.]
That is, You will Consent to the Use of this Rubric, which requires, that
none in England give the Sacrament to any that desire not our Episcopal
Confirmation, which almost all the Non-Conformists desire not; and most of
England show by their practice, that they desire not, because you conceit that
you shall meet with none such your self, who perhaps may never administer the
Sacrament, (at least till you are absolved from your Excommunication.) And yet
you are so honestly against Division, that you will not separate from the
Non-Conformists, and their Assemblies, though you suffer for it. These things
hang not well together.

CHAP. XVI.
1. YOur 15th Section is against my greatest Objection; the manner of baptizing
by Godfathers sole sponsion, in the Liturgy: Where you take your own Order,
and not mine (to satisfy your self,) and put four questions, and overlook the
main, or say as good as nothing to it. My first question is, Which way the
Child comes to have right to Baptism, any more than all the Infidels Children
in the world? That is, Whether the mere Sponsion of Godfathers who adopt not
the Child, nor take him for their own, nor are at all required to do so, do
give or prove a Right to Baptism (and consequently to undoubted Salvation or
pardon) in all the Infants of Apostates, Sadduces, Infidels, Brutists, Arrians,
Socinians, Wicked men, Atheists; yea or of any other? I told you how
Conformists and other Divines here differ; but you easily pass by the
difficulty.

2. And the next question is, Whether the Church of England require any ground
of title in the Infant besides the Sponsion of the fore-described Godfathers,
and God's general Promise? And I have proved that they do not: It is not the
Parents Christianity or Faith that they require, nor the Grandfathers, nor any
Pro-parents, or Adopters or Proprietors. Nor do they ask, Whose Child it is?
but forbid us to refuse any that have Godfathers; nor do they suffer the
Parent to be one of the Godfathers, but forbid him so much as to speak there,
as dedicating his own Child to God, and forbid us to urge him to be present:
Yet are they utterly disagreed of the Child's title: Some say it is from God's
Covenant only; and that all Children on Earth have title, and want but one to
offer them to Baptism, as he may take in an exposed Orphan. Some say that the
Godfathers Act is his Title to Baptism. Some say, it is the Churches Faith.
And by the Church some mean the Ministers; some mean that Parish; some mean the
Diocesan Church; some the National Church; and some the Universal Church: But
you seem to think the title is from the Parent, but you speak it not out, nor
much meddle with the case; and the Church seems not to be of that mind;
though St. Paul say [Else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy.]

2. But you say, The Parent is not excluded nor forbid to be present.] Ans. But
1. No man in the Town is forbid to be present: Does it follow that any man
gives title to the Child who may but be present if he will? If the Parents
Faith were thought necessary to the Title (or a Pro-parents) the Book would
require it, and require the Minister to take account of it, or at least would
suffer the Parent to be one of the Sponsors, or to speak one word of Sponsion,
all which is expressly forbidden by the Canon, and by the Book appropriated to
others.

3. But you say, If he will he may profess and Covenant for his Child, yea, the
Minister may and ought to urge and require him.] Ans. What, and yet Conform?
When he is forbid, and the Minister forbid to suffer it?

4. But say you, [ The Canon is no part of the Liturgy, nor are we bound to it
wherein it is against the Liturgy and good Order.]

Ans. 1. By the Can. 36. we are all to subscribe to use no other form in
Administering the Sacraments but the Liturgy: And you shall be no Minister here
if you subscribe not to that Canon, though you should say, It is against good
Order. 2. The Liturgy it self appropriateth the whole Sponsion to the
Godfathers. 3. Our question is of the Churches sense herein: And it is the
same Church the made the Canons; and still owneth them: Therefore in the Canon
the Church expounds her sense, more obligingly than you, or any Bishop can
expound it. So that for you to assent and consent to the form of Baptism in the
Churches sense, and when you have done, to say that you may and must go against
it, because the Canon binds not, is a method of Conforming, which I will not
follow you in.

5. What you tell me of my Decision in my Directory, is nothing to our present
Case.

But you say, The Canon supposes the Parents as present, or Consenting and
Principal, for he procures the Godfathers, and the Sureties are his Deputies,
or Seconds, and yet undertakes not the Parents duty.]

Ans. I have proved to you that the Canon, or Church, neither foundeth the
Title in the Parent, nor permits him any Sponsion; and professedly lays it
all on the Godfathers, saying; That it is by that the Child believes, and
promises, performs, etc. And no such word of the Parents Faith: Nay, all
Children of Infidels or Atheists; must be thus Baptized. This therefore is your
mere disproved Fiction.

Secondly, That the Parent must procure the Godfathers, no way proves that he
is supposed to be a Christian or Consent, or that he is the Principal Sponsor:
For it is for the Child's sake, that the Law binds him to get Sponsors, and
all Atheists and Infidels among us, are bound to send their Children with
Sponsors to be Baptized as well as Christians.

6. You say, The Sureties undertake not to do the Duties of a Parent, nor more
than they can do, etc.] Ans. Then it is not undertaken at all: For all that is
to be undertaken is by them, and nothing at all required of the Parents.

7. As to the Interrogatories, and Profession, that the Child is said to
Repent, Believe, forsake the Devil, Consent, etc. and not only to be the Child
of one that Repents, Believes (which is his Title) you say it is but to
oblige the Infant: But professing to Believe and Repent at present, and
promising to do it hereafter, are different things.

But you say, These words may be submitted to till better may be had.] Ans. And
why may you not say so of any Untruth? But the question is, whether they may be
Consented to, and approved?

8. As to the great Question, [Whether it be the Intention of the Book that we
deny Baptism to such as cannot procure Godfathers, and Godmothers, or to such
as out of Conscience scruple and refuse to procure them, and will stand as
Undertakers themselves*] You say, No surely.

Ans. Alas, how little know you what the Conformity is which you defend? 1. Are
not all Ministers to subscribe to Administer the Sacraments in no other Form
than the Liturgy? Canon 36. 2. Does not the Liturgy make the Godfathers Office
necessary? and a great part of the Baptismal Office is the Ministers Speech to
them and their Answer, and the Charge laid on them. Can you say all these words
if no Sponsor be there? Or can you have such Answers? 3. Does not the Church
Command that no Parent be Godfather to his own Child, and no Questions or
Answers be used but the words of the Liturgy? 4. And did you ever know a Child
Baptized without any Sponsor? You rightly call your self The Nonconforming
Conformist; for you plead for it and against it, in the same Lines? Your
contradiction meets through all your Book.

9. You add, [ If it be lawful to violate a Divine Command to save the life of
a Beast (the Sabbath) sure it is lawful to violate a Humane Rule, or Order,
rather than cast Infants out of the Church, and deny them Christian Baptism.]
Ans. It is so: And therefore it is unlawful to Consent to that which I must not
do, and to Covenant to use that which I must not use. If I must not obey it, I
must not Covenant to obey it.

But perhaps you mean that the Lawmakers intended, that in such cases the
Ministers have leave to violate it, and admit Men to the Communion that will
not have Godfathers, for God intended such liberty in his Law.

Ans. God's Law was not violated by David, the Priests, or the Disciples, in
the instanced cases of the Sabbath: For he never forbad them what they did in
those Circumstances: Yea, his Law had been violated [I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice] had they done otherwise; and he has no Contradictory Laws: It is
said that the Priests in the Temple brake the Sabbath and are blameless, that
is, They violate materially the outward rest of the Sabbath, but they violate
not God's Law; else they were not blameless. But you can prove no such things
by the Church Laws in question, as that Ministers may break them by admitting
such Persons to the Sacrament as it excludes. For, 1. You Covenant to
Administer only according to the Liturgy. 2. The Canon punishes all Ministers
that give it against the Prohibition. 3. And the Rubric excludes your
supposed power of Dispensation. Can you believe your self that the meaning of
the Liturgy and Canon is [None shall be admitted that desire not Godfathers,
except such as will not out of an Erring Conscience?]

Are those then admitted, that through Profaneness desire not Godfathers? If
so, then you make the sense to be [Those that have not Godfathers shall not be
admitted to that Sacrament, except all that will not, viz. Conscienciously, or
Profanely.] If not, then the sense must be [You shall admit none to that
Sacrament that have no Godfathers, through Parents Profaneness, but all that
have none through scruple of Conscience.] And who cannot pretend such scruple?
And who will not pretend it, when that will justify them? And how would the
Bishops reproach such an Exposition, which either makes every Priest a judge
of Men's Hearts, (whether their pretense be true or not) or else admits all
that will not have Godfathers, while the admission of any of them is expressly
forbidden? It is a stretching Exposition indeed which is against the whole form
of the Office, and the express words of the Churches Canon, [No Parent shall be
Godfather to his own Child.] Try whether any two Bishops in England will allow
you any such Exposition.

If such be allowed in this Case, why not in all other like it? And so the
meaning of Law, Canons, and Rubric be, [You shall do thus except when you have
Moral Reason against it, such as is Mercy, which must be preferred.] Do you
know how many have been Fined and sent to Goal for Preaching, though they
pleaded for it Mercy to Men's Souls? Do you believe that it was the meaning of
the Parliament and Bishops, [You shall keep no Conventicles, nor omit the
Liturgy or Ceremonies, or Subscription, etc. unless when Mercy is to be
preferred?] They that have Auditors that cannot bear the Liturgy, when they
omit it in mercy to the Flock. I pray you get us an authentic signification of
this Sense.

The words cited by you in the Preface to the Articles of 1604 are impertinent
to our business: It follows not that you have leave to break the Laws when
you think mercy requires it, because they are not equivalent to the Eternal
Word of God, nor bind conscience as of necessity in the nature of them,
considered in themselves] and not in the Authority of the Commander. Again I
ask, Shall any man escape punishment by such a plea of mercy? Are not two
thousand Ministers silenced, and more, that pleaded Mercy to themselves and
others, for the reason of their Nonconformity? Did your Learned, Pious,
Moderate Bishop, excuse you for that plea? Does not the express words of the
Law, and Canon, and Rubric, and the sentence and execution of all Judges to
this day, confute your exposition and exception?

You truly say [It is a sin to make a false construction of the Law.] But if
against the express words, and scope, and common judgment and execution, you
will presume to put your sense, which is merciful, because Charity thinks no
evil. Any thing, almost, may be so said, consented to, and sworn.

I have spoken with a Papist that has taken the Oath of Supremacy, and wrote
for it; because it is to be supposed that it is only the spiritual power called
Pastoral, which the Pope claims over England, or such give him; and only the
Power of the Sword which the King claims, and denies to him and Foreigners.
And he cites a fairer pretense for his exposition than you do here for yours:
And thus all may take up the Oath of Supremacy that hold but the Popes
Spiritual Supremacy over us and all the world. What words can be so bad, that a
man may not feign in Charity a good sense of?

9. You say the Liturgy allows private Baptism without the Cross, and
Godfathers. Ans. 1. Thence I must gather, that it does not so allow public
Baptism; no not on pretense of necessity and mercy; else why had they not
expressed their allowance of one as well as of the other? 2. And even there, it
must be repeated after in the Congregation with Godfathers that believe, and
promise in the Name of the Child; (And in the house there is nothing named, or
required of the Parent, but some one (whoever) is only to name the child.)

10. In the Margin you say [ There is no express prohibition in all the
Liturgy, tying Ministers in no case, to baptize without the Cross, and to give
the Sacrament to kneelers only: and to baptize none without Sureties.]

Ans. I am glad that your whole writing favors of that spirit of Love and
Christian Peace and Forbearance, as your dislike of these things signifies.
And while we agree about the sense of God's Law, we shall not break Charity for
our differing of the sense of the Laws of man: But seeing you put these great
points (of my Nonconformity) here together, I shall briefly repeat the reasons
of my exposition against yours.

Words are to signify the mind and the matter. If the Book speak intelligibly,
so as to oblige us to one sense, it is nothing to our case whether the
prohibition be express.

I. The Liturgy-Rubrick says [ There shall be for every male-child to be
baptized, two Godfathers, and one God-mother; and for every female, one
Godfather, and two Godmothers.]

II. The whole transaction, beside prayer to God, and the act of Baptizing, is
mainly speech to the Godfathers, and demands of them, and their answer, by
professing Abrenunciation, Faith, desire to be Baptized, resolved Obedience:
They must name the Child. They are exhorted to see that the Child be taught
what a solemn Vow, Promise and Profession he made by them, etc. and to be
brought up to the Bishop to be confirmed.

III. In the Baptism of the Adult, the Godfathers are called but [Witnesses]
as not giving the person Title to Baptism. But in the Baptism of Infants, they
do profess and covenant in the Child's name, and he does it by them, as his
very Title.

IV. The Catechism says, That Repentance and Faith are required of persons to
be Baptized; and, as the old Book said, They perform them by their Sureties; so
the new one says, They promise them by their Sureties, and therefore are
Baptized.

V. For the Cross, the Liturgy says [ Here the Priest shall make a Cross on
the Child's forehead.] And it refers us to the Canon for the sense and
reasons.

VI. The Communion-Rubrick says, [He shall deliver it into their hands, All
meekly kneeling.]

VII. The last Rubric says, [It is ordained in this Office, that the
Communicants shall receive the same kneeling.]

VIII. The same Church by Can. 36. requires every Minister to subscribe that
he will use the Form in that Book prescribed in Public Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and no other.]

IX. And the Can. 27. says, [ No Minister when he celebrates the Communion,
shall wittingly administer the same to any, but to such as kneel, under pain of
suspension.] Can the Church more plainly speak the sense of her Liturgy? You
say It is against Schismatics. Yes, 1. That is the end; and the words express
the means. 2. And it is expository, calling those Schismatics that scruple and
refuse to kneel.

X. Those that say the Liturgy has any thing contrary to the Scripture, or
that the Ceremonies are such as he may not use, approve, etc. are excommunicate
ipso facto: And therefore as Schismatics not to be admitted to the Sacrament
till they repent of that their wicked Error, Can. 4, 5, 6, 7.

XI. Can. 14. All Ministers shall observe the Orders, Rites and Ceremonies
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, as well in reading the holy
Scriptures, and saying of Prayers, as in administration of the Sacraments,
without either diminishing, in regard of Preaching, or in any other respect
(note that) or adding any thing in the matter or form thereof.

XII. Can. 29. [ No Parent shall be urged to be present, nor be admitted to
answer as Godfather for his own Child; nor any Godfather or God-mother shall
be suffered to make any other answer or speech than by the Book of
Common Prayer is prescribed in that behalf.]

If yet the Church have not declared her sense of the Liturgy, but that I may
Baptize without Cross or Godfathers, and give the Sacrament to them that sit,
rather than refuse them, I can understand no man's words. And what can constrain
an unwilling person to understand?

XIII. Yet I say again, If I practice on any pretense of mercy, according to
your Rule, the Judges will condemn me; the Justices will send me to the common
Gaol, among Rogues, to lie six months, and will fine me twenty pound, and forty
pound a Sermon, as I have tried; and the Bishops or their Courts will
excommunicate me, and prosecute me to lay me in Gaol; as you have tried who fly
to escape it. And are not these made Judges of the sense of the Law? and will
not all this convince us what it means?

Because you have put three of the chief matters of my Nonconformity here
together, I have answered all together. If you will prefer the judgment of the
Bishops before all this, I pray you do not pretend that some honest Bishop
(that had no hand in our Changes and Silencing) says to you in private; but
get it us under the hands of many of them, if you can [that because mercy is to
be preferred before sacrifice, we may Baptize without the Cross, and
Godfathers, and may give the Sacrament to them that kneel not, if they dissent
through conscientious fear of living.]

CHAP. XVII.
1. IN your sixteenth Section you profess your liking of sitting at the Lord's
Supper rather than kneeling: How then can you declare [Assent, Consent and
Approbation] to the Liturgy (expounded by the Canons) which in plain words, and
by sharp penalties on Dissenters, so much prefers kneeling before sitting.

2. Your preferring the preaching and hearing of the Word, and Prayer, and
Praise, as more excellent than the carnal (you mean the outward) part in the
Lord's Supper, is very far from Conformity to the common sense of the Bishops,
who ordered the Altaring of the Communion Tables, and commended bowing toward
them, and suspended so many Ministers on such accounts; even far from the sense
of Archbishop Laud, expressed in his life by Dr. Heylin, and of the whole
Church of England expressed in the Canons of 1640.

3. I answered before your conceit that the Liturgy allows you to give the
Sacrament to them that kneel not, and your distorting the Canon, because the
Title is against Schismatics, when they mean that those that kneel not, shall
be taken and excluded as Schismatics, and so excommunicated (as I have proved)
and not that the word is distinguishing and limiting, allowing you to admit
those to sit that are not Schimaticks. The Bishops will deride that Exposition.
They that heard us at the Savoy, can tell you who that Dr. (now a Dean) was,
who craved leave to have disputed the Case against me, and to have proved [That
it is an Act of mercy to those that scruple and refuse to receive the Sacrament
kneeling, to deny them the Communion of the Church therein.]

CHAP. XVIII.
1. YOur seventeenth Section is for the Cross in Baptism. I distinctly proved
that the Church imposes it [ As a Symbol of our Christian Profession, and as a
consecrating dedicating sign, by which 1. God's part of the Covenant is
signified, even the Grace by him given, and the duty by him imposed on us. 2.
And the Receiver's part is signified, and by solemn Engagement there professed,
even his Faith in Christ crucified, and his resolution and self-obliging
Consent or Covenant to be the Lords as dedicated to him, and to perform all the
future duties of the Covenant, And that this is the true description of a
Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace. The word [Sacrament] larglier taken, may
signify no more than man may institute: But a Sacrament strictly taken as thus
described, I suppose man may not institute. 1. Because Christ has instituted
two as an act of his Royal Prerogative. And if any Institution be proper to his
Kingly and Priestly Power, it must be such: No other can be named excluding
this. And if none be proper, what is it for him to be Great and One Lawgiver
to his Church? If Legislation, the chief part of Supreme Government, be common
to him and Bishops, why is not that Royally Common?

2. And if Christ would have had any more Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace,
he would have somewhere expressed his Commands and Directions to his Ministers
to make them: But he that has given them full Commands and Directions for
Preaching, Prayer, Baptizing, and his Supper; and for their other duties for
the Flocks, has not said a word to them of this; either biding them make new
Sacraments, or telling them how many, or directing them what, or how to do it;
nor how to use them when made; nor promising to bless them.

3. To make more, seems to accuse Christ's Law or Institution of
Imperfection: Subordinate actions do not so: But to make Ordinances ejusdem
generis, with those which he made, not as a mere man, nor as a mere Minister,
but as Mediator, or King of the Church, does seem to say, That Christ left half
his work undone. Did he institute Baptism and his Supper, as a mere Man, or a
mere Minister? then a quatenus ad omne any Man, or any Minister may do the
like, and make more Sacraments: But if as King of the Church, and as Savior,
then none but our King of the Chuch and Savior may do the like.

Christ has instituted one day of each week to commemorate his Resurrection,
as God the Creator instituted a weekly Sabbath (as I have proved in a peculiar
Treatise.) Men may set apart one day in a year for special Thanksgivings, or
Commemorations, and one day in a week, e. g. in a time of Plague and danger, to
fast and pray, etc. But if any should make another weekly day of holy
observance, to commemorate the same work of Christ's Resurrection, or our
Redemption, which Christ did separate that day to commemorate, I think he would
be both an unjust accuser of Christ's Law, as insufficient, and an unjust
usurper of his Prerogative.

4. And it is considerable to me, that though Christ so extraordinarily
Commissioned and Qualified his Apostles to record his Words and Acts in
Scripture, and settle Church-Orders and Inferior Offices, and teach the
Nations to observe all that he had Commanded them; yet even them did did he
never Commission to make a new Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace; nor did they
ever make one; but contrarily rebuked those that would but have kept up some of
the old Ceremonies, Divine or Humane: And was not the Cross a stumbling and
foolishness to the World in the Apostles Days? and yet they never made such a
Sacrament. And who has equal Power with them?

2. If any say the Church does not make it a Sacrament, I answer: 1. It is not
the Name that we contend about, but the thing. 2. I have before proved it by
the Constitutive parts which you answer not. 3. If Christ had Instituted the
Cross as the Church does, [as a Badg of our Christianity, dedicating the Child
to God as a solemn Covenanting Figure, by which the Minister in God's Name, and
in the Persons, pronounces him Consecrated and engaged, as signifying both
God's part or Grace of the Covenant, and Man's part or Duty.] I ask, Whether you
would not have c^^led this a Sacrament? And if it want but Divine Institution
and Benediction, it wants indeed a due Efficient, but it is still a Humane
Sacrament, though not a Divine; and therefore an unlawful Sacrament. I would
but know whether Men may make New Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace, or not?
If yea, how many? and Quo jure?

3. And God's Prohibition, Deuteronomy. 12. of adding or diminishing, is not washed
away so easily as your words would make Men believe. You say, It reaches to
the whole Duty of Man, and Government of the Church, etc. Ans. There be some
things in the Duty of Man and Church Matters, that God has left to Man: To do
those is no addition to God's Laws: But to do the like work that God by his Law
has done, which he never left to Man, seems to me the Addition there
forbidden: e.g. If Men had made another Tabernacle, another Ark of the
Covenant, another holy Vestment for Aaron, another Sacrament like Circumcision,
or the Passover; he that so reproved their worshipping in the High Places,
would have reproved these.

4. But the sum of your defense is ad Hominem to my self, for granting the
lawfulness of humane private professing Signs, and of the Cross as such: It Is
strange to me, that you that are so judicious, can discern no more difference
between, 1. Private and public Church-actions. And, 2. Between a bare
professing Sign in genere, and a Sacramental Covenanting-dedicating Symbolical
Sign in specie.

1. Every Sacramental Symbol is a professing Sign: But every professing Sign is
not a Sacramental Symbol (a solemn Sacramental Celebration of a Mutual
Covenant, by an investing signification of the parts of both the Covenants.)
Does it follow then, that because Men (yea, any Man) may make a professing Sign
of his Mind, that Man (yea, every Man) may make a new Sacrament? An Israelite
might have lift up his Hand to signify consent to a Duty, or to answer a
Question: But might he therefore have imitated Circumcision, or the Passover?
When a Man is Baptized, if you ask him whether he consent, he may signify it
by Bowing, lifting up his Hand, by Writing, which are all but to the same use
as Speech: But he must Sacramentally signify it by the reception of Baptism,
as the instituted solemn Covenanting Symbol of his Religion. But for any to
make to the Church of Christ, a new Sacramental Symbol for such a Covenanting
use, is another Matter.

A Man that at the Lord's Supper, is asked whether he consent to Christ's
Covenant, may signify it as aforesaid: But he may not therefore join to the
Sacrament such another Covenanting Symbol of Christianity, e. g. To make (or
consent to, and approve and use) a Law that all Christians shall, solemnly
after the Eucharist, have their Heads anointed with Oil, to signify that they
are Members of Christ, and hereby Covenant with him and the Holy Ghost, as
signifying his Grace received, and their Duty performed and promised; and this
applied by a Minister Officiating, as by his Commission.

4. I perceive by your mistaking Inferences, that you understood not my
distinction of Private and Public, and thought I had meant Secret, or Open, or
before Few or Many: Whereas I speak in the sense that these words are commonly
used in Politics, e. g. When they distinguish Index publicus and privatus, Res
publicae and privatae, Actiones publicae and privatae, etc. Public is that
which either belongs to the Society, or a Public Officer as such: As a mere
Subject is Homo privatus, so his Actions and Affairs, merely as his, are
private: The Aerarium of the Commonwealth though kept secretly is the public
Treasure. The judgment of a public Judge, when few are present in his Chamber,
is Iudicium publicum; and the judgment of a mere Arbitrator before thousands,
is Iudicium privatum: A private Man's arbitrary Words or Actions in
Westminster Hall at the Bar, are Actiones privatae.

5. I have more reverence for the Ancient Christians, than to be a bold
condemner of all their Actions, which I wish they had not done (and had they
foreseen the Consequents, they would not have done). And I must, Fide humana,
give some credit to those ancient Writers, specially such as Augustine, who
tells us of Miracles adjoined to some use of the Cross: And considering how
they used it, I find it was (when those things were done) as a private
arbitrary professing Sign, such as it would have been to say by words [I am a
Christian,] or [I trust in Christ,] or [I am not ashamed of a Crucified
Savior.] And if when one asked them of their Faith, or derided them for
trusting in a Crucified Man, they answered by crossing, I judge them not for so
doing: The occasions and Persons might excuse such a private professing Action.
But if they would turn this into a public Church-Ordinance by a Law, and into
a Humane Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace, requiring all to receive it as the
common Badge of Christianity; I reproach not the approvers, but I dare not
approve it, or so use it.

6. You say, [We must reduce what is said in the Canon to the words in the 39
Articles, and the Liturgy, for they contradict not themselves.]

Ans. There is no show of contradiction. If the Church in three Books express
her sense, must I not set all together, and take them in all? And when the
Liturgy purposely refers the unsatisfied to the Canon for her sense and
reason, it is an odd way of expounding it, to forsake the Canons Exposition, and
say, I reduce it to the Liturgy. Doubtless all three together express their
sense.

7. The second Commandment forbad not all private use of Images, either a
Civil, or mere Memorative or Monitory private (yea, or public) use. As it
forbad not Jacob to pitch a stone of remembrance, or the Israelites to make a
Memorative and Monitory Altar, and yet forbad such an Altar for Worship to be
erected without God's Order. But it was external symbolizing with Idolaters by
Images, which the second Commandment forbad; that is, either worshipping them,
or God by them; or by setting them up in the place of Worship, seeming so to
do. So it is not all use of a Cross that breaks the second Commandment. When
you have proved lifting up the hand, or laying it on the Book, etc. to be
Sacraments, I shall further answer you: Or if the second Commandment oblige us
not to use Christ's Sacraments (as it is now one of Christ's Commandments) then
I shall confess that it forbids not us to devise the like.

8. You say, [If it be a Sacrament, it would be universally unlawful. If
Baptism had not been ordained by Christ, it would have been traitorous and
sinful to use it as a Sacrament.] Ans. You grant us enough; I durst not have
used the word traitorous so boldly, lest I should anger the Conformists. But
when did you prove that every professing sign is used to the same use in
specie, as the covenanting dedicating Symbol of the Cross is? This was a
supposition not so easily to have been begged.

9. As to my Simile, That Baptism is Christ's Badge or Colors; it illustrates
in the point of similitude: And so it does, that the King would take it ill to
have a public badge of the Order of the Garter to be added to his Star by a
private Subject, much more for any to make a Law for all his Subjects, to be
known by a badge of private invention.

You say, That it is lawful to wear those Colors in the Troop, which he may
wear out. Ans. Yes, if he may wear them out in specie to the same use and ends.
But if you at a Funeral wear a black Ribbon, and your General's Colors be
white; and some Soldiers will make a Law, That the badge of all the Soldiers
shall be black Ribbons, joined to the white, it would not then be lawful for
you in or out of the Troop to wear that black as the badge of a Soldier, much
less to declare that you approved of, and consented to the imposition. And when
you tell me, I allow the use of it, I tell you, I allow not your use prescribed
by the Church.

You say, I can never prove that Christ forbad it: And yet you say before that,
It Is traitorous to have made a Sacrament (without Christ.)

But you affirm, That it is made but for the same use in Baptism, which I allow
out. But why did you not give some answer to my express proof of the contrary?
Or why put you me so often to repeat it? It is an outward visible sign, by which
in the solemnizing of the Covenant between Christ and us, the person is
dedicated to God, by receiving the said sign of the Grace of the Covenant, and
the obligation of the Covenant, and of the persons professed consent and
engagement to the duties of it.

1. That it is a Badge of Christianity, the thirtieth Canon says twice.

2. That it is an honorable Badge by which the Infant is dedicated to the
service of God; the same Canon says.

3. That it is a Covenanting sign, both the celebrating words, and these of the
Canon show.

4. That it is a sign of professed Consent to the Covenant-duties there named
[Not to be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to
fight under his banner against the World, Flesh and Devil, and to continue
Christ's faithful Servant and Soldier to his lives end.] The words show, and
none denies.

5. That it is an Obliging sign, both as imposed by God's Minister, and as
self-obliging by the said professed Consent, is also expressed in the same words.
And this is it which is called The Covenant-Vow. The person is Vowed or Devoted
to God by two Sacramental signs, Baptism and the Cross.

6. That it signifies also God's Grace given by that Covenant, the words of
the expository Canon 30 show: [To dedicate them by that badge to his service,
whose benefits bestowed on them in Baptism, the name of the Cross did represent
[To the service of him that dyed on the Cross.]

7. Yea, that it is an Investing sign, delivering the Church Priviledges,
appears in the words: [We receive this Child into the Congregation of
Christ's Flock, and do sign him with the sign of the Cross.]

8. And that it is to operate Grace morally on the Intelligent, is expressed in
the foresaid words of instructing and obliging signification, with the preface
of the Liturgy [To stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty
to God by a notable and special signification whereby he might be edified.]

10. Anno 1660. endeavoring to prevent what followed, I used these same
reasons with the great Bishop, who, I think, has had the first and and chief
hand in the matter as it stands, and he denied but two things of the
Sacramental Cross; 1. That it is of God's institution, which he thought
essential to a Church-Sacrament: To which I say, It is a humane unlawful
Sacrament; but that it is not Divine we easily grant.

2. That the Cross gives Grace. I answered, that effectually it does not,
because God will not bless unlawful means: But it is appointed by man to give
or work Grace. This I proved, 1. Because as it is a Receiving sign into the
Church, it delivers by Investiture the Relative Grace of Church Priviledges.
2. As the Water of Baptism works morally, by signifying the washing of
Christ's Blood; so the Cross is to operate morally, by signifying Christ's
Crucifixion, the benefits of the Cross, and our duty. But he laid the stress of
his Cause on this assertion, That Sacraments, as such, are to give grace
otherwise than by such moral operation; and it is no Sacrament that is not
instituted to give God's grace otherwise than morally.] I told him how commonly
Protestants maintain that they are not instituted to give grace physically; but
only morally, and by investiture in relations. And here we broke.

And because I must expect that from others that are driven to it, this will be
the last refuge; I will add, that even the wisest Papists themselves do
maintain only such moral Causality in Sacraments.

11. And here, with respect to the forementioned Article of the certainty of
Baptized Infants Salvation; and also the answering of this Objection, I shall
cite some of their words, to show you at how great a loss the most Learned
Papists are about things that every poor English Minister may be certain of, or
profess to hold, or else be silenced or ruined: Though it be ascribing too much
to the opus operatum in Sacraments that we grievously accuse the Papists of.

I. Aquinas of the Efficacy of Sacraments, says, 1. That they are aliquo modo
Causae gratiae. 2. Not merely Causa sine qua non. 3. Aqua baptismatis habet
operationem propriam in Corpus, and ut instrumentum Divinae misericordiae,
habet effectum ulteriorem; non ad gratiam quasi eam attingens in virtute
principalis agentis, sed ad dispositionem praeviam; quae in quibusdam
sacramentis est Character, in aliis aliquis ornatus animae proportionatus
Characteri. 4. In sacramentis est aliqua virtus supernaturalis quae est ipsis
principium agendi in quantum sunt instrumenta Divinae misericordiae. Et haec
virtus est Ens spirituale, incompletum sive intentionale.

Scotus and Ockam confute this at large; and Pet. de Aliaco Card. Cameracensis
(a most judicious School-man) briefly after them in 4. q. 1. B. C. contending
that Sacraments are properly no Causes of grace, but improperly; because Deus
in sacramentis ordinavit sic agere, non quod ipsa sacramenta agant: Et de tali
ordinatione and libera promissione ipse certificavit Ecclesiam: Vel ex sola
voluntate alterius ut Causa sine qua non, quae non invenitur in naturalibus;
sed (sicut meritum) in Moralibus; and proprie non est causa: Et quod
sacramentum sive per virtutem propriam, sive per virtutem ei collatam, non est
proprie Causa Efficiens alicujus dispositionis in anima ad gratiam praeviae
(aut ipsius gratiae.)

So that their judgment is, that it is only Conditio sine qua non, dispositiva,
moralis (improperly called dispositiva,) and not of the effecting, but the
reception of grace. A man that does use God's Ordinance, being in the way where
God does give his grace, and performs the receptive Condition: Yet none of
them deny a Moral Objective Causality on the Considering Adult.

And Brianson in 4. q. 1. fol. 6. 1. doc. concludes Sacramenta non sunt Causa
effectiva gratiae, sed selum per modum meriti; per ea datur gratia citing
Ricardus, Scotus, Aureolus, Fr. Perusius, etc. against Thomas and Alexand.
herein.

And 4. q. 9. Concl. 1. fol. 152. he says [Baptismus indiget fide, (quae est
dispositio and fundamentum omnium sacramentorum) vel in se, ut in adultis; vel
in alio, ut in parvulis, pro quibus sunt Fide-jussores Paternus and Materna.]
And if so, what undoubted certainty is there of thousands whose Godfathers
themselves have no true Faith.

And, Quod ficte recipientes Baptismum non habent gratiam Baptismi, dicunt
Scholastici. vide Brianson, in 4. q. 4. Doct. 1. Fol. 34.

And even Pope Gregory 7. (Hildebrand) in Roman Council says, [That neither
feigned Faith in Baptism, nor feigned Repentance in Penance, do save any.] I
know what some say for the saving of all Heathens, Infidels, or Atheists
Infants, snatched perhaps by military force to Baptism, viz. Ex fide Ecclesiae,
of which I have spoken elsewhere (in Christ. Directory.) But their proofs I
take for Error and worse.

And as to this and their Causality Ex opere operato, Suarez says, (de Legib.
li. 9. c. 6. page 748. Col. 2. de Circumcis.) Nam etiam ipsa fides parentum
erat conditio necessaria, and sine qua'non; and tamen de illa non dici potest
quod gratiam daret Infanti ex opere operato, nec quod gratiam contineret; imo
nec causa justificans parvulos dici potest, nisi late aut improprio modo, sicut
dicitur de quolibet remedio seu condition sine qua non.] Whence he infers,
that Circumcision did not justify Infants.

And even Petr. a Sancto Joseph. says (These. Univers. de Sacrament. page 93.)
Sacramentum est signum sensibile Divinitus institutum longo tempore durans,
Sanctitatem aliquam, saltem EXTERNAM, conferens, and veram significans: Et page
101. Though with the highest he hold, that [Sacramenta novae legis conferunt
gratiam, idque ex opere operato and immediate; duplicem scilicet; aliam
respondentem dispositioni, aliam ipsi Sacramento, cum antiqua adultis nullam
conferrent nisi ratione dispositionis: Yet he says, [Sacramenta novae Legis
non producunt gratiam Physice sed Moraliter.]

And when the Papists that must exceed in ascribing to Sacraments, have no more
to say, and are at such a loss, we leave it to the judgment of the Impartial,
whether no Protestant should be suffered to Preach the Gospel without Ruin,
who cannot declare that [It is certain by the Word of God, that Infants
Baptized and dying before actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved,] none excepted:
And whether Physical, or any but Relative and Moral Efficacy be essential to a
Sacrament; or any save Aptitudinal, or fitness, to convey. to fit Receivers.

And whether as to the new Article of Faith, it had not been enough for us to
have said as the Synod of Dort. Art. 1. c. 17. [Quandoquidem de voluntate Dei
ex verbis ipsius nobis est judicandum, quod testatur liberos fidelium esse
Sanctos, non quidem Natura sed beneficio faederis gratuiti, in quo illicum
Parentibus comprehenduntur; pii Parents de electione and salute suorum, quos
Deus in Infantia ex hac Vita evocat, dubitare non debent.]

And I dissent not from the old Rubric, [That no Man shall think if any
Detriment shall come to Children by deferring of their Confirmation, he shall
know for truth, that it is certain by God's Word, that Children being Baptized,
have all things necessary for their Salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.] That
is, without any other Sacrament, supposing them to be the Children of the
Faithful: And I am sorry any Dispute of mine occasioned any one to endeavor
the altering of these words so much for the worse. But I have long digressed.

12. If God's Word were not the sufficient Law by which your Cause and ours are
to be tried, I would vie with you against your Plea from Humane Opinion, or
Authority: And show you, 1. That the Apostles not using it, will weigh down the
Ancients and others using it. 2. That the Ancients used it not so ill as we
must do, as a Sacrament of the Covenant; but as a mere professing Sign of their
not being ashamed of Christ; till it did degenerate by degrees. 3. That the
Learning and Piety of them that have refused it, has been equal to theirs that
so used it. 4. That he that reads Bernard, Gerson, Kempis, Thauluus,
Gerhardus, Zutphaniensis, Sales, and abundance such (yea, Persons of
Resolution) will think there have been very holy Papists; and for number they
exceed the Protestants: And yet that proves not Popery to be lawful. 5. That
the Baptized's White Garment, Milk and Honey, not kneeling on Lord's Days, etc.
were more generally used of old, and yet are not now so well thought of: Nor
the giving the Eucharist to Infants, nor the Millenary Doctrine, much the
Ancients Language, like the Arrians, which P^tavius cites.

13. Your main Argument you say, is, that [Ye obey that Command, Mat. 28. 19.
And Christ does not forbid you to use the Cross.] Ans. As if you should say,
When I Celebrate Christ's two Sacraments, I obey his Commands; and he has not
forbidden me to use two (or ten) more. As when you are commanded to believe in
Christ as your Savior, it is implied that you must take no other for your
Savior; so when you are commanded to Hear and Obey him as the great Prophet
and King of the Church, it is implied that you Hear and Obey no other as such:
And therefore give to no other any of the Prerogatives of Christ, and ascribe
nothing to Man's Law which is proper to his, which you confess to make a
Sacrament is: Lest your hear, In vain do they Worship me, teaching for Doctrine
the Traditions of Men: If it be Sin, it is worse than Suffering. Do you think
Worshipping in the high Places, was worse than this?

14. You plead the Law of Nature, even Mercy to the Magistrate's Soul, to keep
him from Silencing and Persecuting; and to the Peoples Souls, that they may
have good Ministers.] Ans. What then? If the Cross be lawful to be used as
prescribed, then no doubt I should use it. If it be not, must I sin when the
Magistrate bids me to save him from Persecuting me? The Martyrs might so have
saved Bonner and Gardener, by a Lie: But this is no saving them: For if they
First draw me to Sin, endanger my Soul, and would Silence me, or destroy my
Body if I did not; this does increase their Guilt, and not diminish it. 2. And
you may exercise Mercy to the People, as Ministers did the first 300 Years, in
a Suffering way, and by good Example, better than by Sin, and consent to
corrupt the Ministry and Church.

15. You call the Crossing, and such things [ Trifles and Bawbles, on which
weak and childish Minds dote, yet wise Parents may please their Children with
Bawbles.] Ans. The Bishops will be more offended at this, than the
Non-conformists: They that cannot allow us the pity due to weak Children, will
not take it well to be told that we are Fathers, and they the Children whom we
must please with Bawbles.

And you say, [ The external part of Baptism, is not so excellent as Prayer or
Preaching.] Water and Words, be not matters worth our comparing; but remember,
Words are part of Baptism too; and the Solemnizing the great Vow and Covenant
between God and believing Sinners, on the terms and to the great ends of
Baptism, is a high transaction of unspeakable Concern: And it is shame to many
that cry out against Anabaptists, that they reverence it far less than they.

16. But you say, [ We assent not, and consent not to the Imposing of it.] Ans.
Nor I, and therefore I will not say that I do. Is not the Imposing of the Cross
expressly in the Book? And do you not plead for it openly, declaring that you
Assent and Consent to all things contained in it, and prescribed by it? What
can be plainer?

17. You say, [I t's better to do a doubtful small Evil, than forbear a certain
and great Good.] Ans. Negatives bind ad semper, but Affirmatives do not. And
that which is Evil and not Good, is ill called Better: No evil must be done
that can be avoided: None that good may come of it. The Apostles and Pastors of
the three first Ages did good against the will of Governors. What if a Man
doubt whether a Lie or Perjury be Sin in such a case? must he therefore do it
that he may Preach without Persecution? It is no Duty to you, much less a
greater which you cannot do, but on condition you will Sin.

18. You say that [ Though he that doubts is damned if he eat, the case is
not like the using of the Cross, because there is liberty.]

Ans. I have said so much of Romans 14. in my Treatise of the Church Called, that
I need not add much more. The advantage seems to me more on the other side:
They that did eat, or forbear, did it in Conscience to the Will of God, as they
that kept a Day or not. But that Text expressly commanding even
Church-Governors, to do nothing contrary to mutual forbearance in such things;
here Conscience toward God is set against our obeying the supposed unlawful
command of Man, and our escaping Persecution. The Jews then Persecuted those
Christians that would not conform to their Law in Meats and Days, even to the
Death, and more sharply than the Romans did: And they seemed to be Scandalized
by them, to the hindrance of their Conversion. Why then, was that Case free,
and ours of the Cross not free?

CHAP. XIX.
1. YOur 18th Section is about giving the Sacrament to all the Parishioners,
thrice a Year. You say, It could not be the Churches meaning to give it to all.

Ans. Darkness is a great advantage to one that must be hid, or run away; and
confusion to one that must defend an Error. They are two distinct parts of our
Dissent, 1. That all the Parishioners are enjoined to Communicate thrice a Year.

2. That we are enjoined to give it (not to all, but) to more than we can with
a safe Conscience. You prove that there are Limitations to the last; but that
proves not that they are so to the first.

Do you think that it will excuse a Man that Communicates not, to say, [I am
not willing to be Confined,] or [I am out of Charity,] or (I am a scandalous
Sinner,) or (the Church did suspend me for Scandal, or Contumacy:) If it will,
the Papists may save their Estates, or others called New Recusants at least:
But the Law and Liturgy, and Canon, all show the contrary: If they are unfit,
it is long of themselves, say they: And that shall not excuse them from a Gaol.

You will say, It commands them not to receive unfit, but to be fit and then
receive. Ans. True: But, 1. All the Parish of natural Capacity are commanded to
be fit and then receive, and punished if they do not, though morally never so
unfit. 2. Fitness is not gotten by bare Commands. 3. There are multitudes
unfit, and ought not in that unfitness to receive, that the Law lays no hold
on for any other Fault; and many that cannot receive it; much less can the
Minister by the Law keep away. Too many know themselves to be secret Atheists,
and more to be Infidels, or Sadduces, that believe no Life to come: Many are
conscious of secret Fornication, Drunkenness, Stealing, Deceiving, etc. the
Minister or Magistrate is no judge of these: Yet if they Communicate not, they
break the Rubric and Law, and are to be punished. Many hundreds are conscious
of secret unpreparedness, and many timorous honest People so afraid of eating
and drinking Judgment, etc. that they dare not come: And many on many accounts
are unwilling; and yet all these are commanded to come. In a word, No unwilling
Person has right to the Sacramental Benefits: and yet all such are commanded
on great Penalties to Communicate thrice a Year.

2. And I hinted how many were forced to admit to our wrong and theirs; which
you answer not.

CHAP. XX.
1. YOur 19th Section is for our accusing those that we refuse to the
Ordinance, within fourteen days, that he may proceed against them according to
the Canon. And first you tell us a strange thing, which were it true, would
half reconcile me to the English sort of Prelacy, viz. [ That the lesser
Excommunication out of a particular Congregation, seems to be allowed to all
the Parish Ministers.] Say you so! What a sleep have I been in these 50 Years,
(since I have been Ordained it is 41 Years) that never could hear or read of any
such thing? I have indeed read some honest Passages like it, in the Reformatio
Legum Ecclesiast. published by John Fox, which died before it was born, and
only showed the good purposes of King Edward, and his Divines. But in our
Articles, Canons, Liturgies, or Book of Ordination, I can find no such thing,
nor imagine what could thus deceive you. Nor can I see any such thing in
Cosms's Tables, nor in any Conformist's Writings, which describe our Church
Government. What was in Doctor Mocket's Book that was burnt, I know not; By the
Execution done on it, and their hatred of Archbishop Abbot, I should think it
was as likely to be there as any where: But if it were, it is no proof. The
Laws and Authorized Church-Canons and Forms, must decide the Case. Were there
but any tolerable Parish Discipline, I would never quarrel against Diocesans;
Nay, could I but have been a Pastor, and not a mere Slave, or Executioner of
the will of others, against my Conscience.

2. I cannot imagine what you mean, unless it be that the Canon and Rubric
say, That we shall not admit to the Communion, such [As be openly known to live
in Sin, notorious, without Repentance, nor any who have maliciously and openly
contended with their Neighbors, till they be Reconciled; nor any that desire
not Confirmation.]

But, 1. Do you take this temporary suspension of my act of delivering this Man
the Sacrament, to be the Minor Excommunication, viz. our of that particular
Congregation? You are much mistaken, as any Bishop or Chancellor can tell you.
He is Member of that Congregation still: You only suspend your own Act, and his
Reception, till his Case be tried and judged by the Chancellor, or Diocesan,
whether he shall be cast out, or not.

2. Nay, could all our importunity with the Bishops, have prevailed but for a
Power in the Parish Minister, (for Pastor they would not have been called) to
suspend his own Act, and not give, or deny the Sacrament against his knowledge
and Conscience, I should not have said much against Diocesans, nor any
reasonable Appeals to them. But I will tell you what I take our Case to be,
after my long enquiry.

I. The great Parishes that have many score thousand Souls, are such as the
Priest (or Incumbent, I may call him) knows not one of a multitude of his
Parishioners. (And Bishop Tailor of Repentance Pref. says, A man cannot take
charge of, or answer for the Souls that he knows not.) And though fame say,
That in such a Parish there are multitudes of Atheists, Infidels, Hobbists,
Brutists, Socinians, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Perjured, etc. while they are
almost all strangers to the Minister, he can deny the Sacrament to none of them
pro tempore. And how can the Incumbent know in such Parishes what they are?

II. If he know a man to be a Papist, if he be a Church-Papist, or have a
dispensation, he cannot on that account deny him the Sacrament. Yea, Dr. Heylin
in the Life of Archbishop Laud, makes it his commendable design to have drawn
the Papists into our Churches, (as they were, say some others, in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; and this, say they, is to be a Queen Elizabeth
Protestant, to be one that will communicate with the Papists in our Liturgy.)
But many good Ministers dare not give the Sacrament to a Papist, till he repent
and renounce the Papal Universal Government, and their grossest corruptions.

III. If the Minister know any man to be an Adulterer, Fornicator, Drunkard, or
Heretic, or Infidel, by private conference, confession, or other notice, and
cannot prove it, he must give him the Sacrament.

IV. If he (that converseth not with one of an hundred himself; and can know
them but by hearsay) shall hear a neighbor or two, or ten, report that such a
one is taken by those that converse with him to be an Heretic, Atheist,
Infidel, Scorner at Christ and Scripture, a Fornicator, Drunkard, etc. he
cannot deny him the Sacrament unless the reporters will stand to it as
witnesses. And it is known, 1. That few that can prove it will tell it the
Minister. 2. Good people that hear it, cannot prove it. 3. Those that can prove
it, and privately tell it, will not trouble themselves, and offend their
neighbors, by witnessing it openly. What need we more than experience? Do not
your Books and Complaints tell us, that not only Coffee-houses and Taverns, but
other places are witnesses of abounding Atheism, Infidelity, or Sadduceism; and
that our Parishes have great numbers of them? And how many such have you known
in London excommunicated, or openly suspended? And are not the London Ministers
able good men, that would do it if they could? Ask them why it is never done. If
you say, that such come not, but excommunicate themselves: I answer, 1. Are
they not still members of the Parish Church? 2. How does the Minister know that
they come not, who knows very few of his Parishoners? 3. It Is known by their
acquaintance, that such ordinarily communicate so far as to satisfy the Law.
For what should hinder them when it is their interest?

V. If the Minister should have private proof against one Atheist of forty; or
one Drunkard or Fornicator of many, if he cannot get his witnesses to travel
far, and for nothing become odious to the accused, to attest it before the
Chancellor or Bishop, the Minister must give him the Sacrament after he is
acquit by the Court for want of proof.

VI. If proof be brought, and the Proctors fail managing it, or the Chancellor
favor the accused, or the man resolve before he goes [I will say, I repent,
and then deny me the Sacrament if you dare,] or if his saying he repents,
satisfy the Judge that knows him not, while the Minister that is his
neighbor hears no sign of it; but contrarily of his malice against him for
accusing him, he must still give him the Sacrament, if the Chancellor acquits
him.

VII. Nay, if he be excommunicated first, and by friends, fees, or saying I
repent, get the Chancellor's Absolution, he must be received to Communion,
though the Minister see not the least sign of his repentance, but the contrary.

VIII. If Ignorance be so common in the Parish, that we have reason to judge
that of twenty or thirty thousand Parishioners (more or fewer) one half of them
understand not the very Essentials of Christianity, and of the Sacrament; yet
the Minister must refuse none. I that have but three servants, can seldom have
all three such as with my plain teaching will be brought while they are with
me, to understand all the Essentials, and be capable of the Sacrament. And
though in general experience tells us of the great numbers of such, yet the
Minister cannot know them. He that knows not their faces, much less ever
catechized half. And commonly children and ignorant people will say the words
of the Creed and Lord's Prayer, when they are grossly ignorant of the sense. 2.
And if the Minister know such an one to be so grossly ignorant, the Law gives
him not power to deny him the Sacrament.

IX. How should the Minister have power to excommunicate one out of a
particular Church, when his Parish is not a particular Church, but a part of a
Diocesan Church only? It Is known, now it is maintained by Bishops, That the
Diocesan is the particular Church; That it is no Church that has not a Bishop
of its own: That Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo adunata; and therefore the name of
Pastor is usually appropriated to the Bishop; and in most places of the Liturgy
where Bishops, Pastors and Curates were jointly named, one of the two first is
put out of the New Book, and only Bishops and Curates, or Pastors and Curates
mentioned: And who can cast out of a Church, that is no Church in the Rulers
sense?

X. I have had many Parishioners that have made me know that they take me for
none of their Pastor, nor will do; nor themselves for any of my Flock; and yet
to satisfy the Law, or fame, or humor, they will demand the Sacrament. A
Minister cannot refuse such a one, but must do the one part of a Pastor's
Office to them that disclaim the relation.

XI. If I upon strong suspicion of gross Ignorance, would desire my neighbors
(aged or young) to come and speak with me, and would try them and instruct
them; or if I desire to confer with them on a just private suspicion of Heresy
or Atheism, or accusation or fame of wicked living; and if they refuse to speak
with me, or give me any answer or account, but shut their doors against me, and
bid me meddle with my own business, I have no power to refuse them the
Sacrament.

XII. I have known many persons, that for fear of being guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, would be in danger of desperation or distraction, should they
receive it: Yet if, for fear of an Excommunication, such unwilling ones come, I
must give it them. And I know too many that let me know, that though they will
have the Sacrament, they do not consent to the Essentials of the Sacramental
Covenant, but think Christ's terms too hard (till they have sinned longer;) yet
these must I admit to the Sacrament.

XIII. On the other side, I must give it none that dare not take it kneeling,
nor any that think Conformity unlawful, nor that the Canon calls Schismatics.

XIV. I must give it to none of the most worthy of my Flock, whom the Bishop or
Lay-Chancellor will excommunicate, if it be but for not paying fees, or not
appearing at his Court.

XV. The Priest must publish the Chancellor's or Bishop's Excommunication, if
against the most conscionable of his Flock.

XVI. And he must publish the Chancellor's or Bishop's Absolution, though he
know the party to be most unworthy.

XVII. He has no power to judge whom to take into the Church by Baptism, but
must Baptize any Child of Atheists, Brutists, Heathens, Infidels or Heretics,
that have but Godfathers, who never take them for their own, though his
conscience be against it, as is aforesaid.

XVIII. He has no power to forbear pronouncing Absolution from all sin in
absolute terms, to any sick man that will say he repents, and desire it,
though by never so much evidence the Priest judge it to be either counterfeit,
or from mere attrition or fear, without love.

XIX. I have proved that he has no power to forbear pronouncing all Atheists,
Infidels, Brutists, Adulterers, Drunkards, worldlings, etc. saved, at their
Burial, except the unbaptized, excommunicate and self-murderers.

XX. In a word, the Priest is so far from having the power of excommunicating
out of a particular Church, that he has no power to do the necessary previous
acts. 1. If he would tell him his fault privately, the sinner may refuse to
speak with him, as is said. 2. If he would take two or three witnesses, he may
refuse yet to speak with him, or hear him. 3. If he would tell the Church where
he has Communion, and would publicly admonish him before them all, and pray
for him by name, that he may repent, he does more than he can answer, and the
man may have his Action against him accordingly at Law.

XXI. If a Minister will prosecute at the Bishops Court all that he has cause
to keep from the Sacrament (as he must do within fourteen days) 1. It will
take him off all his Ministerial studies almost, in many great and wicked
Parishes. It will be work enough to travel long journeys as an Informer. 2. It
will spend all his Benefice, in the charge of journeys, Proctors, and bringing
witnesses so far. 3. He shall but get the hatred of sinners, and never be like
more to do them good: Whereas, had he power to use true Pastoral Discipline
with them, his love and tenderness might possibly melt them into repentance,
which a Chancellor's Court, so like a Civil Judicature, and putting them to
great expenses and danger, is unlike to do. Nor did I ever in my whole life
know one sinner brought to Repentance seemingly serious, by their Courts.

XXII. To conclude, If the Minister have power to keep any from the Sacrament
for fourteen days, till he prosecute them, they will as members, have all
other Communion with that Church even in Prayer, Praise and Thanksgiving, and
the Baptizing of his Child, etc. Albaspineus (that great and notable describer
of the Churches Customs) tells us, that the Old Excommunication did shut them
out of all other Church Communion, as well as the Sacrament; even their
oblations were not accepted.

If I understand the Case of the Parish Priests, and their Power of Discipline,
this is it. And is this the Power of the Keys or Excommunication?

If you ask me, How I would have all this remedied; I have often enough answered
it, and will not here repeat it. Only I would have a Minister have some such
freedom as a Schoolmaster or Philosopher has in his School; and not a mere
slave or Agent of others, to take in and use, and exclude and say, as strangers
to the Flock command him, against his conscience and knowledge of the Case;
till it be proved, that it shall justify him at judgment for all such actions,
to say, The Law, Bishop or Chancellor commanded me.

2. You tell us as by your many Years Experience, that private repelling by
Counsel and Persuasion, may serve with most. And 1. I wonder that you that had
but a small Country Chapel and no Church at all, where near Neighbors might
easily be spoken with, should talk of your Experience as an argument against
that which is of notorious matter of Fact. 1. Show me where Law, Canon, or
Rubric, gives power to the Priest to refuse a Parishioner that says, [I take
you not for my Pastor, nor to have any authority over me, but as the Bishop's
Curate, to do what the Law bids you, and I will not speak with you.] 2. Do you
not now dwell in London? where Parishes are so great that the Parson can do no
such thing on one of a Multitude, nor does so much as know them? And know you
not that de facto, there are Multitudes that will refuse, and scorn to give you
any account, or hear you, or come to you, or admit you to any such discourse
with them? I had the most obedient tractable People to deal with that ever I
knew: And yet I had some that attempted by present violence to Murder me, for
Admonishing them, and forbidding them the Sacrament; and many that would give
me no other account of themselves, but demand of me to deliver them the
Sacrament as the Canon and Liturgy order it, whenever they appear at Church and
require it: Hundreds and Thousands will stoop to no other Terms in the great
Parishes of England.

3. I confess, if ever I had been thought tolerable under our Prelates, and had
thought my self able (as I do not) for the care of some of the smaller
Parishes, I should have most trusted to the New Liturgy for my power to keep
away some of the grossly Ignorant [as being not ready to be Confirmed,] because
they know not the Catechism. But now I perceive by you, this were not like to
serve my turn; for you say, [It is only for those that never yet Communicated,]
when as multitudes of the Aged are grossly ignorant of the Essentials that have
long Communicated. 2. And diverse of these grossly ignorant Persons are Confirmed
long ago. Bishop Morton was one of the Learned and best Bishops, that ever I
knew: And when I was fourteen or fifteen Years old, I and my School-fellows,
and abundance of Boys and Girls, when he came into the Country, went as to some
Spectacle, and without any certificate, or question to us, or instruction of
us, we all kneeled in a long row in a Churchyard, in the Pathway, and as he
went by, he laid his Hands on every one, and huddled over a short Collect, of
which I scarce understood one sentence that he said; and I was never the wiser,
nor fitter for the Sacrament that I perceived.

4. But you say, that [The Order binds to a Repelling by public Admonition and
Church Power notifying to the Congregation, such a Man's Crimes and Scandals,
as a Fornicator, etc. and warn him not to come to the Sacrament, till he have
made open confession of his Sins, and reformed his Life.]

Ans. What Order is it that binds us to this? If you mean Christ's Order, we
must do it: If you mean the Churches, where shall we find it? This is like the
Rubric new Article of Faith, which will Silence us all who are not certain by
God's Word, that Baptized Infants (without exception) are undoubtedly saved;
and yet that Charity was wanting that should but once have cited the Text that
makes it undoubtedly certain. A short labor for so great an End. So when you
might know how very far it would go to reconcile me to our Prelacy, could I but
prove what here you say, yet you will not so much as tell me where to find it:
Nay, if you that have studied the Law, would but have told me how to escape,
when I am accused for doing it.

5. But your next is too apt to provoke Laughter, viz. [ Suppose you honestly
tell the Ordinary, that the incapable are too many to be presented, lest
Violence make them worse, and Excommunicating them signify nothing, but
endanger them to rise in Rebellion, or Mutiny, and turn you and us out of Place
(that reason is considerable) or quite leave our Assemblies, and turn Quakers,
Papists, Infidels, and precipitate Souls to Hell by Obstinacy and Viciousness:
But if you will leave it to me, I will Christen their Children and keep them
within the Church; (Is that Excommunicating them?) as Hearers, and Learners,
and Candidates, etc. Do I not then honestly perform the Law?

Ans. Your honesty I shall commend. And Christ's Law you may much perform. But
what Law of the Church is it that you thus perform? What is the Law that gives
you any such power? What Law forbids it you, I have showed. Let the Rejected
sue you, and let the Judges tell you, whether you have kept the Law: The issue
will answer you better than I can.

But you say, It is the Intention of the Law that you perform.

Ans. You have proved me also, and all of us, Conformists, before we were
aware. The end of the Law is to edify and save Men, and to prefer Mercy before
Sacrifice: But all this I do, or endeavor in my Preaching, Dwelling, and
Practice: Ergo, I am a Conformist, and perform the Law. But that did not keep
me out of the common Gaol, nor save my Library. And must we be punished for
Conforming? Break the Law and Canon, and say you did it in Mercy and kept it,
and try whether you will pass for a Conformist? Did you not thus keep the end
of the Law when you Preached at Warrington? and did your Excommunicators call it
Conformity?

6. But you say, All that are accused are not Excommunicate, nor laid in Gaols;
it is to be hoped that the Ordinary will do them Justice.

Ans. 1. As they did you. 2. They may escape the Gaol by flying their Country,
as you do: But what shall they do with their Wives and Children? 3. But we
grant you all this: If 500 in a great Parish should be accused by the Minister
as incapable of the Sacrament by gross Ignorance, Infidelity, Heresy, or
Crimes, and as you say, they be not Excommunicate; when they come home acquit,
the Minister must give them the Sacrament the next time. 4. But our question is
not what the Ordinary will do, but what the Law and Canon bind him and you to
do?

CHAP. XXI.
1. YOu entitle the next Section, of the Chancellor and his Office, and reading
Excommunications, and the Order and Discipline in the Church of England. And,
1. You tell us of them that would have Unordained Ruling Elders in every
Parish. But, 1. If that be ill, how will it justify Lay-Chancellors? 2. Cannot
many with the Pastor better govern one Parish, than one Chancellor can many
Scores, or Hundreds? 3. Some give Lay Elders only a part of the Magistrates
work, and some only to be Delegates for the People to do but what they may do,
who cannot be often present, and to be occasional Arbitrators; and some that give
them any use of the Keys, take them not for Laymen, but Ministers separated to
that Ecclesiastical Office?

2. You tell us of thirteen parts of Discipline among us: To which I said
enough before. 1. No Atheists, Infidels, or Pagans then must be refused
Baptism, if communicating Godfathers (how bad soever) present him who never
take him for their own, and we doubt can neither give or prove his Title: And
that we are disabled to keep the unworthy from the Communion, I have proved;
and the Excellent, Learned, Pious, Parish Priests of London, tell you by
Practice.

2. Few Communicants are Confirmed, and Sacramental Capacity is not required to
Confirmation: And if it be not used, or worse, by Bishops who only have the
power, what satisfaction is that to the Parish Priest and Church?

3. There is no sufficient means to Convict, and keep away scandalous Sinners.

4. The Sinner has power to forbid you private Admonition by refusing to speak
with you, or come near you.

5. What is Family Power to the Church? We thank you for nothing. But were not
Parents formerly disabled from keeping Children and Servants from spending much
of the Lord's Day in Dancing? etc. And does not the Canon yet disable them from
bringing them to hear a Sermon at the next Parish Church, when they have none
at Home?

6. The Lawyers that I speak with, take all for mere Falsehood that you say of
the Priests power, of public admonition of sinners by name, not censured by
the Ordinary. You say, Where is it forbidden? I ask you, Where is the Priest
authorized to do it? If not, the Man will have his Action against him, and
Ruin him; and the Bishop may suspend him for Usurpation. And, 2. Of all the
worthy Parish Incumbents in London, who did you ever hear once do it? I never
one heard one do it, nor heard of one that did it in my life, except a
Nonconformist, or a hot Parson point at a Puritan in the Church for some
Nonconformity in a Circumstance. Reverse then your charge of Hypocrisy, if
you find it must fall on all the worthy London Incumbents: For they all speak
for Discipline, though not for more.

7. If there be half as many bad Ministers as the Country says there is, it is
a small honor to the Church, to reproach the Fathers that admit them as
sinning against Church, Law, and Conscience; and a small relief to Peoples
Souls to tell that some Body had power to have provided better. But the People
had no such power, to save themselves from a bad one; though the Church for
700, if not more Years, took him to be no Bishop but an Usurper, that came not
in by the consent of the Flock, and election of the Clergy, of which more
elsewhere.

8. Do or can Bishops by Visitations know the People and their Cases of a
thousand, or many hundred Parishes, so as to hear and judge them? Would they
not have ten thousand scandalous Sinners sometime to try and exhort to
Repentance in one, or few Days?

9. and 10. We are glad that the old prohibitions of Afternoon Sermons and
Lectures, are not yet revived: But how few Parishes have such Lectures
comparatively? and how few have Catechizing? And they that have none, may not
go to another: If you think that it will save the Peoples Souls, that the
Priest might have instructed them if he could and would, and that the Bishop
should have made him do it, I dissent.

11. I have seen no Visitation Articles of late, but in the old ones of 1634,
1635, 36, 37, 38, 39. the Churchwardens were to swear to persecute Men for so
many things which they thought their Duty (as the foresaid going from a
Non-preaching Minister, keeping private Fasts, and such like) that many Men
that feared an Oath and Persecution, suffered because they durst not be
Churchwardens.

12. I confess more manners of Church Censures are in use among us, than we
desire. The Canons will tell them to you: Else so many hundred Non-Conformists
formerly and lately had not been forbid to Preach, nor all forbid to admit
Nonconforming Christians to Communion; nor had they been ipso facto
excommunicate (though Ant. de Dom. Spalatensis say so much to make odious all
excommunicating ipso facto (who, they say, first devised the name of a
Doctrinal Penitence.) And Bishop Ier. Tailor says so much against it.

And I confess that there is the Magistrate's sword to back all this; by which
about two thousand of us were silenced, and you fly out of your Country from
the Writ de excommunicato capiendo.

3. My belief of your unfeigned honesty makes one at last pity you, and wonder
when you add [What more would you have?] what it was that could tempt you to
contract the guilt of defending things of such public and sad an Aspect and
prospect, against such light, and after such experience of the effects, and in
such a time! 1. Do you believe in your conscience, that the Bishop of York,
Norwich, Lincoln, London, or the rest, with a Chancellor, and his Officials and
Archdeacons, can possibly exercise that Discipline, or the hundredth part of
it, which Christ has appointed, were they never so honest? 2. Do you believe
that a Lay-Chancellor, who you confess has not the power of the Keys, does or
can well execute them? 3. Do you not know how little of the Parish-Government
against scandals is exercised by the Bishop; and how almost is done by this
Chancellor and Officials? 4. Do you not know how unlike their Courts are to fit
a sinner for absolution by true Repetance? 5. Did you ever in your life know a
sinner brought to a repentance seemingly unfeigned by them? 6. Did you ever
hear such worthy men of greatest honesty and Learning as Dr. Lloyd, Dr.
Stillingfleet, Dr. Tillotson, Mr. Sharp, etc. name any in the Pulpit or Church
by way of public admonition and invitation to repentance, who was not first
censured by the Ordinary? 7. Do you think none of them would do it, if they
thought it a duty, and the lawful and safe way of Discipline? 8. Do you think
their Parishes have no scores or hundreds of Brutists, Atheists, Drunkards,
Fornicators, or other scandalous sinners? 9. Do you think they can possibly
know any thing of their peoples gross Ignorance, Infidelity, Atheism, yea, or
Scandal, who can know so few of the persons? (much less can the Bishop.) 10. Do
you think that it is exercise enough of this Discipline, when about 5000 in a
year only communicate to leave 20000 or 30000 more, as members of the Church in
that Parish, that use not to communicate, or else may come when they will
extraordinarily to save them from the Law, though utterly unknown to the
Minister? (And so proportionably in Parishes half as big.) And how is it
possible this can be amended rebus sic stantibus? And would not so many good
men amend it, were it possible? Oh draw not the guilt of so many and such
things on your self without cause! Were it as small a thing as the Israelites
High Places, if you cannot amend it, do not become the open defender of it.
Judas himself at last accused the Pharisees and High Priests, and justified
Christ. I do not think he would have written a Confutation of Christ's
reproofs, recited in Matt. 15. and 23, etc. How can you pray for a Reformation
of that which you think needs none? And has the Church and Cause of holy
Discipline lost so much of your prayers too? If you say to God, as you do to
us, [What more would we have?] I am glad that God has a firmer people that
will pray for more.

4. You say [As to the Chancellor and his Office, it is less matter by whom
Excommunication be done, so it be honestly and soundly done. He is a Christian,
he is a man of Knowledge and Learning; he is authorized by the Laws of the
Kingdom; his Office is incorporate into the Government of the Nation. Though he
may not bind and loose as a Pastor, he may as a Christian, authorized by the
King. See Matthew. 18. 15, etc.

Ans. This is a great business. 1. Why said you before, that the Power of the
Keys belongs to the Pastors, etc? But you meant [not only to them.] 2. Is it
the same sort of Excommunication and Absolution which belongs to the Pastor and
to a Layman? If not, you say nothing to our business. For our Laws, Canons and
Church pretend here no difference. I confess that there are three acts of
separation, which the Magistrate may do. 1. He, may command Bishops and Pastors
to do their Office faithfully in excommunicating notorious impenitent
criminals. 2. When they are excommunicated, he may forbid them intruding into
the Church. 3. He may judge the flagitious to be stigmatized, or be taken as
outlawed, and forbid men to be familiar with them.

But the Power of the Church is a power of judging what individual persons are
fit or unfit for Baptism, the Eucharist, Church Entrance, and Church Communion,
is the Church is the Porch of Heaven, and as a preparation to the final
judgment. And it is not another sort, but this sort which the Lay-Chancellor
pretends to exercise in the Bishop's name.

I have been thought by some to give my self too much to Magistrates in
Church Matters: But I am far from your mind, for the reasons following.

1. It is notorious, that in Scripture Christ has instituted a special Office
to use these Keys, and do this work, which he would not have done, had he left
it common to any others.

2. The Power of the Keys is so much of the essential comprehensive title of
that Office, as that it is nullified when it is made common.

3. If this part may be done by the Laymen or Magistrate, no man can give a
reason why any of the rest may not, even not only to be the stated Teachers of
the Church, and their Guides in Worship, but also Baptizing and administering
the Lord's Supper. As it is more to be the Lawmakers than the Cryers, and the
Judge, than the Marshal; so it is more to decree who shall have the Sacraments,
than barely to deliver it them, which the Deacon may do. And so we shall have
not only Lay-Baptizers, but Lay-Preachers, Lay-Administers of the Lord's
Supper, or by contradiction, Lay-Priests.

4. You plead for Conformity, and may easily know that the Church of England
abhors this Opinion.

5. When King Henry the Eighth was called Head of the Church, to avoid the
Papists calumnies, Queen Elizabeth and King James have published their
disclaiming of that power of Word and Sacraments, called that of the Keys; and
if my Ears deceived me not, I have heard our present King profess the same.

6. The judgment and practice of the Churches of all Ages and places since
Christ, is against you; I think Helvetia it self not excepted. And should this
be nothing to you, who call on us to reverence the Old Conformists?

7. The reason of the Institution fully satisfies me. It was not meet so great
a trust should be placed in unfit men: As in case of Ordination, it must be men
that are able to try the persons, as to skill and life, that must be trusted
with so weighty a business; and also such that can have leisure to attend it;
and therefore as an Office are empowered for it, and separated to it, lest it
miscarry; so as to Baptism, Absolution, Excommunication, it must be done by
men, 1. That are capable of full acquaintance with the person, witnesses and
cause. 2. And that can try and judge of it. 3. And especially of the persons
Faith and Repentance; (for it is on these that the sentence must pass:) No
Baptism without Faith: No Excommunication without obstinate Impenitence: No
Absolution without Repentance.) 4. It must be by men fit to exhort them to
Faith and Repentance, and confute their Errors, and pray for them that God
would give them Faith and Repentance. 5. And it is so great a part of the
world, and all the Church of Christ, that this, or much of this must be done
for, that reason showed it needful, that it be made the work of a great and
special Office. And if so, then those men that do it, 1. Must be tried as
Ordained Ministers be: 2. And Ordained to the Office of doing it: 3. And
profess to do it as such Officers: 4. And not lacerate that Office, and change
it, by taking a part of it, and leaving the rest: And so they must be no
Laymen.

I could with that you had studied and consulted better, before with such more
than Erastian singularity you had pleaded for so dangerous a thing as
Church-Levelling, or so much overthrow of the necessary sacred Office, and set
your self against the judgment and practice of the Christian Church. But all
men have their hour of temptation; and all do not overcome.

5. You say, The Excommunication is of no force till published by the
Parish-Minister, who has power, if he please, to make it his Text, and declare
the nature, use and ends, etc.

Ans. 1. I had rather have a better Text. 2. It is of force if another publish
it. 3. It Is part of the true Charge of the Minister himself, and will, trusting
another with it, discharge him. 4. We fear being guilty of the Lay-man's
Usurpation, and the Church-Confusion. 5. But worst of all, it is people fearing
God that the Canon excommunicateth ipso facto, and that the Chancellor is to
excommunicate. Had it been my duty to pronounce you excommunicate, because the
Chancellor decreed it? 6. Where you say, If I know the sentence to be void,
unjust and illegal, I am not to publish it.

Ans. Well set together. But if you know it to be unjust, and yet legal,
according to the Canon, you must publish it, or be a Nonconformist, and may be
suspended: And are all the Canons Decrees just?

CHAP. XXII.
YOU speak next of the Surplice; of which I gave you no occasion. But we that
know that the true meaning of the Liturgy is, that all must use it that shall
be suffered to officiate, 1. Will not believe you, if you tell us the contrary
hereafter, and lay it only on the Canon, and think it nothing that you are
obliged to consent to, and aprove. 2. Nor will I yet believe that you will
undertake to justify the ejecting and silencing of all that dare not use the
Surplice: Or if you will, you cannot. The 14th and 15th of the Romans cannot be
confuted; nor the many proofs that I have given, that it reaches our case, in
my late Book for the Church's Concord. And why talk you of the Surplice, and
omit the main Question, Whether we may consent to the Liturgy, Preface and
Rubric, which impose it as they do? You durst not consent to silence two
thousand, or one that dare not use it.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. YOur next Section is of the false Rule for finding Easter Day. To this you
say, [If really there be an Error, I assent not to it.] Ans. Nor I: Nor will I
say I do when I do not. And to what purpose then do you write for Conformity,
when one Lie must not be told to save our Liberty?

2. But you say, It is not an Error in Divinity. Ans. What then? May I Lie
about any other things?

3. But you say, Some yet continue to affirm it is no Error. Ans. And what will
not some Men affirm? You see how hard it is for a Nonconformist to be
justified with some Men, when all the Almanacks in England cannot do it in such
a point. I am too weak to deal with Men, that will not take such evidence as
this.

You say, That it is questionable, whether this be any part of the Book to be
assented to. Ans. You had some fair pretense to deny the act of Uniformity to
be a part, though the Contents say it is, but if this be questionable, you may
question (as the Schoolmen) so long till you leave us little unquestionable.
This would increase my Resolution against Conformity, when we cannot be sure
what it is that we must Assent and Consent to, and what not: How can you tell
us which is or not of the Book, if this be not?

4. You say, [For the time past none will lay it to the charge of the
Conformists, and for the time to come it will be abated, those that shall
Subscribe and Conform.]

Ans. How often have I told you, that I am laying nothing to the Charge of
others, but excusing our selves? But I cannot justify them that will do they
know not what. Especially it is sad that, when such a Convocation which is the
Representative Church of England, shall all consent to draw up such things to
be imposed on a Kingdom; and so great a Parliament require assent to it on the
Penalties enacted and executed on so many, they should have no more honorable
a defense than you make for them.

5. And who it is that has the power to abate us that which the Law so
severely requires, we do not yet know, unless it be the King, whose Mind you
know not. It is the Bishop that you mean: But I doubt the Lawyers that have so
lately questioned the Kings Power of Dispensation, will contradict you that
give that to the Bishop which they deny the King.

CHAP. XXIV.
1. THe next Section is about our Assenting to, Consenting to, and approving
the many Disorders and Defects in the Liturgy. You confess there are such, and
name many of them. And the sum of your Answer is, That you Assent and Consent
to use the forms though disordered and defective, and the Assent and Consent
is no otherwise to be understood.

Ans. Soon said, but where is the proof? 1. The words are, All things contained
in, and prescribed by the Book. Is the mode and disorder none of the [All?] If
I should say, I Approve, Assent, and Consent to something but not all; or the
Matter, but not the Order and Manner, does this answer the common sense of the
universal words? What if the Book did say the Lord's Prayer, or Ten
Commandments backward, or Baptized in the Name of the Holy Ghost, the Son, and
the Father, or began as it ends, etc. may I declare that I Consent to, and
approve all things contained in it, and prescribed by it?

2. As to your limitation of the sense to the word Use, I have told you that
the Parliament rejected it, and that it is a groundless Fiction, and that it
makes your Cause no whit the better were it granted.

CHAP. XXV.
1. THe next is, Whether we may assent to the Preface for justifying all that
was in the Book before.

You say that It was not the intent of the Book to bind any Man to approve the
Errors of Translators and Printers, nor to use the Forms in the Liturgy so as
to contradict one another.

Ans. 1. Printers Errors indeed are not the Convocations, nor the Books as made
by them: Did I instance in any of them. But if Translators Errors also be
excepted, our difficulty of understanding the Imposition still increases. Then
it seems as to the Psalms, Epistles and Gospels, we Assent and Consent only to
the Original Text, and so much as we judge well Translated. I thought it the
Book by ill Translation had grossly contradicted, or depraved the Scripture, it
had been one of the worst sort of Errors. I told you where it directly
contradicts the Text. What Heresy may not be brought in by a false
Translation? We thank God for the worst, as a great Mercy to the Church; and by
them that will not receive a better in the Psalms, we are thus commanded to
justify even that which was worst, lest they should be thought to have needed
any amendment. And you make your self their Expositor without their Authority,
and tell us that the intent of the Book is not to bind us to approve the Errors
of Translators: And I believe you as the Book is distinguished from the
Authors, and so has no intent at all. But if the Translaton has done, as
Heylin says the King's Printer did, that put [Thou shall commit Adultery,] for
[Thou shall not,] and I were commanded to approve of all things contained in
the Book; whatever you shall say or do, I would have done as John Fox the
Martyrologist did, says Heylin, who brought a Greek Testament (supposing the
Hebrew. old Testament) and said to them, [I am ready to subscribe this: If that
will not serve your turn, take my Prebendship of Salisbury, which is all the
Preferment that ever I had of you, and much good may it do you.]

2. And you tell us without proof, that when at Christmas we are bid say [As on
this day Christ was born] for diverse Days, it intends not that we shall use the
words [this Day,] but on one Day (and so at Whitsuntide, etc.) That is, It
expressly imposes the very words that we shall read, forbidding us by the Canon
to alter or diminish, and yet it means not that we should use them. May you
not then say what you list, which you think should have been commanded you, and
suppose it the meaning of the Command? You say, This is but a favorable
interpretation: You should have said truly, [It was their oversight, which if
they had seen they had amended.] And I do not say that they meant amiss: But if
they speak amiss, and our humble Prelates that are Servi servorum Dei, come
after them, and command me on pain of Silence to Assent, Consent to, and
Approve the words, they shall take my Liberty and Life if they will; but I will
not Approve them. It is all things in the Book that we must Consent to,
whatever was in their Minds. If they bid me Approve the saying, that [Christ's
Body and Blood is really present, under the forms of Bread and Wine,] and mean
as well by it as Cousins, Heylin, etc. did, I will not Approve it, though you
should. Though Luther de Conciliis, and Dav. Derodon say, that Nestorius meant
soundly, yet the Councils condemned him for a Heretic, and owned not his
words, whatever he meant.

3. But you say, [It is not that the old Book was faultless, but that They were
fully persuaded in their judgments that it was so.]

Ans. You think this but a [favourable Interpretation] too. But by your leave,
[If they had said that we are fully persuaded in our judgment, that the Council
of Trent has nothing contrary to the Word of God,] and then required me to
declare my Assent and Consent to all things contained in that Book, I should
not have done it. If you understand the words so, others will not.

CHAP. XXVI.
1. YOu next undertake to prove, that the Act of Uniformity is no part of the
Book to be Consented to. The Contents say it is: You say it is not. Are these
Contents part of the Book? If so, Then they are false: If not, How shall we
know what is or is not part of the Book? Your Proofs are no Proofs.

1. You say, The Act it self names the Book as distinct from the Law. Ans. And
what then? No more follows but that the word [Book] is sometime taken in the
full sense, and sometime more narrowly. So the Body is often distinguished from
the Head, and the Kingdom from the King: Will you therefore infer that the Head
is no part of the Body, nor the King of the Kingdom, fully taken? The Preface
is usually distinguished from the Book, and so is the Index, or Contents,
Margin, Title, etc. And yet Preface, Index, Contents, Title, Margin of the
Book, are all parts of the Book. Your second Proof is of the same sort.

2. Your third says, The Book must rather (if either) be a part of the Act,
because it is subjoined. Would you by this rate of Argument convince us? Is the
Book part of the Preface, or Contents, or Index, if these go first? Is the
House part of the Porch, or the Porch part of the House? Is the Body part of
the Head? or the Kingdom part of the King? or the Family part of the Porter?

But you say, It is absurd to say that the thing to which the Appendix is
annexed, is part of the Appendix. It is so; therefore say not so your self. But
is not the Appendix part of the Book? And does the Acts, being placed first,
make it no Appendix? And were it put in the end, were it not the same thing?

3. Your Fourth is no better, viz. [ The Old Act of Uniformity is a declared
part of the Contents, and bound up with the Book; and if this be part, we must
subscribe contradictions, to use two Common-Prayer-Books.

Ans. Is that old Act, the old Book? Is subscribing to that Act, subscribing to
the old Book? Why obtrude you on us such things unproved? 2. Do you not know
that the New Act not only confirms the Old, but also alters the sense of
it, and tells you that henceforth it shall be understood, as meaning this New
Book? And as Bishop Tailor truly tells you, Laws are not the Laws of the dead,
but of the living, who therefore give them what sense they please. And yet
shall so sober a man tell us, That subscribing the Old Act, is subscribing the
Old Book? I begin to be weary answering such reasonings as these.

4. Your fifth and sixth Reasons are from the general sense and opinion of all
Divines, as for you: And you say, Never any to this day did think that the 36th
Canon and Subscription included the Act.

Ans. You now practice what you plead for. Can you tell what every Subscriber
to this day thought? He is yet living that at the Savoy undertook to prove it
an Act of Mercy to them to put all from the Sacrament that did not receive it
kneeling. And you know that All the Bishops in the Lords House had their part
in making that Act of Uniformity, with all its penalties. And as certainly they
did consent to the making and imposing of it; so what should make you sure that
they never meant (no not one of them) that any others should be bound to the
same, when they put it into the Book, and put in the words [All things
contained] and when it is so natural to such men to desire that all men approve
of what they do? I should think it ten to one, that they that think it their
duty to do such a thing, as the silencing of two thousand Ministers on those
terms (or five thousand if they had not conformed,) will be very much concerned
to have their act approved: And that they that will not endure us to speak in
the praying Desk, or at either Sacrament to God in any one word but what they
write down for us to say, are likely to desire that we may be also bound to
approve of their Sanctions of this Law. But I am sure you speak that which you
know not to be true.

5. To your Seventh I answer, What would have plainer than the express
Assertion of the Contents themselves?

6. In your Eighth you say, [ Many Conformable men think Nothing in the Book is
to be assented to, but what is ordinarily to be read, and the Ceremonies to be
used.] Ans. Put this down then as one point of our Nonconformity, which
deserves silencing; and ruin that, when we cannot profess to [ Assent and
Consent to all things contained and prescribed in the Book] and mean by [All
things, only the Ceremonies, and so much as is ordinarily to be read.] But
again, teach not Papists to expound the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy at
this rate.

7. You say, 1. That the Title is no part of an Act of Parliament. 2. Nor any
but the Mandatory is part of a Law.

Ans. But you might have known that we will not believe you: Why then should
you thus put us off with your bare word? Though the word [Law] (as all words)
be equivocally often used, and taken for the chief part, yet as properly taken,
and pertinently to our question, we will yet believe whatever you say, 1. That
the prefatory Reasons, and the penal and premiant Sanctions, are parts of the
Act and Law. 2. Yea, that the Title is part of the Act, if it be made and
prefixed, and promulgate with it by the Legislators.

But I will tell you how you may know: If you openly deprave all the rest of
the Law or Book, and some one indict you for it, the Judge may satisfy you
better than I can.

8. But you are never so confident as where you are most overseen. You say, Our
strongest reason from the Contents does most strongly confute it self. This
Title is not only part of your proof, but all that I can see. For that which
you take for your proof, that [Then the Old Act of Uniformity, and consequently
two Books, are consented to, and our Governors speak non-sense] is either
worse than nonsense, or I understand not sense from nonsense. I have called
before for your proof, that [Two Acts are two Common-Prayer-Books] when the
latter establishes the former expressly, as binding only to the New Book! The
words are [Be it enacted -- That the several good Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, which have been formerly made, and are now in force for the Uniformity
of Prayer, etc. shall stand in full force and strength, to all intents and
purposes whatsoever, for the establishing and confirming of the said Book
entitled, etc. herein before mentioned, and shall be applied, practiced, and
put in use for the punishing of all offenses contrary to the said Laws, with
relation to the Book aforesaid, and no other.] And they have caused the Act of
Elizabeth, to be bound with this Book, as it was with the Old: And does this
infer two Books from two Acts, etc? Alas Brother! that we should trouble and
wrong the world at this rate of unadvised confidence. This old Canonical
Subscription is also continued; and yet it is here enacted, that it shall mean
only this New Book, and no other.

You add, If the Printer, or any other through oversight bind up the Apocrypha,
and put in the Contents of the Holy Bible, is it a part of it?

Ans. 1. It is not the Printer's act, but the Law-maker's that we have to do
with.

2. If the Lawmakers cause the Printer to put the Apocrypha in the Bible, and
call it a part of it in the Contents, I will say that he declares it to be a
part, though I believe him not. And I will call God's Word his Word, if Aesop's
Fables be bound with it; and I will subscribe to God's Word. But if the
Lawmakers bind other Books with it, and in the Contents call them part of the
Book, and then bid me declare Assent and Consent to all things in that Book, I
will not obey him.

CHAP. XXVII.
ABout declaring it unlawful, on any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms by the
King's Authority against any Commissioned by him.

1. Here you will prove (in your proving way) that it means only [against
such as be justly and legally commissioned in the due pursuance of their
Commission.] Before I answer you, I will give you my reasons for the contrary.

1. The Act of Militia seems to me to give another sense of the whole matter:
Read it and judge.

2. This Subscription, and other like Professions, were purposely imposed for
the renunciation of the late Parliament Arms. But in your sense what will it
have done to satisfy or oblige any man in that or the like case, when they
professed the same thing, and said, that it was only unjust and unlawful
Commissions, and an unlawful pursuit that they resisted? Be their words true or
false, this was their pretense, and they would in the heat of the War have
subscribed to what you say.

3. This was made and imposed to keep men from the like for the time to come:
But this would not keep them; for they would take it.

4. Are you ignorant what striving there has been in Parliament to have got
the word [Lawfully or Legally] commissioned in, and it could never be obtained?
(save that not long ago it was carried once in a Grand Committee of the House
of Lords only, very many years since this Act was made.) Some say They had
reason not to express it, though they meant it, lest it should be abused. I
answer, Then they had reason to desire not to be so understood. And then we
cannot, nor ought, not so to understand them against their wills; and the non
apparere, and non esse of their sense is all one to us.

5. They knew that it was this that would herein have satisfied dissenters, and
tended to the Concord which they professed to desire; and yet they would not
yield to any such limitation or exposition.

6. There were such Reasons brought against your sense as these in the House.
1. No resisting Arms are lawful. 2. If Subjects be made Judges whether the
King's Commissions be lawful or not, it it is no restraint of Rebellion at all.
For it is as easy to say, They are unlawful, as to say, We may resist them
though lawful, and far more easy. Who will not pretend it?

7. Non est limitandum aut distinguendum de lege sine lege: But in so great a
business as this, do you think our Governors will not take it for a heinous
thing, for such as you or I to put in the word [Lawful] into Subscriptions and
Oaths, which so many great men did so long and deliberately study.

8. A Papist or Jesuit will take it in your words; for he will say, That no
Commission against the Pope's Countermands, or his Authority, or Canons are
lawful.

2. Now to your proofs; 1. You say, [The Act it self implies it; for else,
what use is there for Laws and Parliaments? The King may do what he will: He is
free to violate his Coronation Oath, and set up Arbitrary Government by a Law.]

Ans. Did you ever read Bishop Tailor against Resistance in his Ductor
Dubitant. who despaireth of proving any thing in the world, if he cannot prove
that? Have you read Dr. Hearne, Mr. Digs, Mich. Hudson, Mr. Welden, Dr. Arnway,
etc? you are answered by many.

1. That the King may not do any such thing lawfully.

2. But if he do it, he is answerable only to God.

3. And that the Subject has no remedy but prayers and tears. Yet it follows
not, say they, that Laws or Parliaments are vain: For by them the King
governs as far as he please, and they are his instruments.

3. Your second Reason is, The calling in the the King's Indulgence, as
contrary to Law, shows it.

Ans. Did they that declared it contrary to Law, declare that men may resist it
by Arms?

4. 3. You say, [The Judges at Westminster unanimously agree upon this sense
and exposition of the Law, and their common practice no less.]

Ans. I will give you a Lawyer's Fee if you will prove it. When, and how did
they ever declare any such Agreement? What practice is it that you mean? Do
they commonly resist unlawfully Commissioned Soldiers by Arms? Or declare for
it. 2. But if this were true (which I believe not, whatever their secret
judgment may be) it follows not the Parliament which made this Law was of
that mind. 3. Your assertion is raw ( That the Judges are made the public
Expositors of Laws, made by King and Parliament.) There are two sorts of
Exposition of Laws: One is but limited to a particular Case and Person, in
order to the applicatory Sentence for or against that Man: And so the Judges
are Expositors. The other is Universal, so as to oblige all the Subjects as the
Law it self does, so that they must understand the Law, antecedently to their
Obedience. And this is proper to the Lawgiver: For the sense of the Law is its
Essence: And Judges are not the Lawmakers. Common Politics might have taught
you this.

5. 4. You say [The Parliament's proceedings against Chancellor Hide and the
Earl of Danby, show their sense.] Ans. 1. It was not the same Parliament that
prosecuted them both. 2. What did the Parliament to any such purpose? Is
impeaching a Delinquent, taking Arms against the King's Commission, if
unlawful? You say, [ They mean not to unhinge the Right of the Subject, the
Privilege of Parliaments, to make void all Oaths, Bonds, Engagements of all
the legal authorized Judges, Mayor, Magistrates, Constables, Officers of the
Kingdom.] Ans. You are a bold Man if you dare say that all these are made void,
unless the King's unlawful Commissions may be resisted by Arms. You are for the
Bishops resolving your Doubts: I pray you go ask the Bishops that had a hand in
making the Act, (Bishop Morley, or such other that came not in since) whether
you have hit of the true meaning of it?

CHAP. XXVIII.
1. YOur 27th Section is of the Non-obligation of the Covenant (or Vow.) And
here you tell us first how much you can declare, and then you give us just
twenty Reasons against the making and taking of the Covenant, which you knew
were impertinent to any thing that I said: And yet many of them are as
impertinent to the end which you seem to intend; and a Covenanter would soon
shame. A bad Argument wrongeth the best Cause.

1. You say, There was never such an Oath taken by any Person fearing God. Ans.
How prove you that? Oh! very easily: You bid us prove the Affirmative. Pitiful!
So you may affirm that never Man in the World said or did that, which we cannot
prove that some said or did: or affirm an universal Negation, because we prove
not the contrary. 2. Might not an Arrian at Nice (Conc. 1.) say, Never such a
Creed was drawn and imposed before. 3. May not the Pope say to the first
Protestants, Never such a Protestation was made before? 4. But I pray you read
better the Scottish History, and see whether no such Covenant was made in
Scotland before.

Your 5th is more pitiful, being a Game at Equivocation. 1. Did you think that
the word [Prelacy] in the Common, or the Imposers sense, did mean Pastors that
excel in Gifts and Grace. You may next say, it meant Kings, or Schoolmasters;
when yet they adjoined an expository Description. And I have told you, 1. That
Doctor Burges, Mr. Gataker, and many more openly declared that they would not
Covenant against the Primitive Episcopacy, and were ready to enter their
Protestation; and the Assembly to satisfy them, added the Description, as
meaning only the English concatenated frame. 2. And the House of Lords took it
upon Mr. Coleman's making the same Exposition.

2. But the Bishops will give you little thanks for subjecting them to all
Pastors that have better Gifts and Grace: And they will laugh at you for
talking, as if this were the Prelacy in question.

In your 6th you tell us, That Bishops Name and Thing are Scriptural: And yet
page 6. you say [A Bishop and a Presbyter in the Sense and Language of the
Scripture, are the same.] The Reader may think that when you affirm, and when
you deny, it is the same. And you ask how they would take an Oath to extirpate
Presbyters, and were told, They mean not to extirpate them as Bishops, but as
Presbyters.

Ans. Did you think you spoke to the Case?

1. If they thought a Presbyter as such, as bad as a Bishop as such, no doubt
they would have taken that Oath.

2. But do you take a Bishop here for the same as a Presbyter, or as a species
of Presbyters, or as a superior to Presbyters? Which ever it is, it is nothing
to the Case in hand: He that says, We renounce Diocesan Prelacy, but not
Preeminence of Gifts, nor Parochial Episcopacy, does but say plainly, I
renounce not another thing by renouncing Prelacy in the known and explained
Sense: But he that says, renounce Presbyters but not Bishops, as they signify
the same thing, or as Presbyters signifies the whole Genus; or yet as Bishops
are the Governors of Presbyters, speaks gross Contradictions.

And when after you Argue sometimes from the worth of the Persons to the
goodness of the Office, and sometime from the old Episcopacy, to the English
Diocesan Prelacy; you do but lose your words as to us.

And I could wish you would have left out your medium of multitudes of
Protestants that would turn Papists, if the Papists could prove as much for
them of Antiquity and Universality, as the English Diocesan Prelacy can: When I
consider how in the same Empire they grew up together, I would not have you be
the Man that should Dispute with a Papist, who undertaketh to prove the Roman
Primacy as ancient as our Species of Diocesan Prelacy described in the
Covenant, and to be acknowledged then by as many. I say not that they can prove
it: But I had rather you laid not so much upon it.

You equivocate when you say, All sides are for Bishops: You will have few
assenters when you say, That Episcopacy, Presbytery, and Independancy, are not
three forms of Church Government, as three is contrary to Unity (viz. of such
Form: And when you say, Extirpate one and extirpate all (the Forms) because
Godliness is the same in all. Are not Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy,
three Forms, contrary to unity of Form; though Humanity, Piety, and Regiment,
be the same in all? Do they that extirpate Presbytery, or Democracy, extirpate
all? But why should I trouble the Reader, or you, by any further opening of
your mistakes in a Case that I am not concerned in, and is none of our
Controversy?

When you say that [The generality of the Non-conformists are for a well
tempered Prelacy,] you infer an odious guilt on those Prelatists, who write
vehemently for our Ruin; as intolerable because we are against Episcopacy: I
could name you many such besides Dr. Saywel.

You say, The Presbyterians and Independants, were as bitter against one
another, as the Prelates were against them both, saving Violences, and Coercive
Restraints.

Ans. I refer it to your second thoughts,

1. Whether this be sober Consistency.

2. Whether it be true.

1. To be [as bitter, except Violence, and Coercive Restraint,] is in English
to be [as bitter, except being far more bitter,] q. d. [The differing
Protestants in Ireland were as bitter against each other, as the Papists
against both, saving Cruelties and Murders.] Bradford's Schoolmaster, was as
hurtful to him as Bonner, except Imprisonment and Burning him. He that chides
me is as hurtful to me as he that maimeth me, except hurting me more. When you
have excepted Silencing, Imprisoning, and taking away all our Maintenance, you
except much.

2. But yet is it true? Remember it was but Presbyterians and Independants that
you speak of: Read the Book of their Assembly Debates: Read all their Writings
against each other: I will not except Mr. Edward's Gangraena, and see whether
they do not acknowledge more of God's Grace in one another, and own more of the
duty of Loving and Forbearing own another, than the Prelatists do by either.
Read the Canons that Excommunicate them ipso facto as for wicked Error; and
read Doctor Heylin, Fowlis, the Book against Mr. Calamy's Farwell Sermon, the
Counterminer, L'Estrange, the Friendly Debate, Mr. Parker; and a multitude more
such; and of old Bishop Bancroft; and in a word, the Ordinary Visitation
Articles, or Peter Studley, and a multitude such, that Preached and Wrote
against them as Hypocrites, Pharisees, Schismatics, and such like, and then
consider how far you have here swerved from known truth. I may say that I knew
all those Times, and the sorts of Persons mentioned, much better than you: Many
Sectaries were very bitter, and some too bitter against them. The Presbyterians
and Independants contended with too much intemperance and unskilfulness. But
sure if they had thought as ill of one another as the Prelates did of both,
when they had power, they would as much have Silenced and Ejected one another;
which they did not. I remember not ever to have known any mere Presbyterian or
Independent, especially Ministers, but openly declared that they looked on both
parties as the Servants of Christ, whom they should love and honor. But this
is nothing to our Cause.

You say truly, [ An Oath is a sacred thing, and it is dangerous to use Shifts
and Stretches.] And if so, it is not without danger to persuade thousands so to
do, or to justify many hundred thousand if they will be downright perjured.

You say, [ If one may judge of those Times by these now present, a great many
swore Pell-mell they knew not what, because they knew not what Presbytery,
Independancy, and Episcopacy was.]

1. No doubt many did so.

2. But they partly knew what the English Prelacy was, by long Experience; and
they swore not for Presbytery or Independancy, nor against all Episcopacy.

3. But if you think that they do so in these Times, you and I should lament
it: For God will not hold them Guiltless, whether they be Pastors and Churches,
or Cities and Corporations, that take his Name by Perjury in vain: It Is better
call them to Repentance, than justify them in it. To contract the guilt of the
Perjury of many thousands is an expeditious way to Misery, and does a great
deal in a little time.

2. Having thus proved that which I denied not, you proceed to add Nineteen
Propositions about the Case in question, in all which it is not easy to be
sure which side you conclude for: You grant most of my premises, which make
against Perjury. You confess, that If any one Person be bound by that Oath to
endeavor an alteration of Church Government, no Man may with a safe Conscience
subscribe this. And, If there be evil in the Government of the Church, which
may well and conveniently be reformed, you do not see but that all that have
taken that Oath, stand bound in their Places and Calling to endeavor it: There
can be no just Reformation without some Alteration. A great deal more than this
you grant, how Rulers are bound to yield in things confessed indifferent, which
others account Sin, were it but to heal our Breaches: And what a Sin it is to
cast out of the Church multitudes of holy Conscientious Men for a small and
tolerable Error, when all have some, etc. But yet instead of a Conclusion, if
you are intelligible, you induce Men to subscribe, though that which they fear,
be (not accusing any) lest they should be guilty of many hundred thousand
Perjuries.

You say, 1. [ We must in expounding Laws regard the meaning of our Governors.]

Ans. True: But is it their meaning de genere, or de specie, or individuo? Our
Governor's meaning is not to approve Perjury. But suppose yet they had
commanded me to swear that no man is bound by the Oath of Supremacy; is it no
Perjury so to swear. Then we might swear any thing commanded while the
Commander says, He is not for Perjury. If Rulers command men to marry their
own Sisters, and yet say, That they abhor Incest, may one justify this because
they are against Incest? If Rebels rise in Arms against their Rulers, but yet
renounce Rebellion, how are they to be expounded?

But you say, [ If there be any thing in the Government contrary to the Word of
God, The Laws, Canons, Liturgy, Offices of Judges and Ministers do bind all men
against it, as null and void, though not abolished by Parliament.]

Ans. And what then? Do you infer [Therefore we may subscribe; or therefore we
must interpret nothing in the Law to be against God's Word; or therefore we
must not subscribe it? The last is the true Conclusion. If Socinians renounce
all that is against God's Word, and yet command you to renounce Christ's
Godhead, may you do it?

2. But I would fain see the words which you here suppose in the Law, Canons
and Liturgy; and whether they leave us all to be Judges what is against God's
Word? And,

3. I would have you expound to me, 1. The Canon that requires us to
subscribe, that There is nothing in the Liturgy against God's Word. 2. And that
which excommunicateth all that say there is any thing against it. 3. And the
Law that lays us in Gaol, and ruineth us, if we so say and do forbear
accordingly. Is it an Argument to say, [The Law renounceth all that is contrary
to the Word of God; and Excommunicateth, and Silenceth, and ruineth you, if you
say that there is in the Liturgy any thing against it: Ergo, You may subscribe
though there be somewhat against it, because the Law disowneth it?] I would not
think you mean this: Therefore I know not what you mean to infer, unless it be
your next words: [ Therefore what Faults be in the Government, are rather the
Faults of the Governors.] Alas, this is it and worse. Thus you might infer,
There is no fault in the Papal Government, if the Pope in general renounce all
that is against God's Word, and then bids you swear that Popery is not against
it. Turks and Heathens renounce in general all sinning against God, and yet I
would not say that their Laws may be owned as sinless.

You say, [ If all Governors in Church and State faithfully did their Duties
according to the Canons, Liturgy, etc. it would be happy for all sides.]

Ans. No Man can tell by these words, whether you mean [If they did all that
the Laws and Canons command them,] or [If they did the good part and left out
the bad.] If the later be your sense, it is against you: If it have a bad part
which we must not do, it has a part which we must not consent, covenant, or
promise to do. If the former, then you have part of your Happiness, and may
soon enough see more. Your honest words elsewhere show that you take it for no
Happiness, to have all professed Non-conformists Excommunicated according to
the Canon, and Silenced and Ruined according to the Law.

And yet I cannot tell how to agree you with your self: You say, [All good and
peaceable Men would be protected, whether Conformists, or Non-conformists.

Ans. As Mr. Field, Mr. Thompson, and others that died in Gaol were; or as Mr.
Hughs, Mr. Joseph Allen, and others that died by their Prison-Diseases were; or
as those that must be Silenced, or lie in Gaol six Months, and pay forty pound
a Sermon; or as Men Excommunicated ipso facto are protected.

3. You say, [ The words of the Declaration do not say, No Man is bound to
endeavor the alteration of the Governors but the Government, that is, Of the
Laws, Rules, and Canons, by which they govern, and the several Offices which be
in the Church. -- These may be good. -- The office may be Divine, or justly
prudential, or tolerably lawful. -- Suppose the Oath and Covenant does not bind
to endeavor the alteration of the Chancellor's Office. -- Your Conclusion
seems implied in your Challenge. [ Now let any Nonconformist prove that there
is any Office in the English way of Church Government simply unlawful, etc.]

Ans. 1. Have you answered the proof that I pretend to have brought in my
Disput. of Church Government? If not, must I write it again as often as you will
bid me? Or would it be here meet to write a Treatise to answer this your
Challenge? But get it tolerated, and it shall soon be done.

2. You say, The Government is the Laws, Rules, and Canons, by which they
Govern: And if these need not be altered, why did you before disown the
exercise of them, as a great Sin? And yet this implies [The Law and Canon,
which Excommunicate Non-conformists, and which deny the Lord's Supper to those
that kneel not, and which silence Non-subscribers to the 36th Canon, and which
deny Baptism to those that scruple the English use of the Cross and
Godfathers, and which ruin all that preach when Silenced, need no alteration,
as simply unlawful.]

But we must prove them unlawful: Come to me then in private, and let us debate
the Case, and I will prove to you as much as I affirm. In the mean time, if it
will go for any Proof with you, I crave your answer to these Arguments which
some use, that doubt of the lawfulness which they dare not deny.

I. A Church-governing Office for the exercise of that power of the Church Keys
by Laymen, which Christ has appropriated to the Clergy is sinful: But such is
the Office of our Lay-Chancellors: Ergo, etc.

II. A species of Prelacy which is destructive of, or inconsistent with the
form of particular Churches, and of Bishops and Presbyters, and the exercise of
that Church Discipline which Christ and his Spirit in the Apostles did
institute is sinful. But (they fear) such is the English Diocesan species of
Prelacy: Ergo, etc.

III. The Government which is to be the execution of the foresaid Canons, and
Act of Uniformity, etc. for Expelling, Excommunicating, Silencing, Imprisoning,
Ruining Non-conformists, you said before was unlawful -- But -- Ergo.

But here I would, as your real Friend, advise you to two things more; as well
as not needlessly to contract the guilt of that which you call grievous Sin in
others.

1. That you will publish your Retractation of those words [ The words of the
Declaration do not say, No Man is bound to endeavor the alteration of the
Governors, but only of the Government.]

Do you consider what you say?

1. You know that it is the Government of the State as well as Church, that is
here expressed: And do you think that the King and Parliament never intended to
keep Men from deposing the King? Or the Lords, and Commons, and Judges, though
they changed not the Species, but set up others in their steads? Or will the
Bishops so expound it to you, as that it means not that you are not obliged
by the Covenant, to pull down all the present Bishops if you set up others in
their stead?

2. That you avoid the commoner answer of others, who say, That it is only the
Essentials of Government that are here meant, and not any Integrals, or
Accidents. For,

1. The King and State-Government is here touched. And dare you say that [If
any Man think that the Covenant binds him to destroy all the King's Civil
Government, except the bare essentials of Monarchy, that the Parliament
intended not here to contradict him?]

2. And I doubt the Bishops will be angry with you and call you Schismatics,
if you say that the Parliament here meant not to contradict them that say, they
are bound by the Covenant to turn our Diocesan Bishops into Parochial ones, or
into one in every Corporation, and to take down their Court Officers, and their
Lordships, Parliament, Power and Wealth. That which serves Men best in
Arguing, will not best please the Men that they plead for.

You say, [ We grant that there is no one thing in the Episcopal Government,
but what we may well bear with, and submit to.]

Ans. 1. We well may and must bear with that which we cannot help. In Moscovy
we may fear that all Preaching is put down, saving reading Homilies; and a Man
may there live Godly: But do not you therefore tell all Men, that if the same
were done here, we may enter into a solemn Covenant, never to endeavor to
reform it: No, were it but the high places in Iudaea.

2. Submitting is either by Obedience, or mere Patience. Under Papists and
Turks Men must submit by Patience: But if you say, We hold that we must obey
all that they command, our practice tells you, It is not true. But the question
is, Whether there be no one thing, but what we may covenant never to endeavor
to alter, and subscribe that no Parliament Man, or any other in England, is
bound by that Oath, which they took, to endeavor it? The Law forbids me to
say, They are, and therefore I say it not: But if you say, They are not, Dare
you undertake to answer for them?

You say, Their Office binds them to no evil. That is, None of the things
forementioned are evil: Which you said were so.

Again you say, All the while Excommunications and Church Censures are soundly
done, it is the the less matter by whom they are done.

Ans. 1. Do not say so to the King about Kingly Government: Nor to the Judges
if an intruder invade the Tribunal.

2. Make the Bishops believe this if you can, of any that should usurp their
Office.

3. Make the Parish Priests believe it if you can, who are so angry with us for
helping them at a distance, though we invade not Places.

4. Make any sober Ministers believe if you can, that if the Word be well
Preached, and Sacraments soundly Administered, it is no matter who does it.

5. Make any Master of a Family, or Husband, believe it as to their Offices,
that it is no matter who does it, so it be soundly done. If the Wife do believe,
it is two to one the Husband will not.

4. Again you say, [ By the Government of Church and State, whatsoever is
absolutely sinful is forbidden, -- the Laws declare it Null, etc.]

Ans. This is before answered. You say, Silencing and Excommunicating the
Non-conformists here, are sinful. Instead of this impertinent talk, go try your
Oratory on the Judges and Bishops; if you can persuade them that the Law
forbids them all to fine, Imprison, or Silence us, or Excommunicate us: Why did
you not use this pretty Argument for your self?

2. And do not Papists, and Turks say, that No Law against God is in force? And
does their Government therefore contain no evil? Or will you tell them that
swear to amend it, that it is well enough already?

You tell us what to say to the Bishops and Judges for our selves: But if by
this Medium, I would prove that I am conformable to the Law, and they are the
Non-conformists that punish me, because they break the Law of God; I doubt they
would Laugh at me first, and send me to Gaol next.

5. But in answer to, Where read we in Scripture of the Chancellor's Office?
You repeat again, [If soundly done, no Man may reprove them.] I will not repeat
my Answer: But I add; If so, No Man may reprove the Boys if they soundly Whip
their Master when he deserves it; nor a Cobbler that will send Offenders to
Prison as the Lord Mayor does: Nor a Justice, yea, or a Tinker, that will step
up in the Chancery, or King's Bench, to do Justice.

6. But though I will not Laugh at your Writing; I should hardly forbear if I
heard you do what page 95, you say you would do, viz. [ If a Bishop, or
Archbishop, or Chancellor, live where you are Pastor, and be a Member of your
Congregation, you must needs look on your self as obliged by the Laws and
Canons of the Church and State, by the Word of God, and by the Rules of the
Common Prayer Book, publicly to admonish him, if he grossly misdemean himself,
and do a scandalous crime; and if he shall not by open confession give
satisfaction to the Church, bar him from the Sacrament, and declare him
Disorderly and Contumacious, and that if he do not repent he shall perish; and
warn the People to beware of such evil Courses, and to have no more to do with
him than they needs must: And this I maintain to be part of the Discipline and
Government of the Church of England.]

Ans. I would I could see this bout. I doubt he will have something to do with
you Your Chancellor had the wit to begin with you first. I pray you forget not
this Case when you go to the Bishop for his sense of the Liturgy, and tell us
his answer when you come Home.

I must profess this is an edifying Passage: As when I read in Saltmarsh, that
Christ repented and believed for us, it let in more Light against Libertinism,
than I had before: So does this Passage raise up some useful doubts in me about
our Churches, which I thought not on till now.

Q. 1. Whether are the Bishops that dwell in the London Parishes (or others)
Members of the Parish Church where they dwell?

Q. 2. If they are not, Whether dwelling in the Parish make a Christian a
Member of the Parish Church?

Q. 3. If not, what is it that makes a Member, and how are the Pastors special
Flock truly known to him from others?

Q. 4. If they be Members, to whom shall we present the Bishop for not coming
to Church, or for his Crimes? Is it to himself?

Q. 5. Whether is the Bishop, or the Parish Priest there the higher Power, or
Governor? and which must obey?

Q. 6. Does the Canon that forbids Men to go from their own Parish Churches,
extend to the Bishop?

Q. 7. How is the Bishop one of the Parson's Flock, and the Parson one of the
Bishop's Flock, both at once?

Q. 8. Whether the Bishop that is Excommunicated by the Parson out of the
Parish Church, be cast out of the Universal? or other Churches, may have
Communion with him, or not?

Q. 9. What if the Parson Excommunicate the Bishop, and the Bishop the Parson
both at once, what a Case are they in? And which shall stand, one or both, and
how far?

Q. 10. How will the Parson practice his Conformity, who consents when he
puts any one from the Sacrament, to certify the Ordinary within fourteen
Days? will he prosecute the Bishop to himself, or to his Chancellor?

Q. 11. Does not this Instance prove Mr. Cheyney, to be a mistaking Expositor
of the Church Government, the Bishops themselves being Judges? and would not
one days practice of any such thing convince him by Experience, that the Church
of England now take not Parish Parsons for Parish Bishops?

Q. 12. Is he in the right, page 96. that this Course would make Bishops, and
Archbishops, and Chancellors, stand in awe of the Priests? why then did you
not thus awe your Bishop and Chancellor?

CHAP. XXIX.
YOur 28th Section has nothing in it that requires many words for Answer:
That Oaths and Laws must be charitably expounded no one denies, so they be
truly expounded. In this we stand to Bishop Sanderson's Rules, which are far
better stated than any thing here said by you.

And your citing my limited and conditional approbation of the Assemblies
Catechisms, and the Synod of Dort's, is certainly no Reason for my absolute and
unlimited professing to Assent and Consent to all things, in Books which have
so much more which I dissent from.

CHAP. XXX.
1. YOur 29th Section contains your unproved Opinions, and false Devices, for
stretching Subscriptions, Covenants and Professions. And first you tell us of
the difficulty of using any words that may not seem doubtful: But yet if there
be not a satisfactory intelligibleness in words, Humane Converse is overthrown,
and Oaths of Allegiance, and all Contracts are of little use unto their ends.

2. You say, [ Though there be in this Volume which we call the
Common Prayer Book, many Matters, Sentences, and Words bound all together, yet
do we Assent and Consent to no more but that which goes under the name of the
Service of the Church, and the Rules and Orders touching the same, and the
Rites and Ceremonies thereof.

Ans. If you say [All things contained in it] means not [all things] indeed,
tell us what difference there is between the Equivocations of the Jesuits, and
this of yours. So one tells me, that [when we profess to Assent to all in the
Bible,] the meaning is [To all the Precepts, Promises, and Words of God in it,
but not that there is no Humane Errors in Numbers and Chronology, Genealogy,
History, or Citations.] And so you may say, [I will swear not to endeavor any
alteration of the Government of the State, but I mean not to alter Monarchy.]
And what may not one thus say and swear?

2. But yet I think it is no great number of [Matters, Sentences, and Words]
which are neither (Service, Rules, Orders, or Rites.) Rubricks and Calendars,
and some Prefaces belong to these. But it is a strange Interpretation which
would exclude Doctrinals, such as the Article of Faith, of the certain
Salvation of all Infants baptized, and dying before actual Sin. Your Citations
signify nothing for your purpose, but tell us what you would have them
signify.

3. But now I come to Sampson's Hair, the very strength of all your Book, page
115. The Preface says, [ When Doubts arise in the Use and Practice of the
same, to appease all such diversity (if any arise) and for the resolution of
all Doubts concerning the manner how to understand, do and execute the things
contained in this Book, the Parties that so doubt, or diversely take any thing,
shall always resort to the Bishop of the Diocese, who by his discretion shall
take order for the quieting and appeasing of the same, so that the same Order
be not contrary to any thing contained in this Book.] Whence you gather, that
the Law makes the Bishop the common Expositor; and if he gives a good
Exposition, or by silence show consent, all is safe, and you may Conform.

I confess this Reed is the strongest support of your Cause that I have met
with: And I am not censuring others that lean upon it: I doubt not but they may
be better Men than I: But I will tell you why I cannot.

1. It is a help to those that be in doubt: But I am out of doubt in many of
the Reasons of my Nonconformity; and therefore it is no help to me.

2. The words expressly limit the Bishops Exposition, [so that his order be not
contrary to any thing in the Book.] If it be not contrary to the Book, it will
give me no satisfaction: If it be contrary, it is of no force.

3. It is only about (the things contained in the Book) that the Bishop must
resolve us: Now either the Acts of Uniformity are part of those things, or not:
If yea, then it is the Acts also that I must Assent and Consent to; which you
as well as I are far from. And you maintain that the Act is no part of the
Book: If not, then the Bishop has no power to expound the Act: And the forms
of Assent and Consent, and Subscription imposed, are parts of the Act.

4. The words make not the Bishop the public or common Expositor of the Law,
or Book, as Judge; but only as a Teacher, who binds but so far as he tells
the truth: The Bishop must teach his ignorant or divided Clergy, how to
understand what they understand not: And this is not about their Subscriptions,
but matters of Use and Practice (as where the Table shall stand, and such
like.) That it makes not the Bishop the obliging Judge of the Law, appears,

1. Because here is no such word.

2. The foresaid limitation speaks the contrary.

3. Else there might be as many Religions, Doctrines, or Practices as Bishops,
or many at least: I will give you all the little Money in my Purse, if you will
get me under the hand of Bishop Morley, Bishop Gunning, Bishop Sparrow, and
Archbishop Stern, their approbation of your Expositions of the parts of
Conformity, written in your Book. And I suppose you know how zealously many
write (as well as Doctor Saywel) against tolerating diversity of Forms and
Rites, and Orders of Worship. And this would be to set up as many Sects, or
Ways, as differing Bishops pleased. This Case was notably tried between
Archbishop Laud, and the Church that followed him, and Williams, Bishop of
Lincoln, about the Table, or Altar.

4. Else Bishops would have the Legislative Power: For the sense of the Law is
the Law: And if the Parliament form but the Letter or Body of it, and the
Bishop may give it what Sense or Soul he pleases; it is he that will be the
chief Lawmakers.

5. Else Bishops might corrupt and change our Religion and Church, under
pretense of Exposition. Bishop Godfrey Goodman of Gloucester, who was a Papist,
might have set up Popery in his Diocese, by putting a Popish sense upon
Subscription, Words, and Practices: And the Bishops by agreement might set up
Popery in the Land, by the same means. Or a Bishop might set up
Non-conformists, by gratifying them by his Expositions. The thing meant in
those words is no such dangerous power, but only an Instructing and a
Pacifying, informing of the Clergy, when they ignorantly differ about some dark
Word, or Circumstance, or Practice; the Bishop must teach them the true sense
of the Book, but do nothing against any thing therein.

6. Is it not called An Act for Uniformity, and imposes all the heavy
Penalties on purpose to procure Uniformity? Would they have Silenced and Ruined
two thousand Ministers for Nonconformity, if Uniformity had not been thought
of more worth than their Ministerial Labors? And can you think that after all
this, they meant to leave it to the particular Bishops, whether there should be
any Uniformity or not? You think one Bishop will say, [You are Parish Bishops,
and may publicly admonish and reprove the Scandalous, and Excommunicate them
Excommunicatione minore: You may give them the Sacrament, that conscienciously
scruple Kneeling; you may Baptize them that conscienciously scruple the
dedicating Cross, and the English sort of Godfathers; you may refuse to say
the words of Prayer, which imply his Salvation, over the Dead who were
Excommunicable, though not Excommunicated: You may understand the Article which
professes the certainty of Baptized Infants salvation, of those only that are
the Children of faithful Parents, or Pro-parents; you may say you Assent to all
in the Book, and mean not all but some part, and that not as true, but as
usable: You may profess Consent to use it all, and yet not mean to use the
Calendar, or Rubricks, or to Administer the Sacraments otherwise than as
aforesaid: You may Say, or Subscribe, or Swear, that it is, on any pretense
whatsoever, unlawful to take Arms against any Commissioned by the King, and
mean only such as are lawfully Commissioned. You may subscribe that no one in
England that swear it, is bound by the solemn Vow and Oath, to endeavor any
alteration of Government in Church or State, and mean only that he must not
endeavor it by Sedition or Rebellion.] And so on to the end.

But other Bishops will say the clean contrary: viz. That the Bishop is the
only Pastor, and the Parish Priest has none of the power here named, and so of
all the rest: And what Uniformity then will there be? Know you not how they
write against such different Administrations, as destructive and intolerable?

7. And know you not that a Bishop has no power against the Canons? The Canons
are their own Laws and Judgment, and bind them: And when the Canon says, e. g.
He shall be suspended that gives the Sacrament to one that kneeleth not; or
that the Non-conformists are ipso facto Excommunicate, etc. Has the Bishop
authority to say the contrary?

8. And you know that I wrote not to accuse you, or any Man for Conforming, but
to tell them that judge us worthy to be Silenced and Ruined, what our
Nonconformity is: And what use then is your own Latitude to me, or such as I,
though I went your own way? For I have asked and heard the Opinion of diverse
Bishops already, and they have said clean contrary to you. I have heard him
that first forbad me Preaching in his Diocese, say, that [The Liturgy
forbids delivering the Sacrament to any that Kneel not.] I can show it you
under his Hand, that the Priest must not be Judge, when to omit the
forementioned words at the burial of the Dead; nor tolerated in such Liberty as
you presume on. I have been told by a Bishop, That seeing Christ died for all,
the Children of any Parents in the World have right to Baptism, and any Man
has as good right to present to it an Infidel's Child, as to take in an
exposed Infidel's Child to his House in Charity. I told you, that Bishop
Sanderson, publicly before the Bishops, Nemine contradicente, told me, That I
need not question Baptizing any Infidel's Child, if Godfathers presented him
according to the Order of the Church of England. Are we not then concluded
against Conformity by the Bishop's judgment, by your own Rule? And must not you
be a Nonconformist in the Diocese of any such Bishop as these?

9. And by your Rule, a Man must be a Conformist in one Bishop's Diocese, and a
Nonconformist in another's; and change his mode of Religion as he Travelleth,
or does change his Dwelling. I imagine that by your Rule, I might partly
Conform in the Diocese of London, or Lincoln, Hereford, or Carlisle; but I
should be as Non-conformable as I am, in the Diocese of Winchester, Ely, York,
Norwich, and any other as far as I yet know.

I conclude that your Catholicon may purge your self from all Nonconformity,
but it is utterly unprofitable to me: Facile credimus quod volumus. I have had
as much reason as you, to be willing to find Conformity lawful, if it be so: I
have lost many thousand Pounds more by Nonconformity, than you have got by
Conformity. But I have no such Byas on my Will, as should set all my Wit on
work to find, or buy a Rope for my Conscience. And I find nothing better that
you offer me herein.

4. When you have told us, [Where no Godfathers can be had, we must Christen
without;] and such like: You say, [ And this is the common sense put upon the
Law, by the Lawmakers themselves, that is, by the Bishops.]

Ans. What reason did you think we have in such an Historical Assertion, to
believe your bare word? In what Synod did they declare it? Why did you neither
name the Bishops, nor the Time, or Place, or Witness, by which it might be
proved the common sense? But could you think this should convince me, that know
it to be false?

5. You tell us, page 119. [ If it were a part of Assent and Consent, that
Ordination by good and substantial Presbyters were null, it would be a hard
point indeed, -- to Unchurch Churches, and Unbaptize the Baptized, and plead
the cause of Satan, the Pope, and all Malignants of the Ministry, in the Name
of Christ.

Ans. Excuse us then for not Conforming. I before gave you this Proof, that it
is the sense of the Lawmakers, or Bishops: They that abhor Reordination (or
twice ordaining to the Priesthood) and yet require those to be ordained by
Bishops, who were before ordained by Presbyters, must be judged to hold the
said Ordination by Presbyters to be null. -- But, etc. Ergo.

6. 1. You say, No Man that I know of, takes the Silenced Ministers, and those
ordained by Presbyters only, for no Ministers at all, unless one Mr. Dodwel, a
high-flown Man, whom Conformists themselves do utterly dissent from in this.

Ans. Your ignorance is no good reason for my Conformity: If you know of no
more, I do. Read Mr. Th^rndike, of Forbearance of Penalties: Ask Bishop Gunning
his judgment, etc. If your acquaintance be so small, you should not write of
that which you know not.

7. 2. But you say, All, both Rulers and People, Conformists themselves do own
them for Ministers; otherwise they would take some course for the Rebaptizing
of all Baptized by them.

Ans. Did you ever read the Conference at Hampton Court? Did you dream that all
these take Laymens Baptizing for null? Or do you conclude that all think what
you think?

8. 3. You prove it from the toleration of the Foreigners Churches in London.

Ans. How will you prove that they judge all true Ministers whom they Tolerate?

9. 4. You say, the Acts against Conventicles, and the Five Mile Act prove it.

5. The King's Proclamation for Indulgence proves it.

6. The Fines and Imprisonments for Conventicles prove it.

7. The allowing four Persons to meet in private proves it.

8. The common sense of Bishops, Divines, and People of the Church of England,
prove it.

Ans. You may next say, That any thing that you see or hear proves it. It Is
liker these prove the contrary, than this. By this Men may see how little
satisfaction we may expect from your arguing. You greatly wrong the King,
Parliament, and Bishops, if you think they take all for Ministers, Men, Women,
or Children, whose meeting they tolerate: You leave out the Argument from the
Act of Uniformity, which punishes all by a hundred Pound a time that
Administer the Sacrament, being not ordained by a Bishop. Does that prove them
Ministers too?

10. You say, [ As to the Peoples Conformity, I know no one thing required of
them to Conform to, but what they may do with a good Conscience.

Ans. Why then did you pass by the answering of my Book concerning their part?
Particularly about the Corporation-Declaration? Should they be in the right
that think all the Cities and Corporations in England to be under that -- which
I am loath to name; and that Plagues, Flames, and Poverty, are God's Revenge;
Oh! what a thing would it be for a Servant of Christ, to say to them in Print,
[O England repent not!]

CHAP. XXXI.
1. YOur Conclusion is also a bundle of Mistakes, and Impertinencies.

1. It is more than three or four points that the new Conformity adds to the
old.

2. If the number or goodness of the old Conformists did prove their Cause
good, many things would have a far stronger Proof of that kind, from the
ancient Churches, which yet you judge to be unlawful; and in other Countries
the same Argument will be turned against you.

3. Such Men as you call [The main Body of the best Divines,] were very few in
comparison of the Ignorant bad Clergy.

4. It is not true that Mr. Knewstubs was a Conformist, nor Dr. Reynolds
neither, unless I be one. The Petition of the Non-conformists to King James,
was called Millenary; because it had a thousand Hands in a little compass.

5. That some then did, and now do scruple more than others, is impertinent to
our Business, and it were a wonder if it were not so, till Men are arrived at
scrupling nothing.

6. The 36th Canon was the chief point of the old Nonconformity, and will
receive no justification by the worth of any Subscribers. I doubt not but
Bernard, Gerson, etc. were holy Men, that subscribed far worse.

7. Sponsors of an ill sort are never the better, because there was a better
sort of old; nor because these were before the new Liturgy.

8. Page 125. You could wish Ministers would make the Parents to be present
chief Undertakers, that is, to be Non-conformists called Conformists. The rest
needs but the repetition of what is said before, which would rather tire than
edify the Reader.

CHAP. XXXII.
SInce the writing of my Answer to your Book, you were with me, and when I gave
you two or three Objections which I published not, you gave me no Reply to
them, but went from me and Printed an Answer to them in a Supplement. Seeing
your judgment is most for that way, I crave your patience while I use the way
you choose. I confess my judgment is, that you have unavoidably made me a great
Temptation to you: For if you be not a Man of great Humility, you will

1. Be offended to find all your Labor proved to be hurtful, and your
Reasoning vain; and you will think that the disgracing of them by a just
Confutation, falls on your self.

2. And you will be tempted to turn your thoughts too partially, to justify
what once you have so publicly said, and so to run further into the Extreme.
But my persuasion of your great sincerity, makes me hope that you will
overcome the temptation which you have chosen.

I. I thought that the word [Use of all] did much aggravate, and not extenuate
the burden of the Declaration, as added to Assent. But to them that thought
otherwise, I thought that when both Lords and Commons at a Conference upon
Reasons given, had rejected that Exposition which confineth the sense of the
words to [Use,] it had been a more satisfactory notice of the Lawgivers sense,
than either your private Conceit, or any Bishops Exposition could be. But you
tell us, That this Conference was no Law, or repeal of the Law.

Ans. Impertinent! It is an Exposition of the meaning of the Lawmakers only,
that we are enquiring of, and not the repealing or making of a Law. It is the
Lawmakers part to be the public obliging Interpreters of the Law to the whole
Kingdom. We are enquiring in point of Conscience, how we must understand them:
And you will not believe them it seems, unless they make a new Law, to tell you
the sense of the old one.

II. Every one may know, that it is usual for the Means to have somewhat in it
for the End, besides the intending of the End it self; and that usually Laws
and Canons command many Means for one End. And therefore to make your full and
constant usage of Conformity to be the End, and the Assenting and Consenting to
all things in the Book to be the Means, even in that form of words, are no
contradiction. And it is usual to be stricter in prescribing forms of Words, for
Oaths, Covenants, or Confessions, than in the other integral parts of a Law.
And it is a great wrong to a Parliament of England to say either that, in such
a form imposed on the Learned and Conscientious Tribe, they knew not how to
speak intelligibly according to the common use of words, or that they were so
mischievously Malignant, as seventeen or eighteen Years to refuse to open their
sense, for the healing of so distracted and endangered a Church and Nation, if
they meant not as their words do signify according to common use. It Is no
vanity to say, I have known the Men, Bishops and Commons, better than you have
done, and heard more of them and their Debates, than you have done; and I am
satisfied in my Conscience to conclude, that they meant plainly as they speak,
and no better: Even that no Man's promise to use the Liturgy shall be taken for
trusty and satisfactory, that will not declare that he Assenteth and Consents
to all things contained in it, and prescribed by it:] And this plainly Ex
animo, without uncouth Exposition, Equivocations, or Jesuitical mental
Reservations.

2. I have not wit enough to find out sense in your Quibble, that [ If the
later words (the Form) do import more than the former (for the Use) then there
is something added and altered, which possibly may inconsist and be
contradiction.]

Ans. Is not all prescript of Means an addition to the Precept De fine? Does
the prescript of the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, impose no more than to
be Loyal? Yes: It requires a particular test of Loyalty. Does the Command of
subscribing the thirty nine Articles contain no more, but to be Orthodox? Yes:
It enjoineth us by this means to profess those particulars, in which our
Orthodoxness consists.

3. Assent when thus distinguished purposely from Consent, signifies Assenting
to some Truth, and Consent respects the Good. So that when you make Assent to
be but the same as [Consent to Use] you feign them to speak Nonsense, or to
Tautologize. You say, [You Assent to all,] but not that All is true: Which is a
Contradiction, or Equivocation.

4. [ Prove (say you) that there is any one thing in the Book, which may not in
the course of Conformity be godly used?]

Ans. To some Men I will undertake to prove nothing. If there be no proof in
the Book which you write against, when you have got leave to Print it, you are
likely to have more. Till then, to call for proof when you have it, and speak
not sense against it, is too easy a way to satisfy the Just.

5. III. I told you by word of Mouth, that your Catholicon of trusting, to the
Bishops Exposition of the Book (yea, to his silence, so gentle and tractable
are you become) is no relief to you for expounding the Assent, Consent.
Subscription against the obligation of the Vow, and about Arms, etc. because
these are part of the Act of Uniformity; and you say, that Act is no part of
the Book. To this you Print your Answer, that you [ Have another string to your
Bow.] viz. That the Bishop is by Law the Ordinary, to Ordain and take
Subscriptions, and may admit Ministers to subscribe these Tests with such
Explications, Meanings, and Allowances, as will well stand with the words
justly and fairly construed.

Ans. 1. The Bishop is not made the Expounder of the Law, but the Receiver of
your Subscription according to the Law.

2. If you will confound Indulgent Connivance, and Conformity, must we do so
too? This is Mr. Humphrey's project, And I freely confess to you, That if you
can meet with an Indulgent Bishop, it is a fairer way to intromit a Dissenter,
than any that you have named in your Book. All words are ambiguous: The sense
is the Soul of them. If, e.g. I were commanded to say that [The Scripture is
not God's Word,] and I had leave to expound it;

1. [All Scripture, or Writing, is not God's Word, but the sacred Bible is:] Or
[It is not God's Eternal Coessential Word, which is Christ;] were it not for
Scandal, this might be said as true. And some think the Scandal is sufficiently
avoided, if you give in your sense in Writing, and make it as public as is
your Subscription. But I think that the very subscribing such scandalous Words,
will scandalously harden others, and encourage Tyrannical Imposers more, than
your Exposition can Cure; and therefore I would not use them.

And if I would, I could cast in such an Expository Writing, whether the Bishop
will or not.

And if he accept it, I pray better understand that, This is not Conformity,
but Indulgence, Connivance, Toleration, or Prevarication: You might as well
say, He Conformed, that by the King's Indulgence, was excused from Subscribing
and Declaring.

You put a Supposition, that you had gone to Bishop Sanderson, and asked his
sense according to his Rules, de Juramento.

Ans. I doubt your Party will think you betray their Cause by Prevarication.

1. I told you how publicly in a meeting of Bishops, Bishop Sanderson gave his
judgment about Baptism against you.

2. I cited the words of his Rules de Iuramento, in the Book which you answer,
as being plainly against Conformity: And you give no answer to it, and yet
suppose them to be for you. This is too supine neglect to satisfy us.

5. You come over your foresaid sense of the Declaration again, and page 160.
You have better bethought you, and will take the Debate of the Lords and
Commons as useful to know the meaning of the Law.

Ans. What shall we do then by your Useful Error? Why you now say, [You know
nothing in the Book but what may be assented to as true.]

Ans. And why was this so much disclaimed before? When you put us to the
trouble of Confuting you, you Confute your self by changing your Cause, and so
we labor in vain.

Your Repetitions of the same things, with saying and unsaying, and bare saying
without proof are so many, that I will not wrong the Reader with Confuting any
more of them, save only to give you some account why I am sorry: 1. That you
retract your saying that Oaths are stricti juris, 2. And that while you pretend
to own Bishop Sanderson's Rules de Iuramento, you renounce this which is one of
the chief of them. And I will tell you the reasons of my dissent from that, and
most of your Book.

IV. By stricti juris, is not meant the mere Literal Sense as different from
the less Proper, which is more notified; but strict is contradistinguished from
loose and stretched. I told you the Rule that we go by in this, and it pleased
you not to Confute it. Thus much I repeat:

1. We must take Oaths, Covenants, and Professions imposed by Authority, in the
sense of the Imposers as near as we can know it.

2. But if they discover their Sense in words so unmeet, as that in the Vulgar
Sense they seem false or wicked, we must number such with unlawful words,
unless we can by the public notifying the Exposition avoid the Scandal.

3. We are to take the Laws, and imposed words of Rules, especially in Oaths,
Covenants, and Professions, in that sense as those words are commonly used and
understood in that time and place, by Men of that Profession: Unless the said
Rulers make known, that they use them in a different unusual sense.

4. We must not presume that they mean not as they speak, by an unusual sense,
upon dark and uncertain Conjectures, especially dictated by our Interest, but
only by Cogent Evidence. These are our Rules.

The reasons why we cannot Swear, or Covenant, or profess in your Laxe and
stretched sense, nor call that sense honest, as you do, (especially on pretense
of a Bishop's Exposition, contrary to what I have reason to be fully satisfied
our Lawmakers meant) are those which I gave you in the thirty Aggravations,
Sect. 16. which it did not please you to contradict. These few I repeat:

I. The words of the Third Command are dreadful, God will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain, or falsely.

II. Such licentious stretching of Oaths and Professions overthrow that mutual
trust which is necessary to Humane Converse.

III. It depriveth the King of his due security of his Subjects Loyalty, and of
his Peace and Life. I much fear lest relaxing and stretching the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy but as much as you relax and stretch the words of the
Subscription, Declaration, Liturgy, etc. may untie the Consciences of Rebels
and King-killers so far, as to make way for, and consist with Rebellion, and
killing the King.

IV. It seems to me most dangerously to expose the Lives of all the Subjects
of the Kingdom, to the will of their Enemies, and to be a Vertual Murdering of
many, or any (if not all) Persons that have Enemies: For while two false
Swearers may take away a Man's Life, if Men are taught to stretch Oaths and
Equivocate, it will embolden the Consciences of Men so far, as that few Men's
Lives shall have any security, but be at the mercy of any Rogues. It is a
wonder of God's Merciful Providence, that false Swearers murder no more than
they do: But such a Laxity would make our Case far more dangerous.

V. I that greatly fear lest God's late dreadful Corporation Judgments, Plague,
Flames, Poverty, and Divisions, are inflicted for Corporation Sins, and among
those Sins, eminently for Perjury, am more inclined to call them in Bradford's
words at the Stake, Repent, O England, than to encourage them in such Sin, and
by Printing, to persuade them not to repent.

VI. When we cry out of the Jesuits for stretching Oaths and Testimonies, and
all words by Equivocations, and Mental Reservations, to the endangering of
Kings and Kingdoms, and Men's Lives and Souls, it ill beseems us to imitate or
encourage them, or to enable them to say, that they stretch words no more than
we.

VII. It would be an unexcusable Sin in such a one as I, who live not in
another Age, Land, or Place, where the Imposers sense could not be known, but
in the same Age, and Place, and have had so many Personal Treaties with the
Bishops and the Lord Chancellor Hide, who were the chief promoters of the
Impositions, and who know so many of the Parliament and Convocation that made
these Forms, and have had so great and satisfactory testimony of their Minds
and Meanings, and their Speeches and Reasons in Parliament upon these subjects;
and am fully satisfied in my Conscience, that you satisfy their meaning. It is
not the sense of any Bishops that came in since that Act was made, nor of any
odd Person that is to pass for the Lawmakers sense.

VIII. People commonly think that Preachers should be so much more holy than
they, that if they come but near us they are safe. And therefore if we stretch
Oaths and Covenants, they may do that, and such as they count lesser Sins than
Perjury; and so we may harden them to Damnation.

IX. It is a heinous aggravation of Sin to do it as for God, and that we may
serve him in the Ministry.

X. It is a dreadful thing to undertake to justify thousands whom we never
knew, as well as the old Parliament Men whom we know, and to prove that they
ought not to Repent, nor to endeavor Church Reformation, if it should prove
that by a Vow they are bound to such endeavor by lawful means.

XI. I dare not provoke God to desert me in my Ministry, (yea, and in my secret
Comforts) nor tempt Men to think basely of the Ministers as a Perjured sort of
Men, who cry down other Men's Sins, while they have greater of their own.

XII. It is a dreadful aggravation to do all this (not by sudden Surprise, but)
upon Deliberation, and to make a Covenant against Duty and for Sin, and to say
I ought to do it, and never to Repent; yea, and by justifying it to harden
multitudes against Repentance: Especially if it tend to corrupt the public
state of the Church, and Worship.

For these Reasons I cannot use Violence with imposed Oaths, Covenants, or
Professions; but must expound them in the common sense of Men of that
Profession, till the Lawmakers themselves shall declare that they mean
otherwise.

And all this I speak but as the Reasons of our own Practice, and not at all to
accuse any Conformists: Yea, I so far excuse them against the Nonconforming
Conformist, that I do take the chief Men of them whom I have known, to mean
plainly as they speak: I suppose they really Assent and Consent to all things
contained and prescribed in the Books; and really mean contrary to your
stretching Expositions of Infants Salvation, of Baptism, Communion, Burial, and
the rest. And by Dr. William Smith's Books, and such others, I believe they
take such Conforming Non-conformists to be (as the late Westminster Assembly
proved) the most dangerous underminers of their Church.

And when we have Confuted such as you, our Work is all to begin again, with
the serious Conformists, who deal plainly and go on other Principles.

The Second Part.
Mr. Cheney's Five Undertakings Considered.
1. DEar Brother, you and I have exposed our selves as Public Warnings to
Mankind, to take heed of an overvaluing of their own Understandings, and of a
hasty confidence in their Erroneous Conceptions, and of rash obtruding that
upon the World as necessary Truth, for want of Judgment and Time to digest
things, which will prove very dangerous Error; and if received and practiced,
alas, what Mischief may it do! Erring Men know not that they Err: If I think it
is you, and you think it is I, and a third think it is both, the Reader greatly
profits by us, who learneth by our Harms, to have a due suspicion of his own
Understanding; and so it be without unnecessary Skepticism, to have humble
thoughts of his Conceptions, which have not had time and helps convenient to
ripen them: Especially if your Friend or you be Conscious, that you have
formerly or lately been as confident in that which you now see was your Error,
you should think that the same Mind is still in danger of Deceit, and it is as
easy to reel into the other Extreme.

2. Oh what cause have we to pray, Lead us not into temptation! we little know
what is in our Hearts or others, till just Trial call it up: Nor what great
hurt even good Men may live to do. And if one Error get in, to how many worse
it may open the Door. And if we begin to roll down the Hill, how little know we
where to stop? But though Satan desire to have us that he may sift us, I hope
Christ's Intercession will keep our Faith from failing. But woe, and alas, that
we must, one or both (which ever is in the wrong) be instruments of Mischief
against the Interest of our dear Lord, and his Truth and Church, and Men's
Souls, whilst both our desires are to live in the World for no other end, but
to build up that, which by Ignorance, Self-conceitedness, Error, and Rashness,
we are laboriously pulling down.

3. And if it be I that have by Error wronged the Church, my Case is made worse
by your strengthening my Temptation, when instead of convincing Argument, you
give me little but naked Assertions; and saying [I conceive,] and run into such
Singularities as all sober Men are bound to suspect, and some condemn almost
all Christ's Churches, without one word of Convincing Proof.

4. That you Answer only in Print to the World, the private Talk that I had
with you, whilst you gave me no Vocal Answer, I take but for a small and modal
Irregulatity: Some Men have Humors and Ways of their own, which they will
follow. Had you done it as judiciously, and truly, with fear of Erring and
Seducing, as you did it publicly, the rest might be well interpreted: But we
must take it as it is.

QUESTION. I.
WHether it be certain by God's Word, that Infants Baptized dying before Actual
Sin, be undoubtedly saved?

1. I expected your Work had been to Convince Men of the good of Conformity:
But seeing it is to save Men from being seduced by my Directory, you may doubt
whether you will not rather tempt some impartial Men to read the words: And
then your work is spoiled, when they compare them with your Accusation.

2. I looked for some plain Text of Scripture, to prove this both certain by
God's Word, and undoubted: But finding none such, I humbly beseech you
hereafter, when you have mind to show your Argumentative strength, leave out
the abusive pretense of the Word of God: Holy things must be holily used.

3. Your first Argument is, that [A Carnal Christian has propriety in his
Child, and therefore may devote him to God, as he may his Goods.]

Ans. It had been more piously prudent to hear what could be said to such
pretty new Knacks, before you had tempted the Church by publishing them.

1. Your first Proof is, 1 Samuel 26. 26, 27, 28. and there are but 25 Verses in
the Chapter, and none to your purpose.

The next is, Lev. 27. 28. Did you ever consider the Text? Ainsworth, and the
Rabbis, suppose from the Notation of the word, and from the express words,
ver. 29. that it is devoting of Slaves, or Malefactors to death, that is here
spoken of: Others better, That it includes both the absolute dedication of
acceptable Persons to Service, and of odious Persons to Death: Therefore all
are not saved that are here called holy as devoted: Neither the Cursed, nor the
Levites, that by dedication obliged to Service, are hereby saved: For more than
Obligation is necessary to the reward. The Firstborn were specially to be
given to God, and yet that implied not their certain Salvation.

2. A Dissembler may by his Covenant obtain a right with Man, that knows not
his Heart; and he may be received into the outward Communion of the Church by
God's Approbation, who Commissioneth Ministers who know not men's Hearts, to
receive Men according to their Profession: And these are holy to the Lord, as
the Jews were; but not therefore under a promise that they shall be undoubtedly
saved. Were all the Jews saved because they were a holy Nation?

3. Not only his Child, but the grossest hypocritical Liar himself, who is
Baptized, and comes into the Church in Malice to betray, it, is yet holy as a
Visible Member; and has obliged himself to real Holiness, and yet is far from
a state of Salvation.

4. Nothing is holy and accepted by the Devoters Act alone, without God's
accepting Act: Nor any further, or to any other uses than God accepts it to.
Some he accepts unto Visible Membership and Communion, and some to the Sacred
Ministry, and some to Magistracy, etc. who are not accepted to Salvation.

5. Does Lev. 27. prove, that all Nations in the World might devote their
Children unto God, with the same assurance of acceptance as the Israelites?

6. The Jewish Mosaical Law is abrogated, and neither binds us as such, nor
secureth us of acceptance for obeying it.

7. All Heathens and Infidels have some propriety in their Children; and yet if
in unbelief they devote them with the Tongue alone to God, that will not make
their Salvation undoubted.

8. Few Godfathers have propriety in them: How then will their devoting prove
their Salvation?

9. God has made no promise of his acceptance, which you can show; therefore
you cannot by his Word be certain of it.

10. God says, that the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to Him; much
more when he does it with an evil mind: And he expressly says, [Else were your
Children unclean (if one Parent were not a Believer) but now are they holy.]
Therefore when both Parents are Unbelievers, the Children are not accepted of
God as holy.

11. The question is, of all Baptized Children: For it is Quatenus Baptizati,
that they are said to be saved; and a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia: And
it is an Indefinite in re necessaria: But we have too many scorners at
Christianity, followers of Hobbes, Spinosa, Pomponatius, and Vaninus, who for
fashion sake, will bring their Children to Baptism: And certainly such are far
worse than Heathens. If one believes not in Christ, tell a wilful Lie, and say
he believes, can any Man think that his Child shall be ever the more saved for
his Wickedness and Hypocrisy?

4. You gather Christ's acceptance from Mat. 10. 13. etc. It is not said of the
Infants of the Godly only, is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ans. Nor is it said that of all Infants, or of all Baptized Infants, is the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Text will prove indeed, that the Infant state is capable
of Christ's acceptance into the Kingdom of Grace, and of Glory. But not that
nothing is necessary thereto, but that they be Infants.

If all Infants be saved, bringing them to Christ was not necessary to their
Salvation. If all only that were brought to Christ were saved, it seems they
were very few.

2. Is it like that any would bring their Children to Christ to be Blessed, who
did not believe in him? And what reason have we to surmise that they were not
sound Believers?

3. As Christ healed some blind Men, and not all, and some Lepers, Sick, etc.
so if as a Specimen, to show that Infant state is capable of Grace, he took up
some Infants of Hypocrites, or Infidels, or impious Parents, (which can never
be proved) it will not follow that all such shall be received, and that to
Salvation.

4. If by verbal profession Parents and their Children are taken into the
outward Covenant and Church, and by Water Men are born into the Visible Kingdom
of God, it follows not they need not to be born of the Spirit for admission
into the Invisible and Heavenly Kingdom; or that the Spirit always goes with
the Water; and that the Parents answer of a good Conscience to God, is not
necessary to his Child's Covenant-right to Salvation as well as to his own.

5. I deny that any wicked Man (much more every one) does, yea, or can,
univocally and truly, devote his Child to God according to the sense of the
Baptismal Covenant. Though I grant that the love of his Child's Lust do not hold
him so strongly as the love of his own; yet he that never so knew God in
Christ, and so believed in Christ, and so believed in him as to perceive him
practically to be better for himself than all the World and sinful Pleasures,
cannot with a true and practical Affiance, so take him for his Child.

6. And God no where commands, or accepts the devoting of our Infants to
him primarily, or as separated from our selves; but only as Appendices, or
Conjunct with us; that is, that we devote our selves and ours: And so not
without us, but with us does he accept them.

5. Your great pretended Proof is, That all the Males of Israel were
Circumcised.

Ans. 1. If you had proved that they were all saved, you had said more to the
matter.

2. To open here the nature of the Jews Covenant of Peculiarity, as one select
Nation of whom Christ should come, as distinct from, and as conjunct with the
common antecedent Covenant of Grace, and to show the reasons of the Institution
of Circumcision of Abraham's peculiar Seed, and not for all that from Adam and
Noah, were under the common Law of Crace, would be a work which such a light
occasion would not warrant me here to stand upon.

3. The sign of Circumcision, was but the seal anexed to the Covenant: And the
mere External Act (as Water in Baptism) entered them but into the External
Church State.

4. Almost all the gross Sinners at least, if presumptuous and impenitent, were
to be put to death by that Law; And dead Men beget not Children. But I have so
largely handled this in my 3d Disp. of Right to Sacraments, that while you
leave it unanswered, I will not repeat it on so slight a Cause.

6. And what if you had proved the Salvation of all wicked Christians Baptized
Infants? what is that to our Question, which extends to all, not excepting the
Children of professed Atheists, Infidels, Sadduces, or Heathens, that have but
Godfathers?

7. But page 8, 9. you tell us, that [ Infants by reason of their innocent
harmless state, seem to be Christ's Offspring, and to be a subordinate Root
and Bottom to themselves, and to stand by their own innocence under Christ, and
by his Divine Grace. -- Look what Regeneration is to the Adult, that in some
sort the Infant-state may be to Infants; that is, All Infants are in a New and
Second state by Christ: So the word Regeneration does properly import. -- Page
10. Christ alone without Parents Godliness, is able to the Salvation of all the
Infant World. -- I am not able to prove that bare having of Circumcision and
Baptism does save any; nor that the bare want thereof does bar any from
Salvation.

Ans. 1. But what is this to Conformity? Did you think that this was the
meaning of the Liturgy, that all Infants are saved, when it says All the
Baptized?

2. It does not follow that Christ saves all, because he is able to save them.

3. I have said so much to prove Original Sin, and some participation of Guilt
from our Parents Sins, and to prove God's Promises to the Faithful and their
Seed, which are not made to the Infidels and Wicked, in two Disputations of
Original Sin; that I refer you thither for your Answer to this unproved
Fiction, of the Salvation of all Infants, and their Regenerate Innocence.

4. Woeful experience tells us, as soon as they can but speak and go, how far
their Natures are from an innocent disposition: And to be void of holy
Dispositions is not to be innocent.

5. If they be conceived and born Innocent, what need have they of Baptism for
Remission of Sin? If you say that Christ Regenerateth all as he is the Giver of
their Nature, the Church has condemned this in the Pelagians, that make
Nature, as from Christ, to be the same with Grace.

6. If all be Pardoned, all have the Holy Ghost (for Baptism gives right to
both.) But that is not so.

8. Page 11. Did you satisfy your Conscience in expounding, [But now are they
holy, 1 Cor. 14.] after what we have said of it to Mr. Tombs? Is it [Your
Children are pure to you, as your Meat is?]

9. When you ask me [Why I say notoriously ungodly.] You consulted not the
credit of your knowledge, to tell Men in Print, that you know not what Notorious
signifies; no not in Notation, or common use: As if it signified [more than
ordinary.] Notorious, is that which is certainly, openly, easily, Knowable. I
have told you of some of my own Parishioners, that live in the open opposition
to Christianity, seeking in their Converse to persuade Men, that the Scripture
is a Book of Lies, and Christianity a mere Deceit, and they will bring their
Children to Baptism for Law and Custom-sake; and say all the Creed, and words
required (it was in the time when I had leave to admit the Parent to enter his
own Child in the Covenant with God.) We know now abundance of the followers of
Hobbes, and Spinosa, and many that deride Scripture, and the hopes of Heaven,
and the fears of a Hell, and think Man is but a subtle sort of Beast: Yet these
will all have their Children Baptized, and to avoid the penalty of the Law,
will receive the Eucharist. And there are others who are common scorners of
Serious Religiousness, and persecutors of it to their power; and hate him that
will tell them of the evil of the common Drunkenness and Whoredom which they
live in, and glory in their Shame. We look for better proof than your
Wrigling-nothings, to make us undoubtedly certain from God's Word, that the
Baptized Infants of all these are saved: The Rubric means, [Quia and qua,
Baptized;] and you mean [Because innocent, and Christ died for them, and all
the Unbaptized, are saved.] But as I see none of your proof of the latter, so I
will not crookedly crawl into Conformity by the fallacious Exposition. And you
that were, in your last Book, uncertain your self of what you can now prove
certain, do so quickly Change, and so quickly publish your Change, that your
judgment has the less power by any reverence of it to the changing of mine.

QUEST. II.
WHether may Unconverted ones within the Church, demand and receive the Lord's
Supper? Mr. Baxter says flatly they may not. Right to Sacram. page 140. The
Confutation follows.

1. Ans. I can bethink me, but of one of these three Ends, of this your
Writing: 1. Either barely to make a confession of your Faith and Judgment: 2.
Or to save me from my Error by Conviction: 3. Or to save the Readers of my Book
from the danger of them.

1. If the first be your Work, I confess your words [I conceive] are suitable:
But Confessions use to be otherwise, concisely and orderly formed, and no
Adversaries names besides Pilate's, needed to be put into your Creed.

2. If the second or third be your Work, you seem to think very contemptible of
my Judgment, and of every such Readers, when you expect that when I have
written, and they have read, full Disputations opening the state of the
Question, proving what I assert by many Arguments and Scripture, vindicating
twenty Arguments of Mr. Galespies, from all that is answered to them, we should
after this be convinced that our Cause is wrong, by one that neither will be at
the labor distinctly to state the Controversy, nor to reply to my Answers
already given to all his Reasonings and much more, nor to answer the many
Arguments which I and others urge, but says little more of any moment than [I
am induced to think thus, though I once thought otherwise:] Yea, when you
neither answer our Reasons, nor give us the tenth part so much for your Cause
as we answered, yet we must not think that it [is on slight grounds] that you
have taken up your Opinion, page 16. when what you say is so slight, that as I
will not write over again what you vouchsafe not to answer; so, if your Reader
have read my Book cited by you, I will not so reproach his judgment as to
think, that he needs any farther answer to this of yours. But if he have not
read mine, nor will read it, he is in no danger of being seduced by it, and so
your labor is in vain.

2. But, Reader, lest so small a word as his often [I conceive,] should prove to
the unwary Synonimal to [I deceive,] I shall advertise thee briefly.

I. That my way was to distinguish of Conversion.

1. As from Heathenism, or Infidelity, Mahometanism, or Heresy.

2. From gross Hypocrisy manifested by a notorious wicked Life.

3. From close Hypocrisy not proved.

4. From a particular fall of a sincere Christian, to his integrity; or from
some tolerable Error and Mistake.

II. I use to distinguish between Being sincere in the Christian Faith, and
knowing that we are Sincere.

III. I use to define what the Conversion is that I speak of, in such
Controversy.

IV. And I never confound the Case [Whether it may be demanded,] with the Case
[whether it may be delivered.]

V. And I still distinguish between [A means which an Unconverted self-knowing
Man, is commanded by God to use for his Conversion,] and [a means which God can
use, or consequently the Sinner should in the review make use of hereunto,
supposing that he has unlawfully intruded.] As if a Man unlawfully invade the
sacred Ministerial Office, when he is in it, there is somewhat that may become
a means of his Conversion: Or if one that has vowed Celibate, Marry a godly
Person unlawfully, it may become a means of their Conversion.

Now to make this Controversy intelligible to the unstudied, I would here
perform all these parts, and distinctly by Propositions open the Matter: But it
is done in the Disputations of Right to Sacraments, which he opposes: And if
every Nibbling of one that refuses the rational task of a sober Confuter,
shall call a Man to write new Books, there will be no end of tiring Readers. I
doubt I have Erred already, in not letting some talk on, and show their
Mistakes and false Accusations without any Confutation.

3. He does indeed limit the Case to [the Unconverted within the Church,] and
you would think that by this he excluded Heathens, Mahometans, Infidels, and
Heretics. But remember,

1. That the Baptized not Excommunicate, are in the Universal Church.

2. And that a particular Church with him, seems to be nothing but a
worshipping Assembly; and all that are there are in the Church, and when the
Meeting breaks up, the Church is no Church.

3. And yet sometimes you would that think he took a Parish of such Assemblers
for a Church.

4. And it is matter of Fact past all dispute, that not only all the Papists,
the first ten Years of Queen Elizabeth, came to our Churches, and some do so
still; but that abundance such as aforesaid, come to the Parish Churches, who
in Coffee-Houses talk against Christianity, or the immortality of the Soul, or
the Scriptures, and such as write Books to the same purposes; and these are not
converted from Sadducism, Beastiality, or Infidelity.

5. And then mark whether any of this Brother's Arguments do prove, that the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, was ordained for such Men to use for their
Conversion.

4. Remember that the full Conversion to Sa^^ing-Sincerity, is nothing else but
[sincere Consent to the Baptismal Covenant.] And every such Consenter, and only
such (Adult) are savingly converted. And that it is not that Covenant, when any
essential part is omitted: To believe in the Father and not the Son, or not in
the Holy Ghost, is not that Covenant: Now the Person in question, To receive
the Sacrament as the Sacrament, (Baptism, or the Eucharist) and not to profess
Consent to the Covenant, is a contradiction; no Man can do it: Covenanting is
essential to it. And it is essential to it to be by God's Commission a Solemn
actual investing Delivery, with application to the just receiver of a saving
Right to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and actual present pardon of Sin,
and right to Life.

5. And the Person in question is either,

1. One that Consents not, and knows that he consents not.

2. Or that Consents not and thinks he does, because he consents to some
part.

3. Or one that consents not, and knows not whether he do or not.

(4. For, as for all true Consenters that know not that they do it sincerely,
they are Converted Persons, and not those in Question: And a true Consenter
that doubts of his truth, but upon his best self-trial, thinks that he truly
consents to have God for his God, and Christ for his Savior, and the Holy
Ghost for his Sanctifier, must go without certainty upon the best judgment that
he make of himself.)

I. Now for the Person that consents not, and knows it, to come and demand
the Sacrament for his Conversion, is all one as to say, that [It is God's
Ordinance, that he is not willing after all persuasions, to give up himself to
God, as his Father, Savior, and Sanctifier, and therefore has no right to
Pardon and Life, shall solemnly profess that he does consent to the Covenant
when he does not, and that he does presently by Vow give up himself to God, as
his God and Father, Savior and Sanctifier, when he does not; that this may
convert them to do that which lyingly he says he does: And he shall take the
investing pardoning Sign and Act, when he has no right to Pardon.] Deceive not
your self, or others: Giving and Taking, Eating and Drinking, are as Speaking
(significant Actions) essentially to the Sacrament: And he never received the
Sacrament essentially as that Sacrament, that did not thereby interpretatively
solemnly profess, q. d. [I now consent to the Covenant of Christ, and take God
in Christ for my Father, Savior and Sanctifier, and here give up my self to
him in these Relations.] And therefore all the Ancients taught, that the
Baptized were all certainly presently pardoned; supposing that they really
consented to the Baptismal Covenant, as every adult Baptized Person did, and
must profess.

And can you believe that this was Christ's Institution, q. d. [Come and
solemnly be Perjured, and Lie, and say, Thou consentest to the Covenant when
thou do not, that this may convert thee to Consent. All your mistaken row of
words, will never make this soul Cause fair.

2. But what if it be a Man that consents not but thinks he does, or yet
does not know?

Ans. It is his Sin not to know that he consents not; and that will not make
it lawful for him to Lie, and Vow falsely. But the harder it is for him to know
his own Mind, the more excusable he is: And a false entrance is not a Sin that
is unpardonable, nor is the Sinner uncurable, but may be converted in the
Church, though he came in unlawfully.

6. While preposterously you tell us who you think has right to Baptism, and
the Lord's Supper, you pass over the Fundamental Controversy, as if you knew
it not; which is, What Baptism and the Lord's Supper are. This is it that we
are mostly disagreed about: End this, and end all. I suppose you take Baptism
to be the first Sacrament, and that less is not necessary to the Lord's Supper
than to it. And I presume to tell you, that Christ never ordained, nor the
Church ever used any other Baptism of the Adult, than 1. That which delivered
the present Remission of Sin, and right to Life, to the just receiver of
Baptism; 2. and that which contained on the part of the Receiver, his present
profession of saving Faith and Repentance, that is, his true consent to the
Covenant.

7. The Scripture tells us, that Baptism saves, as containing the answer of
a good Conscience to God: And that as many as are Baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ, and have professed that they are buried with him by Baptism into
his Death, and raised with him to newness of Life, etc.

8. God in great Mercy has delivered down to us from the Apostles, the form of
Baptism by a fuller Tradition than the words of the Scripture, or any things
else of our Religion are delivered. All Ages and Churches to this Day, have
retained the same form as to all the Essential parts: The very words of the
Baptizer and the Baptized, the Credo, Abrenuncio, etc* professed full show that
all used this one Baptism, which was a professed Vow and Covenanting with God,
and renouncing of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, for present (delivered)
pardon and right to Christ and Life. See the long List in Gataker against
Davenant, of the Ancients that took all the Baptized for justified.

In a word, If you make another Species of Baptism, which has lower Conditions
and Gifts only than these, I am past doubt;

1. That you introduce a new sort of Christianity.

2. That you hereby would change the very Essence of the Church, and woefully
corrupt it: A worse thing than to impose new Ceremonies.

3. That by denying the truth of so universal concurrent Tradition, as the form
of Baptism has; you will shake Men's Faith by weakening the Credit of that
Tradition, by which we have received the Bible: It being a harder matter to
keep all the words of such a Book, than the Form of Baptism, used on every
Christian in the World.

4. That you will too grossly reproach all the Christian Churches, as if they
had in all Ages and Places been ignorant what Christening and Christianity is,
and had used a false Baptism, till of late.

5. You will contradict the Church of England which you Conform to, and all the
Churches now in the World, which in their form of Baptizing, and their
Catechisms and Confessions tell us, of no Baptism, but what is a present
Covenanting with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as consenters to his
Covenant, giving up our selves to him in the foresaid Relations, for present
Pardon, etc. See Dr. Hammona's Pract. Cat. of the Baptismal Vow. And is all
this fit Work for two or three singular Men? To deny the said History, is to be
grossly Ignorant, or Immodest.

9. And now I am ashamed to trouble you and the Reader with the opening of all
your Impertinencies and Contradictions, of [ That Man will not be persuaded to
consent to the Baptismal Covenant, and to be a Christian indeed, does yet sigh,
and grown, and pray for that which he would not have; and that the Impenitent
must penitently use this means for Penitence; and because whosoever will must
come and take the Water of Life, therefore they that will not take it must take
the Sacrament: And that the outward. Act, which is false Vowing themselves to
God, and saying, They consent to the Covenant when they do not, is the means of
Grace appointed for their Conversion, in which they do well, and are accepted:
And that Non-consenters may fly to Christ as a merciful Physician to save
Souls, and cast themselves at his Feet, Repenting, Praying, and crying for
Mercy (which they would not have) and yet if they come with particular ill
intentions, away with them.] Confute what I have written to the contrary if you
would convince me, or any Man that has read my Five Disputations.

QUEST. III.
WHether a Minister may put from the Sacrament those of his Parish who be
Christened People, and come to Church, and join in the Public Worship, and
tender themselves to receive, being under no sentence of Excommunication? You
say, He may not.

Ans. 1. 1. What Is this to the Primitive Churches that were not Parishes? Or to
the Countries that yet are not settled into Parish Churches? Or to such
Churches as are but tolerated among Papists Parishes?

2. And all that is here mentioned, the Papists did for the first ten Years of
Queen Elizabeth.

3. And remember that we have in our Parishes, many that are open Atheists,
Infidels, Sadduces, Persecutors, Scorners of the Scripture and Religion, open
boasting impenitent Whore-mongers, Blasphemers, Drunkards, etc. and many that
openly deny the Ministry, and Sacraments; and yet to avoid Penalty, and for
Custom, will do all that is here named, though they deride it: And that all
these are to be received (though also you suppose that they never so much as
professed consent to the Baptismal Covenant) you take on you to prove.

1. Because it is the Will of Christ. [Oh! Brother, dread such additions to
Christ's Words.] And how is that proved? Why, [None but Dogs and Swine must be
denied holy things.]

Ans. 1. Where found you that [None else?]

2. How prove you that none of these are Dogs or Swine?

3. Yea, are not all they swinish despisers of Grace, who will not be persuaded
to consent that God shall be their God, and Christ their Savior, and the Holy
Ghost their Sanctifier, and give up themselves to him in these Relations?

2. Yet Page 30. the Case is this, [ If the People being Christened do make a
credible profession of true Christianity, or a profession of true Christianity
which we cannot prove to be false, at least by a violent Presumption, we must
accept their Profession and admit them.]

Ans. This is mine as cited, and the plain truth. But,

1. Did you think that a credible profession of true Christianity, is not a
credible profession of Conversion? Are not true Christians saved? What else are
Men to be Converted to?

2. Do all such as are before described, make such a credible profession of true
Christianity?

3. You tell us that the Standard that Christ has set is that, [ If now thou
be sincerely Penitent, thy Sin is pardoned, and thou have right to Salvation,
and may come to the Lord's Table.]

Ans. And does not this imply, that else he should not come? And is such a Man
Unconverted?

It is too irksome to rake up the rest of your Contradictions, and examine your
slight words of the Parable of the Tares: But that rooting up the Tares
forbidden is Excommunicating, or denying Sacramental Communion to any
Parishioner of your Description, who will believe that knows?

1. What Christ says, Mat. 18. 15. etc. and Paul, 1 Cor. 5. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.
Tit. 3. 10, 11, etc.

2. Or he that knows that the Universal Church of Christ in all Ages, has
been of another mind; and indeed went at last too far against it, having no
punishment for Christians, but Suspension and Excommunication.

3. And that the Christian World at this day is of another mind, though the
Helvetians are too remiss in the Principles, and most in the Practice.

4. And that the Canons of this Church requires the Minister to deny the
Sacrament to some such as you describe: And in your former Book, you pleaded
this as for Conformity: And are you changed already? And shall any Wise Man
follow such quick Changes?

5. The Church of England forbids us to give the Sacrament to any that are not
Confirmed, and desire it not, or are not ready: But such are many of your
Description.

6. If the power of Excommunicating over a thousand, or many hundred Churches
be confined to the Bishop and the Chancellor, or Officials, and so all the
Parish Ministers denied it, and disabled, all these Churches must be Profaned
and Confounded at the will of one Man, or because he cannot do an
Impossibility. And the reasons why Christ would have his Church to be visibly
Holy, and a Communion of Saints, and openly differenced from the notoriously
ungodly, are so many and so great, that I will not here attempt the opening of
them, having often elsewhere done it.

QUEST. IV.
WHether the common sort of ungodly Christians, are to be cast out of the
Church by Penal Excommunications, and used as Excommunicate ones? You say, [I
conceive not.]

Ans. Would any one that pretended to confute our Errors, no better open the
case in question.

1. In your sense they are Christians that never professed consent to the
Baptismal Covenant, but only took the Water in order to Conversion hereafter.
These are no visible Christians: And I suppose by parity of Reason, the Council
of Nice, which decreed the Rebaptizing of the Paulmists, would have been for
Rebaptizing these.

2. Is the Ordinariness the satisfying Character, who is not to be
Excommunicated? In one Country those are ordinary, that are extraordinary in
others: In some places Arrians are ordinary; in some Socinians; in some
Papists; in some open Scorners of the Scripture, Christianity, and Religion: In
some ignorant Persons that know not the Essentials of Christianity, nor will
learn, or let the Minister instruct them any where but in the Pulpit; in many
Parishes here, not one of many (their Neighbors say) go to Church about once
or twice a Year. 1 Cor. 5. 13. Put away from among you that wicked Person, ver.
11. If any Man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or on
Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one, no
not to eat. Do not ye judge them that are within, 2 Thessalonians. 3. It is the idle and
disorderly: And these are ordinary in some places.

But we easily grant that Excommunications are not to be used Tyranically, or
when they do more hurt than good. And if the Body of a Church turn, e. g.
Socinians, or professedly ungodly, and will not be Reformed, the
Excommunication which we plead for is, but withdrawing from them and renouncing
their Communion, declaredly.

2. I have often said, that Perfidious Covenant-breakers who live in gross Sin,
and still tell the Minister they repent, and will not be persuaded to leave
their Sin, (e. g. Whoredom, Drunkenness, Stealing, Perjury, Blasphemy,) have so
far forfeited the credit of their bare word, that the Pastor should see their
actual amendment before he Absolve them. And now your Hand is in, the World
must be saved from this Doctrine too. But because it is a common principle in
Nature, and in all Church Canons, and the common judgment of Divines, I will
not stay to dispute it with you. But when you are a Master of a Family, if you
think Family Discipline a Duty, Experience will cure your credulity: If your
Servant or Son beat you, or spit in your Face, or Rob you once a Day, or Week,
but for one Year together, and say still after it, I repent. But what will not
Men talk for?

QUEST. V.
WHether Mr. Baxter's Doctrine and Principles concerning particular Churches be
sound and good? And you confute them.

Ans. 1. Those that read them are in no danger by them. And those that do, may
be confirmed by so slight a confutation (as I said.)

2. As for my Book of [Universal Concord of all Christian Churches,] I know
that the Devil hates it so much, that I expect some far more subtle Assault
than yours; or else I shall think that the Devil wants wit or power, more
than is commonly believed. But I am sorry that he has drawn so good a Man to
be his instrument.

1. My first mentioned Error is [That a particular Church is a regular part of
the Universal Church, as a City is of a Kingdom.] The confutation is [In this I
conceive he is out: A particular Church is to the Church Universal with a
single Town, consisting of a Magistrate Governing, and People governed,
according to the general Rules and Principles of Society, is to all the World.

Ans. The proof is [I conceive he is out,] and an Assertion in other words of
the same that is denied; and so we are out both (or neither.)

1. I used the Name, and he the Definition: It may be he thought that by [City]
I had meant only such Towns as are so called in England: But methinks he should
know that the word (...), signifies all such Towns as he defines, and that it
is the common definition of Civitas which he gives us, as all Politics speak
de Civitate: It is therefore the same subject in the Similitude, which we both
speak of.

2. The difference then must be between the words [Kingdom] and [World.] I say,
A Church is such a part of the Universal, as a City is of a Kingdom: He says,
no, but [as a City is of the World.] What a dangerous Error has he detected?
But, All the World is God's Kingdom: And as it has but one King, so I thought
I might liken it to a Kingdom that has one King, but a multitude of
Corporations; without stretching the Similitude to intend that [This Kingdom is
not a part of the World.]

2. My second Error is, [ He that will be a Member of a particular Church, must
cohabit, or dwell near.] The confutation is, [ I conceive he is out.]

Ans. What, is he against Parish Churches after all this? No: He only denies
it of a transient Member pro tempore as a Traveller, and grants it as to a
stated Member. And yet I am out. Many and many a time have I written of
Churches, and use to distinguish first of the Equivocal Name, saying, That an
occasional meeting of Christians for Worship, may be called a Church, and a
transient Christian pro tempore a Member: I have written more this way than
ever he did. But declared that it is a settled Political Society that I
defined, when I speak of what he now accuses. And why should a wise and good
Man thus hastily trouble the World and make discord by pretending, because he
cannot have leisure to know, what he speaks against?

3. My third Error is, [ That to the being of a particular Church there is
necessary a mutual Covenant, or expressed consent between Pastor and People, even
every Member, and the more express the better: And I define a Church to be a
Society of Christians consisting of Pastor and People associated by consent.]

The force of the Confutation is, [I conceive he is out.] But wherein is it? We
have here such work as I never met with before.

1. He grants that none are to each other, Pastor and People against their
Wills. Good still. And yet do I err? [But (says he) as Christ is Christ, and a
Savior by Office whether Sinners will or not: So faithful Ministers are
Pastors by Office, whether the People accept them or no.] Reader, it is not the
least blemish of my Writings, that on diverse occasions I often repeat the same
things: And many a time have I distinctly said, 1. That the Ordainers judge who
shall be a Minister of Christ in general. 2. The Magistrate is judge whom he
will Countenance, Maintain, or Tolerate. 3. And the People must be consenting
judges to whom they will trust the conduct of their Souls: As it is one thing to
be a Licensed Physician, and another to be Physician to this Hospital, or
Person. If this Brother mean otherwise, what meant he by saying, that No Man
can be a Pastor to a People against their will? Does he say, and unsay in the
next Lines? Is Christ any Man's actual Savior whether they believe in him, and
accept him or not? I have often said, that in diverse Cases, the People may be
bound in duty to Consent, as all are bound to be Christians: But they are no
Christians, or Church Members, till they do Consent: What then is it that he
means as our Difference?

4. Yes: He says, [ No more is necessary to the being, or well-being of a
particular Church than this; A company of Christians met together in public
for the Solemn Worship of God by Jesus Christ, having a Pastor or Minister with
them to guide and govern the Congregation, and edify himself and them by the
Word and Sacraments; where there is no Assembly of Pastor and People there is
no Church, and no longer than the Assembly lasts are they a Church.]

Ans. Did the World ever here this Doctrine before? When the Church at
Jerusalem, Corinth, Cenchrea, Colosse, Laodicea, etc. and the Churches in
Judea, Galatia, etc. are mentioned, when the Apostles ordained them Elders in
every Church, Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 3, 5. etc. Is the word Church here taken for
no Christians longer than they are Assembled? Does not Scripture, Canons,
Fathers, and all Writers speak of Churches as Associated Christians, remaining
Churches all the Day, and Year, and not only while Assembled? If the word
Church may be taken for a Transient Assembly, does it follow that there is no
other? Have we so many Books of Ecclesiastical Policy, if there be no
Political Society that is a particular Church? What an unpleasing talk is it to
be put on a defense against such an Opponent?

5. Says he [ I would but ask Mr. Baxter, what is it that you mean by
Associated by consent?]

Ans. Have I in the Books, cited by you, so largely told you what I mean, and
must you print the Question before you will take an Answer? Says he [ Either
you mean bare Assembling, or some other thing.] Ans. Will you better understand
me if I write it again than you did before? When I told you at large, in what
Cases express consent by words, or other signs is meet, and that where the Laws
settle Parish Churches, ordinary attendance and submission to the Pastor's
Office must be taken for express Consent? But then I do hold that there is such
a Church as I describe, and that the Parish is not Unchurcht when the Assembly
is dismissed.

6. He says, [ When the Assembly breaks up, the Church for that time cease
till the Meeting be renewed, till which time they remain Christian Inhabitants,
Neighbors, Families, Parishioners, or Sojourners, the Pastor of the place
dwelling among them.] Ans. In your Equivocal sense of a Church, this is true.
In the Political sense they are a Church still; as the Parliament, Citizens,
Soldiers, are a Parliament, City, Army, when they Assemble not. If your
wrangle be de re, do you deny their continued Relation? If it be de nomine, let
the Scripture and all Nations judge, whether the name Church belong to them no
longer than they are Assembled.

1. Then all that stay at Home, or are Sick, are no Church Members.

2. Then the Bishop or Pastor, has no Church but while Assembled: And he has
no Duty to perform for his Church, but while Assembled.

3. This is quite contrary to our Diocesans, who say (as honest Mr. Cawdry
himself) that a Diocese is the first particular Church, and that it is no
matter how many Assemblies it consist of, and that there is no Church without a
Bishop, and so that we have no more Churches than Bishops.

4. If a Bishop build a Temple on London Road, where Travelers shall be his
ordinary Hearers, whom he shall never see again, this is a Temporary Transient
Church; but verily it is another sort Church that is described in Scripture,
and by Ignatius, Cyprian, and all Church-writers. And when the Bishop was to
visit the Sick, and take care of the Poor, and to exhort from House to House,
it was as for a Church, and not merely as for Christian Neighbors: And do you
think no more consent was necessary to his special Duty to these more than to
others, and theirs to him, than bare Assembling? Atheists, Infidels, Heretics,
may Assemble with the rest; and Catechumens ordinarily did so, and were never
made themselves the judges, whether and when they should be Baptized and
admitted to Communion; but the Pastors were the judges.

7. As to your often mentioning the words [Covenants and Oaths] for such Church
Associations, as if I had written for Oaths, or had not written against all
needless Covenants, which though you say not, your words would make the Reader
believe, whilst over and over it is but Consent competently expressed, which I
require; those that know not your Honesty as I do, I doubt will judge it to
savor of some worse Cause than I am willing to name. If Consent be not
expressed, how shall it be known? And I still say Caeteris paribus, the
plainest Expressions are fittest to attain their End, as the plainest Language
is counted the best for Communication: Oh! how much did Cyprian, and all the
old Churches differ from you about consent!

8. Another of my Errors is to say, [He is an Invader, that without consent
intrudeth into their Privileges.] Ans. 1. But it is not he that transiently
comes into the Temple; 2. But he that will make himself one of my special
Charge, and oblige me to all the duty which I owe to my Charge and cannot pay
to all Men, and he that will claim a Vote in choosing the Bishop, etc. And if
of old one of your mind had said, That every Traveller or Stranger, that comes
within the Room, may claim the Sacrament without any Literae Communicatoriae,
upon his bare word, the Bishops or Churches would not have believed you; so
singular are you in all this.

You tell us, God has made no such Corporations, and every Christian is a
Freeman, etc. Ans. But how shall I know whether every Stranger that comes in
be a Christian, or was ever Baptized? Or be not a Heretic Excommunicate by
other Churches? Or if I am able to do the Office of a Pastor but for 500, and
thousands more will come and claim it?

9. Another of my Errors is, that Parish Chapels and Oratories, are no true
Churches. Ans. You should not thus become an Incendiary, by pretending things
that you will not first understand: Where do I say what you affirm? I say, That
there may be several Chapels that are but parts of one Church. 2. And I say,
That if a Bishop be Essential to a Church, then none below a Diocese is a
Church; and therefore that they that so affirm, do put down all Parish Churches
and turn them into mere Chapels and Oratories, which are but parts of a
Church. 3. I never said, That if a place called in English a Chapel (yea, if a
Barn, or Field, or Ship,) have such a Pastor and People meeting, as a Church
must be Constituted of, that they are no true Church. 4. But if such Pastors
and People related as one Church, are by Persecution forced to meet in several
Houses, or the Sick, Weak, or Distant, to meet sometime at a Chapel, or
without a true Pastor; if a Deacon pray with some of them in a House, or
Oratory, this makes not a Church Political, in the sense that I told you I
used that word in; but in another (Equivocal) sense it may be called a Church,
and so a Family may be.

If this be false you should have confuted it, and not wrangle in the Dark.

10. You say that I blame the Bishops for putting down all the Parish Bishops
and Churches -- when I my self do no less by putting down all the Chapple
Ministers, Chapel Meetings and Oratories, and denying them to be proper
Pastors and Churches. Ans. All false, or a mere Game at Equivocal words: The
word Chapel usually signifies a place for the Assembling of some small part
of a Church, with a Curate, or Household Chaplain, who has only power to Preach
and Pray, (and sometimes to give the Sacrament) but not to Govern: Sometime a
Chapel may have a Governing Pastor, and People subject to him in that
relation, and differs but in name from the Parish Church. It is a mere
Chapel or Oratory, in the common sense, which I say is not a Political Church.

The falsehood of your pretended parity of the Cases I prove: Those
Congregations which are Constituted of Ministers of different Species, are not
of the same Species and Definition: But mere Oratories, or Chapels, which have
no Pastors that have the power of the Keys for Government, and Parish Churches
which have such Pastors according to the Divine Institution, are constituted of
Ministers of different Species: Ergo, They are not of the same Species and
Definition (as you affirm.)

2. Those Assemblies which intentionally meet but as parts of the lowest
Political Church, and those that intentionally meet as the whole or main Body
of that Political Church, are not of the same Species and Definition. (No more
than a Squadron, and a Captain's Company, or Troop; or a Family, and a Village
or Town.) But, etc.

If Bishops deny all the Lord's Chaplains to have the governing power of the
Keys, and their Family-Chappels to be true Political Churches of the same
Species and Definition with a Diocesan Church, or a Parochial; do you confute
them if you can, I cannot. But if I prove that every Parochial, or other proper
Political Church infimae Speciei, should by Divine Order have a Pastor that
has the governing power of the Keys, and the Bishops deny them any such, and
will have but one such in a Diocese; do you defend them if you can, I cannot:
Nor are these Cases the same.

11. My next Error, He cannot tell whether I hold or no: But it seems I do;
against compelling Men to take whom the Magistrate please for their Pastors:
For I make Covenanting Essential, as between a Husband and Wife; likening the
Church Universal to a Kingdom, and particular Churches to Cities and
Corporations.] And here he talks of the Corporation Oath, and exclaimeth [ Is
this the way of curing Church Divisions? And is this the true and only way of
Concord?

Ans. Had you published and proved to us a better way, I hope we should have
been thankful; and so will I, if you will truly show me the Errors of the way
that I commended. 1. He that has read my Books which plead for no Oaths, nor
for any Covenanting, but expressed consent to the Relations and Offices, will
perhaps think that here you were tempted to Injustice at the least.

2. Is not the Church Universal Christ's Kingdom? I rather liken it to a
Kingdom, than to the World, because (whatever you think) I think it is not by
Christ subdivided into many particular Kingdoms as the World is, but only into
many particular Churches, keeping necessary Concord, (and Obedience to
Magistrates.) It is not one sort only that militate against the Cure of
Divisions, by true Concord; but I am sorry that you are become one. Let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

12. He says, [It is Qualification that makes Christians.] Ans. No
Qualifications without Consent and Covenanting with Christ.

And [ It is Qualification and just Ordination, which makes Christian Pastors
and Ministers at large.] Ans. Do you confute me by repeating my one words? And
(says he) [ It is their being placed by the Magistrate in the several
Parishes, which makes them Pastors by Office, and relation to all the Christian
Souls in the Parishes respectively. -- If Jesus Christ shall by the Hand of the
Magistrate set a faithful Minister in the Parish, he becomes as to Office and
Right a Pastor, a Guide, a Minister, and Teacher to their Souls. If they
receive him not, they are Rebels and Traitors against Christ, and are no longer
Christian People, save as an Adulterous Wife, etc.]

Ans. Alas, where can we say a Man will stop when he is once tumbling down the
Hill!

1. Why, did you think your bare word should serve for this? That it is Jesus
Christ that made this the Office of the Magistrate?

2. Is it all Magistrates, or some only that have this Power, and Jesus Christ
chooses us Pastors by? If but some, what the better are we for your Discourse,
if you tell us not how to know them?

And, 3. Will you not then put the People upon a harder and more perilous Task,
to judge of all Magistrates fitness for this Trust, than it would be to judge
of their Pastor.

4. If it be all, then Heathens and Turks must choose Christians their Pastors.
If you say, It is all Christian Magistrates, then the Protestants in France are
Rebels and not Christians, for refusing Papists Priests: If it be not Papists,
who are they? Must all receive Lutherans, or Socinians, or Anabaptists, or such
like Pastors that live under Imposing Princes of those minds?

5. Why do you limit it to [faithful Ministers] who must judge of their
Faithfulness and Qualifications? If the Magistrate, Papists, Socinians,
Profane Magistrates, or Heretical, will judge as they are. If the People, we
are wheeled about to that which is resisted: And then, When is it that they
must judge, before they receive him, or after? If before, then must they have
trial of him, or take all for (Faithful) that are ordained by a Bishop? or that
Being Strangers, they know no harm by him? or all the Patrons present? If so,
we come to the forementioned Misery. If they must receive them first, and try
them after, and depart from them when they show themselves unfaithful; then the
People must either depose their Pastors, or separate: And most that separate
from the Parish Churches, do it as thinking the Ministers unfaithful: And is
this your Cure of Church-divisions? And if never Preaching be a proof of the
Unqualified, the Canon forbids us to go from such. And in some Countries there
are none within reach to go to from them: And if there be, the Canon suspendeth
them if they receive one to their Communion, that goes from a Non-preaching
Minister.

6. Did any one Church on Earth receive a Pastor by the Magistrates imposition
for the first 300 Years? Or had not the Churches then rightly called Pastors?

7. Did not the Orthodox Churches commonly refuse Bishops, which Valens, and
such Erroneous Emperors set over them?

8. Were not Parish Ministers chosen by the Bishops and People, and not by
Magistrates for 1400 Years in all known Churches in the World? It was but the
Patriarchs at first that were imposed on the People by the Emperors; and
afterward when the Henrys contended with the Pope, it was not for choice of
Priests, but for the Investiture of Bishops and Abhots only; and in this they
left the choice to the People and Clergy, and pleaded but for Investiture per
baculum and annulum; so that for ought I know, Magistrates never imposed
Priests on Parish Churches till the Reformation: And since then, besides
Helvetia and Belgia, it is but few that do it. And even in England, it is not
done by Magistracy, but by Patrons presenting, and Diocesan Prelates
Instituting. So that if this be Christ's Way of making Pastors to particular
Churches, there were no true Pastors or Churches for 300 Years, and perhaps
none, or next none for 1400 Years in Parishes: And if this Doctrine be true,
the Catholic Christians in many Princes Reigns that rejected imposed Bishops
(if that were as bad as rejecting Parish Priests) were Rebels and Traitors
against Christ, and no Christians. And whether he so Stigmatize not the
Universal Church for want of such Reception of Priests, in almost all Ages, I
wish him to consider. And whether that be like to be a better way of Concord,
which he and few such in the end of the World devise, to the condemning of the
Churches of all the former Ages, that never had any such Concord?

9. Hereby also he leaves the Tolerated Churches in France, Germany, and all
the Greek Churches, and Copties, and Syrians, etc. that are under adverse
Princes, to be without Pastors sent in the way of Christ's Appointment. (And
yet vouchsafes not to name one Text where Christ ever Appointed it.)

10. And when he makes all in a Parish to be the Pastors Flock, or Charge,
that are Christians, he condemns those Canons that ordained, that if Any
Bishop convert not the Heretics in his City, they shall be his Flock who does
convert them; and all that have had two Churches in one Parish. Or else he
makes Parish Priests to be Pluralists, and if there be many Chapels and
Churches in his Parish, he is the Pastor to them all: And yet he never tells us
whether the Chapel Priest be also Pastor of the rest of the Parish: And if so,
whether each be to Govern distinctly, or one subordinately as Governed by the
other; Or whether both must agree, each being but part of the Governing power.

11. The same Man says, That multitudes of Parishioners are Rebels, Traitors,
and no Christians, etc. and yet that we must give them all the Sacrament if
demanded. For multitudes demand the Sacrament to satisfy Law and Custom, who
declare that they take not the Priest for their Pastor, nor as Authorized by
Christ; and multitudes that know not what Christianity or a Sacrament is, and
will not speak with the Minister about it.

12. Did not he say before, that the Man cannot be their Pastor without his own
and the Peoples consent? And yet the Magistrate may make me a Pastor to the
Parish? What? Whether I will or not? Am I also a Rebel, Traitor, and no
Christian, if I refuse? What if the Parish have 60000, or 40000 Souls, and I am
not able to do a Pastor's Office for 500? What if I think it is a Sin to be
obtruded on dissenting unwilling People? And if my Dissent do not Unchristen
me, why does the People's Unchristen them? The Lord pity us, we need no Enemies
but our selves to seduce us and destroy; nor any to make the most odious
Schisms than the decryers of Schism. What Schismatic does condemn so many
Christians and Churches, as this Censure? I can scarce except Mr. Dodwel, whom
in his last Book he called an odd disowned Man.

13. He tells us after of the Pastor's Duty to teach Publicly, and from House
to House: And yet it is no Church but when Assembled; and he has equal charge
of all Christians (though Papists) in the Parish.

14. He says, [No thing cuts off from a Church particular, but what cuts off
from Christ, Christianity, and the Church Universal.]

Ans. 1. What if a Man disown only the Pastor of that Church? 2. What if he
will not join with them in the Liturgy, or Mode of Worship there used? 3. What
if that Church be Nestorians, or Eutychians, or Papists, and he separates from
them, or they cast him out? 4. What if he remove his Dwelling?

15. Next I am censured for demanding the People of Kederminster' s consent to
my Ministry, and their Church Relation. And he will now be distinct, and makes
Answers to `distinct Questions for them: But never tells us whether such
Answers had been true or false, if they had given them.

His first Question is, [Do we take you to have the just qualifications of a
Pastor?] And the Answer is, [Learning is one qualification of which the
Ignorant are incompetent Judges: And for Wisdom, Holiness, and Ministerial
skill of Fidelity, you are to make proof of them: This is to be answered some
Years after, and not ask beforehand.]

And so under Papists, Socinians, profane Imposers, you are to take all as
Wise, Holy, Faithful, till some Years after you find them otherwise. Here he
expounds his former words, for rejecting the unqualified and unfaithful. But
who shall be judge at some Years after?

His second Question is, [Do we take you to be duly ordained?] And the Answer
is, [We are bound to judge those to be justly Ordained which are so reputed,
and we have no reason to suspect.]

Ans. 1. But whose reputation is it that you rest on? Half the Parish say, you
are not justly ordained but by a Bishop: The other half say, you are justly
ordained by Presbyters: You falsify, if you feign them all of a mind. 2. And
who knows how to define and bound your [Reasons of Suspicion?] 3. The Canons
and Bishops say, you have sorfeited your License if you conform not; and
without a License you may not Preach. 4. And if you will question no men's
orders, you will have many Lay-Pastors.

To his 3d Quest. he answers, [We question not your presentation.] Ans. And
yet it is the Magistrate that must impose Ministers, and in times of Usurpation
he feigneth them to be unquestioned. The sum hitherto is, We must take any Man
for our Pastor, that is Ordained and presented. But what if I knew that
multitudes do not so, does it make them of that Church because they should
consent and do not? Of 1800, or 2000 only 600 would come to the Sacrament,
(though they usually heard) unless all the rest would receive it kneeling and
administered by the Liturgy, though they were left free to use that Gesture
themselves; and withal they were told that we had not a Bishops license.

The 4th Quest. is, [If we take you alone for our Pastor?] And it is answered,
[We know of no other in view but you.] Ans. All these are Fictions. 1. I never
desired nor consented to be their Pastor, but to be one of three. 2. I agreed
with them in the Town Hall publicly in writing, to undertake only a Lecture
which I had before the War, in conjunction with another that should have the
Presentation or Sequestration. And yet honest Mr. Durel tells the World that it
was a rich Benefice given me for my Service under Cromwell, (who would never
endure me to speak to him.) 3. There were three Competitors: One an old Vicar,
that (somehow) preached once a Quarter, that had the Presentation and was
Sequestered. (1. I will not tell you here for what.) 2. His Curate sequestered
and removed. 3. An old Chapel Curate, grossly ignorant and vicious, that lived
by unlawful Marrying.

4. And by all this you determine that of three of us, none was Pastor but only
that one that had the Presentation; and so you depose all other Curates not
presented. And yet the Chapels that have such Curates put in only by the
Parsons are true Churches; such are your frequent Contradictions.

Sect. 16. Next as a meek Questioner, he asked me, Why I will not baptize their
Infants, if I take them for Christians and Parishioners? He says after, [If
they make not a tolerable profession of Christianity in the public Assembly,
they produce no valid claim, we are not to admit them.] Ans. I suppose there
are in the three next Parishes here, 80000 Persons whom the Pastors never had
any other account of, as to their knowledge, but by their coming to Church (and
half of them that rarely come.) And those of us that have talked with almost all
our Parishioners, find that multitudes know not what Christianity or a
Sacrament is: A man about 80 years old in Kederminster said, Christ was the
Sun, and the Holy Ghost the Moon: Is standing up at the Creed then, or sitting
in the Church a tolerable profession? Hobbes and his followers would do the
same. 2. But what obligation is on me to baptize all the Children of those that
take me for none of their Pastor? The Parish may have 20000 more than I am able
to do the Pastoral Office for: I cannot tell whether they come to Church or
not: If they do, they are strangers to me; some come into the Parish and others
go out, and many are Lodgers: And he that as a Pastor is to Baptize, is also to
do abundance more, to Catechize, visit the Sick, the Poor, etc. Am I bound to
impossibilities for every stranger that I never knew? Nor can I know so much as
whether he be Christened, or be indeed a Parishioner? Yea, a Church with you is
only a present Assembly: What if these persons assemble not, or but twice or
thrice a Year? What if Travelers be that day of the Church? Bishop Tailor
says (Pref. of Repen.) No one can give account of those that he knows not.

Sect. 17. His talk of the Tares again deserves no answer, but [read
Expositors.] His repeated insinuation by the word [Oaths, and Covenants] tell
us that a good man may become un insinuater of Calumnies.

His two Conclusions, page 55. from my words are, 1. That they are no Churches
that want this cementing Covenant. Ans. They are none that are not so related
by consent expressed, by one way or other: If you turn this into [cementing
Covenant] when you had newly cited my express denial, that express Covenanting
was necessary, ad esse, it is worse than Ceremony, which you are already come to
think lawful.

The 2d Concl. is, [The Churches that have it not in the most plain obliging
way are defective, spotted, and ill-favored,] because I said that the more
express way is laudable ad been esse: As if all were called spotted and
ill-favored, that want any thing laudable ad been esse, (And will Christ take
away his Churches spots and wrinkles, Ephesians. 6. when there were none?)

And he says, [This he calls the true and only way of the Churches Concord.]
As if every word in the Book were called [the true and only Way.] [ It rather
tends (says he) to Discord, and to make every single Minister a Pope, or
Church-tyrant, and to make Churches Schismatical and traitorous Combinations,
dividing themselves from all other Churches and Christians, etc.]

Ans. 1. And yet he before said himself, that the unwilling cannot be Pastor
and Flock: And is not this the same? 2. Thus all Christ's Churches that ever I
read of for 300, yea, a 1000 Years, are Stigmatized, who still made expressed
consent necessary. 3. A Pope is one that claims Sovereignty over all the
Church on Earth: Does he do so that takes none for his Flock, but Consenters?
4. Which is liker Tyranny, not to pretend to Government over any but
Volunteers, or to say, I will Govern you whether you will or not? 5. Is it
Dividing and Schism, to know my Flock as Consenters, and not to take other Men's
Flocks Sine literis Communicat^riis, as often as they will dwell or lodge in my
Parish? The words [Oaths,] and [Covenants] are often again so mentioned by him,
and his profession; that he has the Episcopal and Presbyterian on his side,
and other untruths so rashly uttered, that I am heartily grieved for the
success of his Temptation: And whether he or I be Schismatical, and differ from
the Ancient Churches, I refer the Reader to my Abridg. of Church History, and
to my Citations in my Book of Right to Sacraments: My Preface to Mr. Rawlet's
Book of the Sacrament, confutes some of his Intimations. I thank God that I am
going to a more peaceable World.

FINIS.

