OF THE IMPUTATION OF Christ's Righteousness TO BELIEVERS:

In what sense sound Protestants hold it; And,

Of the false devised sense, by which Libertines subvert the Gospel.

With an Answer to some common Objections, especially of Dr. Thomas Tully,
whose Justif. Paulina occasioneth the publication of this.

By RICHARD BAXTER;

A compassionate Lamenter of the Churches wounds, caused by hasty judging and
undigested conc^ptions, and by the Theological Wars which are hereby raised and
managed; by persuading the World that mere verbal or notional Differences are
material, and such as our Faith, Love, Concord and Communion must be measured
by, for want of an exact discussion of the ambiguity of words.

London, Printed for Nevil Simons and Jonathan Robinson* at the Kings-Arms and
Golden-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

The Preface.
Reader,
IF thou blame me for writing again, on a Subject which I have written on so
often, and so lately (specially in my Life of Faith, and Disputations of
Justification) I shall not blame thee for so doing; but I shall excuse my self
by telling thee my reasons. 1. The occasion is many loud accusations of my
self, of which I have before given an account. I publish it, because I see the
Contention still so hot in the Church of Christ, and men's Charity destroyed
against each other; one side calling the other Socinians, and the other
Libertines, (who are neither of them Christians) and if I mistake not, for the
most part in the dark about one Phrase, and that of men's devising, rather than
about the sense: But if indeed it be the sense that they differ about, it is
time to do our best to rectify such Fundamental Errors.

I find that all of us agree* in all the Phrases of Scripture. And a Man's Sense
is no way known but by his expressions: The question is then, Which is the
necessary Phrase which we must express our sense by? We all say that to
Believers, Christ is made our Righteousness; We are made the Righteousness of
God in him; He has ransomed, redeemed us, as a Sacrifice for our sins, a
price; He has merited and obtained eternal Redemption for us, that Sin is
remitted, covered, not imputed; that Righteousness is Reckoned or Imputed to
us; that Faith is Imputed to us for Righteousness, and any thing else that is
in the Scripture. But all this will not serve to make us Christians! What is
wanting? Why, we must say that Christ's Righteousness is Imputed to us as ours,
and that Christ satisfied for our sins! Well; The thing signified seems to us
true and good and needful, (though the Scripture has as good words for it as
any of us can invent.) We consent therefore to use these Phrases, so be it you
put no false and wicked sense on them by other words of your own: Though we
will not allow them to be necessary, because not in Scripture; (And we are more
against adding new Fundamental Articles of Faith to the Scripture, than against
adding new Orders, Forms or Ceremonies). But yet it will not serve: what is yet
wanting? why, we must hold these words in a right sense! What? yet are not your
own devised words a sufficient expression of the matter! When we have opened
those words by other words, how will you know that we use those other words in
a right sense, and so in infinitum. Our sense is, that Righteousness is Imputed
to us, that is, we are accounted Righteous, because for the Merits of Christ's
total fulfilling the Conditions of his Mediatorial Covenant with the Father, by
his Habitual Holiness, his Actual Perfect Obedience, and his Sacrifice, or
satisfactory Suffering for our sins in our stead, freely without any merit or
Conditional act of man's, God has made an Act of Oblivion and Deed of Gift,
pardoning all sin, justifying and adopting and giving Right to the Spirit and
Life eternally to every one that believingly accepts Christ and the Gifts
with and by and from him. And when we accept them* they are all ours by virtue
of this purchased Covenant-Gift. This is our short and plain explication. But
yet this will not serve: Christianity is yet another thing. What is wanting?
Why, we must say, that Christ was habitually and actually perfectly Holy and
Obedient, Imputatively in our particular Persons, and that each one of us did
perfectly fulfill that Law which requires perfect Habits and Acts in and by
Christ imputatively, and yet did also in and by him suffer our selves
Imputatively for not fulfilling it, and Imputatively did our selves both
satisfy God's Justice and merit Heaven; and that we have our selves
Imputatively a Righteousness of perfect Holiness and Obedience as sinless, and
must be justified by the Law of Innocence, or Works, as having our selves
imputatively fulfilled it in Christ; And that this is our sole Righteousness;
and that Faith it self is not imputed to us for Righteousness; no not a mere
particular subordinate Righteousness, answering the Conditional part of the new
Justifying Covenant, as necessary to our participation of Christ, and his
freely given Righteousness. And must all this go into our Christianity! But
where is it written? who devised it? was it in the ancient Creeds and Baptism?
Or known in the Church for five thousand years from the Creation? I profess I
take the Pope to be no more to be blamed for making a new Church Government*
than for making us so many new Articles of Faith: And I will not justify those
that Symbolize with him, or imitate him in either.

But yet many of the men that do this, are good men in other respects: and I
love their zeal that does all this evil, as it is for God and the honor of
Jesus Christ, though I love it not as blind, nor their Error or their Evil.
But how hard is it to know what Spirit we are of! But it is the doleful
mischief which their blind zeal does, that makes me speak; That three or four
of them have made it their practice to backbite my self, and tell People, He
holds dangerous opinions; He is erroneous in the point of Justification. And
his Books are unsound and have dangerous Doctrines; He leaves the old way of
Justification, he favors Socinianism, and suchlike: this is a small matter
comparatively. Backbiting and false reports, are the ordinary fruits of bitter
contentious Zeal, and the Spirit of a Sect as such does usually so work (yea to
confusion and every evil work,) when it has banished the Zeal of Love and of
Good Works. Jam. 3.14, 15, 16. Tit. 2.14. And I never counted it any great loss
to their followers, that they dissuade them from the reading of my writings (as
the Papists do their Proselytes) as long as God has blessed our Land with so
many better.

But there are other effects that command me once again to speak to them.

1. One is, that I have good proof of the lamentable Scandal of some very
hopeful Persons of quality, who by hearing such language from these men, have
bin ready to turn away from Religion, and say, If they thus set against and
condemn one another, away with them all.

2. Because diverse great Volumes and other sad Evidence tells me that by their
invented sense of Imputation, they have tempted many Learned men to deny
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness absolutely, and bitterly revile it as a
most Libertine Irreligious Doctrine.

3. But above all, that they do so exceedingly confirm the Papists. I must
profess that besides carnal Interest and the snare of ill Education, I do not
think that there is any thing in the World that makes or hardneth and
confirms Papists more, and hinders their reception of the Truth, than these
same well-meaning people that are most zealous against them, by two means: 1.
One by Divisions and unruliness in Church-respects, by which they persuade men,
especially Rulers, that without such a Center as the Papacy, there will be no
Union, and without such Violence as theirs, there will be no Rule and Order.
Thus one extreme does breed and feed another. 2. The other is by this unsound
sense of the Doctrine of Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, (with an unsound
Description of Faith) saying that every man is to believe it as Gods word (or
fide divina) that his own sins are pardoned; which when the Papists read (that,
these men make it one of the chief Points of our difference from Rome,) does
occasion them to triumph and reproach us, and confidently dissent from us in
all the rest. I find in my self that my full certainty that they err in
Transubstantiation and some other points, does greatly resolve me to neglect
them at least, or suspect them in the rest which seem more dubious. And when
the Papists find men most grossly erring in the very point where they lay the
main stress of the difference, who can expect otherwise, but that this should
make them despise and cast away our Books, and take us as men self-condemned
and already vanquished, and dispute with us with the prejudice as we do with an
Arrian or Socinian? They themselves that cast away our Books because they
dissent from us, may feel in themselves what the Papists are like to do on this
temptation.

4. And it is not to be disregarded, that many private persons not studied in
these points, are led away by the Authority of these men (for more than Papists
believe as the Church believes) to speak evil of the Truth, and sinfully to
Backbite and Slander those Teachers, whom they hear others slander: and to
speak evil of the things which they know not. And to see Gods own Servants
seduced into Disaffection and abuse and false Speeches against those Ministers
that do most clearly tell them the truth, is a thing not silently to be
cherished by any that are valuers of Love and Concord among Christians, and of
the Truth and their Brethrens Souls, and that are displeased with that which
the Devil is most pleased and God displeased with. These are my Reasons,
submitted to every Readers Censure; which may be as various as their
Capacities, Interests or Prejudices.

My Arguments in the third Chapter I have but briefly and hastily mentioned, as
dealing with the lovers of naked Truth, who will not refuse it when they see it
in its self-evidence. But they that desire larger proof, may find enough in Mr.
Gataker and Mr. Wotton de Reconcil. and in John Goodwin of Justification, (If
they can read him without prejudice). From whom yet I differ in the Meritorious
Cause of our Justification, and take in the habitual and actual Holiness of
Christ as well as his Sufferings, and equal in Merits; and think that pardon it
self is merited by his Obedience as well as by his Satisfaction: To say nothing
of some of his too harsh expressions, about the Imputation of Faith, and
non-imputation of Christ's Obedience, which yet in some explications he
mollifyeth, and shows that his sense is the same with theirs that place all
our Righteousness in remission of Sin; such as (besides those after-mentioned)
are Musculus, Chamier, and abundance more: And when one says that Faith is
taken properly, and another that it is taken Relatively in Imputation, they
seem to mean the same thing: For Faith properly taken is essentiated by its
Object; And what Christ's Office is, and what Faith's Office is, I find almost
all Protestants are agreed in sense, while they differ in the manner of
expression, except there be a real difference in this point of simple
Personating us in his perfect Holiness, and making the Person of a Mediator to
contain essentially in sensu Civili the very Person of every elect sinner, and
every such one to have verily been and done, in sensu civili, what Christ was
and did.

I much marvel to find that with most the Imputation of Satisfaction is said to
be for Remission of the penalty, and Imputation of perfect Holiness for the
obtaining of the Reward Eternal Life; and yet that the far greater part of them
that go that way say, that Imputation of all Christ's Righteousness goes first
as the Cause, and Remission of Sin follows as the Effect: So even Mr.
Roborough page 55. and others. Which seems to me to have this Sense, as if
God said to a Believer, [ I do repute thee to have perfectly fulfilled the Law
in Christ, and so to be no sinner, and therefore forgive thee all thy sin.] In
our sense it is true and runs but thus [ I do repute Christ to have been
perfectly just habitually and actually in the Person of a Mediator in the
Nature of Man, and to have suffered as if he had been a sinner, in the Person
of a Sponsor, by his own Consent, and that in the very place, and stead of
sinners; and by this to have satisfied my Justice, and by both to have merited
free Justification and Life, to be given by the new Covenant to all Believers:
And thou being a Believer, I do repute thee justified and adopted by this
satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness of Christ, and by this free
Covenant-Gift, as verily and surely as if thou had done it and suffered thy
self.

For my own part I find by experience, that almost all Christians that I talk
with of it, have just this very notion of our Justification which I have
expressed, till some particular Disputer by way of Controversy has thrust the
other notion into their mind. And for peace-sake I will say again, what I have
elsewhere said, that I cannot think but that almost all Protestants agree in
the substance of this point of Justification (though some having not Acuteness
enough to form their Notions of it rightly, nor Humility enough to suspect
their Understandings, wrangle about Words, supposing it to be about the
Matter); Because I find that all are agreed, 1. That no Elect Person is
Justified or Righteous by Imputation while he is an Infidel or Ungodly (except
three or four that speak confusedly, and support the Antinomians) 2. That God
does not repute us to have done what Christ did in our individual natural
Person's Physically: The Controversy is about a Civil personating. 3. That God
judges not falsely. 4. That Christ was not our Delegate and Instrument sent by
us to do this in our stead, as a man pays his debt by a Servant whom he
sends with the money. 5. That therefore Christ's Righteousness is not Imputed
to us, as if we had done it by him as our Instrument. 6. That all the fruits of
Christ's Merits and Satisfaction are not ours upon our first believing (much
less before). But we receive them by degrees: we have new pardon daily of new*
sins: We bear castigatory punishments, even Death and Denials, or loss of the
greater assistance of the Spirit: Our Grace is all imperfect, etc. 7. That we
are under a Law (and not left ungoverned and lawless) and that Christ is our
King and Judge: And this Law is the Law or Covenant of Grace, containing,
besides the Precepts of perfect Obedience to the Law natural and superadded, a
Gift of Christ with Pardon and Life; but only on Condition that we thankfully
and believingly accept the Gift; And threatening non-liberation, and a far sorer
punishment, to all that unbelievingly and unthankfully reject it. 8. That
therefore this Testament or Covenant-Gift is God's Instrument, by which he
gives us our Right to Christ and Pardon and Life: And no man has such Right
but by this Testament-Gift. 9. That this, (called a Testament, Covenant,
Promise, and Law in several respects) does, besides the Conditions of our first
Right, impose on us Continuance in the Faith, with sincere Holiness, as the
necessary Condition of our continued Justification, and our actual
Glorification. And that Heaven is the Reward of this keeping of the new
Covenant, as to the order of Gods Collation, though as to the value of the
Benefit, it is a Free Gift, purchased, merited and given by Christ. 10. That we
shall all be judged by this Law of Christ. 11. That we shall all be judged
according to our deeds; and those that have done good (not according to the Law
of Innocence or Works, but according to the Law of Grace) shall go into
everlasting life, and those that have done evil (not by mere sin as sin against
the Law of Innocence) but by not keeping the Conditions of the Law of Grace,
shall go into everlasting punishment. The sober reading of these following
texts may end all our Controversy with men that dare not grossly make void the
Word of God. Rev. 20.12, 13.22.12. and 2.23.) 12. That to be Justified at the
day of Judgment, is, to be adjudged to Life Eternal, and not condemned to Hell.
And therefore to be the cause or condition that we are Judged to Glory, and the
Cause or Condition that we are Justified then, will be all one. 13. That to be
Judged according to our deeds, is to be Justified or Condemned according to
them. 14. That the great trial of that day (as I have after said) will not be,
whether Christ has done his part, but whether we have part in him, and so
whether we have believed, and performed the Condition of that Covenant which
gives Christ and Life. 15. That the whole scope of Christ's Sermons, and all
the Gospel, calls us from sin, on the motive of avoiding Hell, (after we are
reputed Righteous) and calls us to Holiness, Perseverance and overcoming, on
the motive of laying up a good Foundation, and having a Treasure in Heaven, and
getting the Crown of Righteousness. 16. That the after-sins of men imputed
Righteous deserve Hell, or at least temporal punishments, and abatements of
Grace and Glory. 17. That after such sins, especially heinous, we must pray for
Pardon, and repent that we may be pardoned, (and not say I fulfilled the Law in
Christ as from my birth to my death, and therefore have no more need of
Pardon.) 18. That he that says he has no sin, deceives himself, and is a
liar. 19. That Magistrates must punish sin as God*s Officers; and Pastors by
Censure in Christ's name; and Parents also in their Children. 20. That if
Christ's Holiness and perfect Obedience, and Satisfaction and Merit, had bin
Ours in Right and Imputation, as simply and absolutely and fully as it was his
own, we could have no Guilt, no need of Pardon, no suspension or detention of
the proper fruits of it, no punishment for sin, (specially not so great as the
withholding of degrees of Grace and Glory); And many of the consequents
aforesaid could not have followed.

All this I think we are all agreed on; and none of it can with any face be
denied by a Christian. And if so; 1. Then whether Christ's perfect Holiness and
Obedience, and Sufferings, Merit and Satisfaction, be all given us, and imputed
unto us at our first believing as Our own in the very thing it self, by a full
and proper Title to the thing: Or only so imputed to us, as to be judged a just
cause of giving us all the effects in the degrees and time forementioned as God
pleases, let all judge as evidence shall convince them. 2. And then, whether
they do well that thrust their devised sense on the Churches as an Article of
Faith, let the more impartial judge.

I conclude with this confession to the Reader, that though the matter of these
Papers has been thought on these thirty years, yet the Script is hasty, and
defective in order and fullness; I could not have leisure so much as to affix in
the margin all the texts which say what I assert: And several things,
especially the state of the Case, are often repeated. But that is, lest once
reading suffice not to make them observed and understood; which if many times
will do, I have my end. If any say, that I should take time to do things more
accurately, I tell him that I know my straights of time, and quantity of
business better than he does; and I will rather be defective in the mode of one
work, than leave undone the substance of another as great.

July, 20. 1672. Richard Baxter.


The Contents.
CHap. 1. The History of the Controversy* In the Apostles days: In the
following Ages. Augustine and his followers Opinion. The Schoolmen. Luther:
Islebius: The Lutherans: Andr. Osiander: The latter German Divines who were
against the Imputation of Christ's Active Righteousness: Our English Divines:
Davenant's sense of Imputation. Wotton. de Reconcil. Bradshaw, Gataker, Dr.
Crisp, Jo. Simpson, Randal, Town, etc. And the Army- Antinomians checked by the
rising of Arminianism there against it. Jo. Goodwin, Mr. Walker, and Mr.
Roborough; Mr. Ant. Burges; My Own endeavors; Mr. Cranden, Mr. Eyres, etc. Mr.
Woodbridge, Mr. Tho. Warren, Mr. Hotchkis, Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Gibbon, Mr. Warton,
Mr. Grailes, Mr. Jessop: What I then asserted: Corn. a Lapide, Vasquez, Suarez,
Grotius de Satisf. Of the Savoy Declaration; Of the Faith of the
Congregational-Divines: Their saying that Christ's Active and Passive Obedience
is imputed for our sole Righteousness, confuted by Scripture. Gataker, Usher,
and Vines read and approved my Confession of Faith. Placeus his Writings and
trouble about the Imputation of Adam's Sin. Dr. Gell, Mr. Thorndike, etc.
vehemently accusing the doctrine of Imputed Righteousness. The Consent of all
Christians, especially Protestants, about the sense of Imputed Righteousness 1.
The form of Baptism. 2. The Apostles Creed. 3. The Nicene and
Constantinopolitan Creed. 4. Athanasius's Creed. 5. The Fathers sense:
Laurentius his Collections: Damasus his Creed. 6. The Augustan Confession. 7.
The English Articles, Homilies and Confession. 8. The Saxon Confession. 9. The
Wittenberg Confession. 10. The Bohemian Confession. 11. The Palatinate
Confession. 12. The Polonian Confessions. 13. The Helvetian Confession. 14. The
Basil Confession. 15. The Argentine Confession of the four Cities. 16. The
Synod of Dort, and the Belgic Confession. 17. The Scottish Confession. 18. The
French Confession. Whether Imputation of Passion and Satisfaction, or of
meritorious Perfection go first: How Christ's Righteousness is called the
formal Cause, etc. That it is confessed that Christ's Righteousness is imputed
to us, as our sin was to him. Molinaeus: Maresius, Vasseur, Bellarmine is
constrained to agree with us. A recommendation of some brief, most clear, and
sufficient Treatises on this subject; viz. 1. Mr. Bradshaw; 2. Mr. Gibbon's
Sermon; 3. Mr. Truman's Great Propitiation. 4. Placeus his Disput. in These.
Salmur. 5. Le Blank's Theses: And those that will read larger, Mr. Watton, John
Goodwin, and Dr. Stillingfleet. Chap. 2. The opening of the Case, by some
Distinctions, and many Propositions: Joh. Crocius Concessions premised: Mr.
Lawson's Judgment. Chap. 3. A further Explication of the Controversy. Chap. 4.
My Reasons against the denied sense of Imputation and personating. The denied
sense repeated plainly. Forty three Reasons briefly named. Chap. 5. Some
Objections answered. Chap. 6, 7, 8. Replies to Dr. Tully; and a Defense of the
Concord of Protestants against his Military Alarm, and false pretense of
greater discord than there is.
Of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness (Material or Formal) to Believers:
Whether we are Reputed personally to have suffered on the Cross, and to have
satisfied God's Justice for our own sins, and to have been habitually perfectly
Holy, and Actually perfectly Obedient, in Christ, or by Christ, and so to have
merited our own Justification and Salvation. And whether Christ's Righteousness
Habitual Active and Passive, be strictly made our own Righteousness, in the
very thing it self simply Imputed to us, or only be made ours in the effects,
and Righteousness Imputed to us when we believe, because Christ has satisfied
and fulfilled the Law, and thereby merited it for us. The last is affirmed, and
the two first Questions denied.

I Have said so much of this subject already in my Confession, but especially
in my Disputations of Justification, and in my Life of Faith that I thought not
to have meddled with it any more; But some occasions tell me that it is not yet
needless, though those that have most need will not read it. But while some of
them hold, that nothing which they account a Truth about the Form and Manner of
Worship is to be silenced for the Churches peace, they should grant to me that
Real Truth so near the Foundation (in their own account) is not to be silenced
when it tends unto Peace.

In opening my thoughts on this subject I shall reduce all to these Heads. 1. I
shall give the brief History of this Controversy. 2. I shall open the true
state of it, and assert what is to be asserted, and deny what is to be denied.
3. I shall give you the Reasons of my Denials. 4. I shall answer some
Objections.

CHAP. I. The History of the Controversy.
1. IN the Gospel it self we have first Christ's Doctrine delivered by his own
mouth. And in that there is so little said of this Subject that I find few that
will pretend thence to resolve the Controversy, for Imputation in the rigorous
sense. The same I say of the Acts of the Apostles, and all the rest of the New
Testament, except Paul's Epistles.

The Apostle Paul, having to do with the Jews, who could not digest the
equalizing of the Gentiles with them, and specially with the factious Jewish
Christians, who thought the Gentiles must become Proselytes to Moses as well as
to Christ, if they would be Justified and Saved, at large confuteth this
opinion, and freeth the Consciences of the Gentile Christians from the
Imposition of this yoke (as also did all the Apostles, Act. 15.) And in his
arguing, proves that the Mosaical Law is so far from being necessary to the
Justification of the Gentiles, that Abraham and the Godly Jews themselves were
not Justified by it, but by Faith* And that by the works of it (and
consequently not by the works of the Law or Covenant of Innocence, which no man
ever kept) no man could ever be justified: And therefore that they were to look
for Justification by Christ alone, and by Faith in him, or by mere
Christianity; which the Gentiles might have as well as the Jews, the
Partition Wall being taken down. This briefly is the true scope of Paul in
these Controversies.

2. But in Paul's own days, there were somethings in his Epistles which the
unlearned and unstable did wrest, as they did the other Scriptures, to their
own destruction, as Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 2. And it seems by the Epistle of
James, that this was part of it: For he is fain there earnestly to dispute
against some, who thought that Faith without Christian works themselves, would
justify, and flatly affirms, that we are Justified by Works, and not by
Faith only; that is, as it is a Practical Faith, in which is contained a
Consent or Covenant to obey, which first puts us into a justified state; so
it is that Practical Faith actually working by Love, and the actual performance
of our Covenant, which by way of Condition is necessary to our Justification,
as Continued and as Consummate by the Sentence of Judgment. Against which
sentence of James there is not a syllable to be found in Paul. But all the
Scripture agrees that all men shall be Judged, that is, Justified or
Condemned, according to their works. But it is not this Controversy (between
Faith and Works) which I am now to speak to, having done it enough heretofore.

3. From the days of the Apostles till Pelagius and Augustine, this
Controversy was little meddled with: For the truth is, the Pastors and Doctors
took not Christianity in those days for a matter of Shcolastick subtilty, but
of plain Faith and Piety. And contented themselves to say that Christ dyed for
our sins, and that we are Justified by Faith; and that Christ was made unto us
Righteousness, as he was made to us Wisdom, Sanctification and Redemption.

4. But withal those three first Ages were so intent upon Holiness of Life, as
that they addicted their Doctrine, their Zeal, and their constant endeavors to
it: And particularly to great austerities to their Bodies, in great Fastings,
and great contemp^ of the World, and exercises of Mortification, to kill their
fleshly Lusts, and deny their Wills, and Worldly Interests; to which end at
last they got into Wildernesses, and Monasteries, where, in Fasting and Prayer,
and a single life, they might live as it were out of the World, while they were
in it; (Though indeed persecution first drove them thither to save themselves.)
Into these Deserts and Monasteries those went that had most Zeal, but not
usually most Knowledge: And they turned much of their Doctrine and discourses
about these Austerities, and about the practices of a Godly Life, and about all
the Miracles which were (some really) done, and (some feigned) by credulous
soft people said to be done among them. So that in all these ages most of their
writings are taken up, 1. In defending Christianity against the Heathens, which
was the work of the Learned Doctors. 2. And in confuting swarms of Heresies
that sprung up. 3. And in matters of Church Order, and Ecclesiastical and
Monastical discipline. 4. And in the precepts of a Godly Life: But the point of
Imputation was not only not meddled with distinctly, but almost all the Writers
of those times, seem to give very much to Man's free will, and to works of
Holiness, and sufferings, making too rare and obscure mention of the distinct
Interests of Christ's Merits in our Justification, at least, with any touch upon
this Controversy: Yet generally holding Pardon, and Grace and Salvation only
by Christ's Sacrifice and Merits; though they spoke most of Man's Holiness, when
they called men to seek to make sure of Salvation.

5. And indeed at the day of Judgment, the Question to be decided, will not be,
Whether Christ dyed and did his part, but, Whether we believed and obeyed him
and did our part: Not, Whether Christ performed his Covenant with the Father;
but, Whether we performed our Covenant with him: For it is not Christ that is
to be judged, but we by Christ.

6. But Pelagius and Augustine disputing about the Power of Nature and Freewill
and the Grace of Christ, began to make it a matter of great Ingenuity (as
Erasmus speaks) to be a Christian. Pelagius (a Britain, of great wit, and
continence, and a good and sober life, as Austin says, Epist. 120.) stiffly
defended the Power of Nature and Freewill, and made Grace to consist only in
the free Pardon of all sin through Christ, and in the Doctrine and Persuasions
only to a holy life for the time to come, with Gods common ordinary help.
Augustine copiously (and justly) defended God's special eternal Election of
some, and his special Grace given them to make them repent and believe, and
presevere: (For though he maintained that some that were true Believers, Lovers
of God, Justified and in a state of Salvation, did fall away and perish, yet he
held that none of the Elect did fall away and perish; And he maintained that
even the Justified that fell away, had their Faith by a special Grace above
nature.) Vid. August. de bono Persever. Cap. 8. and 9. and de Cor. and Great.
Cap. 8, and 9. and alibi passim.

7. In this their Controversy, the point of Justification fell into frequent
debate: But no Controversy ever arose between them, Whether Christ's personal
Righteousness considered Materially or Formally, was by Imputation made ours as
Proprietors of the thing it self, distinct from its effects; or, Whether God
reputed us to have satisfied and also perfectly obeyed in Christ. For Augustine
himself, while he vehemently defends free Grace, speaks too little even of
the Pardon of sin: And though he say, that Free Pardon of sins is part of
Grace, yet he makes Justification to be that which we call Sanctification,
that makes us inherently Righteous or new-Creatures, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost: And he thinks that this is the Justification which Paul pleads
to be of Grace and not of works; yet including Pardon of sin, and confessing
that sometimes to Justify, signifies in Scripture, not to make just, but to
judge just. And though in it self this be but de nomine, and not de re; yet, 1.
no doubt but as to many texts of Scripture Austin was mistaken, though some few
texts Beza and others confess to be taken in his sense: 2. And the exposition
of many texts lies upon it. But he that took Justification to be by the
operation of the Holy Ghost giving us Love to God, could not take it to be by
Imputation in the rigorous sense no question; nor does de re.

8. But because, as some that, it seems, never read Augustine, or understood
not plain words, have nevertheless ventured confidently to deny what I have
said of his Judgment in the points of Perseverance (in my Tract of
Perseverance) so, it is like such men will have no more wariness what they say
in the point of Justification; I will cite a few of Augustin's words among
many, to show what he took Justification to be, though I differ from him de
nomine.

Nec quia recti sunt cord, sed etiam ut recti sint cord, pretendit Justitiam
suam, qua justificat impium -- Quo motu receditur ab illo font vitae, cujus
solius haustu justitia bibitur, bona scil. vita. Aug. de Spir. and Lit. Cap. 7.

Deus est enim qui operatur in eis and velle and operari, pro bona voluntate.
Haec est Justitia Dei, hoc est, quam Deus donat homini quum justificat impium
Hanc Dei justitiam ignorantes superbi Judaei, and suam volentes constituere,
justitiae Dei non sunt subjecti. -- Dei quippe dixit Justitiam, quae homini ex
Deo est, suam vero, quam putant sibi suficere ad facienda mandata sine
adjutorio and dono ejus qui legem dedit. His antem similes sunt qui cum
profiteantur se esse Christianos, ipsi gratiae Christi sic adversantur ut se
humanis viribus divina existiment implere mandata. Epist. 120. cap. 21. and 22.
and Epist. 200.

Et de Spir. and lit. c. 26. Factores justificabuntur: -- Non tanquam per
opera, nam per Gratiam justificentur: Cum dicat Gratis justificari hominem per
fidem sine operibus legis, nihilque aliud velit intelligi, in eo quod dicit
Gratu, nisi quia justificationem opera non precedunt: Aperte quippe alibi
dicit, si gratia, jam non ex operibus: alioquin gratia non est gratia. Sed sic
intelligendum est, factores Legis justificabuntur, ut sciamus eos non esse
factores legis nisi justificentur; ut non justificatio factoribus accedat, sed
factores legis justificatio precedat: Quid est enim aliud Justificati, quam
Justi facti, ab illo scilicet qui justificat Impium, ^t ex impio fiat justus?
-- Aut certe ita dictum est, Justificabuntur, ac si diceretur Justi habebuntur,
justi deputabuntur.

Et ibid. cap. 29. Gentes qua non sectabantur justitiam apprehenderunt
justitiam; Justitiam autem quae ex fide est, impretrando eam ex Deo, non ex
seipsis presumendo; Israel vero persequens legem justitiae, in legem justitiae,
non pervenit: Quare? Quia non ex fide, sed tanquam ex operibus: id est tanquam
eam per seipsos operantes; non in se credentes operari Deum. Deus est enim qui
operatur in nobis -- Finis enim legis Christus est omni credenti. Et adhuc
dubitamus quae sint opera legis, quibus homo non justificatur; si ea tanquam
sua credederit sine adjutorio and dono Dei, quod est ex fide Jesu Christi -- Vt
possit homo facere bona and Sancta, Deus operatur in homine per fidem Jesu
Christi, qui finis ad Justitiam omni credenti: id est, per Spiritum
incorporatus factusque membrum ejus, potest quisque illo incrementum
intrinsecus dante, operari justitiam. -- Justificatio autem ex fide impetratur
-- In tantum justus, in quantum salvus. Per hanc enim fidem credemus, quod
etiam nos Deus a mortuis excitet; interim Spiritu, ut in novitate ejus gratioe
temperanter and just and pie vivamus in hoc seculo -- qui in Resurrectione
sibi congrua, hoc est, in Justificatione precedit: -- c. 30. Fides impetrat
gratiam qua Lex impleatur. --

Cap. 28. page 315. Ibi Lex Dei, non ex omni part delata per injustitiam,
profecto scribitur, renovata, per gratiam: Nec istam inscriptionem, quae
Justificatio est, poterat efficere in Judaeis Lex in tabulis scripta.

Ibid. Cap. 9. page 307, 308. Justitia Dei manifestata est: non dixit, Justitia
hominis vel justitia propriae voluntatis, sed justitia Dei; Non qua Deus justus
est; sed qua induit, hominem cum justificat impium. Haec testificatur per Legem
and Prophetas. Huic quippe testimonium perhibent Lex and Prophetae. Lex quidem
hoc ipso, quod jubendo, and minando, and neminem justificando, satis indicat
dono Dei justificari hominem per Adjutorium Spiritus -- Justitia autem Dei per
fidem Jesu Christi, hoc est, per fidem qua Creditur in Christum: sicut autem
ista fides Christi dicta non est, qua Credit Christus, sic and illa Justitia
Dei non qua Justus est Deus. Vtrumque enim Nostrum est sed ideo Dei and Christi
dicitur quod ejus nobis largitate donatur. -- Justitia Dei sine lege est, quam
Deus per Spiritum Gratiae Credenti confert sine adjutorio legis. -- Justificati
gratis per gratiam ipsius: non quod sine voluntate nostra fiat, sed voluntas
nostra ostenditur infirma per legem, ut sanet Gratia Voluntatem, and sanata
voluntas impleat Legem. -- Et cap. 10. Confugiant per fidem ad Justificantem
Gratiam, and per donum Spiritus suavitate justitiae delectati, poenam literae
minantis evadant. Vid. Ep. 89. q. 2. Et lib. 3. ad Bonifac. c. 7.

Et Tract. 3. in Joan. when he says that, Omnes qui per Christum Justificati
justi, non in se, sed in illo; he expounds it of Regeneration by Christ.

Et Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost. Sine voluntate tua non erit in te Justitia Dei.
Voluntas non est nisi tua; Justitia non est nisi Dei: he expounds it of
Holiness. -- Traditus est propter delicta nostra, and resurrexit, propter
justificationem nostram. Quid est, Propter Justificationem nostram? Vt
justificet nos, and justos faciat nos. Eris opus Dei non solum quia homo es,
sed quia Justus es: Qui fecit te sine te, non te justificat sine te: Tamen ipse
justificat, ne sit justitia tua. -- Dei justitiam dat non litera occidens, sed
vivificans Spiritus. -- Vid. de Great. Christi Cap. 13, 14.

Abundance such passages in Augustine fully show that he took Justification to
signify Sanctification, or the Spirits renovation of us; and thinks it is
called the Righteousness of God and Christ, and not ours, because by the Spirit
he works it in us. And when he says that bona opera sequuntur Justificatum,
non precedunt Justificandum (as in sense he often does) he means that we are
freely sanctified, before we do good. I would cite abundance, but for swelling
the writing, and tiring the Reader. And his followers Prosper, and Fulgentius
go the same way, as you may easily find in their writings.

Johan. Crocius in his copious Treatise of Justification, Disp. 9. p. 442.
says, Augustinum Justificationis nomine utramque partem complecti, id est, tum
Remissionem peccatorum quae proprie Justificatio dicitur, tum Sanctificationem
-- Cum quo nos sentimus quoad rem ipsam, tantum dissidemus in loquendi forma.

9. The Schoolmen being led by the Scholastic wit of Augustine, fell into the
same phrase of speech and opinions, Lombard making Augustine his Master, and
the rest making him theirs, till some began to look more toward the
Semipelagian way.

10. And when Church-Tyranny and Ignorance, had obscured the Christian Light,
the true sense of Justification by the Righteousness of Christ, was much
obscured with the rest, and a world of humane inventions under the name of Good
works, were brought in to take up the peoples minds; And the merits of man, and
of the Virgin Mary, sounded louder than the merits of Christ, in too many
places: And the people that were ignorant of the true Justification, were
filled with the noise of Pardons, Indulgences, Satisfactions, Penances,
Pilgrimages, and such like.

11. Luther finding the Church in this dangerous and woeful state, where he
lived, did labor to reduce men's minds and trust, from humane fopperies and
merits, and indulgences, to Christ, and to help them to the Knowledge of true
Righteousness: But according to his temper in the heat* of his Spirit, he
sometimes let fall some words which seemed plainly to make Christ's own personal
Righteousness in it self to be every Believers own by Imputation, and our sins
to be verily Christ's own sins in themselves by Imputation: Though by many other
words he shows that he meant only, that our sins were Christ's in the effects
and not in themselves, and Christ's personal Righteousness ours in the effects
and not in it self.

12. But his Book on the Galatians, and some other words, gave occasion to the
errors of some then called Antinomians, and afterward Libertines (when some
additions were made to their errors.) Of these Islebius Agricola was the
chief: Whom Luther confuted and reduced, better expounding his own words: But
Islebius ere long turned back to the Contrary extreme of Popery, and with
Sidonius and Julius Pflug, (three Popish Bishops made for that purpose)
promoted the Emperors Interim to the persecution of the Protestants.

13. The Protestant Reformers themselves spoke variously of this subject. Most
of them rightly asserted that Christ's Righteousness was ours by the way of
Meriting our Righteousness, which was therefore said to be Imputed to us. Some
of them followed Luthers first words, and said that Christ's sufferings and all
his personal Righteousness was Imputed to us, so as to be ours in it self, and
when judged as if we had personally done what he did, and were righteous with
the same Righteousness that he was.

14. Ambsdorfius, Gallus, and some other hot Lutherans were so jealous of the
name of works, that they maintained that good works were not necessary to
Salvation. (Yea as to Salvation some called them hurtful:) And Georgius Major a
Learned sober Divine was numbered by them among the Heretics, for maintaining
that Good works were necessary to Salvation; as you may see in the perverse
writings of Chlusseburgius and many others.

15. Andreas Osiander (otherwise a Learned Protestant) took up the opinion,
that we are Justified by the very essential Righteousness of God himself. But
he had few followers.

16. The Papists fastening upon those Divines who held Imputation of Christ's
personal Righteousness in it self in the rigid sense, did hereupon greatly
insult against the Protestants, as if it had been their common doctrine, and it
greatly stopped the Reformation: For many seeing that some made that a
Fundamental in our difference, and articulus stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae,
and seeing how easily it was disproved, how fully it was against the Doctrine
of all the ancient Church, and what intolerable Consequences followed, did
judge by that of the rest of our Doctrine, and were settledly hardened against
all.

17. The Learned Divines of Germany perceiving this, fell to a fresh review of
the Controversy, and after a while abundance of very Learned Godly Doctors
fell to distinguish between the Active and Passive Righteousness of Christ; and
not accurately distinguishing of Imputation, because they perceived that Christ
suffered in our stead, in a fuller sense than he could be said to be Holy in
our stead, or fulfill the Law in our stead. Hereupon they principally managed
the Controversy, as about the sort of Righteousness Imputed to us: And a great
number of the most Learned famous Godly Divines of the Reformed Churches,
maintained that Christ's Passive Righteousness was Imputed to us, even his
whole Humiliation or Suffering, by which the pardon of all sins of Commission
and Omission was procured for us; but that his Active Righteousness was not
Imputed to us, though it profited us; but was Justitia Personae to make Christ
a fit Sacrifice for our sins, having none of his own, but the Suffering was his
Justitia Meriti. His Obedience they said was performed nostro bono, non nostro
loco, for our good but not in our stead; but his Sufferings, both nostro bono
and loco, both for our good and in our stead: but neither of them so strictly
in nostra Persona in our Person, as if we did it by and in Christ. The Writers
that defended this were Cargius, and that holy man Olevian and Vrsine, and
Paraeus, and Scultetus, and Piscator, Alstedius, Wendeline, Beckman, and many
more. He that will see the sum of their arguings may read it in Wendeline's
Theolog. lib. 1. cap. 25. and in Paraeus his Miscellanies after Vrsine's Corpus
Theolog. After them Camero with his Learned followers took it up in France.
Leg. Cameron. p. 364.390. These. Sal. vol. 1. Placaei Disp. de Just. 29. and
Part. 2 de Satisf. 42. So that at that time (as Paraeus tells you) there were
four opinions: some thought Christ's Passive Righteousness only was Imputed to
us; some also his Active instead of our Actual Obedience; some also his
Habitual instead of our Habitual perfection; And some thought also his Divine
Righteousness was Imputed to us, because of our Union with Christ, God and Man.
(Imputed I say; for I now speak not of Osiander's opinion of Inhesion.) And
Lubbertus wrote a Conciliatory Tractate favoring those that were for the
Passive part. And Forbes has written for the Passive only imputed. Molinaeus
casts away the distinction, These. Sedan. v. 1. p. 625. 18.

18. In England most Divines used the phrase, that we were Justified by the
forgiveness of sin and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and being
accepted as Righteous unto life thereon: But the sense of Imputation few
pretended accurately to discuss. Davenant who dealt most elaborately in it, and
maintains Imputation stiffly, in terms; yet when he tells you what
Protestants mean by it, says, that [ Possunt nobis imputari, non solum nostrae
passiones, actiones, qualitates, sed etiam extrinseca quaedam, quae nec a nobis
fluunt, nec in nobis haerent: De facto autem Imputantur, quando illorum
intuitus and respectus valent nobis ad aliquem effectum, aeque ac si a nobis
aut in nobis essent. (Note, that he says, but ad aliquem effectum, non ad
omnem.) And he instanceth in one that is a slothful fellow himself, but is
advanced to the Kings Favor and Nobility for some great Service done by his
Progenitors to the Commonwealth. And in one that deserving death is pardoned
through the Intercession of a friend, or upon some suffering in his stead which
the King imposes on his Friend. This is the Imputation which Davenant and
other such Protestants plead for; which I think is not to be denied. Were it
not for lengthening the discourse and wearying the Reader, I would cite many
other of our greatest Divines, who plead for the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, that Davenant here expounds himself.

But some less judicious grating upon a harsh and unsound sense, Mr. Anthony
Wotton a very Learned and Godly Divine of London, wrote a Latin Treatise de
Reconciliatione, one of the Learned that has ever been written of that
subject, in which he labors to disprove the rigid Imputation of Christ's
Holiness and Obedience to man; and shows that he is Righteous to whom all sin
of Omission and Commission is forgiven; and confuteth these three Assertions.
1. That A Sinner is Reputed to have fulfilled the Law in and by Christ. 2. And
being reputed to have fulfilled the Law, is taken for formally just as a
fulfiller of it. 3. And being formally just as a fullfiller of the Law, Life
eternal is due to him by that Covenant, that says, do this and live. Vid.
Part. 2. li. 1. Cap. 11. page 152. Cum sequentibus. Thus and much further Mr.
Wotton went to the very quick of the Controversy, and irrefragably overthrew
the rigid Imputation.

But Mr. William Bradshaw, a Learned Godly Nonconformist, being grieved at the
differences about the Active and Passive Righteousness, and thinking that Mr.
Wotton denied all Imputation of the Active Righteousness (which he did not, but
owneth it to be Imputed as a meritorious Cause:) Part. 2. li. 1. Cap. 13. page
165. Ne illud quidem negaverim, imputari nobis illius justitiam and
obedientiam, ut ad nostrum fructum redundet: Id unum non concedo, Legem nos in
Christo and per Christum servasse, ut propter eam a nobis praestitam vita
aeterna ex faedere, Hoc fac et vives, debeatur. Mr. Bradshaw I say attempted a
Conciliatory middle way, which indeed is the same in the main with Mr.
Wotton's: He honors the Learned Godly persons on each side, but maintains
that the Active and Passive Righteousness are both Imputed, but not in the
rigid sense of Imputation denying both these Propositions. 1. That Christ by
the Merits of his Passive Obedience only, has freed us from the guilt of all
sin, both Actual and Original, of Omission and Commission. 2. That in the
Imputation of Christ's Obedience both Active and Passive, God does so behold and
consider a sinner in Christ, as if the sinner himself had done and suffered
those very particulars which Christ did and suffered for him. And he wrote a
small book with great accurateness in English first, and Latin after, opening
the nature of Justification, which has been deservedly applauded ever since.
His bosom-Friend Mr. Tho. Gataker, (a man of rare Learning and Humility) next
set in to defend Mr. Bradshaw's way, and wrote in Latin Animadversions on
Lucius (who opposed Piscator, and erred on one side for rigid Imputation) and
on Piscator who on the other side was for Justification by the Passive
Righteousness only; and other things he wrote with great Learning and Judgment
in that cause.

About that time the Doctrine of personal Imputation in the rigid sense began
to be fully improved in England, by the Sect of the Antinomians (trulyer called
Libertines) of whom Dr. Crispe was the most eminent Ringleader, whose books
took wonderfully with ignorant Professors under the pretense of extolling
Christ and Free Grace. After him rose Mr. Randal, and Mr. John Simpson, and
then Mr. Town, and at last in the Armies of the Parliament, Saltmarsh, and so
many more, as that it seemed to be likely to have carried most of the
Professors in the Army, and abundance in the City and Country that way: But
that suddenly (one Novelty being set up against another) the opinions called
Arminianism rose up against it, and gave it a check and carried many in the
Army and City the clean contrary way: And these two Parties divided a great
part of the raw injudicious sort of the professors between them, which usually
are the greatest part: but especially in the Army which was like to become a
Law and example to others.

Before this John Goodwin (not yet turned Arminian) preached and wrote with
great diligence about Justification against the rigid sense of Imputation, who
being answered by Mr. Walker, and Mr. Robourough, with far inferior strength,
his book had the greater success for such answerers.

The Antinomians then swarming in London, Mr. Anthony Burges, a very worthy
Divine was employed to Preach and Print against them; which he did in several
books: but had he been acquainted with the men as I was, he would have found
more need to have vindicated the Gospel against them than the Law.

Being daily conversant my self with the Antinomian and Arminian Soldiers, and
hearing their daily contests, I thought it pity that nothing but one extreme
should be used to beat down that other, and I found the Antinomian party far
the stronger, higher, and more fierce, and working toward greater changes and
subversions; And I found that they were just falling in with Saltmarsh, that
Christ has repented and believed for us, and that we must no more question our
Faith and Repentance, than Christ. This awakened me better to study these
points; And being young, and not furnished with sufficient reading of the
Controversy, and also being where were no libraries, I was put to study only
the naked matter in it self. Whereupon I shortly wrote a small book called
Aphorisms of Justification, etc. Which contained that Doctrine in substance
which I judge sound; but being the first that I wrote, it had several
expressions in it which needed correction; which made me suspend or retract it
till I had time to reform them. Men's judgments of it were various, some for it
and some against it: I had before been a great esteemer of two books of one
name, Vindiciae Gratiae, Mr. Pembles and Dr. Twisses, above most other books.
And from them I had taken in the opinion of a double Justification, one in foro
Dei as an Immanent eternal Act of God, and another in foro Conscientiae, the
Knowledge of that; and I knew no other: But now I saw, that neither of those was
the Justification which the Scripture spoke of. But some half- Antinomians
which were for the Justification before Faith, which I wrote against, were most
angry with my book. And Mr. Crandon wrote against it, which I answered in an
Apology, and fullyer wrote my judgment in my Confession; and yet more fully in
some Disputations of Justification against Mr. Burges, who had in a book of
Justification made some exceptions; and page 346. had defended that [ As in
Christ's suffering we were looked upon by God as suffering in him; so by
Christ's obeying of the Law, we were beheld as fulfilling the Law in him.] To
those Disputations I never had any answer. And sin^^ then in my Life of Faith,
I have opened the Libertine errors about Justification, and stated the sense
of Imputation.

Diverse writers were then employed on these subjects: Mr. Eyers for
Justification before Faith (that is, of elect Infidels) and Mr. Benjamin
Woodbridg, Mr. Tho. Warren against it. Mr. Hotchkis wrote a considerable Book
of Forgiveness of sin, defending the sounder way: Mr. George Hopkins, wrote to
prove that Justification and Sanctification are equally carried on together:
Mr. Warton, Mr. Graile, Mr. Jessop, (clearing the sense of Dr. Twisse,) and
many others wrote against Antinomianism. But no man more clearly opened the
whole doctrine of Justification, than Learned and Pious Mr. Gibbons Minister at
Blackfriars, in a Sermon Printed in the Lectures at St. Giles in the Fields.
By such endeavors the before-prevailing Antinomianism was suddenly and
somewhat marvelously suppressed, so that there was no great noise made by it.

About Imputation that which I asserted was against the two fore-described
extremes; in short, That we are Justified by Christ's whole Righteousness,
Passive, Active, and Habitual, yea the Divine so far included as by Union
advancing the rest to a valuable sufficiency: That the Passive, that is,
Christ's whole Humiliation is satisfactory first, and so meritorious, and the
Active and Habitual meritorious primarily. That as God the Father did appoint
to Christ as Mediator his Duty for our Redemption by a Law or Covenant, so
Christ's whole fulfilling that Law, or performance of his Covenant-Conditions
as such (by Habitual and Actual perfection, and by Suffering) made up one
Meritorious Cause of our Justification, not distinguishing with Mr. Gataker of
the pure moral, and the servile part of Christ's Obedience, save only as one is
more a part of Humiliation than the other, but in point of Merit taking in all:
That as Christ suffered in our stead that we might not suffer, and obeyed in
our nature, that perfection of Obedience might not be necessary to our
Justification, and this in the person of a Mediator and Sponsor for us sinners,
but not so in our Persons, as that we truly in a moral or civil sense, did all
this in and by him; Even so God reputeth the thing to be as it is, and so far
Imputes Christ's Righteousness and Merits and Satisfaction to us, as that it
is Reputed by him the true Meritorious Cause of our Justification; and that for
it God makes a Covenant of Grace, in which he freely gives Christ, Pardon and
Life to all that accept the Gift as it is; so that the Accepters are by this
Covenant or Gift as surely justified and saved by Christ's Righteousness as if
they had Obeyed and Satisfied themselves. Not that Christ meriteth that we
shall have Grace to fulfill the Law our selves and stand before God in a
Righteousness of our own, which will answer the Law of works and justify us:
But that the Conditions of the Gift in the Covenant of Grace being performed by
every penitent Believer, that Covenant does pardon all their sins (as Gods
Instrument) and gives them a Right to Life eternal, for Christ's Merits.

This is the sense of Imputation which I and others asserted as the true
healing middle way. And as bad as they are, among the most Learned Papists,
Cornelius a Lapide is cited by Mr. Wotton, Vasquez by Davenant, Suarez by Mr.
Burges, as speaking for some such Imputation, and Merit: Grotius de Satisf. is
clear for it.

But the Brethren called Congregational or Independent in their Meeting at the
Savoy. Oct. 12. 1658. publishing a Declaration of their Faith, Cap. 11. have
these words [ Those whom God effectually calls, he also freely justifies;
not by infusing Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their Sins, and by
accounting and accepting their persons as Righteous, not for any thing wrought
in them, or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone: not by imputing Faith it
self, the act of believing, or any other evangelical Obedience to them, as
their Righteousness; but by Imputing Christ's Active Obedience to the whole Law,
and Passive Obedience in his death, for their whole and sole Righteousness;
they receiving and resting on him and his Righteousness by Faith.]

Upon the publication of this it was variously spoken of: some thought that it
gave the Papists so great a scandal, and advantage to reproach the Protestants
as denying all inherent Righteousness, that it was necessary that we should
disclaim it: Others said that it was not their meaning to deny Inherent
Righteousness, though their words so spoke, but only that we are not justified
by it: Many said that it was not the work of all of that party, but of some few
that had an inclination to some of the Antinomian principles, out of a mistaken
zeal of free Grace; and that it is well known that they differ from us, and
therefore it cannot be imputed to us, and that it is best make no stir about
it, lest it irritate them to make the matter worse by a Defense, and give the
Papists too soon notice of it. And I spoke with one Godly Minister that was of
their Assembly, who told me, that they did not subscribe it, and that they
meant but to deny Justification by inherent Righteousness. And though such men
in the Articles of their declared Faith, no doubt can speak intelligibly and
aptly, and are to be understood as they speak according to the common use of
the words; yet even able-men sometimes may be in this excepted, when eager
engagement in an opinion and parties, carries them too precipitantly, and
makes them forget something, that should be remembered. The Sentences here
which we excepted against are these two. But the first was not much offensive
because their meaning was right; And the same words are in the Assemblies
Confession, though they might better have been left out.

Scriptures. Declaration.
Romans 4.3. What says the Scripture? [1 Not by imputing Faith it self, part of
Believing, or any other Evangelical Obedience to them as their Righteousness]
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness.

Ver. 5. To him that works not, but believes on him that Justifyeth the
Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness.

Ver. 9. For we say that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness: How
was it then reckoned?

Ver. 11. And he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness
of the Faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father
of all them that believe, -- that Righteousness might be imputed to them also.
-- Ver. 13. Through the Righteousness of Faith. -- Ver. 16. Therefore it is of
Faith that it might be by Grace. -- vid. Ver. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
He was strong in Faith, fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able
also to perform; and therefore it was Imputed to him for Righteousness. Now it
was not written for his sake alone that it was imputed to him, but for us also,
to whom it shall be imputed, if we (or, who) believe on him that raised up
Jesus our Lord from the dead.


Genesis 15.5, 6. Tell the Stars -- so shall thy seed be: And he believed in the
Lord, and he counted it to him for Righteousness, Jam. 2.21, 22, 23, 24. Was
not Abraham our Father justified, by Works? -- And the Scripture was fulfilled
which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness.


Luke 19.17. Well done thou good Servant, Because thou have been Faithful in a
very little, have thou authority over ten Cities.


Mat. 25.34, 35, 40, Come ye blessed. -- For I was hungry and ye gave me Meat.


Genesis 22.16, 17, By my self I have sworn. -- Because thou have done this thing.
--


Joh. 16.27. For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and
have believed that I came out from God. Many such passages are in Scripture.


Our opinion is, 1. That it is better to justify and expound the Scripture,
than flatly to deny it: If Scripture so often say, that Faith is reckoned or
Imputed for Righteousness, it becomes not Christians, to say, It is not: But
to show in what sense it is, and in what it is not. For if it be so Imputed in
no sense, the Scripture is made false: If in any sense* it should not be
universally denied but with distinction.

2. We hold, that in Justification there is considerable, 1. The Purchasing and
Meritorious Cause of Justification freely given in the new Covenant. This is
only Christ's Sufferings and Righteousness, and so it is Reputed of God, and
Imputed to us. 2. The Order of Donation, which is, On Condion of Acceptance;
And so 3. The Condition of our Title to the free Gift by this Covenant; And
that is, Our Faith, or Acceptance of the Gift according to its nature and use.
And thus God Reputeth Faith, and Imputes it to us, requiring but this
Condition of us (which also he works in us) by the Covenant of Grace; whereas
perfect Obedience was required of us, by the Law of Innocence.

If we err in this explication, it had been better to confute* us than deny
God's Word.

Scriptures besides the former. Declaration.
1 John 2.29. Every one which does Righteousness is born of God. [2 For their
sole Righteousness.
-- and 3.7, 10. He that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is
Righteous. -- Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God.

2 Timothy 4.8. He has laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness.

Heb. 11.23. Through Faith they wrought Righteousness. -- Heb. 12. The
peaceable fruit of Righteousness. -- Jam. 3.18. The fruit of Righteousness is
sown in Peace. -- 1 Pet. 2.24. That we being dead to sin, should live unto
righteousness, Mat 5.20. Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. -- Luke 1.71. In Holiness and Righteousness
before him all the days of our Life. -- Act. 10.35. He that fears God, and
works Righteousness is accepted of him, -- Romans 6.13, 16, 18, 19, 20. Whether
of sin unto death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness. -- 1 Cor. 15.34. Awake
to Righteousness and sin not. -- Ephesians. 5.9. The fruit of the Spirit is in all
Goodness, and Righteousness. -- Dan. 12.3. They shall turn many to
Righteousness. -- Dan. 4.27. Break off thy sins by Righteousness. -- Ephesians. 4.24.
The new-man which after God is created in Righteousness. -- Genesis 7.1. Thee have
I seen Righteous before me. -- Genesis 18.23, 24, 25, 26. Far be it from thee, to
destroy the Righteous with the Wicked. -- Prove. 24.24. He that says to the
Wicked thou art Righteous, him shall the people Curse, Nations shall abhor him.
-- Isa. 3.10. Say to the Righteous, it shall be well with him, Isa. 5.23. That
take away the Righteousness from the Righteous. -- Mat. 25.37, 46. Then shall
the Righteous answer. -- The Righteous into life eternal. -- Luke 1.6. They
were both Righteous before God. -- Heb. 11.4, 7. By Faith Abel offered to God a
more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was
righteous, God testifying of his Gifts. By Faith Noah being warned of God of
things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark, -- by which he became
heir of the Righteousness by Faith, 1 Pet. 4.18. If the Righteous be scarcely
saved. -- Math. 10.41. He that receives a Righteous man in the name of a
Righteous man, shall have a Righteous man's reward. -- 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is
not made for a Righteous man, but for -- Many score of texts more mention a
Righteousness distinct from that of Christ imputed to us.

Judge now, Whether he that believes God should believe that he Imputes
Christ's Obedience and Suffering to us, [for our Sole Righteousness.]

That which is not our sole Righteousness, is not so Reputed by God nor
Imputed: But Christ's Obedience and Suffering is not our sole Righteousness. --
See Davenant's many arguments to prove that we have an Inherent Righteousness.

Obj. But, they mean, [ our Sole Righteousness by which we are Justified.]

Answ. 1. We can tell no man's meaning but by his words, especially not contrary
to them, especially in an accurate Declaration of Faith. 2. Suppose it had been
so said, we maintain on the contrary, 1. That we are Justified by more sorts of
Righteousness than one, in several respects. We are justified only by Christ's
Righteousness as the Purchasing and Meritorious Cause of our Justification
freely given by that new Covenant. We are Justified by the Righteousness of God
the Father, as performing his Covenant with Christ and us, (efficiently). We
are justified efficiently by the Righteousness of Christ as our Judge, passing a
just sentence according to his Covenant: These last are neither Ours nor
Imputed to us: But we are justified also against the Accusation, of being
finally Impenitent Unbelievers or unholy, by the personal particular
Righteousness of our own Repentance, Faith and Holiness.

For 2. We say, that there is an universal Justification or Righteousness, and
there is a particular one. And this particular one may be the Condition and
Evidence of our Title to all the rest. And this is our case. The Day of
Judgment is not to try and Judge Christ, or his Merits, but us: He will judge us
himself by his new Law or Covenant, the sum of which is, [ Except ye Repent, ye
shall all perish: and, He that believes, shall be saved: and he that believes
not, shall be condemned. If we be not accused of Impenitence or Unbelief, but
only of not-fulfilling the Law of Innocence, that will suppose that we are to
be tried only by that Law, which is not true: And then we refer the Accuser
only to Christ's Righteousness, and to the Pardoning Law of Grace, and to
nothing in our selves to answer that charge; And so it would be Christ's part
only that would be judged. But Matthew. 25. and all the Scripture assures us of
the contrary, that it is Our part that it is to be tried and judged, and that we
shall be all judged according to what we have done. And no man is in danger
there of any other accusation, but that he did not truly Repent and Believe,
and live a holy life to Christ: And shall the Penitent Believer say, I did
never Repent and Believe, but Christ did it for me; and so use two Lies, one of
Christ, and another of himself, that he may be justified? Or shall the Unholy,
Impenitent Infidel say, It Is true I was never a Penitent Believer, or holy, but
Christ was for me, or Christ's Righteousness is my sole Righteousness? that is a
fashood; For Christ's Righteousness is none of his. So that there is a
particular personal Righteousness, consisting in Faith and Repentance, which by
way of Condition and Evidence of our title to Christ and his Gift of Pardon and
Life, is of absolute necessity in our Justification. Therefore Imputed
Righteousness is not the sole Righteousness which must justify us.

I cited abundance of plain Texts to this purpose in my Confession, page 57.
etc. Of which book I add, that when it was in the press, I procured those three
persons whom I most highly valued for judgment, Mr. Gataker, (whose last work
it was in this World) Mr. Vines, and lastly Archbishop Usher to read it over,
except the Epistles (Mr. Gataker read only to page 163.) and no one of them
advised me to alter one word, nor signified their dissent to any word of it.
But I have been long on this: to proceed in the History. --

The same year that I wrote that book, that most Judicious excellent man Joshua
Placaeus of Saumours in France, was exercised in a Controversy conjunct with
this; How far Adams sin is imputed to us. And to speak truth, at first in the
Theses Salmuriens. Vol. 1. he seemed plainly to dispute against the Imputation
of Adam's actual sin, and his arguments I elsewhere answer.) And Andr. Rivet
wrote a Collection of the Judgment of all sorts of Divines for the contrary.
But after he vindicated himself, and showed that his Doctrine was, that Adam's
fact is not immediately imputed to each of us, as if our persons as persons had
been all fully represented in Adam's person (by an arbitrary Law or Will of
God) or reputed so to be: But that our Persons being Virtually or Seminally in
him, we derive from him first our Persons, and in them a corrupted nature, and
that nature corrupted and justly deserted by the Spirit of God, because it is
derived from Adam that so sinned: And so that Adams fact is imputed to us
mediately, mediante natura and Corruptione, but not primarily and immediately.

This doctrine of the Good and Judicious man was thought too new to escape
sharp censures, so that a rumor was spread abroad that he denied all
Imputation of Adams fact, and placed original guilt only in the Guilt of
Coruption, for which indeed he gave occasion. A Synod being called at
Charenton, this opinion without naming any Author was condemned; and all
Ministers required to subscribe it: Amyraldus being of Placeus mind, in a
speech of two hours vindicated his opinion. Placeus knowing that the Decree did
not touch him, took no notice of it. But Gerissolius of Montauban wrote against
him, pretending him condemned by the Decree, which Drelincourt one that drew it
up, denied, professing himself of Placeus his judgment. and Rivet also,
Maresius, Carol. Daubuz and others, misunderstanding him wrote against him.

For my part I confess that I am not satisfied in his distinction of Mediate
and Immediate Imputation: I see not, but our Persons as derived from Adam,
being supposed to be in Being, we are at once Reputed to be such as Virtually
sinned in him, and such as are deprived of God's Image. And if either must be
put first, methinks it should rather be the former, we being therefore
deprived of God's Immage (not by God, but by Adam) because he sinned it away
from himself. It satisfies me much more, to distinguish of our Being and so
sinning in Adam Personally and Seminally, or Virtually: we were not Persons in
Adam when he sinned; therefore we did not so sin in him: And it is a fiction
added to God's Word, to say that God (because he would do it) reputed us to be
what we were not. But we were Seminally in Adam as in Causa naturali, who was
to produce us out of his very essence: And therefore that kind of being which
we had in him, could not be innocent when he was guilty: And when we had our
Natures and Persons from him, we are justly reputed to be as we are, the
offspring of one that actually sinned: And so when our Existence and
Personality makes us capable Subjects, we are guilty Persons of his sin;
though not with so plenary a sort of Guilt as he.

And I fear not to say, that as I lay the ground of this Imputation in Nature
it self, so I doubt not but I have elsewhere proved that there is more
participation of all Children in the guilt of their parents sins by nature,
than is sufficiently acknowledged or lamented by most, though Scripture abound
with the proof of it: And that the overlooking it, and laying all upon God's
arbitrary Covenant and Imputation, is the great temptation to Pel^gians to deny
Original sin: And that our misery no more increases by it, is, because we are
now under a Covenant that does not so charge all culpability on mankind, as the
Law of Innocence did alone. And there is something of Pardon in the Case. And
the English Litany, (after Ezra, Daniel and others) well prays, Remember not,
Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our Forefathers, etc.

This same Placeus in These. Salmuriens. Vol. 1. has opened the doctrine of
Justification so fully, that I think that one Disputation might spare some the
reading of many contentious Volumes.

The rigid assertors of Imputation proved such a stumbling block to many, that
they run into the other extreme, and not only denied it, but vehemently loaded
it with the Charges of over-throwing all Godliness and Obedience. Of these
Parker (as is said) with some others wrote against it in an answer to the
Assemblies Confession: Dr. Gell often reproacheth it in a large Book in Folio.
And lastly and most sharply and confidently Herbert Thorndike, (to mention no
more.)

The History of this Controversy of Imputation, I conclude, though disorderly,
with the sense of all the Christian Churches, in the Creeds and Harmony of
Confessions, because they were too long to be fitly inserted by the way.

The Consent of Christians, and specially Protestants, about the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness in Justification; How far and in what sense it is Imputed.
I. SEeing Baptism is our visible initiation into Christianity, we must there
begin; and see what of this is there contained. Mat. 28.19. Baptizing them into
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Mar. 16.16. He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, Act. 2.38. Repent, and be Baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. See Acts 8.36, 37, 38. The Eunuch's
Faith and Baptism. Act. 22.16. Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins,
having called on the name of the Lord. Romans 6.3. So many as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death. Gal. 3.27. As many as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. 1. Pet. 3.21. The like whereunto,
Baptism does also now save us, (not the putting away the filth of the flesh,
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Romans 4.24, 25. But for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if we
believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead: who was delivered
for our offenses, and was raised again for our Justification. [Quaer. How far
Christ's Resurrection is imputed to us.]

II. The Creed, called by the Apostles, has but [ I believe -- the forgiveness
of sins.]

III. The Nicene and Constantinopolitane Creed, I acknowledge one Baptism for
the Remission of sins; (Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection premised.)

IV. Athanasius's Creed [ Who suffered for our Salvation, descended into Hell,
rose again the third day. -- At whose coming all men shall rise again with
their bodies, and shall give account for their own works; and they that have
done good, shall go into everlasting life, and they that have done evil into
everlasting Fire.] (Remission is contained in Salvation.)

V. The Fathers sense I know not where the Reader can so easily and surely
gather, without reading them all, as in Laurentius his Collection de Justif.
after the Corpus Confessionum; and that to the best advantage of the Protestant
Cause. They that will see their sense of so much as they accounted necessary to
Salvation, may best find it in their Treatises of Baptism, and Catechizings of
the Catechumens; Though they say less about our Controversy than I could wish
they had. I will have no other Religion than they had. The Creed of Damasus in
Hieron. op. Tom. 2. has but ( In his Death and Blood we believe that we are
cleansed -- and have hope that we shall obtain the reward of good merit,
(meaning our own); which the Helvetians own in the end of their Confession.

VI. The Augustane Confession, Art. 3, 4. Christ died -- that he might
reconcile the Father to us, and be a sacrifice, not only for original sin, but
also for all the actual sins of men. -- And that we may obtain these benefits
of Christ, that is, Remission of sins, justification and life eternal, Christ
gave us the Gospel in which these benefits are propounded. -- To preach
Repentance in his Name, and Remission of sins among all Nations. For when men
propagated in the natural manner have sin, and cannot truly satisfy Gods Law,
the Gospel reproves sin, and shows us Christ the Mediator, and so teaches
us about Pardon of sins -- That freely for Christ's sake are given us,
Remission of sins, and Justification by Faith, by which we must confess that
these are given us for Christ, who was made a Sacrifice for us, and appeased
the Father. Though the Gospel require Penitence; yet that pardon of sin may be
sure, it teaches us that it is freely given us; that is, that it depends not
on the Condition of our worthyness, nor is given for any precedent works, or
worthyness of following works. -- For Conscience in true fears finds no work
which it can oppose to the Wrath of God; and Christ is proposed and given us,
to be a propitiator. This honor of Christ must not be transferred to our
works. Therefore Paul says, ye are saved freely, (or of Grace,) And it is of
grace, that the promise might be sure; that is, Pardon will be sure; when we
know that it depends not on the Condition of our worthiness, but is given for
Christ. -- In the Creed this Article, [I believe the Forgiveness of sins,] is
added to the history: And the rest of the history of Christ must be referred to
this Article: For this benefit is the end of the history, Christ therefore
suffered and rose again, that for him might be given us Remission of sins, and
life everlasting.

Art. 6. When we are Reconciled by Faith, there must needs follow the
Righteousness of good works. -- But because the infirmity of man's nature is so
great, that no man can satisfy the Law, it is necessary to teach men, not only
that they must obey the Law, but also how this Obedience pleases, lest
Consciences fall into desperation, when they understand that they satisfy not
the Law. This Obedience then pleases, not because it satisfies the Law, but
because the person is in Christ, reconciled by Faith, and believes that the
relicts of his Sin are pardoned. We must ever hold that we obtain remission of
sins, and the person is pronounced Righteous, that is, is accepted freely for
Christ, by Faith: And afterward that Obedience to the Law pleases, and is
reputed a certain Righteousness, and meriteth rewards.] Thus the first
Protestants.

VII. The 11th Article of the Church of England (to which we all offer to
subscribe) is [ Of the Justification of Man. We are accounted Righteous before
God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith; and not
for our own works or deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only,
is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of Comfort, as more largely is
expressed in the Homily of Justification.]

The said Homilies (of Salvation and Faith) say over and over the same thing.
As page 14. [ Three things go together in our Justification: On Gods part his
great Mercy and Grace, on Christ's part, Justice* that is the Satisfaction of
Gods Justice, or the Price of our Redemption, by the offering of his body, and
shedding of his blood, with fulfilling of the Law perfectly and thoroughly; And
on our part true and lively Faith in the Merits of Jesus Christ: which yet is
not ours, but by Gods working in us.

And page [ A lively Faith is not only the common belief of the Articles of our
Faith, but also a true trust and confidence of the mercy of God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, and a steadfast hope of all good things to be received at
Gods hand; and that although we through infirmity or temptation -- do fall from
him by sin, yet if we return again to him by true repentance, that he will
forgive and forget our offenses, for his Sons sake our Savior Jesus Christ,
and will make us inheritors with him of his everlasting Kingdom -- Page 23. For
the very sure and lively Christian Faith, is, to have an earnest trust and
confidence in God, that he does regard us, and is careful over us, as the
Father is over the Child whom he does love; and that he will be merciful unto
us, for his only Sons sake; and that we have our Savior Christ our perpetual
Advocate and Prince, in whose only merits, oblation and suffering, we do trust
that our offenses be continually washed and purged, whenever we repenting
truly do return to him with our whole heart, steadfastly determining with our
selves, through his grace to obey and serve him, in keeping his Commandments,
etc.] So also the Apology. This is our doctrine of Imputation.

VIII. The Saxon Confession often insisteth on the free Pardon of sin, not
merited by us, but by Christ. And expounds Justification to be [ Of unjust,
that is, Guilty and disobedient, and not having Christ: to be made Just, that
is, To be Absolved from Guilt for the Son of God, and an apprehender by Faith
of Christ himself, who is our Righteousness; (as Jeremiah and Paul say) because
by his Merit we have forgiveness, and God imputes righteousness to us, and for
him, reputeth us just, and by giving us his Spirit quickens and regenerateth
us. -- By being Justified by Faith alone we mean, that freely for our Mediator
alone, not for our Contrition, or other Merits; the pardon of sin and
reconciliation is given us. -- And before, It is certain, when the mind is
raised by this Faith, that the pardon of sin, Reconciliation and Imputation of
Righteousness, are given for the Merit of Christ himself -- And after [ By
Faith is meant Affiance, resting in the Son of God the Propitiator, for whom we
are received and please (God) and not for our virtues and fulfilling of the Law.

IX. The Wittenberge Confession, (In Corp. Conf. page 104) A man is made
Accepted of God, and Reputed just before him, for the Son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ alone, by Faith. And at the Judgment of God we must not trust to the
Merit of any of the Virtues which we have, but to the sole Merit of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which is made ours by Faith. And because at the bar of God, where
the case of true eternal Righteousness and Salvation will be pleaded, there is
no place for man's Merits, but only for God's Mercy, and the Merits of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whom we receive by Faith: therefore we think our Ancestors said
rightly, that we are justified before God by Faith only.

X. The Bohemian Confession, making Justification the principal Article, goes
the same way. [Pag. 183, 184. By Christ men are Justified, obtain Salvation and
Remission of sin, freely by Faith in Christ, through mercy, without any Work
and Merit of man. And his death and blood alone is sufficient, to abolish and
expiate all the sins of all men. All must come to Christ for pardon and
Remission of Sin, Salvation and every thing. All our trust and hope is to be
fastened on him alone. Through him only and his merits God is appeased and
propitious; Loves us, and gives us Life eternal.

XI. The Palatinate Confession ib. page 149. [ I believe that God the Father
for the most full Satisfaction of Christ, does never remember any of my sins,
and that pravity which I must strive against while I live, but contrarily will
rather of grace give me the righteousness of Christ, so that I have no need to
fear the judgment of God. -- And page 155. If he merited, and obtained
Remission of all our sins, by the only and bitter passion, and death of the
Cross, so be it we embracing it by true Faith, as the satisfaction for our
sins, apply it to our selves. -- ] I find no more of this.

XII. The Polonian Churches of Lutherans and Bohemians agreed in the Augustane
and Bohemian Confession before recited.

XIII. The Helvetian Confession, [ To Justify signifies to the Apostle in the
dispute of Justification, To Remit sins, to Absolve from the fault and
punishment, to Receive into favor, and to Pronounce just -- For Christ took on
himself, and took away the sins of the World, and satisfied Gods Justice. God
therefore for the sake of Christ alone, suffering and raised again, is
propitious to our sins* and imputes them not to us, but imputes the
righteousness of Christ for ours; so that now we are not only cleansed and
purged from sins, or Holy, but also endowed with the Righteousness of Christ,
and so absolved from sins, Death and Condemnation, and are righteous and heirs
of life eternal. Speaking properly, God only justifies us, and justifies only
for Christ, not imputing to us sins, but imputing to us his Righteousness.]
This Confession speaks in terms nearest the opposed opinion: But indeed says
no more than we all say; Christ's Righteousness being given and imputed to us as
the Meritorious Cause of our pardon and right to life.

XIV. The Basil Confession, Art. 9. [ We confess Remission of sins by Faith in
Jesus Christ crucified. And though this Faith work continually by Love, yet
Righteousness and Satisfaction for our Sins, we do not attribute to works,
which are fruits of Faith; but only to true affiance and faith in the blood
shed of the Lamb of God. We ingenuously profess, that in Christ, who is our
Righteousness, Holiness, Redemption, Way, Truth, Wisdom, Life, all things are
freely given us. The works therefore of the faithful are done, not that they
may satisfy for their sins, but only that by them, they may declare that they
are thankful to God for so great benefits given us in Christ.

XV. The Argentine Confession of the four Cities, Cap. 3. ib. page 179. has
but this hereof: When heretofore they delivered, that a man's own proper Works
are required to his Justification, we teach that this is to be acknowledged
wholly received of God's benevolence and Christ's Merit, and perceived only by
Faith. C. 4. We are sure that no man can be made Righteous or saved, unless he
love God above all, and most studiously imitate him. We can no otherwise be
Justified, that is, become both Righteous and Saved (for our Righteousness is
our very Salvation) than if we being first endued with Faith, by which
believing the Gospel, and persuaded that God has adopted us as Sons, and will
for ever give us his fatherly benevolence, we wholly depend on his beck (or
will.)

XVI. The Synod of Dort, mentions only Christ's death for the pardon of sin
and Justification. The Belgic Confession 22. having mentioned Christ and his
merits made ours, 23. adds, [ We believe that our blessedness consists in
Remission of our sins for Jesus Christ; and that our Righteousness before God
is therein contained, as David and Paul teach; We are justified freely, or by
Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. We hold this Foundation
firm, and give all the Glory to God -- presuming nothing of our selves, and our
merits, but we rest on the sole Obedience of a Crucified Christ; which is ours
when we believe in him.] Here you see in what sense they hold that Christ's
merits are ours; Not to justify us by the Law, that says, ( Obey perfectly
and Live) but as the merit of our pardon, which they here take for their whole
Righteousness.

XVII. The Scottish Confession, Corp. Conf. page 125. has but [that true
Believers receive in this life Remission of Sins, and that by Faith alone in
Christ's blood: So that though sin remain -- yet it is not Imputed to us, but is
remitted, and covered by Christ's Righteousness.] This is plain and past all
question.

XVIII. The French Confession is more plain, 18. ib. page 81. [ We believe that
our whole Righteousness lies in the pardon of our sins; which is also as David
witnesses our only blessedness. Therefore all other reasons by which men think
to be justified before God, we plainly reject; and all opinion of Merit being
cast away; we rest only in the Obedience of Christ, which is Imputed to us,
both that all our sins may be covered, and that we may get Grace before God.]
So that Imputation of Obedience, they think is but for pardon of sin, and
acceptance.

Concerning Protestants Judgment of Imputation, it is further to be noted; 1.
That they are not agreed whether Imputation of Christ's perfect Holiness and
Obedience, be before or after the Imputation of his Passion in order of nature.
Some think that our sins are first in order of nature done away by the
Imputation of his sufferings, that we may be free from punishment; and next,
that his perfection is Imputed to us, to merit the Reward of life eternal: But
the most learned Confuters of the Papists hold, that Imputation of Christ's
Obedience and Suffering together, are in order of nature before our Remission
of sin and Acceptance, as the meritorious cause: And these can mean it in no
other sense than that which I maintain. So does Davenant de Just. hab. et act.
and Pet. Molinaeus These. Sedan. Vol. 1. page 625. Imputatio justitiae Christi
propter quam peccata remittuntur, and censemur justi coram Deo. Maresius These.
Sedan. Vol. 2. page 770, 771. 6 and 10. makes the material cause of our
Justification to be the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ, yea the Merit of his
Satisfaction, and so makes the formal Cause of Justification to be the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, or which is the same, the solemn Remission
of all sins, and our free Acceptance with God. Note that he makes Imputation
to be the same thing with Remission and Acceptance; which is more than the
former said.

2. Note, that when they say that Imputation is the Form of Justification, they
mean not of Justification Passively as it is ours, but Actively as it is Gods
Justifying act; so Maresius ibidem. And many deny it to be the form: And many
think that saying improper.

3. Note, that it is ordinarily agreed by Protestants, that Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us in the same sense as our sins are said to be
imputed to him; (even before they are committed many Ages;) which clears
fully the whole Controversy to those that are but willing to understand, and
blaspheme not Christ; so Maresius ubi supra: Quemadmodum propter deliquia
nostra ei imputata punitus fuit Christus in terris; ita and propter ejus
Justitiam nobis imputatam coronamur in Caelis. And Joh. Crocius Disput. 10. p.
502. And Vasseur in his solid Disp. These. Sedan. Vol. 2. page 1053, 1054. While
he mentions only Satisfaction for our Justification, yet 27. says that
Satisfaction is imputed to us, and places Christ's Imputed Righteousness in his
Obedience to the death; and says that this satisfying Obedience, in suffering,
is our Imputed Righteousness. Ea igitur Obedientia Christi qua Patri paruit
usque ad mortem crucis, qua coram Patre comparuit ut voluntatem ejus
perficeret, qua a Patre missus, ut nos sui sanguinis effusione redimeret,
justitiae ejus pro peccatis nostris abunde satisfecit; ea inquam obedientia ex
gratia Patris imputata and donata, illa justitia est qua justificamur. And they
ordinarily use the similitude of the Redemption of a Captive, and Imputing the
Price to him. He adds ( Hence we may gather that as Christ was made sin, so
we are made the Righteousness of God, that is by Imputation] which is true.

The plain truth in all this is within the reach of every sound Christian, and
self-conceited wranglers make difficulties where there are none. Yea, how far
the Papists themselves grant the Protestant doctrine of Imputation, let the
following words of Vasseur on Bellarmine be judge. [ Bellarm. ait; Si solum
vellent haeretici nobis imputari Merita Christi, quia nobis donata sunt, and
possumus ea Deo Patri offerre pro peccatis nostris, quoniam Christus suscepit
super se onus satisfaciendi pro nobis, nosque Deo Patri reconciliandi, recta
esset eorum Sententia: I doubt some will say, it is false, because Bellarmine
grants it; but Vasseur adds [ Haec ille: sed an nostra long abest ab illa,
quam in nobis requireret sententia.] And I wish the Reader that loves Truth
and Peace to read the words of Pighius, Cassander, Bellarmine, etc. saying as
the Protestants, cited by Joh. Crocius de Justificat. Disput. 9. page 458. etc.
And of Morton Apolog especially Tho. Waldensis.

Nazianzen's sentence prefixed by the great Basil-Doctors to their Confession,
I do affectionately recite, [ Sacred Theology and Religion is a simple and
naked thing; consisting of Divine Testimonies without any great artifice: which
yet some do naughtily turn into a most difficult Art.

The History of the Socinians opposing Christ's Satisfaction and Merits I
overpass, as being handled by multitude of Writers.

If any impartial man would not be troubled with needless tedious writings, and
yet would see the Truth clearly, about Justification and Imputation, in a very
little room, let him read, 1. Mr. Bradshaw, 2. Mr. Gibbon's Sermon in the
Exercises at Giles's in the Fields. 3. Mr. Truman's great Propitiation. 4.
Joshua Placeus, his Disput. de Justif. in These. Salmur. Vol. 1. 5. And Le
Blank's late Theses; Which will satisfy those that have any just capacity for
satisfaction. And if he add Wotton de Reconciliatione, and Grotius de
Satisfactione, he need not lose his labor: no nor by reading John Goodwin of
Justification, though every word be not approveable. And Dr. Stillingfleet's
Sermons of Satisfaction, coming last, will also conduce much to his just
information.

So much of the Historical part.

CHAP. II. Of the true stating of the Controversy, and the explication of the
several points contained or merely employed in it.
I take explication to be here more useful than argumentation: And therefore I
shall yet fullier open to you the state of our differences* and my own judgment
in the point, with the reasons of it, in such necessary Distinctions, and brief
Propositions, as shall carry their own convincing light with them. If any think
I distinguish too much, let him prove any to be needless or unjust, and then
reject it and spare not. If any think I distinguish not accurately enough, let
him add what is wanting, and but suppose that I have elsewhere done it, and am
not now handling the whole doctrine of Justification, but only that of
Imputation, and what it necessarily includes.

THough a man that reads our most Learned Protestants, professing that they
agree even with Bellarmine himself in the stating of the case of Imputation,
would think that there should need no further stating of it. I cited you
Bellarmine's words before with Vasseurs consent: I here add Johan. Crocius de
Justif. Disp. 10. page 500.501. Vide hominis sive vertiginem sive improbitutem,
clamat fieri non posse ut Justitia Christi nobis imputetur eo sensu qui
haereticis probetur -- Et tamen rectam vocat sententiam, quam suam faciunt
Evangelici. Quod enim cum recta ratione pugnare dicit, nos per Justitiam
Christi formaliter justos nominari and esse, nos non tangit: Non dicimus; Non
sentimus: Sed hoc totum proficiscitur e Sophistarum officina, qui phrasin istam
nobis affingunt, ut postea eam exagitent tanquam nostram: (yet some of our own
give them this pretense.) Nos sententiam quam ille rectam judicat, tenemus,
tuemur; sic tamen ut addamus, quod Genti adversariae est intolerabile, non alia
ratione nos justos censeri coram Deo.] But by Justification the Papists mean
Sanctification: And they count it not intolerable to say that the penalty of
our sins is remitted to us, by that Satisfaction to the Justice of God
according to the Law of Innocence, which Christ only has made. But though many
thrust in more indeed, and most of them much more in words; yet you see they
are forced to say as we say whether they will or not: For they seem unwilling
to be thought to agree with us, where they agree indeed.] And the following
words of Joh. Crocius page 506, 507. etc. show the common sense of most
Protestants, [ When Bellarmine observes that Imputation makes us as righteous
as Christ, he says, [ If we said that we are Justified by Christ's essential
righteousness. -- But we say it not. Yea above all we renounce that which the
Sophister puts in of his own, even that which he says of Formal Righteousness:
For it is not our opinion, that we are constituted formally Righteous by
Christ's Righteousness, which we rather call the Material cause. -- 32. Christ's
satisfaction is made for all: But it is imputed to us, not as it is made for
all, but as for us. I illustrate it by the like. The Kings Son pays the debt
of a Community deeply indebted to the King, and thence bound to perpetual
slavery. This payment gets liberty for this, and that, and the other member of
the Community: For it is imputed to them by the King as if they had paid it.
But this Imputation transferreth not the honor to them, but brings them to
partake of the Benefit. So when the price paid by Christ for all, is imputed to
this or that man, he is taken into the society of the Benefit, -- Page 503.
Distinguish between the Benefit, and the Office of Christ. The former is made
ours, but not the latter, -- Page 542. The Remission of sin is nothing but the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. Romans 4. Where Imputation of Righteousness,
Remission of Iniquities, and non-imputation of sin, are all one, -- Page 547.
God imputes it as far as he pleases, -- Page 548. Princes often impute the
merits of Parents to unworthy Children, -- Page 551. He denies that we have
Infinite Righteousness in Christ, because it is imputed to us in a finite
manner, even so far as was requisite to our absolution.

But I will a little more distinctly open and resolve the Case.

1. We must distinguish of Righteousness as it relates to the Preceptive part
of the Law; and as it relates to the Retributive part: The first
Righteousness, is Innocence contrary to Reatus Culpae: The second is Jus ad
impunitatem and ad praemium (seu d^num,) Right to Impunity and to the Reward.

2. We must distinguish of Christ's Righteousness, which is either so called,
formally and properly, which is the Relation of Christ's person to his Law of
Mediation imposed on him. 1. As Innocent and a perfect obeyer; 2. As one that
deserved not punishment, but deserved Reward. Or it is so called materially and
improperly; which is, Those same Habits, Acts and Sufferings of Christ, from
which his Relation of Righteous did result.

3. We must distinguish of Imputation, which signifies (here) 1. To repute us
personally to have been the Agents of Christ's Acts, the subjects of his Habits
and Passion in a Physical sense. 2. Or to repute the same formal Relation of
Righteousness which was in Christ's person, to be in ours as the subject. 3. Or
to repute us to have been the very subjects of Christ's Habits and Passion, and
the Agents of his Acts in a Political or Moral sense, (and not a physical); as
a man pays a debt by his Servant, or Attorney, or Delegate. 4. And
consequently to repute a double formal Righteousness to result from the said
Habits, Acts, and Passions; one to Christ as the natural Subject and Agent, and
another to us as the Moral, Political, or reputed Subject and Agent (And so his
Formal Righteousness not to be imputed to us in it self as ours, but another to
result from the same Matter.) 5. Or else that we are reputed both the Agents
and Subjects of the Matter of his Righteousness, morally, and also of the
Formal Righteousness of Christ himself. 6. Or else by Imputation is meant here,
that Christ being truly reputed to have taken the Nature of sinful man, and
become a Head for all true Believers, in that undertaken Nature and Office in
the Person of a Mediator, to have fulfilled all the Law imposed on him, by
perfect Holiness and Obedience, and Offering himself on the Cross a Sacrifice
for our sins, voluntarily suffering in our stead, as if he had been a sinner,
(guilty of all our sins) As soon as we believe we are pardoned, justified,
adopted for the sake and merit of this Holiness, Obedience and penal
Satisfaction of Christ, with as full demonstration of divine Justice, at least,
and more full demonstration of his Wisdom and Mercy, than if we had suffered
our selves what our sins deserved (that is, been damned) or had never sinned:
And so Righteousness is imputed to us, that is, we are accounted or reputed
righteous, (not in relation to the Precept, that is, innocent, or sinless, but
in relation to the Retribution, that is, such as have Right to Impunity and
Life,) because Christ's foresaid perfect Holiness, Obedience and Satisfaction,
merited our Pardon, and Adoption, and the Spirit; or merited the New Covenant,
by which, as an Instrument, Pardon, Justification and Adoption are given to
Believers, and the Spirit to be given to sanctify them: And when we believe,
we are justly reputed such as have Right to all these purchased Gifts.

4. And that it may be understood how far Christ did Obey or Suffer in our
stead, or person, we must distinguish, 1. Between his taking the Nature of
sinful man, and taking the Person of sinners. 2. Between his taking the Person
of a sinner, and taking the Person of you and me, and each particular sinner.
3. Between his taking our sinful persons simply, and ad omnia, and taking them
only, secundum quid, in tantum, and ad hoc. 4. Between his suffering in the
Person of sinners, and his obeying and sanctity in the Person of sinners* or of
us in particular. 5. Between his Obeying and Suffering in our Person, and our
Obeying and Suffering in his Person ( Natural or Political.) And now I shall
make use of these distinctions, by the Propositions following.

Prop. 1. The phrase of [ Christ's Righteousness imputed to us] is not in the
Scripture.

2. Therefore when it comes to Disputation, to them that deny it, some
Scripture Phrase should be put in stead of it; because, 1. The Scripture has
as good, if not much better, phrases, to signify all in this that is
necessary. 2. And it is supposed that the Disputants are agreed of all that is
express in the Scripture.

3. Yet so much is said in Scripture, as may make this phrase [ of Imputing
Christ's Righteousness to us] justifiable, in the sound sense here explained:
For the thing meant by it is true, and the phrase intelligible.

4. Christ's Righteousness is imputed to Believers, in the sixth sense here
before explained; As the Meritorious cause of our Pardon, Justification,
Righteousness, Adoption, Sanctification and Salvation, etc. as is opened.

5. Christ did not suffer all in kind (much less in duration) which sinful man
deserved to suffer: As e. g. 1. He was not hated of God; 2. Nor deprived or
deserted of the sanctifying Spirit, and so of its Graces and Gods Image; Nor
had 3. any of that permitted penalty by which sin it self is a misery and
punishment to the sinner. 4. He fell not under the Power of the Devil as a
deceiver and ruler, as the ungodly do. 5. His Conscience did not accuse him of
sin, and torment him for it. 6. He did not totally despair of ever being saved.
7. The fire of Hell did not torment his body. More such instances may be given
for proof.

6. Christ did not perform all the same obedience in kind, which many men, yea
all men, are or were bound to perform. As 1. He did not dress and keep that
Garden which Adam was commanded to dress and keep. 2. He did not the conjugal
offices which Adam, and millions more, were bound to. 3. Nor the Paternal
Offices to Children. 4. Nor all the offices of a King on Earth, or Magistrate:
nor of a Servant, etc. Nor the duty of the Sick. 5. He did not repent of sin,
nor turn from it to God, nor mortify or resist in himself any sinful lust; nor
receive a Savior by Faith, nor was circumcised or baptized for the Remission
of his sins; nor loved God or thanked him for redeeming or pardoning him; nor
obeyed God in the use of any Ordinance or Means, for the subduing of sin, and
healing or saving of his Soul from any sin or deserved wrath of God; with much
more such.

7. Christ did perform much which no man else was bound to do: As to redeem
Souls, to work his Miracles and the rest of the works, peculiar to the Mediator.

8. That Law which bound us to Suffering, (or made it our due) bound not Christ
to it, (as being innocent); But he was bound to it by the Fathers Law of
Mediator, and by his own voluntary sponsion.

9. The Law obliging every sinner himself to suffer, was not fulfilled by the
Suffering of Christ our Sponsor: But only the Lawgiver satisfied by attaining
its Ends. For neither the letter nor sense of it said, [ If thou sin, thou or
thy surety shall suffer.]

10. Christ satisfied Justice and obeyed in Humane Nature, which also was Holy
in him.

11. He did not this as a Natural Root, or Head to man, as Adam was; to convey
Holiness or Righteousness by natural propagation, as Adam should have done; and
did by sin: For Christ had no Wife or natural Children; But as a Head, by
Contract as a Husband to a Wife, and a King to a Kingdom, and a Head of
Spiritual Influx.

12. No as being Actually such a Head to the Redeemed when he Obeyed and
Suffered; but as a Head by Aptitude and Office, Power and Virtue, who was to
become a Head actually to every one when they Believed and Consented; Being
before a Head for them, and over those that did exist, but not a Head to them,
in act.

13. Therefore they were not Christ's members Political, (much less Natural)
when he obeyed and died.

14. A Natural Head being but a part of a person, what it does the Person does.
But seeing a Contracted Head, and all the members of his Body Contracted or
Politic, are every one a distinct Person, it follows not that each person
did really or reputatively what the Head did. Nay it is a good consequence that
[ If he did it as Head, they did it not (numerically) as Head or Members.]

15. Christ Suffered and Obeyed in the Person of the Mediator between God and
man; and as a subject to the Law of Mediation.

16. Christ may be said to suffer in the person of a sinner, as it means his
own person reputed and used as a sinner by his persecutors, and as he was one
who stood before God as an Undertaker to suffer for Man's sin.

17. Christ suffered in the place and stead of sinners, that they might be
delivered, though in the person of a Sponsor.

18. When we are agreed that the Person of the Sponsor, and of every particular
sinner are diverse; and that Christ had not suffered, if we had not sinned, and
that he as a Sponsor suffered in our stead, and so bore the punishment, which
not he, but we deserved* If any will here instead of a Mediator or Sponsor call
him our Representative, and say that he suffered even in all our Persons
reputatively not simpliciter, but secunduum quid, and in tantum only; that is,
not representing our Persons simply and in all respects, and to all ends, but
only so far as to be a sacrifice for our sins, and suffer in our place and
stead what he suffered; we take this to be but lis de nomine, a question about
the name and words: And we will not oppose any man that thinks those words
fittest, as long as we agree in the matter signified. And so many Protestant
Divines say that Christ suffered in the person of every sinner, (at least
Elect,) that is, so far only and to such effects.

19. Christ did not suffer strictly, simply* absolutely, in the person of any
one elect sinner, much less in the millions of persons of them all, in
Law-sence, or in Gods esteem. God did not esteem Christ to be naturally, or as
an absolute Representer, David, Manasseh, Paul, and every such other sinner,
but only a Mediator that suffered in their stead.

20. God did make Christ to be sin for us; that is, A Sacrifice for our sin,
and one that by Man was reputed, and by God and Man was used, as sinners are,
and deserve to be.

21. Christ was not our Delegate in Obeying or Suffering: We did not commission
him, or depute him to do what he did in our stead: But he did it by God's
Appointment and his own Will.

22. Therefore he did it on God's terms, and to what effects it pleased God,
and not on our terms, nor to what effects we please.

23. God did not suppose or repute Christ, to have committed all or any of the
sins which we all committed, nor to have had all the wickedness in his nature
which was in ours, nor to have deserved what we deserved: Nor did he in this
proper sense impute our sins to Christ.

24. The false notion of God's strict imputing all our sins to Christ, and
esteeming him the greatest sinner in the World, being so great a Blasphemy both
against the Father and the Son, it is safest in such Controversies to hold to
the plain and ordinary words of Scripture. And it is not the Wisdom nor
Impartiality of some men, who greatly cry up the Scripture perfection, and
decry the addition of a Ceremony or Form in the Worship of God; that yet think
Religion is endangered, if our Confession use not the phrases of [ God's
Imputing our sin to Christ, and his Imputing Christ's Righteousness to us] when
neither of them is in the Scripture; As if all God's Word were not big or
perfect enough to make us a Creed or Confession in such phrases as it is fit
for Christians to take up with* Countenancing the Papists, whose Faith is
swelled to the many Volumes of the Councils, and no man can know how much more
is to be added, and when we have all.

25. God does not repute or account us to have suffered in our Natural persons
what Christ suffered for us, nor Christ to have suffered in our Natural persons.

26. Though Christ suffered in our stead, and in a large sense, to certain uses
and in some respects, as the Representer, or in the Persons of sinners; yet did
he not so far represent their persons in his Habitual Holiness and Actual
Obedience (no not in the Obedience of his Suffering,) as he did in the
suffering it self. He obeyed not in the Person of a sinner, much less of
millions of sinners; which were to say, In the person of sinners he never
sinned. He suffered, to save us from suffering; but he obeyed not to save us
from obeying, but to bring us to Obedience. Yet his Perfection of Obedience had
this end, that perfect Obedience might not be necessary in us to our
Justification and Salvation.

27. It was not we our selves who did perfectly obey, or were perfectly holy,
or suffered for sin in the Person of Christ, or by Him: Nor did we ( Naturally
or Morally) merit our own Salvation by obeying in Christ; nor did we satisfy
Gods Justice for our sins, nor purchase pardon of Salvation to our selves, by
our Suffering in and by Christ; All such phrase and sense is contrary to
Scripture. But Christ did this for us.

28. Therefore God does not repute us to have done it, seeing it is not true.

29. It is impossible for the individual formal Righteousness of Christ, to be
our Formal personal Righteousness. Because it is a Relation and Accident, which
cannot be translated from subject to subject, and cannot be in diverse subjects
the same.

30. Where the question is, Whether Christ's Material Righteousness, that is,
his Habits, Acts and Sufferings themselves, be Ours, we must consider how a man
can have Propriety in Habits, Acts and Passions who is the subject of them: and
in Actions, who is the Agent of them. To Give the same Individual Habit or
Passion to another, is an Impossibility, that is, to make him by Gift the
subject of it. For it is not the same, if it be in another subject. To make one
man really or physically to have been the Agent of another Act, even that
Individual Act, if he was not so, is a contradiction and impossibility; that
is, to make it true, that I did that which I did not. To be ours by Divine
Imputation, cannot be, to be ours by a false Reputation, or supposition that we
did what we did not: For God cannot err or lie. There is therefore but one of
these two ways left, Either that we our selves in person, truly had the habits
which Christ had, and did all that Christ did, and suffered all that he
suffered, and so satisfied and merited Life in and by him, as by an Instrument,
or Legal Representer of our persons in all this; Which I am anon to Confute: or
else, That Christ's Satisfaction, Righteousness, and the Habits, Acts and
Sufferings in which it lay, are imputed to us, and made ours; not rigidly in
the very thing it self, but in the Effects and Benefits; In as much as we are
as really Pardoned, Justified, Adopted by them, as the Meritorious cause, by
the instrumentality of the Covenants Donation, as if we our selves had done and
suffered all that Christ did, as a Mediator and Sponsor, do and suffer for us:
I say, As really and certainly, and with a fuller demonstration of Gods Mercy
and Wisdom, and with a sufficient demonstration of his Justice. But not that
our propriety in the benefits is in all respects the same, as it should have
been if we had been, done, and suffered our selves what Christ did. Thus
Christ's Righteousness is ours.

31. Christ is truly The Lord our Righteousness; in more respects than one or
two: 1. In that he is the meritorious Cause of the Pardon of all our sins, and
our full Justification, Adoption, and right to Glory: and by his Satisfaction
and Merits only, our Justification by the Covenant of Grace against the Curse
of the Law of Works is purchased. 2. In that he is the Legislator, Testator and
Donor of our Pardon, and Justification by this New Testament or Covenant. 3. In
that he is the Head of Influx, and King and Intercessor, by and from whom the
Spirit is given, to sanctify us to God, and cause us sincerely to perform the
Conditions of the Justifying and saving Covenant, in Accepting and Improving
the mercy then given. 4. In that he is the Righteous Judge and Justifyer of
Believers by sentence of Judgment. In all these Respects he is The Lord our
Righteousness.

32. We are said to be made the Righteousness of God in him: 1. In that, as he
was used like a sinner for us, (but not esteemed one by God) so we are used
like Innocent persons so far as to be saved by him. 2. In that through his
Merits, and upon our union with him, when we believe and consent to his
Covenant, we are pardoned and justified, and so made Righteous really, that is,
such as are not to be condemned but to be glorified. 3. In that the Divine
Nature and Inherent Righteousness* to them that are in him by Faith, are for
his Merits, given by the Holy Ghost. 4. In that God's Justice and Holiness
Truth, Wisdom, and Mercy, are all wonderfully demonstrated in this way of
pardoning and justifying sinners by Christ. Thus are we made the Righteousness
of God in him.

31. For Righteousness to be imputed to us, is all one as to be accounted
Righteous, Romans 4.6, 11. notwithstanding that we be not Righteous as fulfillers
of the Law of Innocence.

34. For Faith to be imputed to us for Righteousness, Romans 4.22, 23, 24. is
plainly meant, that God who under the Law of Innocence required perfect
Obedience, of us to our Justification and Glorification, upon the satisfaction
and merits of Christ, has freely given a full Pardon and Right to Life, to all
true Believers; so that now by the Covenant of Grace nothing is required of us,
to our Justification, but Faith: all the rest being done by Christ: And so
Faith in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is reputed truly to be the
condition on our part, on which Christ and Life, by that Baptismal Covenant,
are made ours.

35. Justification, Adoption, and Life eternal are considered; 1. Quoad ipsam
rem, as to the thing it self in value. 2. Quoad, Ordinem Conferendi and
Recipiendi, as to the order and manner of Conveyance and Participation. In the
first respect, It is a mere free-gift to us, purchased by Christ: In the second
respect, It is a Reward to Believers, who thankfully accept the free-Gift
according to its nature and uses.

36. It is an error contrary to the scope of the Gospel to say, that the Law of
Works, or of Innocence, does justify us, as performed either by our selves, or
by Christ. For that Law condemns and curses us; And we are not efficiently
justified by it, but from or against it.

37. Therefore we have no Righteousness in Reality or Reputation formally ours,
which consists in the first species; that is, in a Conformity to the
Preceptive part of the Law of Innocence; we are not reputed Innocent: But only
a Righteousness which consists in Pardon of all sin, and right to life, (with
sincere performance of the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, that is, True
Faith.)

38. Our pardon puts not away our Guilt of Fact or Fault, but our Guilt of, or,
obligation to Punishment. God does not repute us such as never sinned, or such
as by our Innocence merited Heaven, but such as are not to be damned, but to be
glorified, because pardoned and adopted through the Satisfaction and Merits of
Christ.

39. Yet the Reatus Culpae is remitted to us Relatively as to the punishment,
though not in it self; that is, It shall not procure our Damnation: Even as
Christ's Righteousness is, though not in it self, yet respectively as to the
Benefits said to be made ours, in as much as we shall have those benefits by it.

40. Thus both the Material and the Formal Righteousness of Christ are made
ours; that is, Both the Holy Habits and Acts, and his Sufferings, with the
Relative formal Righteousness of his own Person, because these are altogether
one Meritorious cause of our Justification, commonly called the Material Cause.

Obj. But though Forma Denominat; yet if Christ's Righteousness in Matter and
Form, be the Meritorious Cause of ours, and that be the same with the Material
Cause, it is a very tolerable speech to say, that His Righteousness is Ours in
it self, while it is the very matter of ours.

Ans. 1. When any man is Righteous Immediately by any action, that action is
called the Matter of his Righteousness, in such an Analogical sense as Action,
an Accident may be called Matter, because the Relation of Righteous is founded
or subjected first or partly in that Action. And so when Christ perfectly
obeyed, it was the Matter of his Righteousness. But to be Righteous and to
Merit are not all one notion: Merit is adventitious to mere Righteousness. Now
it is not Christ's Actions in themselves that our Righteousness resulteth from
immediately as his own did; But there is first his Action, then his formal
Righteousness thereby; and thirdly, his Merit by that Righteousness which goes
to procure the Covenant-Donation of Righteousnass to us, by which Covenant we
are efficiently made Righteous. So that the name of a Material Cause is much
more properly given to Christ's Actions, as to his own formal Righteousness,
than as to ours. But yet this is but de nomine. 2. Above all, consider what
that Righteousness is which Christ merited for us, (which is the heart of the
Controversy.) It is not of the same species or sort with his own. His
Righteousness was a perfect sinless Innocence, and Conformity to the preceptive
part of the Law of Innocence in Holiness. Ours is not such. The dissenters
think it is such by Imputation, and here is the difference. Ours is but in
respect to the second or retributive part of the Law; a Right to Impunity and
Life, and a Justification not at all by that Law, but from its curse or
condemnation. The Law that says, Obey perfectly and live, sin and die, does
not justify us as persons that have perfectly obeyed it, really or
imputatively* But its obligation to punishment is dissolved, not by it self,
but by the Law of Grace. It is then by the Law of Grace that we are judged and
justified. According to it, 1. We are not really or reputatively such as have
perfectly fulfilled all its Precepts: 2. But we are such as by Grace do
sincerely perform the Condition of its promise. 3. By which promise of Gift, we
are such as have right to Christ's own person, in the Relation and Union of a
Head and Savior, and with him the pardon of all our sins, and the right of
Adoption to the Spirit, and the Heavenly Inheritance as purchased by Christ. So
that besides our Inherent or Adherent Righteousness of sincere Faith,
Repentance and Obedience, as the performed condition of the Law of Grace, we
have no other Righteousness our selves, but Right to Impunity and to Life: and
not any imputed sinless Innocence at all. God pardons our sins and adopteth
us, for the sake of Christ's sufferings and perfect Holiness: But he does not
account us perfectly Holy for it, nor perfectly Obedient. So that how-ever you
will call it, whether a Material Cause or a Meritorious, the thing is plain.

Obj. He is made of God Righteousness to us.

Ans. True: But that is none of the question. But how is he so made? 1. As he is
made Wisdom, Sanctification and Redemption as aforesaid. 2. By Merit,
Satisfaction, Direction, Prescription and Donation. He is the Meritorious Cause
of our Pardon, of our Adoption, of our Right to Heaven, of that new Covenant
which is the Instrumental Deed of Gift, confirming all these: And he is also
our Righteousness in the sense that Austin so much stands on, as all our
Holiness and Righteousness of Heart and Life, is not of our natural endeavor,
but his gift, and operation by his Spirit; causing us to obey his Holy precepts
and Example. All these ways he is made of God our Righteousness: Besides the
Objective way of sense; as he is Objectively made our Wisdom, because it is the
truest wisdom to know him; So he is objectively made our Righteousness, in that
it is that Gospel-Righteousness which is required of our selves, by his grace,
to believe in him and obey him.

41. Though Christ fulfilled not the Law by Habitual Holiness and Actual
Obedience, strictly in the Individual person of each particular sinner; yet he
did it in the nature of Man: And so humane nature, (considered in specie, and
in Christ personally, though not considered as a totum, or as personally in
each man,) did satisfy and fulfill the Law and Merit. As Humane Nature sinned
in Adam actually in specie, and in his individual person, and all our Persons
were seminally and virtually in him, and accordingly sinned, or are reputed
sinners, as having no nature but what he conveyed who could convey no better
than he had (either as to Relation or Real quality): But not that God reputed
us to have been actually existent, as really distinct persons in Adam (which is
not true.) Even so Christ obeyed and suffered in our Nature, and in our nature
as it was in him; and humane sinful nature in specie was Universally pardoned
by him and Eternal life freely given to all men for his merits, thus far
imputed to them, their sins being not imputed to hinder this Gift; which is
made in and by the Covenant of Grace: Only the Gift has the Condition of man's
Acceptance of it according to its nature, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. And all the
individuals that shall in time by Faith accept the Gift, are there and thereby
made such as the Covenant for his merits does justify, by that General Gift.

42. As Adam was a Head by Nature, and therefore conveyed Guilt by natural
Generation; so Christ is a Head (not by nature but) by Sacred Contract; and
therefore conveyeth Right to Pardon, Adoption and Salvation, not by Generation,
but by Contract, or Donation. So that what it was to be naturally in Adam,
seminally and virtually, though not personlly in existence; even that it is, in
order to our benefit by him to be in Christ by Contract or the new Covenant,
virtually, though not in personal existence when the Covenant was made.

43. They therefore that look upon Justification or Righteousness, as coming to
us immediately by Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, without the
Instrumental Intervention and Conveyance or Collation by this Deed of Gift or
Covenant, do confound themselves by confounding and overlooking the Causes of
our Justification. That which Christ did by his merits was to procure the new
Covenant. The new Covenant is a free Gift of pardon and life with Christ
himself, for his merits and satisfaction sake.

44. Though the Person of the Mediator be not really or reputatively the very
person of each sinner, (nor so many persons as there are sinners or believers,)
yet it does belong to the Person of the Mediator, so far (limitedly) to bear
the person of a sinner, and to stand in the place of the Persons of all
Sinners, as to bear the punishment they deserved, and to suffer for their sins.

45. Scripture speaking of moral matters, usually speaks rather in Moral than
mere Physical phrase: And in strict Physical sense, Christ's very personal
Righteousness (Material or Formal) is not so given to us, as that we are
proprietors of the very thing it self, but only of the effects (Pardon,
Righteousness and Life,) yet in a larger Moral phrase that very thing is often
said to be given to us, which is given to another, or done or suffered for our
benefit. He that ransometh a Captive from a Conqueror, Physically gives the
Money to the Conqueror and not to the Captive, and gives the Captive only the
Liberty purchased: But morally and reputatively he is said to give the Money to
the Captive, because he gave it for him. And it redeemeth him as well as if he
had given it himself. He that gives ten thousand pounds to purchase Lands, and
freely gives that land to another; physically gives the Money to the Seller
only, and the Land only to the other. But morally and reputatively we content
our selves with the metonymical phrase, and say, he gave the other ten thousand
pound. So morally it may be said, that Christ's Righteousness, Merits and
Satisfaction, was given to us, in that the thing purchased by it was given to
us; when the Satisfaction was given or made to God. Yea when we said it was
made to God, we mean only that he was passively the Terminus of active
Satisfaction, being the party satisfied; but not that he himself was made the
Subject and Agent of Habits and Acts, and Righteousness of Christ as in his
humane nature, except as the Divine Nature acted it, or by Communication of
Attributes.

46. Because the words [ Person] and [ Personating] and [ Representing] are
ambiguous (as all humane language is,) while some use them in a stricter sense
than others do, we must try by other explicatory terms whether we agree in the
matter, and not lay the stress of our Controversy upon the bare words. So some
Divines say that Christ suffered in the Person of a sinner, when they mean not
that he represented the Natural person of any one particular sinner; but that
his own Person was reputed the Sponsor of sinners by God, and that he was
judged a real sinner by his persecuters; and so suffered as if he had been a
sinner.

47. As Christ is less improperly said to have Represented our Persons in his
satisfactory Sufferings, than in his personal perfect Holiness and Obedience;
so he is less improperly said to have Represented all mankind as newly fallen
in Adam, in a General sense, for the purchasing of the universal Gift of Pardon
and Life, called, The new Covenant; than to have Represented in his perfect
Holiness and his Sufferings, every Believer considered as from his first being
to his Death. Though it is certain that he dyed for all their sins from first
to last. For it is most true, 1. That Christ is as a second Adam, the Root of
the Redeemed; And as we derive sin from Adam, so we derive life from Christ,
(allowing the difference between a Natural and a Voluntary way of derivation.)
And though no man's Person as a Person was actually existent and offended in
Adam, (nor was by God reputed to have been and done) yet all men's Persons were
Virtually and Seminally in Adam as is aforesaid; and when they are existent
persons, they are no better either by Relative Innocence, or by Physical
Disposition, than he could propagate: and are truly and justly reputed by God
to be Persons Guilty of Adams fact, so far as they were by nature seminally and
virtually in him: And Christ the second Adam is in a sort the root of Man as
Man, (though not by propagation of us, yet) as he is the Redeemer of Nature it
self from destruction, but more notably the Root of Saints as Saints, who are
to have no real sanctity but what shall be derived from him by Regeneration, as
Nature and Sin is from Adam by Generation. But Adam did not represent all his
posterity as to all the Actions which they should do themselves from their
Birth to their Death; so that they should all have been taken for perfectly
obedient to the death, if Adam had not sinned at that time, yea or during his
Life. For if any of them under that Covenant had ever sinned afterward in their
own person, they should have died for it. But for the time past, they were
Guiltless or Guilty in Adam, as he was Guiltless or Guilty himself, so far as
they were in Adam: And though that was but in Causa, and non extra causam; Yet
a Generating Cause which propagateth essence from essence, by
self-multiplication of form, much differs from an Arbitrary facient Cause in
this. If Adam had obeyed, yet all his posterity had been nevertheless bound to
perfect personal persevering Obedience on pain of Death. And Christ the second
Adam so far bore the person of fallen Adam, and suffered in the nature and room
of Mankind in General, as without any condition on their part at all; to give
man by an act of Oblivion or new Covenant a pardon of Adams sin, yea and of all
sin past, at the time of their consent, though not disobliging them from all
future Obedience. And by his perfect Holiness and Obedience and Sufferings, he
has merited that new Covenant, which Accepts of sincere, though imperfect,
Obedience, and makes no more in us necessary to Salvation. When I say he did
this without any Condition on man's part, I mean, He absolutely without
Condition, merited and gave us the Justifying Testament or Covenant. Though
that Covenant give us not Justification absolutely, but on Condition of
believing, fiducial Consent. 2. And so as this Universal Gift of Justification
upon Acceptance, is actually given to all fallen mankind as such; so Christ
might be said to suffer instead of all, yea and merit too, so far as to procure
them this Covenant-gift.

48. The sum of all lies in applying the distinction of giving Christ's
Righteousness as such in it self, and as a cause of our Righteousness, or in
the Causality of it. As our sin is not reputed Christ's sin in it self, and in
the culpability of it (for then it must needs make Christ odious to God) but in
its Causality of punishment: so Christ's Material or Formal Righteousness, is
not by God reputed to be properly and absolutely our own in it self as such,
but the Causality of it as it produces such and such effects.

49. The Objections which are made against Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
in the sound sense, may all be answered as they are by our Divines; among whom
the chiefest on this subject are Davenant de Justit. Habit and Actual. Johan.
Crocius de Justif. Nigrinus de Impletione Legis, Bp. G. Dowman of Justif.
Chamier, Paraeus, Amesius and Junius against Bellarm. But the same reasons
against the unsound sense of Imputation are unanswerable. Therefore if any
shall say concerning my following Arguments, that most of them are used, by
Gregor. de Valent. by Bellarm. Becanus, or other Papists, or by Socinians, and
are answered by Nigrin^s, Crocius, Davenant, etc. Such words may serve to
deceive the simple that are led by Names and Prejudice; but to the Intelligent
they are contemptible, unless they prove that these objections are made by the
Papists against the same sense of Imputation against which I use them, and that
it is that sense which all those Protestants defend in answering them: For
who-ever so answers them, will appear to answer them in vain.

50. How far those Divines who do use the phrase of Christ's suffering in our
person, do yet limit the sense in their exposition, and deny that we are
reputed to have fulfilled the Law in Christ: because it is tedious to cite
many, I shall take up now with one, even Mr. Lawson in his Theopolitica, which
(though about the office of Faith he somewhat differ from me) I must needs
call an excellent Treatise, as I take the Author to be one of the most Knowing
men yet living that I know.) Pardon me if I be large in transcribing his words.

Page 100, 101. [If we enquire of the manner how Righteousness and Life is
derived from Christ, being one unto so many, it cannot be, except Christ be a
general Head of mankind, and one Person with them, as Adam was. We do not read
of any but two who were general Heads, and in some respect virtually, All
mankind; the first and second Adam. Mark, Virtually.
-- The principal cause of this Representation whereby he is one person with
us, is the will of God, who as Lord made him such, and as Lawgiver and Judge
did so account him. But, 2. How far is he One person with us? Ans. 1. In
general so far as it pleased God to make him so, Not absolutely.
and no further. 2. In particular, He and we are one so far 1. As to make him
liable to the penalty of the Law for us. 2. So far as to free us from that
obligation, and derive the benefit of his death to us. Though Christ be so far
one with us as to be liable unto the penalty of the Law, and to suffer it, and
upon this suffering we are freed; yet Christ is not the sinner, nor the sinner
Christ. Christ is the Word made flesh, innocent without sin, an universal
Priest and King: but we are none of these. Though we be accounted as one person
in Law with him, Mark by a Trope.
by a Trope; yet in proper sense it cannot be said that in Christ's Satisfying
we satisfied for our own sins. For then we should have been the Word made
flesh, able to plead Innocence, etc. All which are false, impossible, Mark how
far.
blasphemous if affirmed by any. It Is true, we are so one with him, that he
satisfied for us, and the benefit of this Satisfaction redounds to us, and is
communicable to all, upon certain terms; though not actually communicated to
all: From this Unity and Identity of person in Law (if I may so speak) it
follows clearly that Christ's sufferings were not only Afflictions, but
Punishments in proper sense. -- Page 102, 103. That Christ died for all in some
sense must needs be granted, because the Scripture expressly affirms it ( vid.
reliqua.) --

There is another question unprofitably handled, Whether the Propitiation which
includes both Satisfaction and Merit, be to be ascribed to the Active or
Passive Obedience of Christ? Ans. 1. Both his Active, Personal, Perfect and
Perpetual Obedience, which by reason of his humane nature assumed, and
subjection unto God was due, and also that Obedience to the great and
transcendent Command of suffering the death of the Cross, both concur as Causes
of Remission and Justification. 2. The Scriptures usually ascribe it to the
Blood, Death, and Sacrifice of Christ, and never to the Personal Active
Obedience of Christ's to the Moral Law. 3. Yet this Active Obedience is
necessary, because without it he could not have offered that great Sacrifice of
himself without spot to God. And if it had not been without spot, it could not
have been propitiatory and effectual for Expiation. 4. If Christ as our Surety
had performed for us perfect and perpetual Obedience, so that we might have
been judged to have perfectly and fully kept the Law by him, then no sin could
have been chargeable upon us, and the Death of Christ had been needless and
superfluous. 5. Christ's Propitiation freeth the Believer not only from the
obligation unto punishment of sense, but of loss; and procured for him not only
deliverance from evil deserved, but the enjoyment of all good necessary to our
full happiness. Therefore, there is no ground of Scripture for that opinion,
that the Death of Christ and his Sufferings free us from punishments, and by
his Active Obedience imputed to us we are made righteous, and the heirs of
life. 6. If Christ was bound to perform perfect and perpetual Obedience for us,
and he also performed it for us, then we are freed not only from sin, but
Obedience too: And this Obedience as distinct and separate from Obedience unto
death, may be pleaded for Justification of Life, and will be sufficient to
carry the Cause. For the tenor of the Law was this, Do this and live: And if
man do this by himself or Surety, so as that the Lawgiver and supreme Judge
accept it, the Law can require no more. It could not bind to perfect Obedience
and to punishment too. There was never any such Law made by God or just men.
Before I conclude this particular of the extent of Christ's Merit and
Propitiation, I thought good to inform the Reader, that as the Propitiation of
Christ makes no man absolutely, but upon certain terms pardonable and savable;
so it was never made, either to prevent all sin, or all punishments: For it
presupposes man both sinful and miserable: And we know that the Guilt and
Punishment of Adams sin, lies heavy on all his posterity to this day. And not
only that, but the guilt of actual and personal sins lies wholly upon us,
whilst impenitent and unbelieving and so out of Christ. And the Regenerate
themselves are not fully freed from all punishments till the final Resurrection
and Judgment. So that his Propitiation does not altogether prevent but remove
sin and punishment by degrees. Many sins may be said to be Remissible by virtue
of this Sacrifice, which never shall be remitted.] So far Mr. Lawson.

Here I would add only these Animadversions.

1. That whereas he explaineth Christ's personating us in suffering by the
similitude of a Debtor and his Surety who are the same person in Law: I note 1.
That the case of Debt much differs from the case of Punishment. 2. That a
Surety of Debt is either antecedently such, or consequently: Antecedently,
either first one that is bound equally with the Debtor; 2. or one that
promises to pay if he do not. I think the Law accounts neither of these to
be the Person of the principal Debtor (as it does a Servant by whom he sends
the Debt.) But Christ was neither of these: For the Law did not beforehand
oblige him with us, nor did he in Law-sence undertake to pay the Debt, if we
failed. Though God decreed that he should do so; yet that was no part of the
sense of the Law. But consequently, if a friend of the Debtor when he is in
Jayl will, without his request or knowledge, say to the Creditor, I will pay you
all the Debt; but so that he shall be in my power, and not have present liberty
(lest he abuse it) but on the terms that I shall please; yea not at all if he
ungratefully reject it] This Consequent Satisfyer, or Sponsor, or Paymaster, is
not in Law-sence the same Person with the Debtor: But if any will call him so,
I will not contend about a word, while we agree of the thing (the terms of
deliverance.) And this is as near the Case between Christ and us, as the
similitude of a Debtor will allow.

2. I do differ from Mr. Lawson and Paraeus, and Vrsine, and Olevian, and
Scultetus and all that sort of worthy Divines in this; that whereas they make
Christ's Holiness and perfect Obedience to be but Justitia personae, necessary
to make his Sacrifice spotless and so effectual: I think that of it self it is
as directly the cause of our Pardon, Justification and Life, as Christ's Passion
is; The Passion being satisfactory and so meritorious, and the personal
Holiness Meritorious and so Satisfactory. For the truth is, The Law that
condemned us* was not fulfilled by Christ's suffering for us, but the Lawgiver
satisfied instead of the fulfilling of it: And that Satisfaction lies, in the
substitution of that which as fully (or more) attaineth the ends of the Law as
our own suffering would have done. Now the ends of the Law may be attained by
immediate Merit of Perfection as well as by Suffering; but best by both. For 1.
By the perfect Holiness and Obedience of Christ, the Holy and perfect will of
God is pleased: whence [ This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.] 2.
In order to the ends of Government, Holiness and perfect Obedience, is honored
and freed from the contempt which sin would cast upon it; and the holiness of
the Law in its Precepts is publicly honored in this grand Exemplar; In whom
only the will of God was done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. And such a
Specimen to the World is greatly conducible to the ends of Government: So that
Christ voluntarily taking humane nature, which as such is obliged to this
Perfection, He first highly merited of God the Father hereby, and this with his
Suffering, went to attain the ends that our suffering should have attained,
much better. So that at least as Meritorious, if not secondarily as
satisfactory, I see not but Christ's Holiness procures the Justifying Covenant
for us, equally with his Death. A Prince may pardon a Traitor for some noble
service of his Friend, as well as for his suffering: much more for both. This
way go Grotius de satisf. Mr. Bradshaw and others.

3. When Mr Lawson says that the Law binds not to Obedience and Punishment
both, he means as to the same Act: which contradicts not what Nigrinus and
others say, that it binds a sinner to punishment for sin past, and yet to
Obedience for the time to come: (which cannot be entire and perfect.)

So page 311. Cap. 22. Qu. 2. Whether there be two parts of Justification,
Remission and Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. 1. He refers us to what
is aforecited against Imputation of Christ's Active Righteousness, separated or
abstracted for Reward from the Passive. 2. He shows that Paul takes
Remission of sin and Imputation of Righteousness for the same thing.] So say
many of ours.

In conclusion I will mind the Reader, that by reading some Authors for
Imputation, I am brought to doubt whether some deny not all true Remission of
sin, that is, Remission of the deserved punishment. Because I find that by
Remission they mean A non-Imputation of sin under the formal notion of sin;
that God takes it not to be our sin, but Christ's; and Christ's Righteousness
and perfection to be so ours, as that God accounts us not as truly sinners.
And so they think that the Reatus Culpae as well as Poenae simply in it self is
done away. Which if it be so, then the Reatus Poenae, the obligation to
punishment, or the dueness of punishment, cannot be said to be dissolved or
remitted, because it was never contracted. Where I hold, that it is the Reatus
ad Poenam, the Dueness of punishment only that is remitted, and the guilt of
sin not as in it self, but in its Causality of punishment. And so in all common
language, we say we forgive a man his fault, when we forgive him all the
penalty positive and privative. Not esteeming him, 1. Never to have done the
fact. 2. Or that fact not to have been a fault, and his fault; 3. but that
punishment for that fault, is forgiven him, and the fault so far as it is a
cause of punishment. We must not feign God to judge falsely.

This makes me think of a saying of Bp. Vshers to me, when I mentioned the
Papists placing Justification and Remission of sin conjunct, he told me that
the Papists ordinarily acknowledge no Remission. And on search I find that
Aquinas and the most of them place no true Remission of sin, in Justification:
For by Remission (which they make part of Justification,) they mean
Mortification, or destroying sin it self in the act or habit. But that the
pardon of the punishment is a thing that we all need, is not denyable; nor do
they deny it, though they deny it to be part of our Justification. For it is
strange if they deny Christ the pardoning power which they give the Pope. And
as Joh. Crocius de Justif. often tells them, They should for shame grant that
Christ's Righteousness may be as far imputed to us, as they say a Saints or
Martyrs redundant merits and supererogations are.

But if the Guilt of Fact and Guilt of Fault in it self considered, be not both
imputed first to us, that is, If we be not judged sinners, I cannot see how we
can be judged Pardoned sinners; For he that is judged to have no sin, is judged
to deserve no punishment. Unless they will say that to prevent the form and
desert of sin, is eminenter, though not formaliter, to forgive. But it is
another (even Actual) forgiveness which we hear of in the Gospel, and pray for
daily in the Lords prayer. Of all which see the full Scripture Proof in Mr.
Hotchkis of Forgiveness of sin.

CHAP. III. A further explication of the Controversy.
Yet I am afraid lest I have not made the state of the Controversy plain
enough to the unexercised Reader, and lest the very explicatory distinctions
and propositions, though needful and suitable to the matter, should be
unsuitable to his capacity; I will therefore go over it again in a shorter way,
and make it as plain as possibly I can; being fully persuaded, that it is not
so much Argumentation, as help to understand the matter, and our own and other
men's ambiguous words, that is needful to end our abominable Contentions.

1. THE Righteousness of a Person is formally a moral Relation of that Person.

2. This moral Relation, is the Relation of that person to the Rule by which he
is to be judged.

3. And it is his Relation to some Cause, or supposed Accusation or Question to
be decided by that judgment.

4. The Rule of Righteousness here is Gods Law, naturally or supernaturally
made known.

5. The Law has a Preceptive part, determining what shall be due from us, and
a Retributive part determining what shall be due to us.

6. The Precept instituting Duty, our Actions and Dispositions, which are the
Matter of that duty, are physically considered, conform or disconform to the
Precept.

7. Being Physically, they are consequently so Morally considered, we being
Moral Agents, and the Law a Rule of Morality.

8. If the Actions be righteous or unrighteous, consequently the Person is so,
in reference to those Actions, supposing that to be his Cause, or the Question
to be decided.

9. Unrighteousness as to this Cause, is Guilt, or Reatus Culpae; and to be
unrighteous is to be Sons, or Guilty of sin.

10. The Retributive part of the Law is, 1. Premiant, for Obedience; 2. Penal,
for Disobedience.

11. To be Guilty or Unrighteous as to the reward, is, to have no right to the
reward (that being supposed the Question in judgment): And to be Righteous
here, is to have right to the reward.

12. To be Guilty as to the penalty; is to be jure puniendus, or Reus poenae,
or obligatus ad poenam. And to be righteous here, is to have Right to impunity,
(quoad poenam damni and sensus.)

13. The first Law made personal, perfect, persevering Innocence both man's
duty, and the Condition of the Reward and Impunity, and any sin the condition
of punishment.

14. Man broke this Law, and so lost his Innocence, and so the Condition became
naturally impossible to him, de futuro.

15. Therefore that Law as a Covenant, that is, the Promissory part with its
Condition, ceased; cessante capacitate subditi; and so did the preceptive part.
1. As it commanded absolute Innocence (of act and habit.) 2. And as it
commanded the seeking of the Reward on the Condition and by the means of
personal Innocence. The Condition thus passing into the nature of a sentence;
And punishment remaining due for the sin.

16. But the Law remained still an obliging Precept for future perfect
Obedience, and made punishment due for all future sin: and these two parts of
it, as the Law of lapsed Nature, remained in force, between the first sin, and
the New Covenant promise or Law of Grace.

17. The eternal Word interposing, a Mediator is promised, and Mercy makes a
Law of Grace, and the Word becomes man's Redeemer by undertaking, and by
present actual reprieve, pardon and initial deliverance: and the fallen world,
the miserable sinners, with the Law and obligations which they were under, are
now become the Redemers jure Redemptionis, as before they were the Creator's
jure Creationis.

18. The Redeemers Law then has two parts; 1. The said Law of lapsed nature
(binding to future perfect obedience or punishment) which he found man under
(called vulgarly the Moral Law.) 2. And a pardoning Remedying Law of Grace.

19. Because man had dishonored God and his Law by sin, the Redeemer undertook
to take man's nature without sin, and by perfect Holiness and Obedience* and by
becoming a Sacrifice for sin, to bring that Honor to God and his Law which we
should have done, and to attain the Ends of Law and Government instead of our
Perfection or Punishment, that for the Merit hereof we might be delivered and
live.

20. This he did in the third person of a Mediator, who as such had a Law or
Covenant proper to himself, the Conditions of which he performed, (by perfect
keeping. 1. The Law of Innocence; 2. Of Moses; 3. And that proper to himself
alone) and so merited all that was promised to him, for Himself and Us.

21. By his Law of Grace (as our Lord-Redeemer) he gave first to all mankind
(in Adam, and after in Noah, and by a second fuller edition at his Incarnation)
a free Pardon of the destructive punishment (but not of all punishment) with
right to his Spirit of Grace, Adoption and Glory, in Union with Himself their
Head, on Condition initially of Faith and Repentance, and progressively of
sincere Obedience to the end, to be performed by his Help or Grace.

22. By this Law of Grace (supposing the Law of lapsed nature aforesaid,
inclusively) all the World is ruled, and shall be judged, according to that
edition of it (to Adam or by Christ) which they are under. And by it they shall
be Justified or Condemned.

23. If the question then be, Have you kept or not kept the Conditions of the
Law of Grace, Personal Performance or nothing must so far be our Righteousness,
and not Christ's keeping them for us, or Satisfaction for our not keeping them.
And this is the great Case (so often by Christ described Mat. 7. and 25. etc.) to
be decided in judgment; and therefore the word Righteous and Righteousness are
used for what is thus personal hundreds of times in Scripture.

24. But as to the question, Have we kept the Law of Innocence? we must confess
guilt and say, No: neither Immediately by our selves, nor Mediately by another,
or Instrument: for Personal Obedience only is the performance required by that
Law; Therefore we have no Righteousness consisting in such Performance or
Innocence; but must confess sin, and plead a pardon.

25. Therefore no man has a proper Universal Righteousness, excluding all kind
of Guilt whatsoever.

26. Therefore no man is justified by the Law of Innocence (nor the Law
Mosaical as of works;) either by the Preceptive or Retributive part: for we
broke the Precept, and are by the Threatening heirs of death.

27. That Law does not justify us, because Christ fulfilled it for us: For it
said not (in words or sense) [Thou or one for thee shall Perfectly Obey, or
Suffer:] It mentioned no Substitute: But it is the Lawgiver (and not that Law)
that justifies us by other means.

28. But we have another Righteousness imputed to us instead of that Perfect
Legal Innocence and Rewardableness, by which we shall be accepted of God, and
glorified at last as surely and fully (at least) as if we had never sinned, or
had perfectly kept that Law; which therefore may be called our Pro-legal
Righteousness.

29. But this Righteousness is not yet either OURS by such a propriety as a
Personal performance would have bin, nor OURS to all the same ends and
purposes: It saves us not from all pain, death or penal desertion, nor
constituteth our Relation just the same.

30. It is the Law of Grace that Justifies us, both as giving us
Righteousness, and as Virtually judging us Righteous when it has made us so,
and it is Christ as Judge according, to that Law (and God by Christ) that will
sentence us just, and executively so use us.

31. The Grace of Christ first gives us Faith and Repentance by effectual
Vocation: And then the Law of Grace by its Donative part or Act does give us a
Right to Union with Christ as the Churches Head (and so to his Body) and with
him a right to Pardon of past sin, and to the Spirit to dwell and act in us for
the future, and to the Love of God, and Life eternal, to be ours in possession,
if we sincerely obey and persevere.

32. The total Righteousness then which we have (as an Accident of which we are
the Subjects,) is 1. A right to Impunity, by the free Pardon of all our sins,
and a right to Gods Favor and Glory, as a free gift quoad valorem, but as a
Reward of our Obedience, quoad Ordinem conferendi and rationem Comparativam
(why one rather than another is judged meet for that free gift.) 2. And the
Relation of one that has by grace performed the Condition of that free Gift,
without which we had been no capable recipients: which is initially [Faith and
Repentance] the Condition of our Right begun, and consequently, sincere
Obedience and Perseverance (the Condition of continued right.)

33. Christ's personal Righteousness is no one of these, and so is not our
Constitutive Righteousness formally and strictly so called: For Formally our
Righteousness is a Relation, (of right;) and it is the Relation of our own
Persons: And a Relation is an accident: And the numerical Relation (or Right)
of one person cannot be the same numerical Accident of another person as the
subject.

34. There are but three sorts of Causes; Efficient, Constitutive, and Final.

1. Christ is the efficient cause of all our Righteousness: (1. Of our Right to
Pardon and Life; 2. And of our Gospel-Obedience:) And that many ways: 1. He is
the Meritorious Cause: 2. He is the Donor by his Covenant; 3. And the Donor or
Operator of our Inherent Righteousness by his Spirit: 4. And the moral
efficient by his Word, Promise, Example, etc.

2. And Christ is partly the final cause.

3. But all the doubt is whether his personal Righteousness be the Constitutive
Cause.

35. The Constitutive Cause of natural bodily substances consists of Matter
disposed, and Form. Relations have no Matter, but instead of Matter a Subject
(and that is Our own persons here, and not Christ.) and a terminus and
fundamentum.

36. The Fundamentum may be called both the Efficient Cause of the Relation (as
commonly it is) and the Matter from which it resulteth: And so Christ's
Righteousness is undoubtedly the Meritorious efficient Cause, and undoubtedly
not the Formal Cause of our personal Relation of Righteousness: Therefore all
the doubt is of the Material Cause.

37. So that all the Controversy is come up to a bare name and Logical term,
of which Logicians agree not as to the aptitude. All confess that Relations
have no proper Matter, besides the subject: all confess that the Fundamentum is
loco efficientis, but whether it be a fit name to call it the Constitutive
Matter of a Relation, there is no agreement.

38. And if there were, it would not decide this Verbal Controversy: For 1.
Titulus est fundamentum Juris: The fundamentum of our Right to Impunity and
Life in and with Christ, is the Donative act of our Savior in and by his Law
or Covenant of Grace: that is our Title; And from that our Relation resulteth,
the Conditio tituli vel juris being found in our selves. 2. And our Relation of
Performers of that Condition of the Law of Grace, resulteth from our own
performance as the fundamentum (compared to the Rule.) So that both these parts
of our Righteousness have a nearer fundamentum than Christ's personal
Righteousness.

39. But the Right given us by the Covenant (and the Spirit and Grace) being a
Right merited first by Christ's personal Righteousness, this is a Causa Causae,
id est, fundamenti, seu Donationis: And while this much is certain, whether it
shall be called a Remote fundamentum (viz. Causa fundamenti) and so a Remote
Constitutive Material Cause, or only (properly) a Meritorious Cause, may well
be left to the arbitrary Logician, that useeth such notions as he pleases; but
verily is a Controversy unfit to tear the Church for, or destroy Love and
Concord by.

40. Quest. 1. Is Christ's Righteousness OURS? Ans. Yes; In some sense, and in
another not.

41. Quest. 2. Is Christ's Righteousness OURS? Ans. Yes; In the sense before
opened; For all things are ours; and his righteousness more than lower Causes.

42. Quest. 3. Is Christ's Righteousness OURS as it was or is His own, with the
same sort of propriety? Ans. No.

43. Quest. 4. Is the formal Relation of Righteous as an accident of our
persons, numerically the same Righteousness? Ans. No; It is impossible: Unless
we are the same person.

44. Quest. 5. Is Christ and each Believer one political person? Ans. A
political person is an equivocal word: If you take it for an Office (as the
King or Judge is a political person) I say, No: If for a Society, Yea* But noxia
and noxa caput sequuntur: True Guilt is an accident of natural persons, and of
Societies only as constituted of such; and so is Righteousness; Though
Physically Good or Evil may for society-sake, befall us without personal desert
or consent.

But if by [ Person] you mean a certain State or Condition (as to be a subject
of God, or one that is to suffer for sin) so Christ may be said to be the same
person with us in specie, but not numerically; because that Accident whence his
Personality is named, is not in the same subject.

45. Quest. 6. Is Christ's Righteousness imputed to us? Ans. Yes; If by imputing
you mean reckoning or reputing it ours, so far as is aforesaid, that is such a
Cause of ours.

46. Quest. 7. Are we reputed our selves to have fulfilled all that Law of
Innocence in and by Christ, as representing our persons, as obeying by him?
Ans. No.

47. Quest. 8. Is it Christ's Divine, Habitual, Active or Passive Righteousness
which Justifies us? Ans. All: viz, the Habitual, Active and Passive exalted in
Meritoriousness by Union with the Divine.

48. Quest. 9. Is it Christ's Righteousness, or our Faith which is said to be
imputed to us for Righteousness? Romans 4. Ans. 1. The text speaks of imputing
Faith, and by Faith is meant Faith, and not Christ's Righteousness in the word:
But that Faith is Faith in Christ and his Righteousness; and the Object is
quasi materia actus, and covenanted.

2. De re, both are Imputed: that is, 1. Christ's Righteousness is reputed the
meritorious, Cause. 2. The free-gift (by the Covenant) is reputed the
fundamentum juris (both opposed to our Legal Merit.) 3. And our Faith is
reputed the Conditio tituli, and all that is required in us to our
Justification, as making us Qualified Recipients of the free-Gift merited by
Christ.

49. Quest. 10. Are we any way Justified by our own performed Righteousness?
Ans. Yes; Against the charge of nonperformance, (as Infidels, Impenitent,
Unholy,) and so as being incapable of the free-gift of Pardon and Life in
Christ.

CHAP. IV. The Reasons of our denying the fore-described rigid sense of
Imputation.
Though it were most accurate to reduce what we deny to several Propositions,
and to confute each one argumentatively by it self, yet I shall now choose to
avoid such prolixity; and for brevity and the satisfaction of such as look more
at the force of a Reason, than the form of the Argument, I shall thrust
together our denied Sense, with the manifold Reasons of our denial.

WE deny, that God does so Impute Christ's Righteousness to us, as to repute or
account us to have been Holy with all that Habitual Holiness which was in
Christ, or to have done all that he did in obedience to his Father, or in
fulfilling the Law, or to have suffered all that he suffered, and to have made
God satisfaction for our own sins, and merited our own Salvation and
Justification, in and by Christ; or that he was, did and suffered, and merited,
all this strictly in the person of every sinner that is saved; Or that Christ's
very individual Righteousness Material or Formal, is so made ours in a strict
sense, as that we are Proprietors, Subjects, or Agents of the very thing it
self simply and absolutely, as it is distinct from the effects; or that Christ's
Individual Formal Righteousness, is made our Formal Personal Righteousness; or
that as to the effects, we have any such Righteousness Imputed to us, as
formally ours, which consists in a perfect Habitual and Actual Conformity to
the Law of Innocence; that is, that we are reputed perfectly Holy and sinless,
and such as shall be Justified by the Law of Innocence, which says, Perfectly
Obey and Live, or sin and die.] All this we deny.

Let him that will answer me, keep to my words, and not alter the sense by
leaving any out. And that he may the better understand me, I add. 1. I take it
for granted that the Law requires Habitual Holiness as well as Actual
Obedience, and is not fulfilled without both. 2. That Christ loved God and man
with a perfect constant Love, and never sinned by Omission or Commission. 3.
That Christ died not only for our Original sin, or sin before Conversion, but
for all our sin to our lives end. 4. That he who is supposed to have no sin of
Omission, is supposed to have done all his duty. 5. That he that has done all
his duty, is not condemnable by that Law, yea has right to all the Reward
promised on Condition of that duty. 6. By Christ's Material Righteousness, I
mean, those Habits, Acts and Sufferings in which his Righteousness did consist,
or was founded. 7. By his and our Formal Righteousness, I mean the Relation it
self of being Righteous. 8. And I hold that Christ's Righteousness, did not only
Numerically (as aforesaid) but also thus tota specie, in kind differ from ours,
that his was a perfect Habitual and Actual Conformity to the Law of Innocence,
together with the peculiar Laws of Mediator-ship, by which he merited
Redemption for us, and Glory for himself and us: But ours is the Pardon of sin,
and Right of Life, Purchased, Merited and freely given us by Christ in and by a
new Covenant, whose condition is Faith with Repentance, as to the gift of our
Justification now, and sincere Holiness, Obedience, Victory and Perseverance as
to our possession of Glory.

Now our Reasons against the denied sense of Imputation are these.

1. In general this opinion sets up and introduces all Antinomianism or
Libertinism, and Ungodliness, and subverteth the Gospel and all true Religion
and Morality.

I do not mean that all that hold it, have such effects in themselves, but only
that this is the tendency and consequence of the opinion: For I know that many
see not the nature and consequences of their own opinions, and the abundance
that hold damnable errors, hold them but notionally in a peevish faction, and
therefore not dammingly, but hold practically, and effectually the contrary
saving truth. And if the Papists shall persuade Men that our doctrine, yea
theirs that here mistake, cannot consist with a godly life, let but the lives
of Papists and Protestants be compared. Yea in one of the Instances before
given; Though some of the Congregational-party hold what was recited, yet so
far are they from ungodly lives, that the greatest thing in which I differ from
them is, the overmuch unscriptural strictness of some of them, in their
Church-admissions and Communion, while they fly further from such as they think
not godly, than I think God would have them do, being generally persons fearing
God themselves: (Excepting the sinful alienation from others, and easiness to
receive and carry false reports of Dissenters, which is common to all that fall
into sidings.) But the errors of any men are never the better if they be found
in the hands of godly men: For if they be practiced they will make them ungodly.

2. It confounds the Person of the Mediator, and of the Sinner: As if the
Mediator who was proclaimed the Beloved of the Father, and therefore capable of
reconciling us to him, because he was still well-pleased in him, had (not only
suffered in the room of the sinner by voluntary Sponsion, but also) in
suffering and doing, been Civilly the very person of the sinner himself; that
sinner I say, who was an enemy to God, and so esteemed.

3. It makes Christ to have been Civilly as many persons as there be elect
sinners in the World: which is both beside and contrary to Scripture.

4. It introduces a false sense and supposition of our sin imputed to Christ,
as if Imputatively it were his as it is ours, even the sinful Habits, the
sinful Acts, and the Relation of evil, Wicked, Ungodly and Unrighteous which
resulteth from them: And so it makes Christ really hated of God: For God
cannot but hate any one whom he reputeth to be truly ungodly, a Hater of God,
an Enemy to him, a Rebel, as we all were: whereas it was only the Guilt of
Punishment, and not of Crime, as such that Christ assumed: He undertook to
suffer in the room of sinners; and to be reputed one that had so undertaken;
But not to be reputed really a sinner, an ungodly person, hater of God, one
that had the Image of the Devil.

5. Nay it makes Christ to have been incomparably the worst man that ever was
in the World by just reputation; and to have been by just imputation guilty of
all the sins of all the Elect that ever lived, and reputed one of the Murderers
of himself, and one of the Persecutors of his Church, or rather many: and the
language that Luther used Catechrestically, to be strictly and properly true.

6. It supposes a wrong sense of the Imputation of Adams sin to his posterity:
As if we had been justly reputed persons existent in his person, and so in him
to have been persons that committed the same sin; whereas we are only reputed
to be now (not then) persons who have a Nature derived from him, which being
then seminally only in him, deriveth by propagation an answerable Guilt of his
sinful fact, together with natural Corruption.

7. It supposes us to be Justifiable and Justified by the Law of Innocence,
made to Adam, as it says [ Obey perfectly and Live.] As if we fulfilled it by
Christ: which is not only an addition to the Scripture, but a Contradiction.
For it is only the Law or Covenant of Grace that we are Justified by.

8. It puts, to that end, a false sense upon the Law of Innocence: For
whereas it commands Personal Obedience, and makes Personal punishment due to
the offender: This supposes the Law to say or mean [ Either thou, or one for
thee shall Obey; or, Thou shall obey by thy self, or by another: And if thou
sin thou shall suffer by thy self, or by another.

Whereas the Law knew no Substitute or Vicar, no nor Sponsor; nor is any such
thing said of it in the Scripture: so bold are men in their additions.

9. It falsely supposes that we are not Judged and Justified by the new
Covenant or Law of Grace, but (but is said) by the Law of Innocence.

10. It fathereth on God an erring judgment, as if he reputed, reckoned or
accounted things to be what they are not, and us, to have done what we did not.
To repute Christ a Sponsor for sinners who undertook to obey in their natures,
and suffer in their place and stead, as a Sacrifice to redeem them, is all just
and true: And to repute us those for whom Christ did this. But to repute Christ
to have been really and every one of us, or a sinner, or guilty of sin it self;
or to repute us to have been habitually as Good as Christ was, or actually to
have done what he did, either Naturally or Civilly and by Him as our
substitute, and to repute us Righteous by possessing his formal personal
Righteousness in it self; All these are untrue, and therefore not to be
ascribed to God. To Impute it to us, is but to Repute us as verily and
groundedly Righteous by his Merited and freely-Given Pardon, and Right to Life,
as if we had merited it our selves.

11. It feigneth the same Numerical Accident [their Relation of Righteousness]
which was in one subject to be in another, which is Impossible.

12. It makes us to have satisfied Divine Justice for our selves, and merited
Salvation (and all that we receive) for our selves, in and by another: And so
that we may plead our own Merits with God for Heaven and all his benefits.

13. The very making and tenor of the new Covenant, contradicts this opinion:
For when God makes a Law or Covenant, to convey the effects of Christ's
Righteousness to us, by degrees and upon certain Conditions, this proves that
the very Righteousness in it self simply was not ours: else we should have had
these effects of it both presently and immediately and absolutely without new
Conditions.

14. This opinion therefore makes this Law of Grace, which gives the benefits
to us by these degrees and upon terms, to be an injury to Believers, as keeping
them from their own.

15. It seems to deny Christ's Legislation in the Law of Grace, and
consequently his Kingly Office. For if we are reputed to have fulfilled the
whole Law of Innocence in Christ, there is no business for the Law of Grace to
do.

16. It seems to make internal Sanctification by the Spirit needless, or at
least, as to one half of its use: For if we are by just Imputation in Gods
account perfectly Holy, in Christ's Holiness the first moment of our believing,
nothing can be added to Perfection; we are as fully Amiable in the sight of
God, as if we were sanctified in our selves; Because by Imputation it is all
our own.

17. And so it seems to make our after-Obedience unnecessary, at least as to
half its use: For if in Gods true account, we have perfectly obeyed to the
death by another, how can we be required to do it all or part again by our
selves? If all the debt of our Obedience be paid, why is it required again?

18. And this seems to Impute to God a nature less holy and at enmity to sin,
than indeed he has; if he can repute a man laden with hateful sins, to be as
perfecty Holy, Obedient and Amiable to him as if he were really so in himself,
because another is such for him.

19. If we did in our own persons Imputatively what Christ did, I think it will
follow that we sinned; that being unlawful to us which was Good in him. It is a
sin for us to be Circumcised, and to keep all the Law of Moses, and send forth
Apostles, and to make Church-Ordinances needful to Salvation. Therefore we did
not this in Christ: And if not this, they that distinguish and tell us what we
did in Christ, and what not, must prove it. I know that Christ did somewhat
which is a common duty of all men, and somewhat proper to the Jews, and
somewhat proper to himself: But that one sort of men did one part in Christ,
and another sort did another part in him, is to be proved.

20. If Christ suffered but in the Person of sinful man, his sufferings would
have been in vain, or no Satisfaction to God: For sinful man is obliged to
perpetual punishment; of which a temporal one is but a small part: Our persons
cannot make a temporal suffering equal to that perpetual one due to man: but
the transcendent person of the Mediator did.

Obj. Christ bore both his own person and ours: It belongs to him as Mediator
to personate the guilty sinner.

Ans. It belongs to him as Mediator to undertake the sinners punishment in
his own person. And if any will improperly call that, the Personating and
Representing of the sinner, let them limit it, and confess that it is not
simply, but in tantum, so far, and to such uses and no other, and that yet
sinners did it not in and by Christ, but only Christ for them to convey the
benefits as he pleased; And then we delight not to quarrel about mere words;
though we like the phrase of Scripture better than theirs.

21. If Christ was perfectly Holy and Obedient in our persons, and we in him,
then it was either in the Person of Innocent man before we sinned, or of sinful
man. The first cannot be pretended: For man as Innocent had not a Redeemer. If
of sinful man, then his perfect Obedience could not be meritorious of our
Salvation: For it supposes him to do it in the person of a sinner: and he that
has once sinned, according to that Law, is the Child of death, and incapable
of ever fulfilling a Law, which is fulfilled with nothing but sinless perfect
perpetual Obedience.

Obj. He first suffered in our stead and persons as sinners, and then our sin
being pardoned, he after in our persons fulfilled the Law, instead of our
after-Obedience to it.

Ans. 1. Christ's Obedience to the Law was before his Death. 2. The sins which
he suffered for, were not only before Conversion, but endure as long as our
lives: Therefore if he fulfilled the Law in our persons after we have done
sinning, it is in the persons only of the dead. 3. We are still obliged to
Obedience our selves.

Obj. But yet though there be no such difference in Time, God does first Impute
his sufferings to us for pardon of all our sins to the death, and in order of
nature, his Obedience after it, as the Merit of our Salvation.

Ans. 1. God does Impute or Repute his sufferings the satisfying cause of our
Pardon, and his Merits of Suffering and the rest of his Holiness and Obedience,
as the meritorious cause of our Pardon and our Justification and Glory without
dividing them. But 2. that implies that we did not our selves reputatively do
all this in Christ: As shall be further proved.

22. Their way of Imputation of the Satisfaction of Christ, overthrows their
own doctrine of the Imputation of his Holiness and Righteousness. For if all
sin be fully pardoned by the Imputed Satisfaction, then sins of Omission and of
habitual Privation and Corruption are pardoned; and then the whole punishment
both of Sense and Loss is remitted: And he that has no sin of Omission or
Privation, is a perfect doer of his duty, and holy; and he that has no
punishment of Loss, has title to Life, according to that Covenant which he is
reputed to have perfectly obeyed. And so he is an heir of life, without any
Imputed Obedience upon the pardon of all his Disobedience.

Obj. But Adam must have obeyed to the Death if he would have Life eternal:
Therefore the bare pardon of his sins did not procure his right to life.

Ans. True, if you suppose that only his first sin was pardoned: But 1. Adam
had right to heaven as long as he was sinless. 2. Christ dyed for all Adams
sins to the last breath, and not for the first only: And so he did for all
ours. And if all the sins of omission to the death be pardoned, Life is due to
us as righteous.

Obj. A Stone may be sinless, and yet not righteous nor have Right to life.

Ans. True: because it is not a capable subject. But a man cannot be sinless,
but he is Righteous, and has right to life by Covenant.

Obj. But not to punish is one thing and to Reward is another?

Ans. They are distinct formal Relations and Notions: But where felicity is a
Gift and called a Reward only for the terms and order of Collation, and where
Innocence is the same with perfect Duty, and is the title-Condition; there to
be punished is to be denied the Gift, and to be Rewarded is to have that Gift
as qualified persons: and not to Reward, is materially to punish; and to be
reputed innocent is to be reputed a Meriter. And it is impossible that the most
Innocent man can have any thing from God, but by way of free-Gift as to the
Thing in Value; however it may be merited in point of Governing Paternal
Justice as to the Order of donation.

Obj. But there is a greater Glory merited by Christ, than the Covenant of
works promised to man.

Ans. 1. That Is another matter, and belongs not to Justification, but to
Adoption. 2. Christ's Sufferings as well as his Obedience, considered as
meritorious, did purchase that greater Glory. 3. We did not purchase or merit
it in Christ, but Christ for us.

23. Their way of Imputation seems to me to leave no place or possibility for
Pardon of sin, or at least of no sin after Conversion. I mean, that according
to their opinion who think that we fulfilled the Law in Christ as we are elect
from eternity, it leaves no place for any pardon: And according to their
opinion who say that we fulfilled it in him as Believers, it leaves no place
for pardon of any sin after Faith. For where the Law is reputed perfectly
fulfilled (in Habit and Act) there it is reputed that the person has no sin.
We had no sin before we had a Being; and if we are reputed to have perfectly
obeyed in Christ from our first Being, we are reputed sinless. But if we are
reputed to have obeyed in him only since our believing, then we are reputed to
have no sin since our Believing. Nothing excludes sin, if perfect Habitual and
Actual Holiness and Obedience do not.

24. And consequently Christ's blood shed and Satisfaction is made vain, either
as to all our lives, or to all after our (...) believing.

25. And then no believer must confess his sin, nor his desert of punishment
nor repent of it, or be humbled for it.

26. And then all prayer for the pardon of such sin is vain, and goes upon a
false supposition, that we have sin to pardon.

27. And then no man is to be a partaker of the Sacrament as a Conveyance or
Seal of such pardon; nor to believe the promise for it.

28. Nor is it a duty to give thanks to God or Christ for any such pardon.

29. Nor can we expect Justification from such guilt here or at Judgment.

30. And then those in Heaven praise Christ in error, when they magnify him
that washed them from such sins in his blood.

31. And it would be no lie to say that we have no sin, at least, since
believing.

32. Then no believer should fear sinning, because it is Impossible and a
Contradiction, for the same person to be perfectly innocent to the death, and
yet a sinner.

33. Then the Consciences of believers have no work to do, or at least, no
examining, convincing, self-accusing and self-judging work.

34. This charge God by Consequence of wronging all believers whom he lays
the least punishment upon: For he that has perfectly obeyed, or has perfectly
satisfied, by himself or by another in his person, cannot justly be punished.
But I have elsewhere fully proved, that Death and other Chastisements are
punishments, though not destructive, but corrective: And so is the permission
of our further sinning.

35. It intimates that God wrongeth believers, for not giving them immediately
more of the Holy Ghost, and not present perfecting them and freeing them from
all sin: For though Christ may give us the fruits of his own merits in the time
and way that pleases himself; yet if it be we our selves that have perfectly
satisfied and merited in Christ, we have present Right to the thing merited
thereupon, and it is an injury to deny it us at all.

36. And accordingly it would be an injury to keep them so long out of Heaven,
if they themselves did merit it so long ago.

37. And the very Threatening of Punishment in the Law of Grace would seem
injurious or incongruous, to them that have already reputatively obeyed
perfectly to the death.

38. And there would be no place left for any Reward from God, to any act of
obedience done by our selves in our natural or real person: Because having
reputatively fulfilled all Righteousness, and deserved all that we are capable
of by another, our own acts can have no reward.

39. And I think this would overthrow all Humane Laws and Government: For all
true Governors are the Officers of God, and do what they do in subordination
to God; and therefore cannot justly punish any man, whom he pronounces
erfectly Innocent to the death.

40. This makes every believer (at least) as Righteous as Christ himself, as
having true propriety in all the same numerical Righteousness as his own. And
if we be as Righteous as Christ, are we not as amiable to God? And may we not
go to God in our Names as Righteous?

41. This makes all believers (at least) equally Righteous in degree, and
every one perfect, and no difference between them. David and Solomon as
Righteous in the act of sinning as before, and every weak and scandalous
believer, to be as Righteous as the best. Which is not true, though many say
that Justification has no degrees, but is perfect at first; as I have proved
in my Life of Faith and elsewhere.

42. This too much levelleth Heaven and Earth; For in Heaven there can be
nothing greater than perfection.

43. The Scripture nowhere calls our Imputed Righteousness by the name of
Innocence, or sinless Perfection, nor Inculpability Imputed. Nay when the very
phrase of Imputing Christ's Righteousness is not there at all, to add all these
wrong descriptions of Imputation, is such Additions to Gods words as tends to
let in almost any thing that man's wit shall excogitate and ill beseems them,
that are for Scripture-sufficiency and perfection, and against Additions in the
general. And whether some may not say that we are Imputatively Christ himself,
Conceived by the Holy Ghost; Born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, Crucified, etc. I cannot tell.

To conclude, the honest plain Christian may without disquieting the Church or
himself, be satisfied in this certain simple truth; That we are sinners and
deserve everlasting misery: That Christ has suffered as a Sacrifice for our
sins in our room and stead, and satisfied the Justice of God: That he has by
his perfect Holiness and Obedience with those sufferings, merited our pardon
and Life: That he never hereby intended to make us Lawless have us Holy, but
has brought us under a Law of Grace: which is the Instrument by which he
pardons, justifies and gives us Right to life: That by this Covenant he
requires of us Repentance and true Faith to our first Justification, and
sincere Obedience, Holiness and Perseverance to our Glorification, to be
wrought by his Grace and our Wills excited and enabled by it: That Christ's
Sufferings are to save us from suffering; but his Holiness and Obedience are to
merit Holiness, Obedience and Happiness for us, that we may be like him, and so
be made personally amiable to God: But both his Sufferings and Obedience, do
bring us under a Covenant, where Perfection is not necessary to our Salvation.

CHAP. V. The Objections Answered.
Obj. 1. YOU confound a Natural and a Political person: Christ and the several
believing sinners are not the same natural Person, but they are the same
Political. As are with us, says Dr. Tullie, the Sponsor and the Debtor, the
Attorney and the Clyent, the Tutor and the Pupil; so are all the faithful in
Christ, both as to their Celestial regenerate nature, of which he is the first
Father, who begets sons by his Spirit and seed of the Word to his Image, and
as to Righteousness derived by Legal Imputation. Vid. Dr. Tullie, Justif. Paul.
p. 80, 81. It Is commonly said that Christ as our surety is our Person.

Ans. 1. The distinction of a Person into Natural and Political or Legal, is
equivoci in sua equivocata: He therefore that would not have contention
cherished and men taught to damn each other for a word not understood, must
give us leave to ask what these equivocals mean. What a Natural Person
signifies, we are pretty well agreed; but a Political Person is a word not so
easily and commonly understood. Calvin tells us that Persona definitur homo qui
caput habet civil. (For omnis persona est homo, sed non vicissim: Homo cum est
vocabulum naturae; Persona juris civilis.) And so (as Albenius) civitas,
municipium, Castrum, Collegium, Vniversitas, and quod. libet corpus, Personae
appellatione continetur, ut Spigel. But if this Definition be commensurate to
the common nature of a civil person, then a King can be none; nor any one that
has not a civil head. This therefore is too narrow. The same Calvin (in n.
Personae) tells us, that Seneca Personam vocat, cum prae se fert aliquis, quod
non est; A Counterfeit: But sure this is not the sense of the Objectors. In
general says Calvin, Tam hominem quam qualitatem hominis, seu Conditionem
significat. But it is not sure every Quality or Condition: Calvin therefore
gives us nothing satisfactory, to the decision of the Controversy which these
Divines will needs make, whether each believer and Christ be the same Political
Person. Martinius will make our Controversy no easier by the various
significations gathered out of Vet. Vocab. Gel. Scaliger, Valla; Which he thus
enumerateth. 1. Persona est accidens conditio hominis, qualitas qua homo
differt ab homine, tum in animo, tum in corpore, tum in externis. 2. Homo
qualitate dicta proditus: 3. Homo insigni qualitate praeditus habens gradum
eminentiae, in Ecclesia Dei, etc. 4. Figura, seu facies ficta, larva
histrionica, etc. 5. Ille qui sub hujusmodi figura aliquam representat, etc. 6.
Figura eminens in aedificiis quae ore aquam fundit, etc. Individua substantia
humana, seu singularis homo. 8. Individua substantia Intelligens quaelibet. Now
which of these is Persona Politica vel Legalis. Let us but agree what we mean
by the word and I suppose we shall find that we are agreed of the Matter. When
I deny the Person of Christ and the sinner to have been the same, or to be so
reputed by God, I mean by Person, univocally or properly, An Individual
Intelligent substance. And they that mean otherwise are obliged to Define; For
Analogum per se positum stat pro* suo significato famosiore. If they mean that
Christ and the Believer are the same as to some Quality, or Condition, let them
tell us what Quality or Condition it is, and I think we shall be found to be of
one mind.

But I think by the similitudes of a Sponsor, Attorney, and Guardian, that they
mean by a Political Person (not as a society, nor such as agree in Quality,
but) A natural Person so related to another Natural person, as that what he
does and suffers, Is or Has, is limitedly to certain ends and uses as
effectual as if that other person himself did and suffered, Were or Had
numerically the same thing. I obtrude not a sense on others, but must know
theirs before I can know where we differ. And if this be the meaning, we are
agreed: Thus far (though I greatly dislike their way that lay much stress on
such humane phrases,) I grant the thing meant by them. Christ's Holiness
Habitual and Actual, and his Merits and Satisfaction are as effectual to a
believers Justification and Salvation upon the terms of the Covenant of Grace
(which is sealed by baptism) as if we had been, done and suffered the same our
selves. But still remember that this is only [ limitedly] to these uses, and on
these terms and no other, and I think that this is the meaning of most Divines
that use this phrase.

But the sense of those men that I differ from and write against (the
Libertines and Antinomians, and some others that own not those names,) is this:
that A Legal Person is one so Related to another Natural person as that what
he Has, Does, or Suffers in such a case, is (not only effectual as aforesaid
to others, but) is in itself simply Reputed or Imputed to be Morally, though
not physically, the Habit, Act and Suffering, the Merit and satisfactory
Sacrifice of the other person: And so being the reputed Haver, Doer or
Sufferer, Meriter or Satisfyer himself, he has absolute right to all the
proper results or benefits.

And so a man may indeed many ways among us Represent or Personate another. If
I by Law am Commanded to do this or that service per meipsum aut per alium, I
do it in the Moral or Law-sence, because the other does it in my name and I am
allowed so to do it. So if I appear or answer by any Proctor or Attorney; if
the Law make it equal to my personal appearance and answer, it is said that I
did it by him: (but only so far as he does it as my Representer or in my name):
So if I pay a debt by the hand of my Servant or any Messenger, if so allowed, I
do it by that other. So indeed a Pupil, does by his Guardian what his Guardian
does, only so far as the Law obliges him to consent or stand to it.

We did not thus our selves fulfill all the Law in and by Christ: Nor are we
thus the Proprietors of his Habitual perfection, Merits or Satisfaction.

The common reason given by the contrary-minded is, that he was our Surety, or
Sponsor, or fidejussor: and so we translate (...) Heb. 7.22. and I remember not
any other text of Scripture allegable for that title. But this word does not
necessarily signify any such Representer of our Persons as aforesaid. Nay when
he is called thus the fidejussor of a better Covenant, it seems plain that it
is Gods Covenant as such, and so Gods Sponsor that is meant; and as Grotius
says Moses pro Deo spospondit in Lege Veteri: Jesus pro Deo in Lege Nova: Lex
utraque and pactum continet, promissa habet. Sponsorem dare solent minus nati:
and Moses and Deus hominibus melius nati erant quam Deus qui inconspicuus. So
also Dr. Hamond [ He was Sponsor and Surety for God, that it should be made
good to us on Gods part, on Condition that we performed that which was required
of us:] And here they that translate (...) a Testament, never intended that it
was our Part of the Covenant that is meant by a Testament: But (the most
Judicious expositor,) Mr. Lawson on the text, truly says [The Scriptures of
Moses and the Prophets translated into Greek will tell us; That (...) always
signifies a Law or a Covenant, and for the most part both: so it does in the
writings of the Apostles and Evangelists where it seldom signifies the last
Will and Testament of a man. The same thing is a Law in respect of the
precepts, etc. (...) turned Surety, signifies one that undertaketh for another
to see something paid or performed: And though the word is not found in the New
Testament except in this place, etc. But Varnius tells us that (...) is (...),
a Mediator; and so it is taken here as it is expounded by the Apostle in the
Chapter following: And because a Priest does undertake to procure from God,
both the Confirmation and performance of the promises to the people, and to
that end mediates between both; therefore he is a Surety and Mediator of the
Covenant, and in this respect the Surety and Mediator of the Covenant is a
Priest.]

So Calvin (though almost passing it by) seems to intimate that which I think
is the truth, that Christ is called (...) of Gods Covenant from the sacerdotal
appropinquation, mentioned verse. 19. etc.

And M^rlorate after Theoph^lact, Sponsorem pro Mediatore and intercessore
posuit.

So Paraeus in loc. Est novi faederis Sponsor Christus, quia novum faedus
sanguine and morte sua obsignavit.

So the Dutch Annot. and many others, besides the Ancients, by a Sponsor, tell
us is meant a Mediator.

And we grant that a Mediator is not of one, but does somewhat on the behalf of
both parties. But that as Mediator he Is; Has, Does, Suffers, Meritteth,
Satisfyeth; so as the Representer or person of each believer, as that every
such Person is supposed in Law to have Been, Done, Suffered, Merited, thus in
and by the Mediator, is neither signified by this or any other text.

2. And they that distinguish of a Natural and Political Person, do but darken
the case by an ill-expressed distinction, which indeed is not of two sorts of
Persons, but between Reality and Acceptance, taking Person properly for a
Natural Person: It Is one thing to be such a Person, and another thing to have
the Act, Passion, Merit, etc. Accepted for that other Person: And this latter
signifies, either 1. That it was done by the other person mediately, as being
a chief Cause acting by his Instrument. 2. Or that it was done for that other
Person by another. The first is our denied sense, and the second our affirmed
sense.

Among us Sureties and Sponsors are of several sorts: Grotius de Jure Belli
tells you of another sense of Sponsion in the Civil Law, than is pertinent to
the objectors use: And in Baptism the same word, has had diverse senses as used
by persons of different intentions. The time was when the Sponsor was not at
all taken for the Political Person (as you call it) of Parent or Child, nor
spoke as their Instrument, in their name: But was a Third person, who (because
many parents Apostatized, and more Died in the Child's minority) did pass his
word, 1. That the Parent was a credible Person, 2. That if he Dyed so soon or
Apostatized, he himself would undertake the Christian Education of the Child.
But the Parent himself was Sponsor for the Child in a stricter sense, (as also
Adopting Pro-parents were, and as some take Godfathers to be now,) that is,
they were taken for such, whose Reason, will and word, we authorized to dispose
of the Child as obligingly, as if it had been done by his own reason will and
word, so be it, it were but For his good, and the Child did own it when he came
to age: And so they were to speak as in the Child's name, as if Nature or
Charity made them his Representers, in the Judgment of many. (Though others
rather think that they were to speak as in their own persons, e. g. I dedicate
this Child to God, and enter him into the Covenant as obliged by my Consent.)
But this sense of Sponsion is nothing to the present Case.

They that lay all upon the very Name of a Surety as if the word had but one
signification, and all Sureties properly represented the person of the
Principal obliged person, do deal very deceitfully: There are Sureties or
Sponsors, 1. For some Duty, 2. For Debt, 3. For Punishment. 1. It is one thing
to undertake that another shall do a Commanded duty: 2. It Is another thing to
undertake that else I will do it for him: 3. It Is another thing to be Surety
that he shall pay a Debt, or else I will pay it for him: 4. It Is another thing
to undertake that he shall suffer a penalty, or else to suffer for him, or make
a Valuable Compensation.

1. And it is one kind of Surety that becomes a second party in the bond, and
so makes himself a debtor; 2. And its another sort of Surety that undertaketh
only the Debt afterward voluntarily as a Friend; who may pay it on such
Conditions as he and the Creditor think meet, without the Debtors knowledge.
Every Novice that will but open Calvin may see that Fidejussor and Sponsor are
words of very various signification; and that they seldom or never signify the
Person Natural or Political (as you call it) of the Principal: Sponsor est qui
sponte and non rogatus pro alio promittit, ut Accurs. vel quicunque spondet,
maxim pro aliis: Fidejubere est suo periculo fore id, de quo agitur, recipere:
Vel, fidem suam pro alio obligare. He is called Adpromissor, and he is Debtor,
but not the same person with the Principal, but his promise is accessoria
obligatio, non principalis. Therefore Fidejussor sive Intercessor non est
conveniendus, nisi prius debitore principali convento: Fidejussores a correis
ita differunt, quod hi suo and proprio morbo laborant, illi vero alieno
tenentur: Quare fideijussori magis succurrendum censent: Venia namque digni
sunt qui aliena tenentur Culpa, cujusmodi sunt fidejussores pro alieno debito
obligati, inquit Calv.

There must be somewhat more than the bare name (...) once used of Christ as
Mediator of Gods Covenant, or the name of a Surety as now used among men, that
must go to prove that the Mediator and the several sinners are the same Legal
Persons in Gods account.

But seeing Legal-Personality is but a Relation of our Natural person, to
another Natural person, that we may not quarrel and tear the Church when really
we differ not 1. Let our agreement be noted. 2. Our difference intelligibly
stated.

1. It is granted (not only by Dr. Tullie, but others that accurately handle
the Controversy,) 1. That Christ and the Believer never were nor are our
Natural person; and that no union with him makes us to be Christ, or God, nor
him to be Peter, John, or Paul, etc. That we know of no third sort of Natural
person, (which is neither Jesus, nor Peter, John, etc.) But composed of both
united, which is constituted by our Union. For though it be agreed on, that the
same Spirit that is in Christ is (operatively) also in all his Members, and
that therefore our Communion with him is more than Relative, and that from this
Real-Communion, the name of a Real-Vnion may be used; yet here the Real-Vnion
is not Personal (as the same Sun quickens and illuminateth a Bird and a Frog
and a Plant, and yet makes them not our person:) Therefore he that will say we
are Physically one with Christ, and not only Relatively; but tell us [ ONE
What?] and make his words Intelligible; and must deny that we are ONE PERSON:
and that by that time we are not like to be found differing. But remember that
while Physical Communion, is confessed by all, what UNION we shall from thence
be said to have (this Foundation being agreed on) is like to prove but a
question, de realitione and nomine.

2. Yea all the world must acknowledge that the whole Creation is quoad
praesentiam and derivationem more dependant on God than the fruit is on the
Tree, or the Tree on the Earth, and that God is the inseperate Cause of our
Being, Station, and Life; And yet this natural intimateness, and influx, and
causality, makes not GOD and every Creature absolutely or personally One.

3. It is agreed therefore that Christ's Righteousness is neither materially
nor formally, any Accident of our natural Persons; (and an Accident it is)
unless it can be reduced to that of Relation. 1. The Habits of our Person,
cannot possibly be the habits of another inherently. 2. The actions of one
cannot possibly be the actions of another, as the Agent, unless as that other
as a principal Cause, acts by the other as his Instrument or second Cause. 3.
The same fundamentum relationis inherent in One Person, is not inherent in
another if it be a personal Relation: And so the same individual Relation that
is one Man's, cannot numerically be another Man's, by the same sort of in-being,
propriety* or adherence. Two Brothers have a Relation in kind the same, but not
unmerically.

4. And it is agreed that God judges not falsely, and therefore takes not
Christ's Righteousness to be any more or otherwise ours; than indeed it is; nor
imputes it to us erroneously.

5. Yet it is commonly agreed, that Christ's Righteousness is OURS in some
sense; And so far is justly reputed Ours, or imputed to us as being Ours.

6. And this ambiguous syallable [ OVRS] (enough to set another Age of
Wranglers into bitter Church-tearing strife, if not hindered by some that will
call them to explain an ambiguous word) is it that must be understood to end
this Controversy. Propriety is the thing signified. 1. In the strictest sense
that is called Ours, which inhereth in us, or that which is done by us. 2. In a
larger (Moral) sense, that which a Man as the principal Cause, does by another
as his Instrument, by authorizing, commanding, persuading, etc. 3. In a yet
larger sense that may be called OURS, which a third person does partly instead
of what we should have done (had, or suffered) and partly for our use, or
benefit. 4. In a yet larger sense that may be called OURS, which another has,
or does, or suffers for our Benefit, (though not in our stead) and which will
be for our good, (as that which a Friend or Father has, is his Friends or
Child's, and all things are Ours, whether Paul, or etc. and the Godly are owners
of the World, in as much as God will use all for their good).

7. It is therefore a Relation which Christ's Righteousness has to us, or we
to it, that must here be meant by the word [ OVRS]: Which is our RIGHT or Jus;
And that is acknowledged to be no Jus or Right to it in the foresaid denied
sense; And it is agreed that some Right it is. Therefore, to understand what it
is, the Titulus seu Fundamentum juris must be known.

8. And here it is agreed; 1. That we are before Conversion or Faith related to
Christ as part of the Redeemed World, of whom it is said, 2 Cor. 5.19. That God
was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself, not imputing to them their
sins, etc. 2. That we are after Faith related to Christ as his Covenanted
People, Subjects, Brethren, Friends, and Political Members; yea, as such that
have Right to, and Possession of Real Communion with him by his Spirit: And
that we have then Right to Pardon, Justification, and Adoption, (or have Right
to Impunity in the promised degree, and to the Spirits Grace, and the Love of
God, and Heavenly Glory). This Relation to Christ and this Right, to the
Benefits of his Righteousness are agreed on: And consequently that his
Righteousness is OURS, and so may be called, as far as the foresaid Relations
and Rights import.

II. Now a Relation (as Ockam has fully proved) having no real entity, beside
the quid absolutum, which is the Subject, Fundamentum, or Terminus, he that yet
raileth at his Brother as not saying enough, or not being herein so wise as he,
and will maintain that yet Christ's Righteousness is further OURS, must name
the Fundamentum of that Right or Propriety: What more is it that you mean? I
think the make-bates have here little probability of fetching any more Fuel to
their Fire, or turning Christ's Gospel into an occasion of strife and mutual
enmity, if they will but be driven to a distinct explication, and will not make
confusion and ambiguous words their defense and weapons. If you set your
quarrelsome Brains on work, and study as hard as you can for matter of
Contention, it will not be easy for you to find it, unless you will raze out
the names of Popery, Socinianism, Arminianism, or Solifidianism, Heresy, etc.
instead of real Difference. But if the angriest and lowdest Speakers be in the
right, Bedlam and Billingsgate may be the most Orthodox places.

Briefly, 1. The foresaid Benefits of Christ's Righteousness, (Habitual, Active
and Passive) as a Meritorious, Satisfactory, Purchasing Cause, are ours.

2. To say that the Benefits are Ours, imports that the Causal Righteousness
of Christ is related to us, and the Effects as such a Cause: and so is it self
OURS, in that sense, that is, so related.

3. And Christ himself is OURS, as related to us as our Savior; the Procurer
and Giver of those Benefits. And do you mean any more by [ OVRS]?

If you say that we deny any Benefits of Christ's Righteousness which you
assert, name what they are. If you say that we deny any true Fundamentum juris,
or reason of our title, name what that is. If you say that we deny any true
Relation to Christ himself, tell us what it is: If you cannot, say that you are
agreed.

1. If you say that the Benefit denied by us, is that we are judged by God, as
those that (habitually and actively) have perfectly fulfilled the Law of
Innocence our selves, though not in our natural Persons, yet by Christ as
representing us, and so shall be justified by that Law of Innocence as the
Fulfiller of it, we do deny it, and say, That you subvert the Gospel, and the
true Benefits which we have by Christ.

2. If you say that we deny that God esteems or reputeth us, to be the very
Subjects of that Numerical Righteousness, in the Habits, Acts, Passion or
Relation, which was in the Person of Christ, or to have done, suffered, or
merited our selves in and by him, as the proper Representer of our Persons
therein; and so that his Righteousness is thus imputed to us as truly in it
self our own propriety, we do deny it, and desire you to do so also, lest you
deny Christianity.

2. If you blame us for saying, That we had or have no such Relation to Christ,
as to our Instrument, or the proper full Representer of each Believers
particular Person, by whom we did truly fulfill the Law of Innocence, habitually
and actively, and satisfied, merited, etc. We do still say so, and wish you to
consider what you say, before you proceed to say the contrary.

But if you come not up to this, where will you find a difference.

Object. 2. Christ is called The Lord our Righteousness, and he is made
Righteousness to us, and we are made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5.21, etc. And by the Obedience of one, many are made Righteous.

Answ. And are we not all agreed of all this? But can his Righteousness be Ours
no way but by the foresaid Personation Representating? How prove you that? He
is Our Righteousness, and his Obedience makes us Righteous.

1. Because the very Law of Innocence which we dishonored and broke by sin, is
perfectly fulfilled and honored by him, as a Mediator, to repair the injury
done by our breaking it.

2. In that he suffered to satisfy Justice for our sin.

3. In that hereby he has merited of God the Father, all that Righteousness
which we are truly the Subjects of, whether it be Relative, or Qualitative, or
Active; that is, 1. Our Right to Christ in Union to the Spirit, to Impunity,
and to Glory; And, 2. The Grace of the Spirit by which we are made Holy, and
fulfill the Conditions of the Law of Grace. We are the Subjects of these, and he
is the Minister, and the meritorious Cause of our Life, is well called Our
Righteousness, and by many the material Cause, (as our own perfect Obedience
would have been) because it is the Matter of that Merit.

4. And also Christ's Intercession with the Father, still procures all this as
the Fruit of his Merits.

5. And we are Related as his Members (though not parts of his Person as such)
to him that thus merited for us.

6. And we have the Spirit from him as our Head.

7. And he is our Advocate, and will justify us as our Judge.

8. And all this is God's Righteousness designed for us, and thus far given us
by him.

9. And the perfect Justice and Holiness of God, is thus glorified in us
through Christ. And are not all these set together enough to prove, that we
justly own all asserted by these Texts? But if you think that you have a better
sense of them, you must better prove it, than by a bare naming of the words.

Object. 3. If Christ's Righteousness be Ours, then we are Righteous by it as
Ours; and so God reputeth it but as it is: But it is Ours; 1. By our Union with
him. 2. And by his Gift, and so consequently by God's Imputation.

Answ. 1. I have told you before that it is confessed to be Ours; but that this
syllable OURS has many senses; and I have told you in what sense, and how far
it is OURS, and in that sense we are justified by it, and it is truly imputed
to us, or reputed or reckoned as OURS: But not in their sense that claim a
strict Propriety in the same numerical Habits, Acts, Sufferings, Merits,
Satisfaction, which was in Christ, or done by him, as if they did become
Subjects of the same Accidents; or, as if they did it by an instrumental second
Cause. But it is OURS, as being done by a Mediator, instead of what we should
have done, and as the Meritorious Cause of all our Righteousness and Benefits,
which are freely given us for the sake hereof.

2. He that is made Righteousness to us, is also made Wisdom, Sanctification
and Redemption to us: but that sub genere Causae Efficientis, non autem Causae
Constitutivae: We are the Subjects of the same numerical Wisdom and Holiness
which is in Christ. Plainly the Question is, Whether Christ or his
Righteousness, Holiness, Merits, and Satisfaction, be Our Righteousness
Constitutively, or only Efficiently? The Matter and Form of Christ's Personal
Righteousness is OURS, as an Efficient Cause, but it is neither the nearest
Matter, or the Form of that Righteousness which is OURS as the Subjects of it;
that is, It is not a Constitutive Cause nextly material, or formal of it.

3. If our Union with Christ were Personal, (making us the same Person) then
doubtless the Accidents of his Person would be the Accidents of ours, and so
not only Christ's Righteousness, but every Christians would be each of Ours:
But that is not so. Nor is it so given us by him.

Object. 4. You do seem to suppose that we have none of that kind of
Righteousness at all, which consists in perfect Obedience and Holiness, but
only a Right to Impunity and Life, with an imperfect Inherent Righteousness in
our selves: The Papists are forced to confess, that a Righteousness we must
have which consists in a conformity to the preceptive part of the Law, and
not only the Retributive part: But they say, It is in our selves, and we say it
is Christ's imputed to us.

Answ. 1. The Papists ( e. g. Learned Vasque^ in Romans 5.) talk so ignorantly of
the differences of the Two Covenants, or the Law of Innocence and of Grace, as
if they never understood it. And hence they 1. seem to take no notice of the
Law of Innocence, or of Nature now commanding our perfect Obedience, but only
of the Law of Grace. 2. Therefore they use to call those Duties but
Perfections; and the Commands that require them, but Counsels, where they are
not made Conditions of Life: and sins not bringing Damnation, some call Venial,
(a name not unfit) and some expound that as properly no sin, but analogically.
3. And hence they take little notice, when they treat of Justification, of the
Remitting of Punishment; but by remitting Sin, they usually mean the destroying
the Habits: As if they forgot all actual sin past, or thought that it deserved
no Punishment, or needed no Pardon: For a past Act in it self is now nothing,
and is capable of no Remission but Forgiveness. 4. Or when they do talk of
Guil^ of Punishment, they lay so much of the Remedy on Man's Satisfaction, as
if Christ's Satisfaction and Merits had procured no pardon, or at least, of no
temporal part of Punishment. 5. And hence they ignorantly revile the
Protestants, as if we denied all Personal Inherent Righteousness, and trusted
only to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness as justifying wicked
unconverted Men: The Papists therefore say not that we are innocent or sinless,
(really or imputatively); no not when they dream of Perfection and
Supererrogation, unless when they denominate Sin and Perfection only from the
Condition of the Law of Grace, and not that of Innocence.

2. But if any of them do as you say, no wonder if they and you contend: If one
say, We are Innocent, or Sinless in reality, and the other, we are so by
Imputation, when we are so no way at all (but sinners really, and so reputed);
what Reconciliation is there to be expected, till both lay by their Error?

Object. 5. How can God accept him as just, who is really and reputedly a
Sinner? This dishonors his Holiness and Justice.

Answ. Not so: Cannot God pardon sin, upon a valuable Merit and Satisfaction of
a Mediator? And though he judge us not perfect now, and accept us not as such;
yet 1. now he judges us Holy, 2. and the Members of a perfect Savior; 3. and
will make us perfect and spotless, and then so judge us, having washed us from
our sins in the Blood of the Lamb.

Object. 6. Thus you make the Reatus Culpae, not pardoned at all, but only the
Reatus Poenae.

Answ. 1. If by Reatus Culpae be meant the Relation of a Sinner as he is Revera
Peccator, and so to be Reus, is to be Revera ipse qui peccavit; then we must
consider what you mean by Pardon: For if you mean the nullifying of such a
Guilt, (or Reality) it is impossible, because necessiate existentiae, he that
has once sinned, will be still the Person that sinned, while he is a Person,
and the Relation of one that sinned will cleave to him: It will eternally be a
true Proposition, [ Peter and Paul did sin]; But if by Pardon you mean, the
pardoning of all the penalty which for that sin is due, ( damni vel sensus) so
it is pardoned; and this is indeed the Reatus poenae: Not only the Penalty, but
the Dueness of that Penalty, or the Obligation to it, is remitted and nullified.

2. Therefore if by Reatus Culpae you mean an Obligation to Punishment for that
Fault, this being indeed the Reatus poenae, as is said, is done away. So that
we are, I think, all agreed de re; And de nomine you may say that the Reatus
Culpae is done away or remitted, or not, in several senses: In se it is not
nullified, nor can be: But as Dueness of Punishment follows, that is pardoned.

Object. 7. You have said, That though we were not personally but seminally in
Adam when he sinned, yet when we are Persons, we are Persons guilty of his
actual sin: And so we must be Persons that are Partakers of Christ's Actual
Righteousness, and not only of its Effects, as soon as we are Believers. For
Christ being the Second Adam, and public Person* we have our part in his
Righteousness, as truly and as much as in Adam's sin.

Answ. 1. We must first understand how far Adam's sin is ours: And first I have
elsewhere proved that our Covenant-Vnion and Interest supposes our Natural
Union and Interest; and that it is an adding to God's Word and Covenant, to
say, That he covenanted that Adam should personate each one of his Posterity in
God's imputation or account, any further than they were naturally in him; and
so that his innocence or sin should be reputed theirs, as far as if they had
been personally the Subjects and Agents. The Person of Peter never was in
Reality or God's Reputation, the Person of Adam. (Nor Adam's Person the Person
of Peter): But Peter being virtually and seminally in Adam, when he sinned, his
Person is derived from Adam's Person: And so Peter's Guilt is not numerically
the same with Adams, but the Accident of another Subject, and therefore another
Accident, derived with the Person from Adam (and from nearer Parents). The
Fundamentum of that Relation (of Guilt) is the Natural Relation of the Person
to Adam, (and so it is Relatio in Relatione fundata). The Fundamentum of that
natural Relation, is Generation, yea a series of Generations from Adam to that
Person: And Adam's Generation being the Communication of a Guilty Nature with
personality to his Sons and Daughters, is the fundamentum next following his
personal Fault and Guilt charged on him by the Law: So that here is a long
series of efficient Causes, bringing down from Adam's Person and Guilt a
distinct numerical Person and Guilt of every one of his later Posterity.

2. And it is not the same sort of Guilt, or so plenary, which is on us, for
Adam's Act, as was on him, but a Guilt Analogical, or of another sort: that is,
He was guilty of being the wilful sinning Person, and so are not we, but only
of being Persons whose Being is derived by Generation from the wilful sinning
Persons, (besides the guilt of our own inherent pravity): That is, The Relation
is such which our Persons have to Adam' s Person, as make it just with God to
desert us, and to punish us for that and our pravity together. This is our
Guilt of Original sin.

3. And this Guilt comes to us by Natural Propagation, and resultancy from our
very Nature so propagated. And now let us consider of our contrary Interest in
Christ.

And, 1. Our Persons are not the same as Christ's Person, (nor Christ's as
ours) nor ever so judged or accounted of God.

2. Our Persons were not naturally, seminally, and virtually in Christ's Person
(any further than he is Creator and Cause of all things) as they were in Adams.

3. Therefore we derive not Righteousness from him by Generation, but by his
voluntary Donation or Contract.

4. As he became not our Natural Parent, so our Persons not being in Christ
when he obeyed, are not reputed to have been in him naturally, or to have
obeyed in and by him.

5. If Christ and we are reputed one Person, either he obeyed in our Person, or
we in his, or both. If he obeyed as a Reputed Sinner in the Person of each
Sinner, his Obedience could not be meritorious, according to the Law of
Innocence, which required sinless Perfection; And he being supposed to have
broken the Law in our Persons, could not so be supposed to keept it. If we
obeyed in his Person, we obeyed as Mediators, or Christ's, of which before.

6. But as is often said, Christ our Mediator undertook in a middle Person to
reconcile God and Man, (not by bringing God erroneously to judge that he or we
were what we are not, or did what we did not, but) by being, doing, and
suffering for us, that in his own Person, which should better answer God's Ends
and Honor, than if we had done and suffered in our Persons, that hereby he
might merit a free Gift of Pardon and Life (with himself) to be given by a Law
of Grace to believing penitent Accepters. And so our Righteousness, as is often
opened, is a Relation resulting at once from all these Causes as fundamental to
it, viz. Christ's Meritorious Righteousness, his free Gift thereupon, and our
Relation to him as Covenanters or United Believers. And this is agreed on.

Object. 8. As Christ is a Sinner by imputation of our sin, so we are
Righteous, by the imputation of his Righteousness. But it is our sin it self
that is imputed to Christ: Therefore it is his Righteousness it self that is
imputed to us.

Answ. 1. Christ's Person was not the Subject of our personal Relative Guilt,
much less of our Habits or Acts.

2. God did not judge him to have been so.

3. Nay, Christ had no Guilt of the same kind reckoned to be on him; else those
unmeet Speeches, used rashly by some, would be true, viz. That Christ was the
greatest Murderer, Adulterer, Idolater, Blasphemer, Thief, etc. in all the
World, and consequently more hated of God, (for God must needs hate a sinner as
such). To be guilty of sin as we are, is to be reputed truly to be the Person
that committed it: But so was not Christ, and therefore not so to be reputed.
Christ was but the Mediator that undertook to suffer for our sins, that we
might be forgiven; and not for his own sin, real or justly reputed: Expositors
commonly say that to be [ made sin for us], is but to be made [ a Sacrifice for
sin]. So that Christ took upon him neither our numerical guilt of sin it self,
nor any of the same species; but only our Reatum Poenae, or Debt of Punishment,
or (lest the Wrangler make a verbal quarrel of it) our Reatum Culpae non qua
talem and in se, sed quatenus est fundamentum Reatus poenae: And so his
Righteousness is ours; not numerically the same Relation that he was the
Subject of made that Relation to us; nor yet a Righteousness of the same
Species as Christ's is given us at all, (for his was a Mediators Righteousness,
consisting in, 1. perfect Innocence; 2. And that in the Works of the Jewish
Law, which bind us not; 3. And in doing his peculiar Works, as Miracles,
Resurrection, etc. which were all His Righteousness as a conformity to that
Law, and performance of that Covenant, which was made with, and to him as
Mediator). But his Righteousness is the Meritorious Cause and Reason of another
Righteousness or Justification (distinct from his) freely given us by the
Father and himself by his Covenant. So that here indeed the Similitude much
clears the Matter; And they that will not blaspheme Christ by making guilt of
sin it self in its formal Relation to be his own, and so Christ to be formally
as great a sinner as all the Redeemed set together, and they that will not
overthrow the Gospel, by making us formally as Righteous as Christ in kind and
measure, must needs be agreed with us in this part of the Controversy.

Object. 9. When you infer, That if we are reckoned to have perfectly obeyed in
and by Christ, we cannot be again bound to obey our selves afterward, nor be
guilty of any sin; you must know that it is true, That we cannot be bound to
obey to the same ends as Christ did, (which is to redeem us, or to fulfill the
Law of Works) But yet we must obey to other ends, viz. Ingratitude, and to live
to God, and to do good, and other such like.

Answ. 1. This is very true, That we are not bound to obey to all the same ends
that Christ did, as to redeem the World, nor to fulfill the Law of Innocence.
But hence it clearly follows that Christ obeyed not in each of our Persons
legally, but in the Person of a Mediator, seeing his due Obedience and ours
have so different Ends, and a different formal Relation, (his being a
conformity proximately to the Law, given him as Mediator) that they are not so
much as of the same species, much less numerically the same.

2. And this fully proves that we are not reckoned to have perfectly obeyed in
and by him: For else we could not be yet obliged to obey, though to other ends
than he was: For either this Obedience of Gratitude is a Duty or not; If not,
it is not truly Obedience, nor the omission sin: If yea, then that Duty was
made a Duty by some Law: And if by a Law we are now bound to obey in gratitude
(or for what ends soever) either we do all that we are so bound to do, or not.
If we do it (or any of it) then to say that we did it twice, once by Christ,
and once by our selves, is to say that we were bound to do it twice, and then
Christ did not all that we were bound to, but half: But what Man is he that
sins not? Therefore seeing it is certain, that no Man does all that he is
bound to do by the Gospel, (in the time and measure of his Faith, Hope, Love,
Fruitfulness, etc.) it follows that he is a sinner, and that he is not
supposed to have done all that by Christ which he failed in, both because he
was bound to do it himself, and because he is a sinner for not doing it.

3. Yea, the Gospel binds us to that which Christ could not do for us, it being
a Contradiction. Our great Duties are, 1. To believe in a Savior. 2. To
improve all the parts of his Mediation by a Life of Faith. 3. To repent of our
sins. 4. To mortify sinful Lusts in our selves. 5. To fight by the Spirit
against our flesh. 6. To confess our selves sinners. 7. To pray for pardon. 8.
To pray for that Grace which we culpably want. 9. To love God for redeeming us.
10. Sacramentally to covenant with Christ, and to receive him and his Gifts;
with many such like; which Christ was not capable of doing in and on his own
Person for us, though as Mediator he give us Grace to do them, and pray for the
pardon of our sins, as in our selves.

4. But the Truth which this Objection intimates, we all agree in, viz. That
the Mediator perfectly kept the Law of Innocence, that the keeping of that Law
might not be necessary to our Salvation, (and so such Righteousness necessary
in our selves) but that we might be pardoned for want of perfect Innocence, and
be saved upon our sincere keeping of the Law of Grace, because the Law of
Innocence was kept by our Mediator, and thereby the Grace of the New Covenant
merited, and by it Christ, Pardon, Spirit and Life, by him freely given to
Believers.

Object. 10. The same Person may be really a sinner in himself, and yet
perfectly innocent in Christ, and by imputation.

Answ. Remember that you suppose here the Person and Subject to be the same
Man: And then that the two contrary Relations of perfect Innocence, or
guiltlesness, and guilt of any, (yea much sin) can be consistent in him, is a
gross contradiction. Indeed he may be guilty, and not guilty in several partial
respects; but a perfection of guiltlesness excludes all guilt. But we are
guilty of many a sin after Conversion, and need a Pardon. All that you should
say is this, We are sinners our selves, but we have a Mediator that sinned not,
who merited Pardon and Heaven for sinners.

2. But if you mean that God reputeth us to be perfectly innocent when we are
not, because that Christ was so, it is to impute Error to God: He reputeth no
Man to be otherwise than he is: But he does indeed first give, and then impute
a Righteousness Evangelical to us, instead of perfect Innocence, which shall as
certainly bring us to Glory; and that is, He gives us both the Renovation of
his Spirit, (to Evangelical Obedience) and a Right by free gift to Pardon and
Glory for the Righteousness of Christ that merited it; And this thus given us,
he reputeth to be an acceptable Righteousness in us.

CHAP. VI. Animadversions on some of Dr. T. Tullies Strictures.
. 1. I Suppose the Reader desires not to be wearied with an examination of all
Dr. Tullies words, which are defective in point of Truth, Justice, Charity,
Ingenuity, or Pertinency to the Matter, but to see an answer to those that by
appearance of pertinent truth do require it, to disabuse the incautelous
Readers; Though somewhat by the way may be briefly said for my own Vindication.
And this Tractate being conciliatory, I think meet here to leave out most of
the words, and personal part of his contendings, and also to leave that which
concerns the interest of Works (as they are pleased to call Man's performance
of the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace) in our Justification, to a fitter
place, viz. To annex what I think needful to my friendly Conference with Mr.
Christopher Cartwright on the Subject, which Dr. Tullies Assault persuades me
to publish.

. 2. page 71. Justif. Paulin. This Learned Doctor says, [ The Scripture
mentions no Justification in foro Dei at all, but that One, which is
Absolution from the Maledictory Sentence of the Law.

Answ. 1. If this be untrue, it is pity so worthy a Man should unworthily use it
against peace and concord. If it be true, I crave his help for the expounding
of several Texts.

Exodus 23.6, 7. Thou shall not wrest the Judgment of thy Poor in his Cause:
Keep thee far from a false Matter, and the Innocent and Righteous slay thou
not; for I will not justify the wicked]. Is the meaning only, I will not
absolve the wicked from the Maledictory Sentence of the Law (of Innocence)? Or
is it not rather, [I will not misjudg the wicked to be just, nor allow his
wickedness, nor yet allow thee so to do, nor leave thee unpunished for thy
unrighteous judgment, but will condemn thee if thou condemn the Just].

Job 25.4. How then can Man be justified with God? or, How can he be clean that
is born of a Woman? Is the sense, [ How can Man be absolved from the
Maledictory Sentence of the Law?] Or rather, [How can he be maintained
Innocent?]

Psalm. 143.2. In thy sight shall no Man living be justified. Is the sense, [ No
Man living shall be absolved from the Maledictory sentence of the Law? Than we
are all lost for ever: Or rather no Man shall be found and maintained Innocent,
and judged one that deserved not punishment]; (Therefore we are not judged
perfect fulfillers of that Law by another or our selves).

Object. But this is for us and against you: for it denies that there is any
such Justification.

Answ. Is our Controversy de re, or only de nomine, of the sense of the word
Justify? If de re, then his meaning is to maintain, That God never does judge a
Believer to be a Believer, or a Godly Man to be Godly, or a performer of the
Condition of Pardon and Life to have performed it, nor will justify any
believing Saint against the false Accusations, that he is an Infidel, a wicked
ungodly Man, and an Hypocrite, (or else he writes against those that he
understood not). But if the Question be (as it must be) de nomine, whether the
word Justify have any sense besides that which he appropriateth to it, then a
Proposition that denies the Existentiam rei, may confute his denial of any
other sense of the word.

So Isa. 43.9, 26. Let them bring forth their Witnesses that they may
justified: Declare thou that thou may be justified; that is, proved Innocent.

But I hope he will hear and reverence the Son; Matthew. 12.37. By thy words thou
shall be Justified, and by thy words thou shall be Condemned] (speaking of Gods
Judgment) which I think means ( de re and nomine) Thy Righteous or
unrighteous words shall be a part of the Cause of the day, or Matter, for or
according to which, thou shall be judged obedient or disobedient to the Law of
Grace, and so far just or unjust, and accordingly sentenced to Heaven or Hell,
as is described Matthew. 25. But it seems this Learned Doctor understands it
only, By thy words thou shall be absolved from the Maledictory Sentence of the
Law, and by thy words contrarily condemned.

Luke 18.14. The Publican [ went down to his House justified rather than the
other]; I think not only [from the Maledictory Sentence of the Law of
Innocency] but [ by God approved a sincere Penitent], and so a fit Subject of
the other part of Justification.

Acts 13.39. is the Text that speaks most in the sense he mentions; And yet
I think it includes more, viz. By Christ, 1. we are not only absolved from
that Condemnation due for our sins; 2. but also we are by his repealing or
ending of the Mosaic Law justified against the Charge of Guilt for our not
observing it; and 3. Augustine would add, That we are by Christ's Spirit and
Grace made just (that is, sincerely Godly) by the destruction of those inherent
and adherent sins, which the Law of Moses could not mortify and save us from,
but the Spirit does.

Romans 2.13. Not the Hearers of the Law are just before God, but the Doers of
the Law shall be justified]. Is it only, The Doers shall be Absolved from the
Maledictory Sentence, etc.? Or first and chiefly, They shall be judged
well-doers, so far as they do well, and so approved and justified, so far as
they do keep the Law? (which because no Man does perfectly, and the Law of
Innocence requires Perfection, none can be justified absolutely, or to
Salvation by it).

Object. The meaning is, (say some) The Doers of the Law should be justified by
it; were there any such.

Answ. That Is true, of absolute Justification unto Life: But that this is not
all the sense of the Text, the two next Verses show, where the Gentiles are
pronounced partakers of some of that which he means inclusively in doing to
Justification: Therefore it must include that their Actions and Persons are so
far justified, (more or less) as they are Doers of the Law, as being so far
actively just.

Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified; And 1 Cor. 6. ^^* Ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Many
Protestants, and among them Bez^ himself, expound (in the Papists and Austins
sense of Justification) as including Sanctification also, as well as Absolution
from the Curse: And so Arch Bishop Usher told me he understood them. As also
Tit. 3.7. That being justified freely by his Grace.

And many think so of Romans 4.5. he [ justifies the Vngodly] say they, by
Converting, Pardoning, and Accepting them in Christ to Life.

And Romans 8.33. Who shall condemn? it is God that justifies, seems to me
more than barely to say, God absolveth us from the Curse, because it is set
against Man's Condemnation, (who reproached, slandered and persecuted the
Christians as evil Doers, as they did Christ, to whom they were predestined
to be conformed). And so must mean, God will not only absolve us from his
Curse, but also justify our Innocence against all the false Accusations of our
Enemies.

And it seems to be spoken by the Apostle, with respect to Isa. 50.8. He is
near that justifies me, who will contend with me? Which my reverence to this
Learned Man suffices not to make me believe, is taken only in his sense of
Absolution.

Rev. 22.11. He that is Righteous, let him be justified still, ((...)) which
not only our Translaters, but almost all Expositors take as inclusive of
Inherent Righteousness, if not principally speaking of it.

To speak freely, I remember not one Text of Scripture that uses the word [
Justifie] in this Doctor's sense; that is, Only for the said absolution from
the Curse of the Law: For all those other Texts that speak for Justification by
Christ's Grace, and Faith, and not by the Works of the Law, (as Romans 3.20, 24,
28, 30. and 4.2, 5, 25. and 5.1, 9, 16, 18. 1 Cor. 4.4. Gal. 2.16, 17. and 3.8,
11, 24. and 5.4, etc.) do all seem to me to mean, not only that [we are
absolved from the Maledictory Sentence of the Law], but also that we are first
made, and then accounted Persons first meet for Absolution, and next meet for
God's Acceptance of us as just, and as Heirs of Life Eternal, and meet for the
great Reward in Heaven: For when the Apostle denies Justification by Works; it
is not credible that he means only, that [ By the Works of the Law no Man is
absolved from the Curse of the Law]; But also, No Man by the Works of the Law,
is before God taken for a Performer of the necessary Condition of Absolution
and Salvation, nor fit for his Acceptance, and for the Heavenly Reward.

Answ. 2. But let the Reader here note, that the Doctor supposes James to
mean, that [ By Works a Man is absolved from the Maledictory Sentence of the
Law, and not by Faith only]. For that James speaks of Justification in foro Dei
is past all doubt: And who would have thought that the Doctor had granted this
of the Text of James? But mistakes seldom agree among themselves.

Answ. 3. And would not any Man have thought that this Author had pleaded for
such an Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as justifies not only from the
Maledictory Sentence of the Law, but also from the very guilt of sin as sin, we
being reputed, (not only pardoned sinners, but) perfect fulfillers of the Law
by Christ, and so that we are in Christ conform to the Fac hoc or preceptive
part commanding Innocence? Who would have thought but this was his drift? If it
be not, all his angry Opposition to me, is upon a mistake so foul, as reverence
forbids me to name with its proper Epithets: If it be, how can the same Man
hold, That we are justified as in Christ, conform to the Precept of perfect
Innocence? And yet that The Scripture mentions no Justification at all, in
foro Dei, besides that one, which is Absolution from the Maledictory Sentence
of the Law. But still mistakes have discord with themselves.

Answ. 4. It is the judgment indeed of Mr. Gataker, Wotton, Piscator, Paraeus,
Vrsine, Wendeline, and abundance other excellent Divines, that as sins of
omission are truly sin, and poena damni, or privations truly punishment; so for
a sinner for his sin to be denied God's Love and Favor, Grace and Glory, is to
be punished; and to be pardoned, is to have this privative punishment remitted
as well as the rest; and so that Justification contains our Right to Glory,
as it is the bare forgiveness of the penalty of sin; because Death and Life,
Darkness and Light are such Contraries, as that one is but the privation of the
other: But this Learned Doctor seems to be of the commoner Opinion, that the
Remission of Sin is but one part of our Justification, and that by Imputation
of perfect Holiness and Obedience we must have another part, which is our Right
to the Reward* (and I think a little Explication would end that difference).
But does he here then agree with himself? And to contradict the common way of
those with whom he joyneth? Do they not hold that Justification is more than an
Absolution from the Maledictory Sentence of the Law?

Answ. 5. But indeed his very Description by Absolution is utterly ambiguous:
1. Absolution is either by Actual Pardon, by the Law or Covenant of Grace;
which gives us our Right to Impunity: 2. Or by Sentence of the Judge, who
publicly decideth our Case, and declares our Right determinatively: Or by
execution of that Sentence in actual delivering us from penalty; And who
knows which of these he means? This is but confusion, to describe by an
unexplained equivocal word.

And who knows what Law he means, whose Maledictory Sentence Justification
absolveth us from? Does he think that the Law of Innocence, and of Moses, and
the Law of Grace are all one, which Scripture so frequently distinguishes? Or
that each of them has not its Malediction? If he deny this, I refer him to my
full proof of it, to Mr. Cartwright and elsewhere. If not, we should know
whether he mean all, or which.

3. And what he means by the Sentence of the Law is uncertain: Whether it be
the Laws Commination, as obliging us to punishment, which is not a Sentence in
the usual proper sense, but only a virtual Sentence, that is, the Norma
Judicis; or whether he mean the Sentence of God as Judge, according to the Law:
which is not the Sentence of the Law properly, but of the Judge: It Is more
intelligible speaking, and distinct, that must edify us, and end those
Controversies which ambiguities and confusion bred and feed.

Answ. 6. But which-ever he means, most certainly it is not true that the
Scripture mentions no other Justification in foro Dei. For many of the
forecited Texts tell us, that it often mentions a Justification, which is no
Absolution from the Maledictory Sentence, (neither of the Law of Innocence, of
Moses, or of Grace) but a Justification of a Man's innocence in tantum, or
quoad Causam hanc particularem, Viz.

1. Sometimes a Justifying the Righteous Man against the slanders of the World,
or of his Enemies.

2. Sometimes a justifying a Man in some one action, as having dealt faithfully
therein.

3. Sometimes a judging a Man to be a faithful Godly Man, that performs the
Conditions of Life in the Law of Grace made necessary to God's Acceptance.

4. Sometimes for making a Man such, or for making him yet more inherently
just, or continuing him so.

5. Sometimes for Justification by the Apology of an Advocate, (which is not
Absolution).

6. Sometimes for Justification by Witness.

7. And sometimes, perhaps, by Evidence. As appears, Isa 50.8. Romans 8.33.
(and so God himself is said to be justified, Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.4. and Christ,
1 Timothy 3.16.) 1 King. 8.32. Hear thou in Heaven, and do, and judge thy Servants,
condemning the Wicked to bring his way upon his Head; and justifying the
Righteous, to give him according to his Righteousness, (where the Sentence is
passed by the Act of Execution). Is this absolving him from the Curse of the
Law? So 1 Chronicles. 6.23. so Mat. 12.37. and Jam. 2.21, 24, 25. where
Justification by our Words and by Works is asserted; and many other Texts so
speak: Frequently to Justify, is to maintain one, or prove him to be just.
It Is strange that any Divine should find but one sort of sense of Justification
before God mentioned in the Scriptures.

I would give here to the Reader, a help for some excuse of the Author, viz.
that by [ praeter unam illam quae est Absolutio] he might mean, which is partly
Absolution and partly Acceptance, as of a fulfiller of the Precept of
Perfection by Christ, and partly Right to the Reward, all three making up the
whole; but that I must not teach him how to speak his own mind, or think that
he knew not how to utter it; And specially, because the Instances here prove
that even so it is very far from Truth, had he so spoken.

Answ. 7. But what if the word [ Justification] had been found only as he
affirmed? If Justice, (Righteousness) and Just, be otherwise used, that is all
one in the sense, and almost in the word; seeing it is confessed, that to
Justify, is, 1. To make Just; 2. Or to esteem Just; 3. Or sentence Just; 4. Or
to prove Just, and defend as Just; 5. Or to use as Just by execution. And
therefore in so many senses as a Man is called Just in Scripture, he is
inclusively, or by connotation, said to be Justified, and Justifiable, and
Justificandus. And I desire no more of the Impartial Reader, but to turn to his
Concordances, and peruse all the Texts where the words [Just, Justice, Justly,
Righteous, Righteousness, Righteously] are used; and if he find not that they
are many score, if not hundred times used, for that Righteousness which is the
Persons Relation resulting from some Acts or Habits of his own, (as the Subject
or Agent) and otherwise than according to his solitary sense here, let him then
believe this Author.

. 3. But he is as unhappy in his Proofs, as in his singular untrue Assertion: [
Romans 8.2, 4. The Law of the Spirit of Life, has freed us from the Law of Sin
and of Death. Gal. 3.13. God sent his Son, thta the Righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us; Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law;
and many more such: Here is no mention of any but one legal Justification].

Answ. 1. Reader, do you believe that these two Texts are a perfect
Enumeration. And that if these mention but one sense or sort of Justification,
that it will follow that no more is mentioned in Scripture: Or if many hundred
other Texts have the same sense?

2. Nay, he has chosen only these Texts where the word [ Justification] or [
Justifie] is not at all found. By which I may suppose that he intends the
Controversy here de re, and not de nomine. And is that so? Can any Man that
ever considerately opened the Bible, believe that de re no such Thing is
mentioned in Scripture. 1. As making a Man a believing Godly Man. 2. Or as
performing the Conditions of Life required of us in the Covenant of Grace. 3.
Nor esteeming a Man such. 4. Not defending or proving him to be such. 5. Nor
judging him such decisively. 6. Nor using him as such. 7. Nor as justifying a
Man so far as he is Innocent and Just against all false Accusation of Satan or
the World.

3. The first Text cited by him, Romans 8.24. downright contradicts him: Not only
Augustine, but diverse Protestant Expositors suppose, that by the Law of the
Spirit of Life is meant, either the quickening Spirit it self given to us that
are in Christ, or the Gospel, as it gives that Spirit into us; And that by
delivering us from the Law of Sin, is meant either from that sin which is as a
Law within us, or Moses Law, as it forbids and commands all its
peculiarities, and so makes doing or not doing them sin; and as it declares
sin, yea, and accidentally irritateth it: Yea, that by the Law of Death is
meant, not only that Law we are cursed by, and so guilty, but chiefly that Law,
as it is said Romans 7. to kill Paul, and to occasion the abounding of sin, and
the Li^e of it: And that by [ the fulfilling of the Law in us, that walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit], is meant [that by the Spirit and Grace
of Christ, Christians do fulfill the Law, as it requires sincere Holiness,
Sobriety and Righteousness, which God accepts for Christ's sake; which the
Law of Moses, without Christ's Spirit, enabled no Man to fulfil]. Not to weary
the Reader with citing Expositors, I now only desire him to peruse, Ludov. de
Dieu on the Text.

And it is certain, that the Law that Paul there speaks of, was Moses Law:
And that he is proving all along, that the observation of it was not necessary
to the Gentiles, to their performance, or Justification and Salvation, (
necessitate praecepti vel medii); (for it would not justify the Jews
themselves). And sure, 1. all his meaning is not, [The Law will not absolve Men
from the sense of the Law]. But also its Works will give no one the just title
of a Righteous Man, accepted of God, and saved by him, as judging between the
Righteous and the wicked: (as Christ says, Matthew. 25. The Righteous shall go
into Everlasting Life, etc.) 2. And if it were only the Maledictory Sentence of
Moses Law, as such, that Paul speaks of Absolution from, as our only
Justification, then none but Jews and Proselites who were under that Law, could
have the Justification by Faith which he mentions; for it curses none else:
For whatever the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law: The rest
of the World were only under the Law of lapsed Nature, (the relicts of Adam's
Law of Innocence) and the Curse for Adam's first Violation; and the Law of
Grace made to Adam and Noah, and after perfected fullier by Christ in its
second Edition.

2. His other Text [ Christ redeemed us from the Curse of the Law] proves
indeed that all Believers are redeemed from the Curse of the first Law of
Innocence, and the Jews from the Curse of Moses Law (which is it that is
directly meant): But what is that to prove that these words speak the whole and
the only Justification? and that the Scripture mentions no other?

. 4. He adds, [ Lex est quae prohibet; Lex quae poenam decernit; Lex quae
irrogat: Peccatum est transgressio Legis: Poena effectus istius trangressionis;
Justificatio denique absolutio ab ista poena: Itaque c^m Lex nisi praestita
nenimem Justificat, and praestitam omnes in Christo agnoscunt, aut Legalis erit
omnis JUstificatio coram Deo, aut omnino nulla].

Answ. 1. But does he know but one sort of Law of God? Has every Man incurred
the Curse by Moses Law that did by Adams? Or every Man fallen under the
peremptory irreversible condemnation which the Law of Grace passes on them
that never believe and repent? Does this Law, [ He that believes not shall be
damned] damn Believers? One Law condemns all that are not Innocent. Another
supposes them under that defect, and condemns peremptorily (not every
Sinner) but the Wicked and Unbelievers.

2. Again here he says, [ Justification is Absolution from that Penalty]. But
is a Man absolved (properly) from that which he was never guilty of? Indeed if
he take Absolution so loosly as to signify, the justifying a Man against a
false Accusation, and pronouncing him Not-Guilty; So all the Angels in Heaven
may possibly be capable of Absolution: Justification is ordinarily so used, but
Absolution seldom by Divines. And his words show that this is not his senses,
if I understand them. But if we are reputed perfect fulfillers of the Law of
Innocence by Christ, and yet Justification is our Absolution from the Curse,
then no Man is justified that is Righteous by that Imputation.

3. And how unable is my weak Understanding, to make his words at peace with
themselves? The same Man in the next lines says, [ Lex nisi praestita neminem
justificat: and all Justification before God must be legal or none]; so that no
Man is justified but as reputed Innocent, or a performer of the Law: And yet
Justification is our Absolution from the Punishment and Malediction of the Law;
As if he said, No Man is justified but by the pardon of that sin which he is
reputed never to have had, and Absolution from that Curse and Punishment which
he is reputed never to have deserved or been under. Are these things
reconcilable? But if really he take Absolution for justifying or acquitting
from a false Accusation, and so to be absolved from the Malediction of the Law,
is to be reputed one that never deserved it, or was under it, then it is as much
as to say, that there is no pardon of sin, or that no Man that is pardoned, or
reputed to need a Pardon, is justified.

4. All this and such Speeches would persuade the Reader that this Learned
Disputer thinks that I took and use the word [Legal] generally as of that
which is related to any Law in genere, and so take Evangelical contrarily for
that which is related to no Law: whereas I over and over tell him, that
(speaking in the usual Language that I may be understood) I take [Legal]
specially (and not generally) for that Righteousness, which is related to the
Law of Works or Innocence, (not as if we had indeed such a Righteousness as
that Law will justify us for; But a pro-Legal-Righteousness, one instead of
it, in and by our perfect Savior, which shall effectually save us from that
Laws condemnation): And that by [ Evangelical Righteousness], I mean, that
which is related to the Law of Grace, as the Rule of Judgment, upon the just
pleading whereof that Law will not condemn but justify us. If he knew this to
be my meaning, in my weak judgment, he should not have written either as if he
did not, or as if he would persuade his Rsaders to the contrary: For Truth is
most congruously, defended by Truth: But if he knew it not, I despair of
becoming intelligible to him, by any thing that I can write, and I shall expect
that this Reply be wholly lost to him and worse.

5. His [ Lex nisi praestita neminem justificat] is true; and therefore no Man
is justified by the Law, But his next words [ and praestitam omnes in Christo
agnoscunt] seems to mean that [ It was performed by us in Christ]; Or that [
It justifies us, because performed perfectly by Christ as such]: Which both
are the things that we most confidently deny. It was not Physically, or
Morally, or Politically, or Legally, or Reputatively, (take which word you
will) fulfilled by us in Christ: it does not justify us, because it was
fulfilled by Christ, ( as such, or immediately, and eo nomine). It justified
Christ, because he fulfilled it; and so their Law does all the perfect Angels.
But we did not personally fulfill it in Christ; it never allowed vicarium
obedientiae to fulfill it by our selves or another: Therefore another
Obedience, merely as such, (even a Mediators) is not our Obedience or
Justification: But that Obedience justifies us, as given us only in or to the
effecting of our Personal Righteousness, which consists in our right to
Impunity, and to God's Favor and Life, freely given for Christ's Merits sake,
and in our performance of the Conditions of the Law of Grace, or that free
Gift, which is therefore not a coordinate but a sub-ordinate Righteousness
(and Justification) to qualify us for the former. This is so plain and
necessary, that if (in sense) it be not understood by all that are admitted to
the Sacramental Communion, (excepting Verbal Controversies or Difficulties) I
doubt we are too lax in our admissions.

. 5. Next he tel's us of a threefold respect of Justification: 1. Ex part
principii. 2. Termini. 3. Medii: (I find my self uncapeable of teaching him,
that is a Teacher of such as I, and therefore presume not to tell him how to
distinguish more congruously, plainly, and properly, as to the terms). And as
to the Principle or Fountain whence it flows, that is, Evangelical Grace in
Christ, he says, It is thus necessary, that in our lapsed State all
Justification be Evangelical].

Answ. Who would desire a sharper or a softer, a more dissenting or a more
consenting Adversary? Very good: If then I mean it ex part principii, I offend
him not by asserting Evangelical Righteousness: The Controversy then will be
only de nomine, whether it be congruous thus to call it. And really are his
Names and Words put into our Creed, and become so necessary as to be worthy of
all the stress that he lays on them, and the calling up the Christian World
to arrive by their Zeal against our Phrase? Must the Church be awakened to rise
up against all those that will say with Christ, [ By thy words thou shall be
justified]. And with James, [ By Works a Man is justified, and not by Faith
only], and [ we are judged by the Law of Liberty], and as Christ, Joh. 5.22. [
The Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son]; and
that shall recite the 25 th Chapter of Matthew.

Even now he said at once, [ There is no Justification in foro Dei, but
Absolution, etc. The Law of the Spirit of Life has freed us, etc. Here is no
mention of any Justification but Legal]. And now [ All our Justification ex
part principii, is only Evangelical]. So then no Text talks of Evangelical
Justification, or of Justification ex part principii: And Absolution which
defines it, is named ex part principii. And yet all Justification is
Evangelical. Is this mode of Teaching worthy a Defense by a Theological War?

2. But Reader, Why may not I denominate Justification ex part principii?
Righteousness is formally a Relation: To justify constitutively, is to make
Righteous. To be Justified, (or Justification in sensu passivo) is to be made
Righteous; And in foro, to be judged Righteous: And what means he by
Principium as to a Relation, but that which other Men call the Fundamentum,
which is loco Efficientis, or a remote efficient? And whence can a Relation be
more fitly named, than from the fundamentum, whence it has its formal being?
Reader, bear with my Error, or correct it, if I mistake. I think that as our
Righteousness is not all of one sort, no more is the fundamentum: 1. I think I
have no Righteousness, whose immediate fundamentum is my sinless Innocence, or
fulfilling the Law of Works or Innocence, by my self or another: and so I have
no fundamentum of such. 2. I hope I have a Righteousness consisting in my
personal Right to Impunity and Life; and that Jus or Right is mine by the Title
of free Condonation and Donation by the Gospel Covenant or Grant: And so that
Grant or Gospel is the fundamentum of it: But the Merits of Christ's
Righteousness purchased that Gift, and so those Merits are the remote
fundamentum or efficient: And thus my Justification, by the Doctor's
confession, is Evangelical. 3. I must perish if I have not also a subordinate
personal Righteousness, consisting in my performance of those Conditions on
which the New Covenant gives the former. And the fundamentum of this
Righteousness is the Reality of that performance, as related to the Irrogation,
Imposition, or Tenor of the Covenant, making this the Condition. This is my
Heresy, if I be heretical; and be it right or wrong, I will make it
intelligible, and not by saying and unsaying, involve all in confusion.

. 6. He adds, [ Ex part Termini Legalis est, quia terminatur in
satisfactione, Legi praestanda: Liberavit me a Lege mortis, etc. And hence, he
says, the denomination is properly taken.

Answ. 1. The Reader here sees that all this Zeal is exercised in a Game at
Words, or Logical Notions; and the Church must be called for the umpirage, to
stand by in* Arms to judge that he has won the Day: What if the denomination be
properly to be taken from the Terminus? Is it as dangerous as you frightfully
pretend to take it aliunde? 2. But stay a little: Before we come to this, we
must crave help to understand what he talks of: Is it, 1. Justificatio,
Justificans (active sumpta)? Or, 2. Justificatio Justificati (passive)? 3. Or
Justitia?

1. The first is Actio, and the Terminus of that Action is twofold. 1. The
Object or Patient (a believing Sinner). 2. The Effect, Justificatio passive,
neither of these is the Law, or its Malediction. But which of these is it that
we must needs name it from?

2. The passive or effective Justification is in respect of the Subjects
Reception called Passio: In respect of the form received, it is as various as I
before mentioned.

1. The Effect of the Donative Justification of the Law of Grace, is Justitia
data; a Relation (often described).

2. The Effect of the Spirits giving us Inherent Righteousness, is a Quality
given, Acts excited, and a Relation thence resulting.

3. The Effect of Justification per sententiam Judicis, is immediately a
Relation, Jus Judicatum.

4. The Effect of an Advocates Justification, is Justitia and persona ut
defensa seu vindicata.

5. The Effect of Executive Justification, is Actual Impunity or Liberation.
And are all these one Terminus, or hence one name then? These are the Termini
of Justificatio Justificantis, ut Actionis; and nothing of this nature can be
plainer, than that, 1. Remission of sin (passively taken) the Reatus or
Obligatio ad poenam, (the first ad quem, and the second a quo) are both the
immediate Termini of our Act of Justification. 2. That the Terminus Justitiae,
as it is the formal Relation of a Justified Person, as such, is the Law as
Norma Actionum, as to Righteous Actions, and the Law or Covenant, as making the
Condition of Life, as to those Actions, sub ratione Conditionis and Tituli. And
the Promissory and Minatory part of the Law, as Justitia is Jus praemii, and
impunitatis. First, The Actions, and then the Person are Just in Relation to
the Law or Covenant, by which their Actions and they are to be judged. But the
remoter Terminus is the malum a quo, and the bonum ad quod. And as a quo, it is
not only the evil denounced, but also the Reatus, or Obligation to it, and the
efficacious Act of the Law thus cursing, and the Accusation of the Actor or
Accuser, (real or possible) that is such a terminus.

II. But when he says, Ex part Termini Legalis est, either still he takes
legal generally, as comprehending the Law of Innocence, of Works, and of Grace,
or not. If he do, I must hope he is more intelligent and just, than to
insinuate to his Reader, that I ever mention an Evangelical Justification that
is not so legal, as to be denominated from the Law of Grace, as distinct from
that of Works: If not, he was indebted to his intelligent Reader for some
proof, that no Man is justified against this false Accusation; [Thou art by the
Law of Grace the Heir of a far sorer punishment, for despising the Remedy, and
not performing the Conditions of Pardon and Life. And also for this thou have
no right to Christ, and the Gifts of his Covenant of Grace]. But no such proof
is found in his Writings, nor can be given.

III. But his [ Quia Terminatur in satisfactione Legi praestanda]. I confess it
is a Sentence not very intelligible or edifying to me. 1. Satisfactio proprie
and stricte sic dicta differ^ a solutione ejusdem quod sit,solutio
aequivalentis alias indebite: Which of these he means, Satisfaction thus
strictly taken, or solutio ejusdem, I know not: Nor know what it is that he
means by Legi praestanda: Indeed solutio ejusdem is Legi praestanda, but not
praestita by us (personally or by another): For we neither kept the Law, nor
bare the full Penalty; And the Law mentioned no Vicarium Obedientiae aut
p^enae; Christ performed the Law, as it obliged himself as Mediator, and as a
Subject, but not as it obliged us; for it obliged us to Personal performance
only: And Christ by bearing that Punishment (in some respects) which we
deserved, satisfied the Lawgiver, (who had power to take a Commutation) but
not the Law: unless speaking improperly you will say that the Law is satisfied,
when the remote ends of the Lawgiver and Law are obtained. For the Law has
but one fixed sense, and may be it self changed, but changes not it self, nor
accepts a tantundem: And Christ's suffering for us, was a fulfilling of the
Law, which peculiarly bound him to suffer, and not a Satisfaction loco
solutionis ejusdem: And it was no fulfilling the Penal part of the Law as it
bound us to suffer: For so it bound none but us; so that the Law as binding us
to Duty or Suffering, was neither fulfilled, nor strictly satisfied by Christ;
but the Lawgiver satisfied, and the remote ends of the Law attained, by
Christ's perfect fulfilling all that Law which bound himself as Mediator.

Now whether he mean the Law as binding us to Duty, or to Punishment, or both,
and what by satisfaction I am not sure: But as far as I can make sense of it,
it seeneth to mean, that Poena is satisfactio loco obedientiae, and that
Punishment being our Due, this was satisfactio Legi praestanda, (for he says
not Praestita). But then he must judge that we are justified only from the
penal Obligation of the Law, and not from the preceptive Obligation to perfect
Obedience. And this will not stand with the scope of other Passages, where he
endures not my Opinion, that we are not justified by the fae hoc, the Precept
as fulfilled, or from the Reatus Gulpae in se, but by Christ's whole
Righteousness from the Reatus ut ad paenam.

2. But if this be his sense, he means then that it is only the Terminus a
quo, that Justification is properly denominated from. And why so? 1. As
Justitia and Justificatio passive sumpta, vel ut effectus, is Relatio, it has
necessarily no Terminus a quo; And certainly is in specie, to be rather
denominated from its own proper Terminus ad quem. And as Justification is taken
for the Justifiers Action; why is it not as well to be denominated from the
Terminus ad quem, as a quo? Justificatio efficiens sic dicitur, quia Justum
facit: Justificatio apologetica, quia Justum vindicat vel probat. Justificatio
per sententiam, quia Justum aliquem esse Judicat: Justificatio executiva, quia
ut Justum eum tractat.

But if we must needs denominate from the Terminus a quo, how strange is it
that he should know but of one sense of Justification?

3. But yet perhaps he means, [ In satisfactione Legi praestita, though he
say praestanda, and so denominateth from the Terminus a quo: But if so, 1. Then
it cannot be true: For satisfacere and Justificare are not the same thing, nor
is Justifying giving Satisfaction; nor were we justified when Christ had
satisfied, but long after: Nor are we justified eo nomine, because Christ
satisfied, (that is, immediately) but because he gave us that Jus ad
impunitatem and vitam and spiritum sanctum, which is the Fruit of his
Satisfaction. 2. And as is said, if it be only in satisfactione, then it is not
in that Obedience which fulfileth the preceptive part as it bound us: for to
satisfy for not fulfilling, is not to fulfill it. 3. And then no Man is
justified, for no Man has satisfied either the Preceptive or Penal Obligation
of the Law, by himself or another: But Christ has satisfied the Lawgiver by
Merit and Sacrifice for sin.

His Liberavit nos a Lege Mortis, I before showed impertinent to his use, Is
Liberare and Justificare, or Satisfacere all one? And is a Lege Mortis, either
from all the Obligation to Obedience, or from the sole mal^diction? There be
other Acts of Liberation besides Satisfaction: For it is [ The Law of the
Spirit of Life] that does it: And we are freed both from the power of
indwelling-sin, (called a Law) and from the Mosaical Yoke, and from the
Impossible Conditions of the Law of Innocence, though not from its bare
Obligation to future Duty.

. 7. He adds a Third, Ex part Medii, quod est Justitia Christi Legalis nobis
per fidem Imputata: Omnem itaque Justificationem proprie Legalem esse constat.

Answ. 1. When I read that he will have but one sense or sort of Justification,
will yet have the Denomination to be ex termino, and so justifies my
distinction of it, according to the various Termini; And here how he makes the
Righteousness of Christ to be but the MEDIVM of our Justification, (though he
should have told us which sort of Medium he means) he seems to me a very
favorable consenting Adversary: And I doubt those Divines who maintain that
Christ's Rig^teousness is the Causa Formalis of our Justification, (who are no
small ones, nor a few, though other in answer to the Papists disclaim it) yea,
and those that make it but Causa Materialis, (which may have a sound sense)
will think this Learned Man betrayeth their Cause by prevarication, and seems
to set fiercly against me, that he may yield up the Cause with less suspicion.
But the truth is, we all know but in part, and therefore err in part, and Error
is inconsistent with it self. And as we have conflicting Flesh and Spirit in
the Will, so have we conflicting Light and Darkness, Spirit and Flesh in the
Understanding; And it is very perceptible throughout this Author's Book, that
in one line the Flesh and Darkness says one thing, and in the next often the
Spirit and Light says the contrary, and sees not the inconsistency: And so
though the dark and fleshy part rise up in wrathful striving Zeal against the
Concord and Peace of Christians, on pretense that other Men's Errors wrong the
Truth, yet I doubt not but Love and Unity have some interest in his lucid and
Spiritual part. We do not only grant him that Christ's Righteousness is a
Medium of our Justification, (for so also is Faith a Condition, and Dispositio
Receptiva being a Medium); nor only some Cause, (for so also is the
Covenant-Donation); but that it is* an efficient meritorious Cause, and because
if Righteousness had been that of our own, Innocence would have been founded in
Merit, we may call Christ's Righteousness the material Cause of our
Justification, remotely, as it is Materia Meriti, the Matter of the Merit which
procures it.

2. But for all this it follows not that all Justification is only Legal, as
Legal notes its respect to the Law of Innocence: For 1. we are justified from
or against che Accusation of being non-performers of the Condition of the Law
of Grace; 2. And of being therefore unpardoned, and liable to its sorer
Penalty. 3. Our particular subordinate Personal Righteousness consisting in the
said performance of those Evangelical Conditions of Life, is so denominated
from its conformity to the Law of Grace, (as it instituteth its own Condition)
as the measure of it, (as Rectitudo ad Regulam). 4. Our Jus ad impunitatem and
vitam, resulteth from the Donative Act of the Law or Covenant of Grace, as the
Titulus qui est Fundamentum Juris, or supposition of our Faith as the
Condition. 5. This Law of Grace is the Norma Judicis, by which we shall be
judged at the Last Day. 6. The same Judge does now per sententiam conceptam judge
of us, as he will then judge per sententiam prolatam. 7. Therefore the Sentence
being virtually in the Law, this same Law of Grace, which in primo instanti
does make us Righteous, (by Condonation and Donation of Right) does in secundo
instanti, virtually justify us as containing that regulating use, by which we
are to be sententially justified. And now judge Reader, whether no Justification
be Evangelical, or by the Law of Grace, and so to be denominated: (for it is
lis de nomine that is by him managed). 8. Besides that the whole frame of
Causes in the Work of Redemption, (the Redeemer, his Righteousness, Merits,
Sacrifice, Pardoning Act, Intercession, etc.) are sure rather to be called
Matters of the Gospel, than of the Law.

And yet we grant him easily; 1. That Christ perfectly fulfilled the Law of
Innocence, and was justified thereby, and that we are justified by that
Righteousness of his, as the meritorious Cause. 2. That we being guilty of Sin
and Death, according to the tenor of that Law, and that Guilt being remitted by
Christ, as aforesaid, we are therefore justified from that Law, (that is, from
its Obligation of us to Innocence as the necessary terms of Life, and from its
Obligation of us to Death, for want of Innocence): But we are not justified by
that Law, either as fulfilled or as satisfied by us our selves, either
personally or by an Instrument, substitute or proper Representative, that was
Vicarius Obedientiae aut poenae. 3. And we grant that the Jews were delivered
from the positive Jewish Law, which is it that Paul calls, The Law of Works.
And if he please, in all these respects to call Justification Legal, we intend
not to quarrel with the name, (though what I called Legal in those Aphorisms, I
chose ever after to call rather, Justitia pro-legalis). But we cannot believe
him, 1. That it is only Legal; 2. Or that that is the only (or most) proper
denomination.

. 8. He proceeds thus, [ And it will be vain, if any argue, That yet none can
be saved without Evangelical Works, according to which it is confessed that all
men shall be judged: for the distinction is easy (which the Author of the
Aphorisms somewhere uses) between the first or Private, and the last or
Public Justification. -- In the first sense it is never said, That Works
justify, but contrary, That God justifies him that works not, Romans 4.5. In
the latter we confess that Believers are to be justified according to Works,
but yet not Of (or By) Works, nor that that Justification makes men just
before God, but only so pronounces them.

Answ. 1. This is such another Consenting Adversary as once before I was put to
answer; who with open mouth calls himself consequentially what he calls me;
if the same Cause, and not the Person make the Guilt. Nay let him consider
whether his grand and most formidable Weapon [So also says Bellarmine, with
other Papists] do not wound himself: For they commonly say, That the first
Justification is not of Works, or Works do not first justify us. Have I not
now proved that he erreth and complyeth with the Papists? If not, let him use
better Arguments himself.

2. But why is the first Justification called Private? Either he means God's
making us just constitutively, or his judging us so: and that per sententiam
conceptam only, or prolatam also.

1. The common distinction in Politics, inter judicium Privatum and Publicum,
is fetched from the Judge, who is either Persona privata vel publica: a private
Man, or an authorized Judge judging as such: And so the Judgment of Conscience,
Friends, Enemies, Neighbors, mere Arbitrators, etc. is Judicium privatum; and
that of a Judge in foro, is Judicium publicum, (yea, or in secret, before the
concerned Parties only in his Closet, so it be decisive): If this Learned
Doctor so understand it, then, 1. Constitutive Justification (which is truly
first) is public Justification, being done by God the Father, and by our
Redeemer, who sure are not herein private authorized Persons. 2. And the first
sentential Justification, as merely Virtual, and not yet Actual, viz. as it is
virtually in the Justifying Law of Grace as norma Judicis is public in suo
genere, being the virtus of a Public Law of God, or of his Donative Promise.
3. And the first Actual Justification, per Deum Judicem per sententiam
conceptam (which is God's secret judging the Thing and Person to be as they
are) is (secret indeed in se, yet revealed by God's public Word but) public
as to the Judge. 4. And the first sententia prolata (the fourth in order) is
someway public as opposite to secrecy, (for, 1. it is before the Angels of
Heaven; 2. And in part by Executive demonstrations on Earth): But it is
certainly by a public Judge, that is, God. 5. And the first Apologetical
Justification by Christ our Interceding Advocate, is public both quoad
personam, and as openly done in Heaven: And if this worthy Person deny any
Justification per sententiam Judicis, upon our first Believing, or before the
final Judgment, he would woefully fall out with the far greatest number of
Protestants, and especially his closest Friends, who use to make a Sentence of
God as Judge to be the Genus to Justification.

But if by [ Private and Public Justification]; he means [ secret and open].
1. How can he hope to be understood when he will use Political Terms
unexplained, out of the usual sense of Politicians: But no men use to abuse
words more than they that would keep the Church in flames by wordy
Controversies, as if they were of the terms of Life and Death. 2. And even in
that sense our first Justification is public or open, quoad Actum
Justificancantis, as being by the Donation of a public Word of God; Though
quoad effectum in recipiente, it must needs be secret till the Day of Judgment,
no Man knowing another Heart, whether he be indeed a sound Believer: And so of
the rest as is intim^ted.

Concerning, what I have said before, some may Object, 1. That there is no such
thing as our Justification notified before the Angels in Heaven. 2. That the
Sententia Concepta is God's Immanent Acts, and therefore Eternal.

Answ. To the first, I say, 1. It is certain by Luke 15.10. that the Angels
know of the Conversion of a Sinner, and therefore of his Justification and
publicly Rejoice therein. Therefore it is notified to them. 2. But I refer the
Reader for this, to what I have said to Mr. Tombs in my Disputation of
Justification, where I do give my thoughts, That this is not the Justification
by Faith meant by Paul, as Mr. Tombs asserteth it to be.

To the Second, I say, Too many have abused Theology, by the misconceiving of
the distinction of Immanent and Transient Acts of God, taking all for Immanent
which effect nothing ad extra. But none are properly Immanent quoad Objectum,
but such as God himself is the Object of, (as se intelligere, se amare): An Act
may be called indeed immanent in any of these three respects; 1. Ex part
Agentis; 2. Ex part Objecti; 3. Ex part effectus. 1. Ex part agentis, all
God's Acts are Immanent, for they are his Essence. 2. Ex part Objecti vel
Termini, God's Judging a Man Just or Unjust, Good or Bad, is transient; because
it is denominated from the state of the Terminus or Object: And so it may be
various and mutable denominatively, notwithstanding God's Simplicity and
Immutability. And so the Sententia Concepta is not ab Aeterno. 3. As to the
Effect, all confess God's Acts to be Transient and Temporary. But there are
some that effect not (as to judge a thing to be what it is).

3. Either this Militant Disputer would have his Reader believe that I say,
That a Man is justified by Works, in that which he called [ making just, and
the first Justification], or not: If he would, such untruth and unrighteousness
(contrary to the full drift of many of my Books, and even that which he
selected to oppose) is not a congruous way of disputing for Truth and
Righteousness: nor indeed is it tolerably ingenuous or modest. If not, then why
does he all along carry his professed agreement with me, in a militant strain,
persuading his Reader, that I savor of Socinianism or Popery, or some
dangerous Error, by saying the very same that he says. O what thanks does
God's Church owe such contentious Disputers for supposed Orthodoxness, that
like noctambuli, will rise in their sleep, and cry, Fire, Fire, or beat an
Allarm on their Drums, and cry out, The Enemy, The Enemy, and will not let
their Neighbors rest!

I have wearied my Readers with so often repeating in my Writings (upon such
repeated importunities of others) these following Assertions about Works.

1. That we are never justified, first or last, by Works of Innocence.

2. Nor by the Works of the Jewish Law (which Paul pleads against).

3. Nor by any Works of Merit, in point of Commutative Justice, or of
distributive Governing Justice, according to either of those Laws (of
Innocence, or Jewish).

4. Nor by any Works or Acts of Man, which are set against or instead of the
least part of God's Acts* Christ's Merits, or any of his part or honor.

5. Nor are we at first justified by any Evangelical Works of Love, Gratitude
or Obedience to Christ, as Works are distinguished from our first Faith and
Repentance.

6. Nor are we justified by Repentance, as by an instrumental efficient Cause,
or as of the same receiving Nature with Faith, except as Repentance signifies
our change from Unbelief to Faith, and so is Faith it self.

7. Nor are we justified by Faith as by a mere Act, or moral good Work.

8. Nor yet as by a proper efficient Instrument of our Justification.

9. Much less by such Works of Charity to Men, as are without true love to God.

10. And least of all, by Popish bad Works, called Good, (as Pilgrimages,
hurtful Austerities, etc.)

But if any Church-troubling Men will first call all Acts of Man's Soul by the
name of WORKS, and next will call no Act by the name of Justifying Faith, but
the belief of the Promise (as some) or the accepting of Christ's Righteousness
given or imputed to us, as in se, our own (as others) or [the Recumbency on
this Righteousness] (as others) or all these three Acts (as others); and if
next they will say that this Faith justifies us only as the proper
Instrumental Cause; And next that to look for Justification by any other Act of
Man's Soul, or by this Faith in any other respect, is to trust to that
Justification by Works, which Paul confuteth, and to fall from Grace, I do
detest such corrupting and abusing of the Scriptures, and the Church of Christ.
And I assert as follows;

1. That the Faith which we are justified by, does as essentially contain our
belief of the Truth of Christ's Person, Office, Death, Resurrection,
Intercession, etc. as of the Promise of Imputation.

2. And also our consent to Christ's Teaching, Government, Intercession, as to
Imputation.

3. And our Acceptance of Pardon, Spirit, and promised Glory, as well as
Imputed Righteousness of Christ.

4. Yea, that it is essentially a Faith in God the Father, and the Holy Ghost.

5. That it has in it essentially somewhat of Initial Love to God, to Christ,
to Recovery, to Glory; that is, of Volition; and so of Desire.

6. That it contains all that Faith, which is necessarily requisite at
Baptism to that Covenant; even a consenting-practical-belief in God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: and is our Christianity it self.

7. That we are justified by this Faith, as it is [ A moral Act of Man, adapted
to its proper Office, made by our Redeemer, the Condition of his Gift of
Justification, and so is the moral receptive aptitude of the Subject, or the
Dispositio materiae vel subjecti Recipientis]: Where the Matter of it is [ An
adapted moral Act of Man] (by Grace). The Ratio formalis of its Interest in our
Justification is [ Conditio praestita] speaking politically, and [ Aptitudo vel
Dispositio moralis Receptiva] speaking logically; which Dr. Twiss still calls
Causa dispositiva.

8. That Repentance as it is a change of the Mind from Unbelief to Faith, (in
God the Father, Son; and Holy Ghost) is this Faith denominated from its
Terminus a quo (principally).

9. That we are continually justified by this Faith as continued, as well as
initially justified by its first Act.

10. That as this Faith includes a consent to future Obedience, (that is,
Subjection) so the performance of that consent in sincere Obedience, is the
Condition of our Justification as continued (Secondarily) as well as Faith (or
consent it self) primarily: And that thus James means, that we are Justified
by Works.

11. That God judging of all things truly as they are, now judges Men just or
unjust, on these Terms.

12. And his Law being Norma judicii, now vertually judges us just on these
terms.

13. And that the Law of Grace being that which we are to be judged by, we
shall at the last Judgment also be judged (and so justified) thus far by or
according to our sincere Love, Obedience, or Evangelical Works, as the
Condition of the Law or Covenant of free Grace, which justifies and glorifieth
freely all that are thus Evangelically qualified, by and for the Merits,
perfect Righteousness and Sacrifice of Christ, which procured the Covenant or
free Gift of Universal Conditional Justification and Adoption, before and
without any Works or Conditions done by Man whatsoever.

Reader, Forgive me this troublesome often repeating the state of the
Controversy; I meddle with no other. If this be Justification by Works, I am
for it. If this Doctor be against it, he is against much of the Gospel. If he
be not, he had better have kept his Bed, than to have called us to Arms in his
Dream, when we have sadly warred so many Ages already about mere words. For my
part, I think that such a short explication of our sense, and rejection of
ambiguities, is fitter to end these quarrels, than the long disputations of
Confounders.

4. But when be says, [ Works make not a Man just, and yet we are at last
justified according to them], it is a contradiction, or unsound. For if he mean
Works in the sense excluded by Paul, we are not justified according to them,
viz. such as make, or are thought to make the Reward to be not of Grace, but of
Debt: But if he take Works in the sense intended by James, sincere Obedience is
a secondary constitutive part of that inherent or adherent personal
Righteousness, required by the Law of Grace, in subordination to Christ's
Meritorious Righteousness; And what Christian can deny this? So far it makes
us Righteous, (as Faith does initially). And what is it to be justified
according to our Works, but to be judged, so far as they are sincerely done, to
be such as have performed the secondary part of the Conditions of free-given
Life?

5. His [ According] but not [ ex operibus] at the Last Judgment, is but a
Logomachie [ According] signifies as much as I assert: But [ ex] is no unapt
Preposition, when it is but the subordinate part of Righteousness and
Justification, of which we speak, and signifies (with me) the same as [
According].

6. His Tropical Phrase, that [ Works pronouce us just] is another ambiguity:
That the Judge will pronounce us just according to them, as the foresaid second
part of the Constitutive Cause, or Matter of our Subordinate Righteousness, is
certain from Matthew. 25. and the scope of Scripture: But that they are only
notifying Signs, and no part of the Cause of the day to be tried, is not true,
(which too many assert).

. 9. He proceeds, [ If there be an Evangelical Justification at God's Bar,
distinct from the legal one, there will then also be in each an absolution of
diverse sins: For if the Gospel forgive the same sins as the Law, the same thing
will be done, and a double Justification will be unprofitable and idle. If from
diverse sins, then the Law forbids not the same things as the Gospel, etc.]

Answ. It Is pity such things should need any Answer.

1. It Is a false Supposition, That all Justification is Absolution from sin: To
justify the sincerity of our Faith and Holiness, is one act or part of our
Justification, against all (possible or actual) false Accusation.

2. The Law of Innocence commanded not the Believing Acceptance of Christ's
Righteousness and Pardon, and so the Remnants of that Law in the hand of Christ
(which is the Precept of perfect Obedience de futuro) commands it only
consequently, supposing the Gospel-Promise and Institution to have gone before,
and selected this as the terms of Life; so that as a Law in genere (existent
only in speciebus) commands Obedience, and the Law of Innocence in specie
commanded [ personal perfect perpetual Obedience, as the Condition of Life]; so
the Gospel commands Faith in our Redeemer, as the new Condition of Life: on
which supposition, even the Law of lapsed Nature further obliges us thereto:
And as the Commands differ, so do the Prohibitions.

There is a certain sort of sin excepted from pardon, by the pardoning Law,
viz. Final nonperformance of its Conditions: And to judge a Man not guilty of
this sin, is part of our Justification, as is aforesaid.

. 10. He adds, [ If Legal and Evangelical Justification are specie distinct,
then so are the Courts in which we are justified. -- If distinct and
subordinate, and so he that is justified by the law, is justified by the
Gospel, etc.]

Answ. 1. No Man is justified by the Law of Innocence or Works, but Christ: Did
I ever say that, [ That Law justifies us], who have voluminously wrote against
it? If he would have his Reader think so, his unrighteousness is such as
civility forbids me to give its proper Epithets to. If not, against what or
whom is all this arguing?

2. I call it [Legal] as it is that perfect Righteousness of Christ our Surety,
conform to the Law of Innocence; by which he was justified (though not absolved
and pardoned): I call it [ pro Legalis justitia], because that Law does not
justify us for it (but Christ only) but by it given us ad effecta by the
New Covenant; we are saved and justified from the Curse of that Law, or from
Damnation, is certainly as if we had done it our selves: I call Faith our
Evangelical Righteousness, on the Reasons too often mentioned. Now these may be
called Two Justifications, or (rather) two parts of one, in several respects,
as pleases the Speaker. And all such Word-Souldiers shall have their liberty
without my Contradiction.

3. And when will he prove that these two Sorts, or Parts, or Acts, may not be
at once transacted at the same Bar? Must there needs be one Court to try
whether I am a true Believer, or an Infidel, or Hypocrite; and another to judge
that being such, I am to be justified against all Guilt and Curse, by virtue of
Christ's Merits and Intercession? Why may not these two parts of one Man's
Cause be judged at the same Bar? And why must your Pupils be taught so to
conceive of so great a business, in it self so plain?

. 11. He proceeds, [ The Use of this Evangelical* Justification is made to
be, that we may be made partakers of the Legal Justification out of us, in
Christ: And so our Justification applies another Justification, and our
Remission of sins another.

Answ. No Sir; but our particular subordinate sort of Righteousness, consisting
in the performance of the Conditions of the free Gift, ( viz. a believing
suitable Acceptance) is really our Dispositio receptiva, being the Condition of
our Title to that Pardon and Glory, which for Christ's Righteousness if freely
given us. And our personal Faith and Sincerity must be justified, and we in
tantum, before our Right to Christ, Pardon and Life can be justified in foro.

2. And to justify us as sincere Believers, when others are condemned as
Hypocrites, and Unbelievers, and Impenitent, is not Pardon of Sin. These
Matters should have been put into your (excellent) Catechism, and not made
strange, much less obscured and opposed, when laying by the quarrels about mere
words, I am confident you deny none of this.

. 12. He adds, [ Then Legal Justification is nothing but a bare word, seeing
unapplyed; as to the Matter it is nothing, as it is not called Healing by a
Medicine not applied; nor was it ever heard that one Healing did apply another].

Answ. Alas, alas, for the poor Church, if this be the Academies best! sorrow
must excuse my Complaint! If it be an Argument it must run thus: If Legal (or
pro-legal) Righteousness (that is, our part in Christ's Righteousness) be none
to us (or none of our Justification) when not-applyed, than it is none also
when it is applied: But, etc.

Answ. It is none till applied: Christ's Merits, or Legal Righteousness
justify himself, but not us till applied: (Do you think otherwise, or do you
wrangle against your self?) But I deny your Consequence: How prove you that it
is none when applied therefore? Or the Cure is none when the Medicine is
applied?

Perhaps you will say, That then our Personal Righteousness, and subordinate
Justification, is ours before Christ's Righteousness, and so the greater
depends on, and follows the less.

Answ. 1. Christ's own Righteousness is before ours. 2. His Condition, Pardon
to fallen Mankind is before ours. 3. This Gift being Conditional, excepteth the
nonperformance of the Condition; And the nature of a Condition, is to suspend
the effect of the Donation till performed. 4. Therefore the performance goes
before the said Effect, and our Title. 5. But it is not therefore any cause of
it, but a removal of the suspension; nor has the Donation any other dependence
on it. And is not all this beyond denial with Persons not studiously and
learnedly misled?

But you say, It was never heard that one Healing applied another.

Answ. And see you not that this is a lis de nomine, and of a name of your own
introduction for illustration? If we were playing at a Game of Tropes, I could
tell you that the Healing of Men's Unbelief is applicatory for the healing of
their Guilt; And the healing of Men's Ignorance, Pride, and Wrangling about
words, and frightning Men into a Conceit that it is about Life and Death, is
applicatory as to the healing of the Churches Wounds and Shame. But I rather
choose to ask you, Whether it was never heard that a particular subordinate
personal Righteousness (even Faith and Repentance) was made by God the
Condition of our Right to Pardon, and Life by Christ's Righteousness? Did you
never teach your Sholars this, (in what words you thought best?) And yet even
our Faith is a Fruit of Christ's Righteousness; but nevertheless the Condition
of other Fruits.

If you say that our Faith or Performance is not to be called Righteousness, I
refer you to my Answer to Mr. Cartwright; And if the word Righteousness be not
ofter (ten to one) used in Scripture for somewhat Personal, than for Christ's
Righteousness imputed, then think that you have said something.

If you say, But it justifies not as a Righteousness, but as an Instrument. I
Answer, 1. I have said elsewhere so much of its Instrumentality, that I am
ashamed to repeat it. 2. It justifies not at all, (for that signifies
efficiency); but only makes us capable Recipients. 3. We are justified by it
as a medium, and that is a Condition performed (as aforesaid): And when that
Condition by a Law is made both a Duty and a Condition of Life, the performance
is by necessary resultancy [a Righteousness]. But we are not justified by it,
as it is a Righteousness in genere; nor as a mere moral Virtue or Obedience to
the Law of Nature; but as it is the performance of the Condition of the Law of
Grace; and so as it is this particular Righteousness, and no other.

. 13. [ In Legal Justification (says he) taken precisely, either there is
Remission of sin, or not: If not, What Justification is that? If yea, then
Evangelical Justification is not necessary to the application of it; because
the Application is supposed, etc.]

Answ. 1. What I usually call [Evangelical Righteousness] he supposes me to
call Justification; which yet is true, and sound, but such as is before
explained.

2. This is but the same again, and needs no new answer; The performance of
the Condition is strangely here supposed to follow the Right or Benefit of the
Gift or Covenant: If he would have the Reader think I said so, he may as
ingeniously tell, that I deny all Justification: If not, what means he?

CHAP. VII. Dr. Tullies Quarrel about Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
considered.
. 1. CAp. 8. page 79. he says, [ Because no Man out of Socinus School, has by
his Dictates more sharply exagitated this Imputation of Righteousness, than the
Author of the Aphorisms; and it is in all men's hands, we think meet to bring
into a clearer Light, the things objected by him (or more truly his Sophistical
Cavils) whence the fitter Prospect may be taken of almost the whole
Controversie].

Answ. That the Reader may see by what Weapons Theological Warriors wound the
Churches Peace, and profligate brotherly Love; let him consider how many
palpable Untruths are in these few Lines, even in matter of Fact.

1. Let him read Dr. Gell, Mr. Thorndike, and by his own confession, the
Papists (a multitude of them) and tell me true, that [ No Man out of Socinus
School has, etc.] To say nothing of many late Writings near us.

2. If I have, 1. never written one word against [ Imputation of Righteousness]
there or elsewhere; 2. Yea, have often written for it; 3. And if those very Pages
be for it which he accuses; 4. Yea, if there and elsewhere I write more for it
than Olevian, Vrsine, Paraeus, Scultetus, Wendeline, Piscator, and all the rest
of those great Divines, who are for the Imputation only of the Passive
Righteousness of Christ, when I profess there and often, to concur with Mr.
Bradshaw, Grotius, and others that take in the Active also, yea and the
Habitual, yea and Divine respectively, as advancing the Merits of the Humane;
If all this be notoriously true, what Epithets will you give to this Academical
Doctors notorious Untruth?

3. When that Book of Aphorisms was suspended or retracted between twenty and
thirty years ago (publicly), because of many crude Passages and unapt Words,
and many Books since written by me purposely, fully opening my mind of the same
things; all which he passes wholly by, save a late Epistle; what credit is to
be given to that Man's ingenuity, who pretends that this being in all men's
hands, the answering it will so far clear all the Controversy.

. 2. Dr. T. [ He hence assaulteth the Sentence of the Reformed; because it
supposes, as he says, that we were in Christ, at least, legally before we
believed, or were born. But what proof of the consequence does he bring?] (The
rest are but his Reasons against the Consequences, and his talk against me, as
pouring out Oracles, etc.)

Answ. 1. Is this the mode of our present Academical Disputers, To pass by the
stating of the Controversy, yea, to silence the state of it, as laid down by
the Author, whom he opposes in that very place, (and more fully elsewhere
often)? Reader, the Author of the Aphorisms, page 45. and forward,
distinguishing as Mr. Bradshaw does, of the several senses of Imputation, and
how Christ's Righteousness is made ours, 1. Begins with their Opinion, who
hold, [ That Christ did so obey in our stead, as that in God's esteem, and in
point of Law we were in Christ dying and suffering, and so in him we did both
perfectly fulfill the Commands of the Law by Obedience, and the Threatenings of
it by bearing the Penalty, and thus (say they) is Christ's Righteousness
imputed to us, viz. His Passive Righteousness for the pardon of our sins, and
deliverance from the Penalty; His Active Righteousness for the making of us
Righteous, and giving us title to the Kingdom; And some say the Habitual
Righteousness of his Humane Nature, instead of our own Habitual Righteousness;
Yea, some add the Righteousness of the Divine Nature].

The second Opinion which he recites is this, [ That God the Father accepts
the sufferings and merits of his Son, as a valuable consideration, on which he
will wholly forgive and acquit the Offenders, and receive them into his favor,
and give them the addition of a more excellent happiness, so they will but
receive his Son on the terms expressed in the Gospel.

And as distinct from theirs, who would thus have the Passive Righteousness
only imputed, he professes himself to hold with Bradshaw, Grotius, etc. that
the Active also is so imputed, being, Justitia Meriti, as well as Personae, and
endeavors to prove it: But not imputed in the first rigid sense, as if God
esteemed us to have been, and done, and suffered our selves in and by Christ,
and merited by him. Thus he states the Controversy; And does this Doctor fight
for Truth and Peace, by 1. passing by all this; 2. Saying, I am against Imputed
Righteousness; 3. And against the Reformed? Were not all the Divines before
named Reformed? Was not Camero, Capellus, Placeus, Amyrald, Dallaeus* Blondel,
etc. Reformed? Were not Wotton, Bradshaw, Gataker, etc. Reformed? Were not of
late Mr. Gibbons, Mr. Truman, to pass many yet alive, Reformed? Must that Name
be shamed, by appropriating it to such as this Doctor only?

2. And now let the Reader judge, with what face he denies the Consequence,
(that it supposes us to have been in Christ legally, etc.) When as I put it
into the Opinion opposed, and opposed no other. But I erred in saying, that [
most of our ordinary Divines] hold it; But he more in fathering it in common on
the Reformed.

. 2. Dr. T. [2. Such Imputation of Righteousness, he says, agrees not with
Reason or Scripture: But what Reason means he? Is it that vain, blind,
maimed, unmeasurably procacious and tumid Reason of the Cracovian Philosophers?
-- Next he says, Scripture is silent of the Imputed Righteousness of Christ;
what a saying is this of a Reformed Divine? so also Bellarmine, etc.

Answ. Is it not a doleful case that Orthodoxness must be thus defended? Is
this the way of vindicating Truth? 1. Reader, my words were these, (just like
Bradshaws) [ It tea^heth Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in so strict a
sense, as will neither stand with Reason, nor the Doctrine of the Scripture,
much less with the PHRASE of Scripture, which mentions no Imputation of
Christ or his Righteousness]. 1. Is this a denying of Christ's Righteousness
imputed? Or only of that intolerable sense of it? 2. Do I say here that
Scripture mentions not Imputed Righteousness, or only that strict sense of
it? 3. Do I not expressly say, It is the Phrase that is not to be found in
Scripture, and the unsound sense, but not the sound?

2. And as to the Phrase, Does this Doctor, or can any living Man find that
Phrase in Scripture, [ Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us]? And when he
knows that it is not there, are not his Exclamations, and his Bug-bears [
Cracovian Reason, and Bellarmine] his dishonor, that has no better Weapons to
use against the Churches Peace? To tell us that the sense or Doctrine is in
Scripture, when the question is of the Phrase, or that Scripture speaks in
his rigid sense, and not in ours, is but to lose time, and abuse the Reader,
the first being impertinent, and the second the begging of the Question.

. 3. Dr. T. The Greek word answering to Imputation, is ten times in Romans 4. And
what is imputed but Righteousness? we have then some imputed Righteousness. The
Question is, only what or whose it is, Christ's or our own? Not ours, therefore
Christ's: If ours, either its the Righteousness of Works, or of Faith, etc.

Answ. 1. But what is all this to the Phrase? Could you have found that Phrase [
Christ's Righteousness is imputed], why did you not recite the words, but
Reason as for the sense?

2. Is that your way of Disputation, to prove that the Text speaks of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, when the Question was only, In what
sense? What kind of Readers do you expect, that shall take this for rational,
candid, and a Plea for Truth?

3. But to a Man that comes unprejudiced, it is most plain, that Paul means
by [ imputing it for Righteousness] that the Person was or is, accounted,
reckoned, or judged Righteous, where Righteousness is mentioned as the formal
Relation of the Believer: so that whatever be the matter of it (of which next)
the formal Relation sure is our own, and so here said: And if it be from the
matter of Christ's Righteousness, yet that must be our own, by your Opinion.
And it must be our own, in and to the proper Effects, in mine. But sure it is
not the same numerical formal Relation of [ Righteousness] that is in Christ's
Person, and in ours: And it is that formal Relation, as in Abraham, and not in
Christ, that is called Abraham's Reputed Righteousness in the Text: I scarce
think you will say the contrary.

. 4. Dr. T. [ But Faith is not imputed to us for Righteousness.

Answ. Expressly against the words of the Holy Ghost there often repeated. Is this
defending the Scripture, expressly to deny it? Should not reverence, and our
subscription to the Scripture sufficiently rather teach us to distinguish, and
tell in what sense it is imputed, and in what not, than thus to deny, without
distinction, what it does so often assert? Yea, the Text names nothing else as
so imputed, but Faith.

. 5. If it be imputed, it is either as some Virtue, or Humane Work, (the (...)
Credere) or as it apprehends and applies Christ's Righteousness? Not (the
first) -- If Faith be imputed relatively only, as it applies to a Sinner the
Righteousness of Christ, it is manifest that it is the Righteousness of Christ
only that is imputed, and that Faith does no more to Righteousness, than an
empty hand to receive an Alms.

Answ. 1. Sure it does as a voluntarily receiving hand, and not as a mere empty
hand. And voluntary grateful Reception may be the Condition of a Gift.

2. You and I shall shortly find that it will be the Question on which we shall
be Justified or Condemned; not only whether we received Christ's Righteousness,
but whether by Faith we received Christ in all the Essentials of his Office,
and to all the essential saving Uses: Yea, whether according to the sense of
the Baptismal Covenant, we first believingly received* and gave up our selves
to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and after performed sincerely that
Covenant.

3. But let me defend the Word of God: Faith is imputed for Righteousness, even
this Faith now described; 1. Remotely, ex materiae aptitudine, for its fitness
to its formal Office; And that fitness is, 1. Because it is an Act of Obedience
to God, or morally good, (for a bad or indifferent Act does not justify). 2.
More specially as it is the receiving, trusting, and giving up our selves to
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to the proper ends of Redemption, or a
suitable Reception of the freely offered Gift; and so connoteth Christ the
Object (for the Object is essential to the Act in specie). 2. But proximately
Faith is so reputed, or imputed, as it is the performance of the Condition of
the Justifying Covenant or Donation.

And to be imputed for Righteousness, includes, That [ It is the part required
of us by the Law of Grace, to make us partakers of the Benefits of Christ's
Righteousness, which meriteth Salvation for us instead of a legal and perfect
Righteousness of our own, (which we have not). Or, [ Whereas we fell short of a
Righteousness of Innocence, Christ by such a Righteousness has merited our
Pardon and Salvation, and given title to them by a New Covenant of Grace, which
makes this Faith the Condition of our Title; and if we do this, we shall be
judged evangelically Righteous; that is, such as have done all that was
necessary to their right in Christ and the said Benefits; and therefore have
such a Right].

This is plain English, and plain Truth, wrangle no more against it, and
against the very Letter of the Text, and against your Brethren and the Churches
Concord, by making Men believe that there are grievous Differences, where there
are none.

Reader, I was going on to Answer the rest, but my time is short, Death is at
the door: Thou see what kind of Work I have of it, even to detect a Learned
Man's Oversights, and temerarious Accusations. The weariness will be more to
thee and me, than the profit: I find little before, but what I have before
answered here, and often elsewhere; And therefore I will here take up, only
adding one Chapter of Defense of that Conciliation which I attempted in an
Epistle to Mr. W. Allens Book of the Two Covenants, and this Doctor, like an
Enemy of Peace, assaulteth.

CHAP. VIII. The Concord of Protestants in the Matter of Justification
defended, against Dr. Tullies Oppositions, who would make Discord under
pretense of proving it.
. 1. WHile Truth is pretended by most, that by envious striving introduce
Confusion, and every evil Work, it usually falls out by God's just Judgment,
that such are almost as opposite to Truth, as to Charity and Peace. What more
palpable instances can there be, than such as on such accounts have lately
assaulted me: Mr. Danvers, Mr. Bagshaw, etc. and now this Learned Doctor. The
very stream of all his Opposition against me about Imputation, is enforced by
this often repeated Forgery, that I deny all Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness: Yea, he neither by fear, modesty, or ingenuity, was restrained
from writing, page 117. [ Omnem ludibrio habet Imputationem] [ He derideth all
Imputation]. Judge by this what credit contentious Men deserve.

. 2. The conciliatory Propositions which I laid down in an Epistle to Mr. W.
Allens Book, I will here transcribe, that the Reader may see what it is that
these Militant Doctors war against.

Lest any who know not how to stop in mediocrity, should be tempted by
Socinians or Papists, to think that we countenance any of their Errors, or that
our Differences in the point of Justification by Faith or Works, are greater
than indeed they are; and lest any weak Opinionative Persons, should clamor
unpeaceably against their Brethren, and think to raise a name to themselves for
their differing Notions; I shall here give the Reader such evidences of our
real Concord, as shall silence that Calumny.

Though some few Lutherans did, upon peevish suspiciousness against George
Major long ago, assert, That [Good Works are not necessary to Salvation]: And
though some few good Men, whose Zeal without Judgment does better serve their
own turn than the Churches, are jealous, lest all the good that is ascribed to
Man, be a dishonor to God; and therefore speak as if God were honored most by
saying the worst words of our selves; and many have uncomely and irregular
Notions about these Matters: And though some that are addicted to sidings, do
take it to be their Godly Zeal to censure and reproach the more understanding
sort, when they most grossly err themselves: And though too many of the People
are carried about through injudiciousness and temptations to false Doctrines
and evil Lives; yet is the Argument of Protestants thus manifested.

1. They all affirm that Christ's Sacrifice, with his Holiness and perfect
Obedience, are the meritorious Cause of the forgiving Covenants, and of our
Pardon and Justification thereby, and of our Right to Life Eternal, which it
gives us. And that this Price was not paid or given in it self immediately to
us, but to God for us; and so, that our foresaid Benefits are its Effects.

2. They agree that Christ's Person and ours were not really the same; and
therefore that the same Righteousness, which is an Accident of one, cannot
possibly be an Accident of the other.

3. They all detest the Conceit, that God should aver, and repute a Man to have
done that which he never did.

4. They all agree that Christ's Sacrifice and Merits are really so effectual
to procure our Pardon, Justification, Adoption, and right to the sealing Gift
of the Holy Ghost, and to Glory, upon our Faith and Repentance; that God gives
us all these benefits of the New Covenant as certainly for the sake of Christ
and his Righteousness, as if we had satisfied him, and merited them our selves:
and that thus far Christ's Righteousness is ours in its Effects, and imputed to
us, in that we are thus used for it, and shall be judged accordingly.

5. They all agree, that we are justified by none, but a practical or working
Faith.

6. And that this Faith is the Condition of the Promise, or Gift of
Justification and Adoption.

7. And that Repentance is a Condition also, though (as it is not the same with
Faith, as Repentance of Unbelief is) on another aptitudinal account; even as a
willingness to be cured, and a willingness to take one for my Physician, and to
trust him in the use of his Remedies, are on several accounts the Conditions on
which that Physician will undertake the Cure, or as willingness to return to
subjection and thankful acceptance of a purchased Pardon, and of the Purchasers
Love and future Authority, are the Conditions of a Rebel's Pardon.

8. And they all agree, that in the first instant of a Man's Conversion or
Believing, he is entered into a state of Justification, before he has done any
outward Works: and that so it is true, that good Works follow the Justified,
and go not before his initial Justification: as also in the sense that Austin
spoke it, who took Justification, for that which we call Sanctification or
Conversion.

9. And they all agree, that Justifying Faith is such a receiving affiance, as
is both (...) Intellect and the Will; and therefore as in (...), participateth
of some kind of Love to the justifying Object, as well as to Justification.

10. And that no Man can choose or use Christ as a Means (so called, in respect
to his own intention) to bring him to God the Father, who has not so much love
to God, as to take him for his end in the use of that means.

11. And they agree, that we shall be all judged according to our Works, by the
Rule of the Covenant of Grace, though not for our Works, by way of commutative,
or legal proper merit. And Judging is the Genus, whose Species is Justifying
and Condemning: and to be judged according to our Works, is nothing but to be
justified or condemned according to them.

12. They all agree, that no Man can possibly merit of God in point of
Commutative Justice, nor yet in point of Distributive or Governing Justice,
according to the Law of Nature or Innocence, as Adam might have done, nor by
the Works of the Mosaical Law.

13. They all agree, that no Works of Man's are to be trusted in, or pleaded,
but all excluded, and the Conceit of them abhorred.

1. As they are feigned to be against, or instead of the free Mercy of God.

2. As they are against, or feigned, instead of the Sacrifice, Obedience,
Merit, or Intercession of Christ.

3. Or as supposed to be done of our selves, without the Grace of the Holy
Ghost.

4. Or as supposed falsely to be perfect.

5. Or as supposed to have any of the afore-disclaimed Merit.

6. Or as materially consisting in Mosaical Observances.

7. Much more in any superstitious Inventions.

8. Or in any Evil mistaken to be Good.

9. Or as any way inconsistent with the Tenor of the freely pardoning Covenant.
In all these senses Justification by Works is disclaimed by all Protestants at
least.

14. Yet all agree, that we are created to good Works in Christ Jesus, which
God has ordained, that we should walk therein; and that he, that names the
Name of Christ, must depart from iniquity, or else he has not the Seal of God;
and that he that is born of God sins not; that is, predominantly. And that
all Christ's Members are Holy, Purified, zealous of Good Works, cleansing
themselves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, that they might perfect
Holiness in God's fear, doing good to all Men, as loving their Neighbors as
themselves; and that if any Man have not the Sanctifying Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his, nor without Holiness can see God.

15. They all judge reverently and charitably of the Ancients, that used the
word [Merit of Good Works], because they meant but a moral aptitude for the
promised Reward, according to the Law of Grace through Christ.

16. They confess the thing thus described themselves, however they like not
the name of Merit, lest it should countenance proud and carnal Conceits.

17. They judge no Man to be Heretical for the bare use of that word, who
agrees with them in the sense.

18. In this sense they agree, that our Gospel-Obedience is such a necessary
aptitude to our Glorification, as that Glory (though a free Gift) is yet truly
a reward of this Obedience.

19. And they agree, that our final Justification by Sentence at the Day of
Judgment does pass upon the same Causes, Reasons, and Conditions, as our
Glorification does.

20. They all agree, that all faithful Ministers must bend the labor of their
Ministry in public and private, for promoting of Holiness and good Works, and
that they must difference by Discipline between the Obedient and the
Disobedient. And O! that the Papists would as zealously promote Holiness and
good Works in the World, as the true serious Protestants do, whom they
factiously and peevishly accuse as Enemies to them; and that the Opinion,
Disputing, and name of good Works, did not cheat many wicked Persons into
self-flattery and Perdition, while they are void of that which they dispute
for. Then would not the Mahometans and Heathens be deterred from Christianity
by the wickedness of these nominal Christians, that are near them: nor would
the serious practice of that Christianity, which themselves in general profess,
be hated, scorned, and persecuted by so many, both Protestants and Papists; nor
would so many contend that they are of the True Religion, while they are really
of no Religion at all any further, than the Hypocrites Picture and Carcass may
be called Religion: Were Men but resolved to be serious Learners, serious
Lovers, serious Practisers according to their knowledge, and did not live like
mockers of God, and such as look toward the Life to come in jest, or unbelief,
God would vouchsafe them better acquaintance with the True Religion than most
Men have.

. 3. One would think now that this should meet with no sharp Opposition, from
any Learned lover of Peace; and that it should answer for it self, and need no
defense. But this Learned Man for all that, among the rest of his Military
Exploits, must here find some Matter for a Triumph.

And 1. Page 18. he assaulteth the third Propos. [ They all detest the Conceit,
that God should aver, and repute a Man to have done that which he never did].

And is not this true? Do any sober Men deny it, and charge God with Error or
Untruth? Will not this Man of Truth and Peace, give us leave to be thus far
agreed, when we are so indeed?

But says he, [ Yea, the Orthodox abhor the contrary, if [to have done it] be
taken in sensu forensi, (for in a Physical and Personal, they abhor it not, but
deride it): Does the Aphorist abhor these and suchlike sayings, [We are dead,
buried, risen from the Dead with Christ?]

Answ. 1. Take notice Reader, that it is but the Words, and not the Matter that
he here assaulteth; so that all here seems but lis de nomine. He before, page
84. extolleth Chrysostom for thus expounding, [He made him sin for us]; that
is* to be condemned as an Offender, and to die as a Blasphemer. And this sense
of Imputation we all admit; But Chrysostom in that place often tells us, That
by [Sin] he means both one counted a wicked Man by his Persecutors, [not by
God] and one that suffered that cursed Death, which was due to wicked cursed
Men: And which of us deny not Justification by Works as Chrysostom does? I
subscribe to his words, [ It is God s Righteousness; seeing it is not of Works
(for in them it were necessary that there be found no blot) but of Grace, which
blotteth out and extinguisheth all sin: And this begets us a double benefit,
for it suffers us not to be lift up in mind, because it is all the Gift of
God, and it shows the greatness of the benefit]. This is as apt an Expression
of my Judgment of Works and Grace as I could choose. But it is given to some Men
to extol that in one Man, which they fervently revile in others. How frequently
is Chrysostom by many accused as favoring Free Will, and Man's Merits, and
smelling of Pelagianism? And he that is acquainted with Chrysostom, must know,
That he includes all these things in Justification. 1. Remission of the Sin,
as to the Punishment, 2. Remission of it by Mortification, (for so he calls
it, in Romans 3. p. (mihi) 63.) 3. Right to Life freely given for Christ's sake.
4. And Inherent Righteousness through Faith: And he often says, That this is
called the Righteousness of God, because as God, who is living, quickens the
dead, and as he that is strong gives strength to the weak; so he that is
Righteous, does suddenly make them Righteous that were lapsed into sin], as he
there also speaks. And he often tells us, It is Faith it self, and not only
Christ believed in, that is imputed for Righteousness, or Justifies: And in
Romans 4. p. 80. he calls the Reward, [the Retribution of Faith]. And page 89.
he thus conjoyneth [ Faith and Christ's Death] to the Question, How Men
obnoxious to so much sin are justified, [he shows that he blotted out all
sin, that he might confirm what he said, both from the Faith of Abraham by
which he was justified, and from our Saviors Death, by which we are delivered
from sin]. But this is on the by.

2. But says Dr. T. The Orthodox abhor the contrary in sensu forensi.

Answ. How easy is it to challenge the Titles of Orthodox, Wise, or good Men
to ones self? And who is not Orthodox, himself being Judge? But it seems with
him, no Man must pass for Orthodox that is not in so gross an error of his
Mind, (if these words, and not many better that are contrary must be the
discovery of it) viz. That will not say, that in sensu forensi, God esteems
Men to have done that which they never did. The best you can make of this is,
that you cover the same sense, which I plainlier express, with this illfavoured
Phrase of Man's inventing: But if indeed you mean any more than I by your
sensus forensis, viz. that such a suffering and meriting for us may, in the lax
improper way of some Lawyers speaking, be called, [ Our own Doing, Meriting,
Suffering, etc.] I have proved, that the Doctrine denied by me, subverteth the
Gospel of Christ.

Reader, I remember what Grotius (then Orthodox, thirty years before his Death)
in that excellent Letter of Church-Orders, Predestination, Perseverance, and
Magistrates, animadverting on Molinaeus, says, How great an injury those
Divines, who turn the Christian Doctrine into unintelligible Notions and
Controversies, do to Christian Magistrates; because it is the duty of
Magistrates to discern and preserve necessary sound Doctrine, which these Men
would make them unable to discern. The same I must say of their injury to all
Christians, because all should hold fast that which is proved True and Good,
which this sort of Men would disable them to discern. We justly blame the
Papists for locking up the Scripture, and performing their Worship in an
unknown Tongue. And alas, what abundance of well-meaning Divines do the same
thing by undigested Terms and Notions, and unintelligible Distinctions, not
adapted to the Matter, but customarily used from some Persons reverenced by
them that led the way? It is so in their Tractates, both of Theology and other
Sciences; and the great and useful Rule, Verba Rebus aptanda sunt, is laid
aside: or rather, Men that understand not Matter, are like enough to be little
skilful in the expressing of it: And as Mr. Pemble says, A cloudy
unintelligible style, usually signifies a cloudy unintelligent Head, (to that
sense): And as Mr. J. Humfrey tells Dr. Fullwood, (in his unanswerable late
Plea for the Conformists against the charge of Schism) page 29. [ So overly are
men ordinarily wont to speak at the first sight, against that which others have
long thought upon]; that some Men think, that the very jingle of a distinction
not understood is warrant enough for their reproaching that Doctrine as
dangerous and unsound, which has cost another perhaps twenty times as many
hard studies, as the Reproachers ever bestowed on that Subject.

To deliver thee from those Learned Obscurities, read but the Scripture
impartially, without their Spectacles and ill-devised Notions, and all the
Doctrine of Justification that is necessary, will be plain to thee: And I will
venture again to fly so far from flattering those, called Learned Men, who
expect it, as to profess that I am persuaded the common sort of honest
unlearned Christians, (even Plowmen and Women) do better understand the
Doctrine of Justification, than many great Disputers will suffer themselves or
others to understand it, by reason of their forestalling ill-made Notions:
these unlearned Persons commonly conceive, 1. That Christ in his own Person, as
a Mediator, did by his perfect Righteousness and Sufferings, merit for us the
free pardon of all our sins, and the Gift of his Spirit and Life Eternal, and
has promised Pardon to all that are Penitent Believers, and Heaven to all that
so continue, and sincerely obey him to the end; and that all our
after-failings, as well as our former sins, are freely pardoned by the
Sacrifice, Merits, and Intercession of Christ, who also gives us his Grace for
the performance of his imposed Conditions, and will judge us, as we have or have
not performed them]. Believe but this plain Doctrine, and you have a righter
understanding of Justification, than many would let you quietly enjoy, who tell
you, [That Faith is not imputed for Righteousness; that it justifies you only
as an Instrumental Cause, and only as it is the reception of Christ's
Righteousness, and that no other Act of Faith is justifying, and that God
esteems us to have been perfectly Holy and Righteous, and fulfilled all the
Law, and died for our own sins, in or by Christ, and that he was politically
the very Person of every Believing Sinner]; with more such like.

And as to this distinction which this Doctor will make a Test of the Orthodox,
(that is, Men of of his Size and Judgment) you need but this plain explication
of it.

1. In Law-sense, a Man is truly and fitly said himself to have done that,
which the Law or his Contract allows him to do either by himself or another;
(as to do an Office, or pay a Debt by a Substitute or Vicar). For so I do it by
my Instrument, and the Law is fulfilled and not broken by me, because I was at
liberty which way to do it. In this sense I deny that we ever fulfilled all the
Law by Christ; and that so to hold subverts all Religion as a pernicious
Heresy.

2. But in a tropical improper sense, he may be said to [ be esteemed of God to
have done what Christ did; who shall have the benefits of Pardon, Grace, and
Glory thereby merited, in the manner and measure given by the free Mediator, as
certainly as if* he had done it himself]. In this improper sense we agree to
the Matter, but are sorry that improper words should be used as a snare against
sound Doctrine, and the Churches Love and Concord. And yet must we not be
allowed Peace?

. 4. But my free Speech here makes me remember how sharply the Doctor
expounded and applied one word in the retracted Aphorisms: I said (not of the
Men, but of the wrong Opinion opposed by me) [ It fondly supposes a Medium
betwixt one that is just, and one that is no sinner] one that has his sin or
guilt taken away, and one that has his unrighteousness taken away: It Is true
in bruits and insensibles that are not subjects capable of Justice, there is,
etc. There is a Negative Injustice which denominateth the Subject non-justum,
but no^ injustum, where Righteousness is not due. But when there is the debitum
habendi, its privative. The Doctor learnedly translateth first the word [
fondly] by [ stolide]; and next he ( fondly, though not stolide) would persuade
the Reader, that it is said of the Men, though himself translate it [ Doctrina].

And next he blows his Trumpet to the War, with this exclamation, [ Stolide!
O vocis mollitiem, and modestiam! O stolidos Ecclesiae Reformatae Clarissimos
Heroas! Aut ignoravit certe, aut scire se dissimulat, (quod affine est
calumniae) quid isti statu^nt, quos loquitur, stolidi Theologi].

Answ. 1. How blind are some in their own Cause? Why did not Conscience at the
naming of Calumny say, [ I am now committing it?] It were better write in
English, if Latin translations must needs be so false! we use the word [ fond]
in our Country, in another sense than [ foolish]; with us it signifies any
biased Inclination, which beyond reason propendeth to one side: and so we use
to say, That Women are fond of their Children, or of any thing over-loved: But
perhaps he can use his Logic, to gather by consequences the Title of the
Person, from the Title of his Opinion, and to gather [ foolishly] by
consequence out of [ fondly]. To all which I can but answer, That if he had
made himself the Translator of my Words, and the Judge of my Opinions; if this
be his best, he should not be chosen as such by me. But it may be he turned to
Riders Dictionary, and found there [ fondly, vide foolishly].

2. The Stolidi Theologi then is his own phrase! And in my Opinion, another
Man's Pen might better have called the Men of his own Opinion [ Ecclesiae
Reformatae clarissimos Heroas] compared with others! I take Gataker, Bradshaw,
Wotton, Camero, and his followers; Vrsine, Olevian,*Piscator, Paraeus,
Wendeline, and multitudes such, to be as famous Heroes as himself: But this
also on the by.

. 5. But I must tell him whether I abhor the Scripture Phrase, [ We are dead,
buried, and risen with Christ].

I answer, No; nor will I abhor to say, That in sensu forensi, I am one
political Person with Christ, and am perfectly holy and obedient by and in him,
and died and redeemed my self by him, when he shall prove them to be Scripture
Phrases: But I desire the Reader not to be so fond, (pardon the word) as by
this bare question to be enticed to believe, that it is any of the meaning of
those Texts that use that Phrase which he mentions, that [ Legally, or in
sensu forensi, every Believer is esteemed by God to have himself personally
died a violent death on the Cross, and to have been buried, and to have risen
again, and ascended into Heaven, nor yet to be now there in Glory, because
Christ did and does all this in our very Legal Person. Let him but 1. consider
the Text, 2. and Expositors, 3. and the Analogy of Faith, and he will find
another sense; viz. That we so live by Faith on a dying, buried, risen and
glorified Savior, as that as such he dwells objectively in our Hearts, and
we partake so of the Fruits of his Death, Burial, and Resurrection, and Glory,
as that we follow him in a Holy Communion, being dead and buried to the World
and Sin, and risen to newness of Life, believing that by his Power we shall
personally, after our death and burial, rise also unto Glory. I will confess
that we are perfectly holy and obedient by and in Christ, as far as we are now
dead, buried, and risen in him.

. 6. And here I will so far look back, as to remember, That he (as some others)
confidently tells us, That [ the Law bound us both to perfect Obedience, and
to punishment for our sin, and therefore pardon by our own suffering in Christ,
may stand with the reputation, that we were perfectly Obedient and Righteous in
Christ.]

Answ. And to what purpose is it to dispute long, where so notorious a
contradiction is not only not discerned, but obtruded as tantum non necessary
to our Orthodoxness, if not to our Salvation? I ask him,

1. Was not Christ as our Mediator perfectly holy habitually, and actually,
without Original or Actual Sin?

2. If all this be reputed to be in se, our own as subjected in and done by our
selves political, or in sensu forensi; Are we not then reputed in foro, to have
no original or actual sin, but to have innocently fulfilled all the Law, from
the first hour of our lives to the last? Are we reputed innocent in Christ, as
to one part only of our lives, (if so, which is it?) or as to all?

3. If as to all, is it not a contradiction that in Law-sense, we are reputed
perfectly Holy and Innocent, and yet sinners.

4. And can he have need of Sacrifice or Pardon, that is reputed never to have
sinned (legally)?

5. If he will say that in Law-sense, we have or are two Persons, let him
expound the word Persons only, as of Qualities and Relations, (nothing to our
Case in hand); or else say also, That as we are holy and perfect in one of our
own Persons, and sinful, unrighteous, or ungodly in another, so a Man my be in
Heaven in one of his own Persons, and on Earth, yea and in Hell in the other:
And if he mean that the same Man is justified in his Person in Christ, and
condemned in his other Person; consider which of these is the Physical Person,
for I think its that which is like to suffer.

. 7. page 224. He has another touch at my Epistle, but gently forbeareth
contradiction as to Number. 8. And he says so little to the 11 th, as needs no
answer.

. 8. page 127. He assaulteth the first Number. of N. 13. That we all agree against
any conceit of Works that are against or instead of the free Mercy of God].

And what has he against this? Why that which takes up many pages of his
Book, and seems his chief strength in most of his Contest, viz. [The Papists
say the same] and [so says Bellarmine]. It Is strange that the same kind of Men
that deride Fanatic Sectaries, for crying out in Church-Controversies, [O
Antichristian Popery, Bellarmine, etc.] should be of the same Spirit, and take
the same course in greater Matters, and not perceive it, nor acknowledge their
agreement with them! But as Mr. J. Humfrey says in the foresaid Book of the
word [ Schism, Schism] often canted out against them, that will not
sacrilegiously surrender their Consciences, or desert their Ministry, [ The
great Bear has been so often led through the streets, that now the Boys lay by
all fear, and laugh or make sport at him] so say I of this Sectarian Bugbear, [
Popery, Antichristian, Bellarmine] either the Papists really say as we do, or
they do not. If not, is this Doctor more to be blamed for making them better
than they are, or for making us worse? which ever it be, Truth should defend
Truth. If they do, I heartily rejoice, and it shall be none of my labor any
more (whatever I did in my Confession of Faith) to prove that they do not. Let
who will manage such ungrateful Work. For my part, I take it for a better
Character of any Opinion, that Papists and Protestants agree in it, than that
the Protestants hold it alone. And so much for [ Papists and Bellarmine] though
I think I know better what they teach, than his Book will truly tell me.

. 9. But he adds, [ Humane Justifying Works are in reality adverse to the
free Mercy of God, therefore to be accounted of no value to Righteousness].

Answ. 1. But whose phrase is Justifying Works?

2. Does not the Holy Ghost say, That a Man is justified by Works, and not by
Faith only? Jam. 2.

3. Does not Christ say, By thy words thou shall be justified?

4. Do not I over and over tell the World, That I hold Justification by Works
in no sense, but as signifying the same as [ According to Works] which you own?
And so both Name and Thing are confessed by you to be Scriptural.

5. I have before desired the Reader to turn to the words, [ Righteous,
Righteousness, Justification, etc.] in his Concordance. And if there he find
Righteousness mentioned as consisting in some Acts of Man, many hundred times,
let him next say if he dare, that they are to be had in no price to
Righteousness: Or let him read the Texts cited by me in my Confession of Faith.

6. Because, Faith, Repentance, Love, Obedience, are that whose sincerity is to
be judged in order to our Life or Death ere long; I will not say that they are
to be vilified as to such a Righteousness or Justification, as consists in
our vindication from the charge of Impenitency, Infidelity, Unholiness,
Hypocrisy, etc. The reading of Mat. 25. resolved me for this Opinion.

. 10. Next he notes our detesting such Works as are against or instead of
Christ's Sacrifice, Righteousness, Merits, etc. To this we have the old Cant,
The Papists say the like.

Reader, I proved that the generality of Protestants are agreed in all those
twenty Particulars, even in all the material Doctrines about Man's Works and
Justification, while this warlike Doctor would set us all together by the ears
still, he is overruled to assert that the Papists also are agreed with us. The
more the better, I am glad if it be so, and will here end with so welcome a
Conclusion, that makes us all herein to be Friends: only adding, That when he
says that [ such are all Works whatever, (even Faith it self) which are called
into the very least part of Justification]; even as a Condition or subordinate
personal Evangelical Righteousness, such as Christ and James, and a hundred
Texts of Scripture assert; I answer, I cannot believe him, till I cease
believing the Scriptures to be true; which I hope will never be: And am sorry
that so worthy a Man can believe so gross an Opinion, upon no better reasons
than he gives: And yet imagine, that had I the opportunity of free conference
with him, I could force him to manifest, That he himself differs from us but
in mere words or second Notions, while he hotly proclaims* greater discord.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. TULLIES Angry Letter.

By Rich. Baxter.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons and Jonath. Robinson, at the Princes-Arms
and Golden-Lion, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

An Answer to Dr. Tullies Angry Letter.
Reverend Sir,
If I had not before perceived and lamented the great Sin of Contenders, the
dangerous snare for ignorant Christians, and the great Calamity of the Church,
by making Verbal Differences seem Material, and variety of some Arbitrary
Logical Notions, to seem tantum non, a variety of Religions; and by frightning
Men out of their Charity, Peace, and Communion, by Bugbear-Names, of this or
that Heresy or dangerous Opinion, which is indeed but a Spectrum or Fantasm of
a dreaming or melancholy Brain, your Justificatio Paulina, and your Letter to
me, might be sufficient means of my full Conviction. And if once reading of
your Writings do not yet more increase my love of the Christian simplicity, and
plain old Divinity, and the amicable Communion of practical Christians upon
those terms, and not meddling with Controversies in a militant way, till by ^ong
impartial studies they are well understood, I must confess my non-proficience
is very unexcusable.

With your self I have no great business: I am not so vain as to think my self
able to understand you, or to be understood by you: and I must not be so bold
as to tell you why, much less will I be so injurious to the Reader, as by a
particular examining all your words, to extort a confession that their sense is
less or worse than I could wish: For cui bono? What would this do but more
offend you? And idle words are as great a fault*in writing as in talk: If I
have been guilty of too many, I must not so much add to my fault, as a too
particular examination of such Books would be. But for the sake of your
Academical Youth, whom you thought meet to allarm by your Caution, I have
answered so much of your Treatise as I thought necessary to help even Novices
to answer the rest themselves. For their sakes (though I delight not to offend
you) I must say, That if they would not be deceived by such Books as yours, it
is not an Answer to them that must be their preservative, but an orderly
studying of the Doctrines handled; Let them but learn truly the several senses
of the word [ Justifica^ion], and the several sorts, and what they are, and
still constrain ambiguous words to confess their sense, and they will need no
other Answer to such Writings.

And as to your Letter (passing by the spume and passion) I think these few
Animadversions may suffice.

. 1. Between twenty and thirty years ago, I did in a private Disputation prove
our guilt of the sins of our nearer Parents; and because many doubted of it, I
have often since in other writings mentioned it: About three years ago, having
two Books of Mr. William Allens in my hand to peruse, in order to a
Publication, (a Persuasive to Unity, and a Treatise of the Two Covenants); in a
Preface to the latter, I said, [ That most Writers, if not most Christians, do
greatly darken the Sacred Doctrine, by overlooking the Interest of Children in
the Actions of their nearer Parents, and think that they participate of no
guilt, and suffer for no original sin, but Adam' s only, etc.] You fastened on
this, and warned seriously the Juniors, not rashly to believe one that brings
forth such Paradoxes of his (or that) Theology, which you added to your [ O
caecos ante Theologos quicunque unquam fuistis]: The charge was expressed by [
aliud invenisse peccatum Originale, multo citerius quam quod ab Adamo traductum
est]. Hereupon I thought it enough to publish that old private Disputation,
which many before had seen with various Censures: Now you send me in your
Letter the strange tidings of the success: You that deterred your Juniors by so
frighful a warning, seem now not only to agree with me, that we are guilty of
our nearer Parents sin, and contract additional pravity from them as such,
(which was my Assertion) but over-do all others, and Truth it self in your
Agreement! Now you take it for an injury to be reported to think otherwise
herein than I do: yea, and add, [ Which neither I, nor any Body else I know of,
denies as to the thing, though in the extent, and other circumstances, all are
not agreed, and you may in that enjoy your Opinion for me]. This is too kind: I
am loath to tell you how many that I know, and have read, deny it, lest I tempt
you to repent of your Agreement.

But does the World yet need a fuller evidence, that some Men are de materia
agreed with them, whom they raise the Country against by their Accusations and
Suspicions?

But surely what passion or spatling soever it has occasioned from you, I
reckon that my labor is not lost: I may tell your Juniors, that I have sped
extraordinary well, when I have procured the published consent of such a
Doctor. Either you were of this mind before or not: If not, it is well you are
brought to confess the Truth, though not to confess a former Error. If yea,
then it is well that so loud and wide a seeming disagreement is confessed to be
none, that your Juniors may take warning, and not be frightened from Love and
Concord by every melancholy Allarm.

Yea, you declare your conformity to the Litany, [ Remember not our Offenses,
nor the Offenses, of our Fore fathers], and many words of indignation you use
for my questioning it. All this I like very well as to the Cause; And I matter
it not much how it looks at me: If you agree more angrily than others disagree,
the Cause has some advantage by the Agreement. Though methinks it argues
somewhat unusual, that seeming Dissenters should close by so vehement a
Collision.

But yet you will not agree when you cannot choose but agree, and you carry it
still as if your Allarm had not been given without cause: Must we agree, and
not agree? What yet is the Matter? Why it is [ a new original sin]. My ordinary
expressions of it may be fully seen in the Disputation: The phrase you laid
hold on in a Preface is cited before, [ That we participate of no guilt, and
suffer for no original sin but Adam' s only], I denied. And what is the
dangerous Error here? That our nearer Parents sin was Adams, I may presume
that you hold not. That we are guilty of such, you deny not: That it is sin, I
find you not denying: sure then all the difference must be in the word
[ORIGINAL].

And if so, you that so hardly believe your loud-noised disagreements to be but
verbal, must patiently give me leave here to try it. Is it any more than the
Name ORIGINAL that you are so heinously offended at? Sure it is not: Else in
this Letter purposely written about it, you would have told your Reader what it
is. Suffer me then to summon your Alarmed Juniors to come and see what a
Spectrum it is that must affright them; and what a Poppet-Play or dreaming War
it is, that the Church is to be engaged in, as if it were a matter of Life and
Death? Audite juvenes! I took the word [ORIGINAL] in this business to have
several significations. First, That is called [ ORIGINAL] Sin, which was the
ORIGO of all other sins in the Humane World: And that was not Adam's sin, but
Eves.

2. That which was the ORIGO of sin to all the World, save Adam and Eve,
communicated by the way of Generation: And that was Adams and Eves conjunct,
viz. 1. Their first sinful Acts; 2. Their Guilt; 3. And their habitual pravity
(making it full, though in Nature following the Act). This Sin, Fact, Guilt,
and Habit, as Accidents of the Persons of Adam and Eve, are not Accidents of
our Persons.

3. Our personal participation; 1. In the guilt of the sin of Adam and Eve; 2.
And of a vicious privation and habit from them, as soon as we are Persons.
Which is called Original sin, on three accounts conjunct; 1. Because it is a
participation of their Original Act that we are guilty of; 2. Because it is in
us ab Origin, from our first Being; 3. And because it is the Origo of all our
Actual Sins.

4. I call that also [ORIGINAL] (or part of Original Sin) which has but the
two later only; viz. 1. Which is in us AB ORIGIN, from our first personal
being; 2. Which is the Root or ORIGO in our selves of all our Actual Sins: And
thus our Guilt and Vice derived from our nearer Parents, and not from Adam, is
our Original Sin; That is, 1. Both Guilt and Habit are in us from our Original,
or first Being; 2. And all our Actual Sin springs from it as a partial Cause:
For I may presume that this Reverend Doctor does not hold that Adam's sin
derived to us is in one part of the Soul, (which is not partible) and our
nearer Parent's in another; but will grant that it is one vitiosity that is
derived from both, the latter being a Degree added to the former; though the
Reatus having more than one fundamentum, may be called diverse. That Origo and
Active and passive dicitur, I suppose we are agreed. Now I call the vicious
Habits contracted from our nearer Parents by special reason of their own sins,
superadded to the degree, which else we should have derived from Adam, a part
of our original sinful Pravity, even a secondary part. And I call our guilt of
the sins of our nearer Parents (not Adam's) which you will, either a secondary
Original Guilt, or Sin, or a secondary part of our Original Guilt. See then our
dangerous disagreement: I call that ORIGINAL, which is in us ab Origin, when
we are first Persons, and is partly the Root or Origo in us of all our
following Actual Sin: though it was not the Original Sin of Mankind, or the
first of Sins. The Doctor thinks this an Expression, which all Juniors must be
warned to take heed of, and to take heed of the Doctrine of him that uses it.
The Allarm is against this dangerous word [ ORIGINAL]. And let a Man awake tell
us what is the danger.

But I would bring him yet to agreement even de nomine, though it anger him. 1.
Let him read the Artic. 9. of the Church of England, and seeing there Original
Sin is said to be that corruption of Nature whereby we are far gone from
Original Righteousness, and are of our own Nature inclined to evil, so that the
flesh lusts against the Spirit. The lust of the flesh called (...), which
some do expound the Wisdom, some Sensuality, some the Affection, some the
desire of the Flesh, not subject to the Law of God]: Seeing a degree of all this
same Lust is in Men from the special sins of their Forefathers, as well as
from Adam's; Is not this Degree here called Original Sin? (why the Church
omitted the Imputed Guilt aforesaid, I enquire not).

2. If this will not serve, if he will find me any Text of Scripture, which
uses the Phrase, [ ORIGINAL Sin], I will promise him hereafter to use it in no
other sense, than the Scripture uses it.

3. If that will not serve, if the Masters of Language will agree, (yea, to
pass by our Lexicons, if the Doctors of that University will give it us under
their hands) that the word [ORIGINAL] is unaptly and dangerously applied to
that sinful Guilt and Pravity which is in us ab Origin Nostrae existentiae,
and is the internal Radix vel Origo of all our Actual Sin, in part of
Causality, I will use that Epithete so no more.

4. If all this will not serve, if he himself will give me a fitter Epithete, I
will use it: And now we over-agree in Doctrine, a word shall not divide us,
unless he will be angry because we are agreed, as Jonas was that the Ninivites
were spared, because it seemed to disgrace his Word.

. II. page 4, 5, etc. You invite me to, [ a full entire retractation of my
Doctrine of Justification (you add, By Works) and the secondary Original Sin].

1. Will you take it well if I retract that which you profess now to hold, and
know none that denies, then there is no pleasing you: If I must be thought to
wrong you for seeming to differ from you, and yet must retract all: What, yours
and all Men's?

2. Do you mean the words or the sense of Justification (as you call it) by
Works? For the words, I take you for a subscriber to the 39 Articles; and
therefore that you reject not the Epistle of St. James: And for the sense, I
confess it is a motion suitable to the Interest of your Treatise, (though not
of the Truth): He that cannot confute the Truth, would more easily do his Work,
if he could persuade the Defenders of it to an Entire Retractation. Hereupon,
page 5. you recite my words, of the difficulty of bringing some Militant
Divines to yield: Your Admonition for Self-Application of them is useful, and I
thank you for it: But is it not a straight that such as I am in, between two
contrary sorts of Accusers? When Mr. Danvers, and Multitudes on that side,
Reproach me daily for Retractations, and you for want of them? How natural is
it now to Mankind, to desire to be the Oracles of the World, and that all
should be Silenced, or Retracted, which is against their Minds? How many call
on me for Retractation? Mr. Tombs, and Mr. Danvers, for what I have Written
for Infants Baptism: The Papists for what I have Written against them: And how
many more? And as to what I have Retracted, One reproached me for it, and
another either knows not of it, or persuades others that it is not done.

You say, page 6. [ A great outcry you have made of me, as charging you with
things you have Retracted -- And page 7. What Is the reason you have not
hitherto directed us to the particulars of your Recantation; what, when, where?
-- You direct one indeed, to a small Book, above Twenty years a-go retracted.
-- All I can pick up of any seeming Retractation, is that you say, that Works
are necessary at least to the continuation of our Justification.

Answ. Either this is Written by a Wilful, or a Heedless mistaking of my words.
The first I will not suspect; it must therefore be the second, (for I must not
judge you Unable to understand plain English). And is it any wonder if you have
many such Mistakes in your disputes of Justification, when you are so heedless
about a matter of Fact? Where did I ever say, that I had Recanted? Or that I
Retracted any of the Doctrine of Justification, which I had laid down? Cannot
you distinguish between Suspending, or Revoking, or Retracting a particular
Book, for the sake of several Crude and Incongruous Expressions, and Retracting
or Recanting that Doctrine of Justification? Or can you not understand words,
that plainly thus Distinguish? Why talk you of what, and when, and where, and
conjecture at the words, as if you would make the Reader believe, that indeed
it is some confessed Errors of mine, which you Confuted? and that I take it for
an Injury, because I* Retracted them? And so you think you salve your
Confutation, whatever you do by your Candor and Justice: But you have not so
much as Fig Leaves for either. It was the Aphorisms, or Book, that I said was
above Twenty years a go Revoked: When in my Treatise of Infant Baptism, I had
craved Animadversions on it, and promised a better Edition, if I Published it
any more; I forbad the Reprinting it, till I had time to Correct it; and when
many called for it, I still denied them. And when the Cambridg Printer Printed
it a second time, he did it by Stealth, pretending it was done beyond Sea. In
my Confession Twenty years ago, I gave the Reasons, Preface, page 35. [ I find
that there are some Incautelous Passages in my Aphorisms, not fitted to their
Reading, that come to suck Poison, and seek for a Word to be Matter of
Accusation and Food for their Censuring opinionative Zeal. -- And page 42. If
any Brother understand not any word in my Aphorisms which is here Interpreted,
or mistake my sense about the Matter of that Book, which is here more fully
opened; I must expect, that they interpret that by this. And if any one have so
little to do as to write against that Book (which is not unlikely) if he take
the Sense contrary to what I have here and elsewhere since then Published, I
shall but neglect him as a Contentious, Vain Wrangler, if not a Calumniator]. I
Wrote this sharply, to forwarn the Contentious, not knowing then that above
Twenty years after, Dr. Tully would be the Man. Page 43. [ If any will needs
take any thing in this Book to be rather a Retractation, than an Explication,
of what I have before said, though I should best know my own Meaning; yet do
such commend me, while they seem to blame me: I never look to write that which
shall have no need of Correction. -- And Cap. 1. page 2. [ Lest I should prove
a further Offense to my Brethren, and a Wrong to the Church, I desired those
who thought it worth their Labor, to vouchsafe me their Animadversions, which
I have spent much of these Three last years in considering, that I might
Correct whatever was discovered to be Erroneous, and give them an account of
my Reasons of the rest. I have not only since SVPPRESSED that Book which did
offend them, but also laid by those Papers of Universal Redemption, which I had
written, lest I should be further offensive, etc.] In my Apology elsewhere I
have suchlike Passages, ever telling Men that [ It was the first Book I wrote
in my Unexperienced Youth; that I take the Doctrines of it to be sound and
needful, save that in diverse places they are unskilfully and incautelously
worded. (As the Word [ Covenant] is often put for [ Law,] etc.) And that I wrote
my Confession, and Disputes of Justification, as an Exposition of it; and that
I Retracted, or Suspended, or Revoked, not the Doctrine, but the Book, till I
had Corrected it, and did disown it as too unmeet an Expression of my Mind,
which I had more fully expressed in other Books.

And is not this plain English? Does this warrant a Wise and Righteous Man, to
intimate that I accuse him of writing against that Doctrine of Justification
which I Recanted, and to call for the What, and Where, and When? Yea, and tell
me, that I [ refer you to a small Book] when instead of referring you to it, I
only blame you for referring to that alone, when I had said as before?

When many Divines have published the first Edition of their Works imperfectly,
and greatly corrected and enlarged them in a Second (as Beza his Annotations,
Polanus his Syntagma, and many such) all Men take it for an Injury for a
Neighbor twenty years after, to select the first Edition to confute as the
Author's Judgment: Much more might I, when I published to the World, that I
Suspended the whole Book, and have these twenty four years hindered the Printing
of it; professing that I have in many larger Books, more intelligibly and fully
opened the same things.

Yea, you fear not page 23. to say, That I tell you of about 60 Books of
Retractations, in part at least which I have Written]; when never such a word
fell from me. If I say, That one that has published his Suspension of a small
Book written in Youth, not for the Doctrine of it, but some unfit Expressions,
and has since in al-most thirty Years time, written about sixty Books, in many
or most of which is somewhat of the same Subject, and in some of them he
fullier opens his Mind; should be dealt with by an Adversary, according to
some of his later and larger Explications, and not according to the Mode and
Wording of that one Suspended Book alone: Shall such a Man as you say, that I
[tel you of about sixty Books of Retractations]? Or will it not abate Men's
reverence of your disputing Accurateness, to find you so untrusty in the
Recitation of a Man's words? The truth is, it is this great Defect of Heed and
Accurateness, by hasty Temerity, which also spoileth your Disputations.

But, page 7. the Aphorisms must be, [ The most Schollar-like, and Elaborate
(though Erroneous) Book in Controversy, you ever Composed]. Answ. 1. Your
Memory is faulty: Why say you in the next, that I appeal to my Disputation of
Justification and some others; but you cannot Trudg up and down, to every place
I would send you, your Legs are too weak? Either you had read all the sixty
Books which you mention (the Controversal at least) or not: If not, How can you
tell that the Aphorisms is the most Elaborate? If yea, Why do you excuse your
Trudging, and why would you select a Suspended Book, and touch none that were
Written at large on the same Subject? 2. By this (I su^pose to make your Nibble
to seem a Triumph) you tell your Reader again, how to value your Judgment. Is
it like that any Dunce that is diligent, should Write no more Schollar-like at
Sixty years of Age than at Thirty? And do you think you know better what of
mine is Elaborate, than I do? Sure that Word might have been spared; When I
know that one printed Leaf of Paper has cost me more Labor than all that
Book, and perhaps one Scheme of the Distinctions of Justification, which you
deride. If indeed you are a competent Judge of your own Writings, Experience
assures me, that you are not so of mine. And page 25. you say, You desire not
to be preferred before your Betters, least of all when you are singular; as
here I think you are.

. III. Page 9. You are offended for being put in the Cub, with diverse mean and
contemptible Malefactors.]

Answ. O for Justice! 1. Was not Bellarmin, or some of the Papists and the
Socinians, as great Malefactors, with whom (as you phrase it) you put me in the
Cub? 2. Are they Malefactors so far as they agree with you in Doctrine, and are
you Innocent? What is the Difference between your Treatise, in the part that
touches me, and that of Mr. Eyres, Mr. Crandon, and some others such? Dr.
Owen, and Dr. Kendale, indeed differed from you; the latter seeking (by Bishop
Usher) an amicable Closure, and the former (if I understand his Book on the
Hebrews) less differing from me in Doctrine, than once he either did, or seemed
to do. (And if any of us all grow no Wiser in thirty years Study, we may be
ashamed). But to give you your due Honor, I will name you with your Equals, as
far as I can judge, viz. Maccovius, Cluto, Coccejus, and Cloppenburgius, (I mean
but in the Point in Question; it is no Dishonor to you to give some of them
Precedencie in other things). It may be also Spanhemius, was near you. But (if
I may presume to liken my Betters) no Men seem to me to have been so like you,
as Guilielmus Rivet, (not Andrew), Mr. George Walker, and Mr. Roborough. (I
hope this Company is no Dishonor to you). And very unlike you are Le Blank,
Camero, Davenant, Dr. Hammond, Mr. Gataker, Mr. Anthony Wotton, and in
Complexion Scotus and Ockam, and such as they: If yet I have not Chosen you
pleasing Company, I pray you choo se so your self.

But you say on, [ Had you not (in your Memory many Scores of greatest Eminence
and Repute in the Christian World, of the same Judgment with me -- Know you
not, I speak the same thing with all the Reformed Churches, etc. -- For shame
let it be the Church of England, with all the rest of the Reformed, etc.]

Answ. 1. I know not what you hold, even when I read what you write: (I must
hope as well as I can, that you know your self): How then should I know who are
of the same Judgment with you?

2. Yet I am very confident, that all they whom you mention, are of the same in
some thing or other; and in particular, that we are Justified by Faith, and not
by the Works of the Law, or any Works in the sense denied by St. Paul, etc.

3. Do not I, with as great Confidence as you, lay Claim to the same Company
and Concord? And if one of us be mistaken, must your bare Word determine which
it is? Which of us has brought the fuller Proofs? I subscribe to the Doctrine
of the Church of England, as well as you; and my Condition these thirteen or
fourteen years, gives as much Evidence, that I am loath to subscribe to what I
believe not, as yours does of you. And you that know which of my Books is the
most Elaborate, sure know, that in that Book which I Wrote to explain those
Aphorisms (called my Confession) I cite the Words of above an Hundred
Protestant Witnesses, that give as much to Works as I do: And that of this
Hundred, one is the Augustine Confession, one the Westminster Synod, one the
Synod of Dort, one the Church of England, each one of which being Collectives,
contain many. (And here I tell you of more). And have you brought more
Witnesses? Or any to the contrary? Did you Confute, or once take Notice of any
of these?

4. Do you not here before you are aware, let your Reader know that it was, and
still is, in the Dark, that you Alarm the World about our dangerous
Differences, and run to your Arms undrest, before your Eyes are open? Qui
convenient in aliquo tertio, etc. They that agree with the Church of England,
in the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, do so far agree between themselves:
But Dr. Tullie, and R.B. do agree with the Church of England, in the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith. Ergo. -- The Article refers to the Homilies,
where it is more fully Explained.

5. May not I then retort your Argument, and bid you [ For shame let it be no
longer Bellarnine, and R.B. but the Church of England, and all the Reformed,
and R.B.]? Disprove the Witnesses twenty years ago, produced by me in this very
Cause; or else speak out, and say, [ The Church of England, and the rest of the
Reformed, hold Justification by Works, just as Bellarmine and the Papists do]
which is it which you would fasten on me, who agree with them (as if you had
never there read my Answer to Mr. Crandon, objecting the same thing).

. IV. Your Censure, page 10, 11. of my Windings, Clouds of Novel Distinctions,
Preambles, Limitations, etc. is just such as your Treatise did bid me expect:
Till you become guilty of the same Crime, and fall out with Confusion, and take
not equivocal ambiguous Words unexplained, instead of Univocals, in the stating
of your Questions, I shall never the more believe that Hannibal is at the
Gates, or the City on Fire, for your Allarms.

. V. Page 11. Where you tell me, that [ You have no Profit by my Preface: I
shall not deny it, nor wonder at it; you are the fittest Judge: Where you say,
that [ I have no Credit,] You do but tell the World at what Rates you write.
Honor est in honorante. And have all my Readers already told you their
Judgment? Alas! How few? In all London, not a Man has yet given me Notice of
his Dislike, or Dissent. And sure your own Pen is a good Confuter of you. It is
some Credit, that such a Man as you, is forced to profess a full Consent to the
Doctrine, though with passionate Indignation.

You tell me of [ Nothing to the Question]. But will you not be angry if I
should but tell you, how little you did to state any Question, and in Reason
must be supposed, when you assaulted my Doctrine, to take it as I stated it;
which I have fully showed you?

You tell me, that You Charged me only with new Original Sin, underived from
Adam, unknown, unheard of before, in the Christian World.

Answ. De re, is not our Guilt of nearer Parent's Sins such which you and all
that you know (now at last) confess? De nomine, 1. Tell the World if you can,
when I called it [ New Original Sin, or underived from Adam, or unknown, or
unheard of]. There are more ways than one of Derivation from Adam. It is not
derived from him by such Imputation as his first Sin; but it is derived from
him as a partial Causa Causae, by many Gradations. All Sin is some-way from
him. Either you mean that I said, that it was not Derived from Adam, or you
gather it by some Consequence from what I said. If the First, show the Words,
and the Shame shall be mine. If not, you know the old Law, that to false
Accusers, it must be done as they would have done to the Accused. But if it be
your Consequence, prove it, and tell the World, what are the Premises that
infer it.

. VI. Page 12. You friendly help me to profit by my self, however you profess
that you profit not by me! What I have said to you against [ Hasty Judging], I
have first said to my self, and the more you warn me of it, the more friendly
you are: If it be not against such as you but my self, it is against my self
that I have a Treatise on that Subject; but I begin to think my self in this
more Seeing than you; for I see it both in my self and you, and you seem to see
it in me, and not in your self. But with all Men, I find, that to see the Spots
in our own Face immediately is hard, and to love the Glass which shows them,
is not easy; especially to some Men that neither are low, nor can endure to be
so, till there is no Remedy.

But, Sir, how easy a Way of Disputing have you happily light on, Who instead
of Examining the hundred Witnesses which I brought, and my elsewhere often
proving the Doctrine opposed by me to be Novel, and Singular, do in few words
talk of your holding the Doctrine delivered to the Saints, and of the many
Worthies that concur with you, and of my pelting at their Heads, and draging
them by the Hoary-heads, as a Spectacle and Byword to all, (by proving their
consent by express Citations) what Armies, and of what Strength appear against
me, whose Names I defy and wound, through yours?

Answ. And is not he a weak Man that cannot talk thus upon almost any Subject?
But who be these Men, and what be their Names? Or rather, first, rub your Eyes,
and tell us what is the Controversy? Tully sometimes talked at this rate in his
Orations, but verily much better in his Philosophy.

And you see no cause to repent, but you bless God that you can again and again
call to all Youth, that as they love the Knowledge of Truth, they take me not
for an Oracle in my bold dividing Singularities].

Answ. That the Name of Truth is thus abused, is no News; I would the Name of
God were not: And I am sorry, that you see no Cause to repent. I am obliged to
love you the better, for being against dividing Singularities in the general
Notion; I hope if you knew it, you would not be for them, as in singular
Existents. But sure, none at Oxford are in danger of taking me for an Oracle?
This is another needless Work. So Spanhemius took that for a Singularity, which
Dallaeus in a large Catalogue, has proved the Common Judgment of the Church,
till Contention of late caused some Dissenters.

Will you cease these empty general Ostentations, and choose out any one Point
of real* Difference between you and me about Justification, and come to a fair
Trial, on whose side the Churches of Christ have been for 1500 years after
Christ; yea, bring me but any two or one considerable Person, that was for a
thousand years for your Cause against mine, and I will say, that you have done
more to confute me by far, than yet you have done; and if two only be against
me, I will pardon you for calling me Singular.

. VII. Page 13, 14, 15. You again do keep up the Dividing Fear, are offended
that I persuade you, that by Melancholy Phantasms you set not the Churches
together by the Ears, and make People believe that they differ, where they do
not: And you ask, Who began the Fray?

Answ. 1. Do you mean that I began with you? You do not sure: But is it that I
began with the Churches, and you were necessitated to defend them? Yes, if
Gallus, Ambsdorfius, Schlusselburgius, and Dr. Crispe, and his Followers, be
the Church? But, Sir, I provoke you to try it by the just Testimony of
Antiquity, who began to differ from the Churches. In this Treatise I have given
you some Account, and Vossius has given you more. which you can never answer:
But if my Doctrine put you upon this Necessity, what hindered you from
perceiving it these twenty years and more, till now? O Sir, had you no other
work to do, but to Vindicate the Church and Truth? I doubt you had.

. VIII. But page 15. You are again incredulous, that [ All the Difference
betwixt you and me, or others of the same Judgment in the Point of
Justification, is merely Verbal; and that in the Main we are agreed]. And again
you complain of your weak Legs.

Answ. 1. I do agree with very many against, their wills in Judgment (because
the Judgment may be constrained), but with none in Affection, as on their part.
Did I ever say, that I differed not from you? I tell you, I know not what your
Judgment is, nor know I who is of your Mind? But I have not barely said, but
often proved, that (though not the Antinomians) the Protestants are mostly here
agreed in the Main. If you could not have time to read my larger Proof, that
short Epistle to Mr. Allen's Book of the Covenant, in which I proved it, might
have stopped your Mouth from calling for more Proof, till you had better confuted
what was given.

But you say, [ Are perfect Contradictions no more than a difference in Words?
Faith alone, and not Faith alone? Faith with and without Works? Excuse our
Dullness here].

Answ. 1. Truly, Sir, it is a tedious thing, when a Man has over and over
Answered such Objections; yea, when the full Answers have been twenty years in
Print, to be put still to say over all again, to every Man that will come in
and say, that his Legs are too weak to go see what was answered before: How
many score times then, or hundreds, may I be called to repeat.

2. If I must pardon your Dullness, you must pardon my Christianity (or choose)
who believe that there is no such [ perfect Contradictions] between Christ's, [
By thy Words thou shall be Justified] and Paul's, [Justified by Faith, without
the Works of the Law] or [ not of Works]; and James's [ We are justified by
Works, and not by Faith only]. Must we needs proclaim War here, or cry* out,
Heresy, or Popery? Are not all these Reconcilable? Yea, and Paul's too, Romans
2. The Doers of the Law shall be justified.

3. But did I ever deny that it is [ by Faith alone and without Works]? Where,
and when? But may it not be, by Faith alone in one sense, and not by Faith
alone in another sense?

4. But even where you are speaking of it, you cannot be drawn to distinguish
of Verbal and Real Differences. Is it here the Words, or Sense, which you
accuse? The Words you dare not deny to be Gods own in Scripture, spoken by
Christ, Paul, and James. My Sense I have opened to you at large, and you take
no Notice of it; but as if you abhorred Explication and Distinction, speak
still against the Scripture Words.

. IX. Page 16. But you say, [ Let any discerning Reader compare the 48. of this
Preface with the Words in page 5. of your Appeal to the Light, and it is likely
he will concur with me, in that Melancholy Phantasm, or Fear: For it is worth
the noting, how in that dark Appeal where you distinguish of Popish Points, i.
e. some-where the Difference is reconcilable, others in effect but in words;
we have no Direction upon which Rank we must bestow Justification, nothing of
it at all from you, Name or Thing: But why, next to the All-seeing God, you
should know best your self].

Answ. Alas, Sir, that God should be in such a manner mentioned! I answered
this same Case at large in my Confession, Apology, Dispute of Justification,
etc. Twenty years ago, or near; I have at large Opened it in a Folio ( Cathol.
Theol.) which you saw, yea, in the very part which you take Notice of; and now
you publish it [ worth the Noting, that I did not also in one sheet of Paper,
Printed the other day against a Calumny of some Sectarian Hearers, who gave me
no Occasion for such a work. Had it not been a Vanity of me, Should I in that
sheet again have repeated, how I and the Papists differ about Justification?
Were you bound to have read it in that sheet, any more* than in many former
Volumns? It Is no matter for me; But I seriously beseech you, be hereafter more
sober and just, than to deal with your Brethren, the Church and Truth, in such
a manner as this! But by this Talk I suspect, that you will accuse me more for
opening no more of the Difference in this Book. But, 1. It is enough for to
open my own Meaning, and I am not obliged to open other Men's: And my own I have
opened by so many Repetitions, in so many Books, as nothing but such Men's
Importunity and obstructed Minds, could have Excused. 2. The Papists minds
sure, may be better known by their own Writings, than by mine: The Council of
Trent, tells it you: What need I recite it? 3. I tell you again, as I did in
my Confession, that I had rather all the Papists in the World agreed with us,
than disagreed: I like a Doctrine the better, and not the worse, because all
the Christian World consents to it. I am not ambitious to have a Religion to
my self, which a Papist does not own. Where they differ, I am sorry for it: And
it pleases me better, to find in any Point that we are agreed, than that we
differ. Neither you, nor any such as you, by crying [ O Popish! Antichristian!]
shall tempt me to do by the Papists, as the Dominicans, and Jansenists, and
some Oratorians, do by the Calvinists: I will not with Alvarez, Arnoldus,
Gibieuf, etc. make the World believe, that my Adversaries are much further from
me than they are, for fear of being censured by Faction, to be one of them. If
I would have been of a Church-Faction, and sold my Soul to please a Party, I
would have begun before now, and taken a bigger Price for it, than you can
offer me if you would.

Page, 17. You say, [ Pile one Distinction or Evasion on another, as long as you
please; as many several Faiths, and Works, and Justifications, as you can name,
all this will never make two Poles meet].

Answ. And do you cry out for War in the Darkness of Confusion, as long as you
will, you shall never tempt me by it to renounce my Baptism, and List my self
under the grand Enemy of Love and Concord, nor to Preach up Hatred and Division
for nothing, as in the Name of Christ. If you will handle such Controversies,
without Distinguishing of Faiths, Works, and Justifications, I will never
persuade any Friend of mine to be your Pupil, or Disciple. Then Simon Magus's
faith, and the Devils faith, and Peter's faith must all pass for the same, and
justify accordingly. Then indeed, Believing in God the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, yea, and Christ, as our Teacher, King and Judge, etc. must pass for the
Works by which no Man is Justified! If Distinction be unsound, detect the Error
of it: If not, it is no Honor to a disputing Doctor to reproach it.

. X. But page 17. you set upon your great unde^eiving Work, to show the evil of
ill using Words: [Words (you say) as they are enfranchised into Language, are
but the Agents and Factors of things, for which they continually negotiate with
our Minds, conveying Errands on all occasions, etc. (Let them mark, that charge
the vanity and bombast of Metaphors on others, one word [ Signa] should have
served our turn instead of all this). [ Whence it follows, that their use and
signification is Unalterable, but by the stamp of the like public usage and
imposition from whence at first they received their being, etc.]

Answ. O Juniors, Will not such deceiving Words save you from my Deceits? But,
1. Is there a Law, and unalterable Law for the sense of Words? Indeed, the
Words of the sacred Text must have no new Sense put upon them. 2. Are you sure
that it was Public usage, and Imposition from whence they first received their
being? How shall we know that they grew not into public use from one Man's
first Invention, except those that (not Public use, but) God Himself made? 3.
Are you sure that all or most Words now, Latin or English, have the same, and
only the same use or sense, as was put upon them at the first? Is the change of
the sense of Words a strange thing to us? 4. But that which concerns our Case
most, is, Whether there be many Words either of Hebrew and Greek in the
Scripture, or of Latin, English, or any common Language, which have not many
Significations? Your Reputation forbids you to deny it. And should not those
many Significations be distinguished as there is Cause? Are not Faith, Works,
Just, Justice, Justification, words of diverse senses in the Scripture? and do
not common Writers and Speakers use them yet more variously* And shall a
Disputer take on him, that the use or signification of each is but one, or two,
or is so fixed that there needs no distinction? 5. Is the change that is made
in all Languages in the World, made by the same public usage and imposition,
from which at first they received their being? 6. If (as you say) the same
thing can be represented by different words, only when they are Synonymous,
should we not avoid seeming to represent the same by Equivocals, which
unexplained are unfit for it?

Page 20. You tell me what sad work you are doing; and no wonder, Sin and
Passions are self-troubling things: And it is well if it be sad to your self
alone, and not to such as you tempt into Mistakes, Hatred, and Division. It
should be sad to every Christian, to see and hear those whom they are bound to
Love, represented as odious: And you are still, page 19. feigning, that [ Every
eye may see Men dealing Blows and Deaths about, and therefore we are not wise
if we think them agreed.

But doubtless, many that seem killed by such Blows as some of yours, are still
alive? And many a one is in Heaven, that by Divines pretending to be Orthodox,
were damned on Earth! And many Men are more agreed than they were aware of. I
have known a Knavish Fellow set two Persons of quality on Fighting, before they
spoke a word to one another, by telling them secretly and falsely what one said
against the other. Many differ, even to persecuting and bloodshed, by Will and
Passion and Practice, upon a falsely supposed great- difference in Judgment. I
will not so suddenly repeat what Proof I have given of some of this in the
place you noted, Cath. Theol. Confer. 11, 12, and 13. There is more skill
required to narrow differences, than to widen them; and to reconcile, than to
divide; as there is to quench a Fire, than to kindle it; to build, than to pull
down; to heal, than to wound.

I presume therefore to repeat aloud my contrary Cautions to your Juniors.

Young Men, after long sad Experience of the sinful and miserable Contentions
of the Clergy, and consequently of the Christian World, that you may escape
the Guilt, I beseech you, whoever contradicts it, consider and believe these
following Notices: 1. That all Words are but arbitrary Signs, and are changed
as Men please; and through the Penury of them, and Man's imperfection in the Art
of Speaking, there are very few at all, that have not various Significations.

2. That this Speaking-Art requires so much time and study, and all Men are so
defective in it, and the variety of Men's skill in it is so very great, that no
Men in the World do perfectly agree in their interpretation and use of Words.
The doleful plague of the Confusion of Tongues, does still hinder our full
Communication, and makes it hard for us to understand Words our selves, or to
be understood by others; for Words must have a threefold aptitude of
Signification. 1. To signify the Matter, 2. And the Speakers conceptions of
it. 3. And this as adapted to the hearers Mind, to make a true Impression there.

3. That God in Mercy has not made Words so necessary as Things, nor necessary
but for the sake of the Things: If God, Christ, Grace, and Heaven, be known,
believed, and duly accepted, you shall be saved by what Words soever it be
brought to pass.

4. Therefore Real Fundamentals, or Necessaries to Salvation, are more easily
defined than Verbal ones: For more or fewer Words, these or other Words are
needful to help some Persons, to Faith, and Love, and Holiness, as their
Capacities are different.

5. But as he that truly believes in, and gives up himself to God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, according to the sense of the Baptismal Covenant, is a
true Christian, to be loved, and shall be saved; so he that understands such
Words, as help him to that true Faith and Consent, does know so much of the
Verbal part, as is of necessity to his Christianity and Salvation.

6. And he that is such, holds no Heresy or Error inconsistent with it: If
he truly love God, it is a contradiction to say, that he holds an Error
inconsistent with the Love of God.

7. Therefore see that you Love all such as Christians, till some proved or
notorious inconsistents nullifying his Profession disoblige you.

8. Take your selves to be neither of Roman, or any other Church as Universal,
which is less than the Universality of all Christians headed by Christ alone.

9. Make this Love of all Christians the second part of your Religion, and the
Love of God, of Christ, of Holiness and Heaven, the first; and live thus in the
serious practice of your Covenant, even of Simple Christianity: For it is this
that will be your Peace, in Life and at Death.

10. And if Men of various degrees of Learning (or Speaking-skill) and of
various degrees of Holiness, Humility, and Love, shall quarrel about Words, and
forms of Speech, and shall hereticate, and revile, and damn each other, while
the Essentials are held fast and practiced, discern Right from Wrong as well as
you can; but take heed that none of them make Words a snare, to draw you
injuriously to think hatefully of your Brother, or to divide the Churches, or
Servants of Christ: And suspect such a Snare because of the great ambiguity of
Words, and imperfection of Man's Skill and Honesty in all Matters of debate: And
never dispute seriously, without first agreeing of the Sense of every doubtful
term with him that you Dispute with].

Dr. Tully's Allarm, and other Men's militant Course, persuaded me as a
Preservative, to commend this Counsel to you.

. XI. Page 19. You next very justly commend Method, ordering, and expressing
our Conceptions, of which (you say) I seem to make little account in
Comparison].

Answ. 1. Had you said, that I had been unhappy in my Endeavors, your
Authority might have gone for Proof with many: But you could scarce have spoken
a more incredible word of me, than that I seem to make little account of
Method, I look for no sharper Censure from the Theological Tribe, than that I
Over-do in my Endeavors after Method. You shall not tempt me here
unseasonably, to anticipate what Evidence I have to produce for my acquittance
from this Accusation.

2. But yet I will still say, that it is not so necessary either to Salvation,
or to the Churches Peace, that we all agree in Methods and Expressions, as that
we agree in the hearty reception of Christ, and obedience to His Commands? So
much Method all must know, as to know the Beginning and the End, from the
Effects and Means, God from the Creature, and as our true consent to the
Baptismal Covenant does require; and I will thankfully use all the help which
you give me to go further: But I never yet saw that Scheme of Theology, or of
any of its Heads, which was any whit large, (and I have seen many) which was so
exact in Order, as that it was dangerous in any thing to forsake it. But I
cannot think meet to talk much of Method, with a Man that talks as you do of
Distinguishing, and handles the Doctrine of Justification no more Methodically
than you do.

. XII. But page 19. you instance in the difference between Protestants and
Papists, about the Necessity of Good works, which is wide in respect of the
placing or ranking of them, viz. The one stretching it to the first
Justification, the other not, but confining it to its proper rank and province
of Inherent Holiness, where it ought to keep].

Answ. Wonderful! Have you that have so loudly called to me to tell how I
differ about Justification, brought your own, and as you say, the Protestants
difference to this? Will none of your Readers see now, who comes nearer them,
you or I?

1. Is this distinction our proof of your accurateness in Method, and Order,
and Expression? What means a distinction between [ First-Justification,] and
[Inherent Holiness]? Do you difference them Quoad ordinem, as First and Second?
But here is no Second mentioned: Is it in the nature of the things [
Justification, and Inherent Holiness]? What signifies the [ First] then? But
Sir, how many Readers do you expect who know not, 1. That it is not to the
First Justification at all, but to that which they call the Second or Increase,
that the Church of Rome asserteth the necessity or use of Man's meritorious
Works? See what I have fully cited out of them for this, Cath. Theol. Lib. 2.
Confer. 13. page 267. etc. saving that some of them are for such Preparatives
as some call Merit of Congruity, and as our English Divines do constantly
preach for, and the Synod of Dort at large assert; though they disown the name
of Merit, as many of the Papists do. They ordinarily say with Austine, Bona
opera sequuntur Justificatum, non praecedunt Justificandum.

2. But, I hope, the word [ First] here overslipt your your Pen, instead of [
Second]: But suppose it did so: What Is the difference between the Papists first
or second Justification, and the Protestants Inherent Holiness? None that ever
I heard or read of: Who knows not that the Papists take Justification for
Inherent Holiness? And is this the great difference between Papists and
Protestants, which I am so loudly accused for not acknowledging? viz. The
Papists place Good-Works before Justification, that is, Inherent Holiness; and
the Protestants more rightly place them before Inherent Holiness? Are you
serious, or do you prevaricate?

The Papists and Protestants hold, that there are some Duties and common Grace,
usually preparatory to Conversion (or Sanctification); which some Papists (de
nomine) call Merit of Congruity, and some will not. The Papists and Protestants
say, that Faith is in order of nature, at least, before that Habitual Love,
which is called Holiness, and before the Works thereof. The Papists and
Protestants say, that Works of Love and Obedience, follow our First
Sanctification, and make up but the Second part of it, which consists in the
Works of Holiness. If you speak not of Works in the same sense in each part of
your Assignation, the Equivocation would be too gross, viz. If you should mean
[ Papists rank the necessity of preparatory Common Works, or the Internal act
of Faith, or Love, stretching it to the First Justification; and Protestants
rank other Works, viz. The fruits of Faith and Love, with Inherent Holiness.
All agree, 1. That Common Works go before Sanctification. 2. That Internal
Love, and other Grace, do constitute Sanctification in the First part of it. 3.
That Special Works proceeding from Inward Grace, are the effects of the First
Part, and the constitutive Causes of the Second Part of Sanctification; as the
word extends also to Holiness of Life: And whilst Papists take Just^fication
for Sanctification, in all this there is De re no difference. (But your
accurate Explications by such terms, as [ Stretching, Confirming, Province,
etc.] are fitter for Tully, than for Aristotle).

And is this it in the Application that your Zeal will warn Men of, that we
must in this take heed of joining with the Papists? Do you mean [ Rank
Good-Works with Inherent Holiness, and not with the First Sanctification, and
you then do widely differ from the Papists]? Will not your Reader say, 1. What
does Inherent Holiness differ from the First Sanctification? 2. Do you not
invite me thus herein to be a Papist, when they rank them no where but, as you
say, the Protestants do? 3. Do not you here proclaim, that Papists and
Protestants differ not about the necessity of Good-works to Justification? But
yet I that would make no Differences wider than they are, can find some greater
than you have mentioned.

Truly Sir, I am grieved and ashamed, to foresee how Learned Papists will make
merry with such Passages; and say, See here how we differ from the Protestants!
See what it is for, that the Protestant Doctors separate from the Church of
Rome! viz. Because we make Good-Works necessary to the First Justification,
which unless equivocally spoken, is false; and because the Protestants rank
them with Inherent Holiness, as we do]. What greater advantage will they desire
against us, than to choose us such Advocates? And to show the World that even
where their keenest Adversaries condemn them, and draw Men from them, they do
but justify them? Who knows what a Temptation they may make of such passages
to draw any to Popery? It is my assurance, that such Over-doing, is Undoing;
and that mistaken Accusations of the Papists greatly advantage them against us,
which makes me the more against such Dealing; besides the sinfulness, of
pretending that any differences among Christians, are greater than indeed they
are.

But may not I think that you take the word [ Justification] here in the
Protestant Sense, and not in the Papists, when you say that they rank
Good-work's-necessity as stretched to the First Justification? No sure: For, 1.
Protestants use not to distinguish of a First and Second Justification, which
Papists do, but of Justification as Begun, Continued, and Consummate. 2. If it
were so, it were not true: For the First Justification in the Protestant Sense,
is our first right to Impuni^y and Life Eternal, freely given to Believers, for
the Merits of Christ's perfect Righteousness and Satisfaction. And Papists do
not make Good-works (unless Equivocally so called) necessary to this; but as a
Fruit to follow it.

As for Remission of Sin, I have elsewhere proved, 1. That most commonly by
that word the Papists mean nothing, but that which we call Mortification, or
Putting away, or destroying the Sin it self, as to the habit and ceasing the
Act. 2. That most of them are not resolved, where the Remission of the
Punishment (which Protestants call Remission of Sin, or Forgiveness) shall be
placed: They differ not much as to its Time, but whether it be to be called any
part of Justification: Some say, yea; some make it a distinct thing. Most
describe Justification by it self, as consisting in our Remission of, or
Deliverance from Sin it self, and the infused habit of Love or Righteousness
(all which we call Sanctification), and the forgiveness of the Penalty by it
self, not meddling with the Question, whether the latter be any part of the
former; so much are they at a loss in the Notional part among themselves. But
they (and we) distinguish of Forgiveness, as we distinguish of Penalties: We
have a right to Impunity as to everlasting Damnation, upon our first being
Justified; but our Right becomes afterward more full, and many other Penalties
are after to be remitted.

. XIII. Page 20. In my 42. Direct. for the Cure of Church-divisions, telling
the Weak whom they must follow, I concluded, 1. That the necessary Articles of
Faith must be made our own, and not taken merely on the authority of any; and
we must in all such things of absolute necessity keep company with the
Universal Church. 2. That in Matters of Peace and Concord the greater part must
be our Guide. 3. That in Matters of humane Obedience, our Governors must be
our Guides. And, 4. In Matters of high and difficult Speculation, the judgment
of one Man of extraordinary Understanding and Clearness, is to be preferred
before the Rulers and the major Vote. I instanced in Law, Philosophy, Physic,
Languages, etc. and in the Controversies of the Object of Predestination, the
nature of the Will's Liberty, Divine Concourse, the determining way of Grace,
of the definition of Justification, Faith, etc.] Here I was entreated before
God and my Conscience, to search my self, with what Design or Intent I wrote
this, and to tell you, Who that One is, that we may know whom to prefer, and to
whom, in the Doctrine of Justification, etc.

Answ. How greatly do you dishonor your self, (and then you will impute it to
me) by insisting on such palpably abusive Passages? Had you not been better,
have silently past it by? 1. Does not the World know, that Heathens and
Christians, Papists and Protestants, are Agreed on this general Rule? 2. And
will you make any believe that Definition of Justification is none of these
Works of Art, which depend on humane Skill? How then came you to be so much
better at it than I? I find not that you ascribe it to any special Revelation
which you have. And if you should ascribe it to Piety, and say, Hoc non est
Artis, sed Pietatis opus: I would go to many a good Woman before you. Nor do
you plead general Councils, nor the Authority of the Church. 3. And what sober
Scholar will you make believe, that by laying down this common Rule, I signify
some One singular Person, as an Individuum determinatum; whom therefore I must
acquaint you with? These things are below a Grave Divine.

Page 21. Where you called me to seriousness or diligence in my search, and I
told you by what, and how many Writings, I have manifested my almost thirty
years Diligence in this Controversy, and that I am now grown past more serious
and diligent Studies; that I might show you what a trifling way it is, for a
Man to wrangle with him that has written so many things, to tell the World
what his studies of this Point have been, and never to touch them, but to call
him a- new to serious diligence: You now expostulate with me, whether you
accused me for want of diligence? I talk not of Accusing, but I tell you, that
I have done my best* and that it were a poor kind of dealing with your self, if
you had written against many, as you have done against me twenty five years
ago, and very often, if instead of taking any notice of your Labors, I should
call you now to diligent Studies.

As for your Lesson, page 22. that tumbling over many Books without meditation,
may breed but Crudities, etc. It is very true, and the calamity of too many of
the literate Tribe, who think that they have deserved Credit and Reverence,
when they say the words which others, whom they would be joined with, have said
before them: Want of good Digestion is a common Disease of many that never
complain of it, nor feel any present trouble by it.

Page 22, 23. You insinuate that about Retractation, which I before detected: I
told you when, and where, I Suspended or Retracted the Book, and for what
Reasons, and you presently feign a Retractation of the Doctrine, and of about
sixty Books of Retractions.

It Is well that page 23. you had the justice not to justify your [ Nec dubito
quin imputatam Christi justitiam incluserit]; But to confess your Injustice,
was too much: It is not your own Retractation that you are for, it seems.

. XIV. Page 23, 24. You talk as if my supposing that both [ Justice] and [
Imputation], are capable of Definitions which are not the Things, were a
Fallacy, because [ or] is a disjunctive; viz. When I say that the Definition of
the one, or the other, is not the Thing. Do you grant it of them Disjunctively,
and yet maintain the contrary of them Conjunct? Yes, you say, [ Imputed Justice
cannot differ from its true definition, unless, you will have it to differ
really from it self]. And, page 34. you say, [ I am ashamed you should thus
over and over expose your self -- as if supposing (Definitions) true, they were
not the same Re, with the Definitum. -- Good Sir, talk what you please in
private, to such as understand not what you say, and let them give you a grand
(...) for your pains; but you may do well to use more Civility to the reason of
a Scholar, though he has not yet worn out his Freshmans Gown].

Answ. This is no light or jesting Matter: The comfort of Souls depends on
it. I see some Men expect that Reverence of their Scholarship should give them
great advantage: But if one argued thus with me for Transubstantiation, I would
not turn to him, to escape the Guilt of Incivility.

If the Definition, and the Definitum, as in question now, be the same Thing,
woe to all the Unlearned World, and woe to all Freshmen, that yet have not learnt
well to define; and woe to all Divines that differ in their Definitions, except
those that are in the right.

I know that a Word and a Mental Conception, are not Nothing: They may be
called Things, but when we distinguish the Things from their Signs, Names, or
Definitions, we take not the word [ Things] so laxly, as to comprehend the said
Signs, Names, etc. When we say, that the Thing defined is necessary, but to be
able to Define it, or actually to Define it, is not necessary (to Salvation) it
is notorious that we take Definition (as Defining) actively, as it is Actus
definientis; and Definire sure is not the same with the Thing defined. I have
heard before your Letter told me, that Definitum and definitio idem sunt: But,
I pray you, let us not quibble almost all the World under a sentence of
Damnation. As long ago as it is since I read such words, I remember our Masters
told us, (I think Schibler in his Topics for one) that when they are taken Pro
terminis Logicis definitio and definitum non sunt idem; but only when they are
taken Pro rebus per eos terminos significatis; and that there they differ in
Modo significandi essentiam, the definitum signifying the Essence confusedly,
and the Definition distinctly. If you will take the Res definita, for that
which is strictly nothing but Rei conceptus inadaequatus seu partialis, (that
is, a Species) and that not as the thing is Existent extra intellectum, but as
the conception is an operation of the Mind, so I confess, that he that has a
true Conception of a Species as merely denominated, or as defined, has the
same conception of it: And also the Thing named, and the Thing defined, is the
same thing in it self. Homo and Animal rationale, are the same; that is, it is
the same essence, which is denominated Homo, and defined Animal rationale. And
it is the same Conceptus mentis, which we have (if true) when we denominate,
and when we define. But as Things are distinct from the knowledge and signs of
Things, nothing is Res, that is not existent; and nothing existeth but in
Singulars* (or Individuals): And as nothing can be defined but a Species, so a
Species, or any Universal, is nothing but a Notion, or Ens rationis, save as it
existeth in the said Individuals. And in the Individuals, it is nothing but
their being as partially, or inadequatly taken, or a Conceptus objectivus
partialis, (whether it be of a thing really, or only intellectually partible,
or any thing which our narrow Minds cannot conceive of, Vno and simplici
conceptu activo). Now if you take the word [ Definition] for the Species, as
existent in Individuals, it is really a part of the thing; that is, a Partial
objective conceptus, or somewhat of the Thing as Intelligible: But this is to
take [ Definition] in Sensu passivo, for the Thing defined; which our Case
distinguishes.

But Sir, I crave your leave, to distinguish Real objective Beings, from, 1.
The Knowledge. 2. and the Names, and other Logical Organs, by which we know
them, and express our knowledge of them: God, Christ, Grace, Glory, Pardon,
Justification, Sanctification, the Gospel-Doctrine, Precept, Promises, Faith,
Hope, Love, Obedience, Humility, Patience, etc. are the Res definitae in our
Case, not as they are in esse cognito, or in the notion or idea of them, but in
esse reali. To Define properly, is either, 1. Mentally to conceive of these
things; 2. or Expressively, to signify such Conceptions, agreeably to the
nature of the things known, or Expressively defined: Which is, if the
Definition be perfect, under the notions of a Genus, and Differentia. The
Definition as in Words, is but a Logical Organ, (as Names are also Notifying
signs): Mental defining, is but the said distinct knowledge of the thing
defined, and is neither really the Thing it self, nor usually of necessity to
the Thing: Which two, I shall prove distinctly as to the sense of our Case.

1. The Definition of Justification, is either our Distinct knowledge, or
Expression of it: Justification is not our Distinct knowledge, or Expression of
it: Therefore the Definition of Justification, and Justification, are not the
same.

Justification In sensu activo, is not an Act of God, and In sensu passivo, is
the Relative state of Man thereby effected: But the Definition of Justification
is neither.

The Definition of Justification, is a work of Art; but Justification is a Work
of Grace.

A wicked damnable Man, or a damned Devil, may define Justification, and so
have the Definition of it; but not Justification it self.

The Definition of Justification, Faith, Love, etc. is Quid Logicum; but
Justification, Faith, Love, etc. are things Physical and Moral.

A Man is Justified (or has Christ's Righteousness imputed to him) in his
sleep, and when he thinks not of it; but he has not the Active definition of
Justification in his sleep, etc.

Other things be not the same Really with their D^finition, therefore neither
is Justification, Faith, etc.

The Sun is not really the same thing with a Definition of the Sun; nor Light,
Heat, Motion, etc. A Brute can see, taste, feel, smell, that cannot define
them. If you have a Bishopric, because you define a Bishopric, or have a
Lordship, a Kingdom, Health, etc. because you can define them, your Axiom has
stood you in good stead.

The Definition is but Explicatio rei: But Rei explicatio non est ipsa res.

Individuals (say most) are not Definable: But nothing is truly Res, but
Individuals. Vniversals as they are in the Mind, are existent Individual Acts,
Cogitations, N^tions: As they are out of the Mind, they are nothing but
Individuorum quid intelligibile.

The Definition of Learning, of a Doctor, etc. may be got in a day: If Learning
and Doctorship may be so, what useless things are Universities and Books?

Persuade a hungry Scholar, that he has Meat and Drink; or the Ambitious, that
he has Preferment; or the Covetous, or Poor, that he has Money, because he
has in his Mind, or Mouth, the Definition of it; and quibble him into
satisfaction by telling him, that Definitio and definitum sunt idem re. We know
and express things narrowly by Names, and largely and distinctly by
Definitions: The Definition here, is Explicatio nominis, (as Animal rationale,
of the name Homo); and both Name and Definition, as they are Verba mentis vel
oris, or Verborum significatio, are surely diverse from the things named and
defined, known and expressed; unless by the Thing you mean only the Knowledge,
or Notion of the Thing.

Therefore though Cui competit definitio eidem quoque competit definitum, and
contra, and quod convenit definitioni convenit definito: Yet say not that
Imputed Righteousness in Re, is the same with the Definition, as it is the
Definers act.

By this time you have helped Men to understand by an Instance, why St. Paul so
much warns Christians to take heed lest any deceive them by vain Philosophy,
even by Sophistry, and abused, arbitrary Notions.

Remember, Sir, that our Case is of grand Importance; As it is stated in my
Direct. 42. which you assaulted; it is [ Whether if the Question were of the
Object of Predestination, of the nature of the Will's liberty, Divine
concourse, and determining way of Grace, of the Definition of Justification,
Faith, etc. a few well studied Divines are not here to be preferred before
Authority, and the major Vote. Such are my words. I assert, 1. That the
Defining of Justification, Faith, etc. is a work of Art. 2. And I have many and
many times told the World (which you seem to strike at) that Christians do not
differ so much in their Real conceptions of the Matter, as they do in their
Definitions. 1. Because Definitions are made up of Ambiguous words, whose
Explication they are not agreed in; and almost all Words are ambiguous till
explained; and ambiguous Words are not fit to define, or be defined, till
explained. And, 2. Because both selecting fit terms, and explaining them, and
ordering them, are works of Art, in which Men are unequal; and there is as
great variety of Intellectual Conceptions, as of Faces. 3. And I have often
said, That a Knowledge intuitive, or a Simple apprehension of a thing as
Sensate, or an Internal experience, or Reflect act, and a general notion of
some things, may prove the truth of Grace, and save Souls, and make us capable
of Christian Love and Communion, as being true saving Knowledge. 4. And
consequently I have often said, that many a thousand Christians have Faith,
Hope, Desire, Love, Humility, Obedience, Justication, Adoption, Union with
Christ, who can define none of these: Unless you will speak equivocally of
Definition it self, and say as good Melancthon, and as Gutherleth, and some
other Romists, that Notitia intuitiva est definitio, who yet say but what I am
saying, when they add, [ Vel saltem instar definitionis]. If all are without
Faith, Love, Justification, Adoption, who cannot give a true Definition of
them, how few will be saved? How much more then does Learning to Men's
salvation, than Grace? And Aristotle then is not so far below Paul, or the
Spirit of Christ, as we (justly) believe.

The Case is so weighty and palpable, that you have nothing to say; but as you
did about the Guilt of our nearer Parents sins, to yield all the Cause, and
with a passionate clamor to tell Men that I mistake you, or wrest your words;
of which I shall appeal to every sober Reader, that will peruse the words of
mine which you assault, and yours as they are an Answer to mine.

In a word, you go about by the abuse of a trivial Axiom of Definitions, 1. To
sentence most Christians to Hell, and cast them into Desperation, as wanting
the Grace which they cannot define. 2. And to destroy Christian Love and
Concord, and tear the Church into as many Shreds, as there be diversities of
Definitions used by them. 3. And you would tempt us to think much hardlier of
your self, than we must or will do; as if your Faith, Justification, etc. were
unsound, because your Definitions are so.

I know that Vnius rei una tantum est Definitio, speaking, 1. Not of the Terms,
but the Sense. 2. And supposing that Definition to be perfectly true; that is,
the truth of Intellection and Expression consisting in their congruity to the
Thing; while the thing is one and the same, the conception and expression which
is perfectly true, must be so too. But, 1. Our understandings are all
imperfect, and we know nothing perfectly but Secundum quaedam; and Zanckez
says truly, that Nihil scitur, if we call that only Knowledge which is perfect:
And consequently no Mental Definition is perfect. 2. And Imperfections have
many degrees. 3. And our Terms, which make up that which you know I called a
Definition in my Dir. 42. (as it is in words) are as aforesaid, various,
mutable, and variously understood and used.

. XV. Page 24. Again you are at it, [ Whom do you mean by that one rare Person,
whose single Judgment is to be preferred in the point of Justification, and to
whom].

Answ. 1. No one that knows not the difference between an Invididuum vagum
and determinatum. 2. No one that is of so hard Metal, as in despite of the
plainest words, to insinuate to the World, that these words [ A few
well-studied Judicious Divines] do signify only one; and that these words [
One Man of extraordinary understanding and clearness], ( is to be preferred
before the Rulers and major Vote, in difficult speculations) do signify one
individuum determinatum in the World, and that the Speaker is bound to name the
Man. No one that thinks that Pemble, who in his Vind. Great. has almost the
very same words, said well, and that I who repeat them, am as criminal as you
pretend: No one who either knows not, that almost all the World (even
Papists) agree in this Rule, or that thinks his judgment fit herein to bear
them all down: No one who, when his abuses are brought into the open Sunshine,
will rather accuse the Light than repent.

But, page 25. After some words to jeer away Conviction, you tell me, [ We must
have some better account of you, quem quibus, than what you have given us yet.
I shall take leave to present our indifferent Readers with a more ingenuous and
truer state of the Question, far more suitable both to my plain meaning and the
clear purport of your Direction. Let the Case be this: There is One who of late
has raised much dust among us, about the grand Article of Justification;
Whether it be by Faith without Works, or by Faith and Works too? All our old
Renowned Divines on this side and beyond the Seas are unanimously agreed, that
Justification is by Faith alone, i. e. without Works. This one Person has
often published his Judgment to the contrary -- so that a poor Academical
Doctor may very rationally enquire of you, Who in this case is to be preferred?
That one, or those many?

Answ. There was a Disputant who would undertake to conquer any Adversary: When
he was asked, How? He said he would pour out upon him so many and so gross
untruths, as should leave him nothing to answer congruously, but a Mentiris;
and then all the World would judge him uncivil, and condemn him for giving such
an unreverent answer. But you shall not so prevail with me, but I will call
your Reader to answer these Questions:

1. Whether it be any truer, that [ This is the clear purport of my Direction],
than it is that I say, There is but one Star in the Firmament, because I say
that one Star is more Luminous than many Candles?

2. Whether if a diseased Reader will put such a Sense upon my words, his
Forgery be a true stating of the Question between him and me, with out my
consent?

3. Whether an intimation that this ONE is either Vnicus, or Primus, or
Singular, in the definition of Justification, or the interest of Works, be any
truer, than that he is the only ejected Minister in England, While the writings
of Bucer, Ludov. Crocius, Joh. Bergius, Conrad. Bergius, Calixtus Placeus, le
Blank, Dave. Gatak. Wott. Pressed. Ball, and multitudes such are visible still
among us?

4. Whether he deals truly, wisely, or friendly with the holy Scripures, and
the Protestants, who would persuade the Ignorant, that this is the true state
of the Controversy, [ Whether it be by Faith without Works, or by Faith and
Works too, that we are justified] While the Scripture speaks both, and all
Protestants hold both in several senses? And whether this easy stating of
Controversies, without more Explication or Distinction, be worthy an Academical
Disputant?

5. Whether it be true or notoriously false, that [ All our Renowned Divines on
this side, and beyond the Seas, are agreed], of that in this Question of the
interest of Works, which this one contradicts?

6. Whether this Doctors naked Affirmation hereof be better proof, than that
one Man's citation of the words of above an Hundred (yea many Hundred) as giving
as much to Works as he does, is of the Contrary?

7. Whether it be an ingenuous way beseeming Academics, to talk at this rate,
and assert such a stating of the Question and such consent, without one word of
notice or mention of the Books, in which I state the Question, and bring all
this evidence of consent?

8. If such a Doctor will needs enquire, whether the secret thoughts of the
Writer meant not himself, when he pretends but to accuse the Rule there
given, and should enquire but of the meaning of the words, whether it savor
more of Rationality, or a presumptuous usurping the Prerogative of God?

. XVI. Page 27. Though your approach be wrathful, you are constrained to come
nearer yet, and you cannot deny my Rule of Direct. in other Points, but only
those of [ High and difficult speculation]: And do you deny it there? You will
deal with it but as the application of that Rule to the Definition of
Justification? (And shall we lose your favor, by forcing you to lay by your
Opposition as to all the rest?) But here you say you [ exceedingly differ from
me]; Or else you would be ashamed of so much Combating in the dark: Exceeding
often signifies some extreme.

Your Reasons are, 1. You hold not the Doctrine of Justification to be properly
of Speculative concern, but wholly Practical: Where yet you confess, that in
all Practical knowledge, there be some antecedent contemplations of the Nature,
Properties, End, Object, and that to know the certain number of Paces
b^me-ward, is a Speculative nicety].

Answ. And can you find no fairer a shift for disagreement? I would such as you
made not the Doctrine of Justification too little Practical? I am far from
thinking that it is not Practical: But is not a Logical definition the opening
the Nature, Properties, End, Object, or some of these which you call
Contemplations? Make not plain things dark, Sir: The use of Art is not to shut
the Windows, and confound Men's Minds. I take all Theology to be together,
Scientia-affectiva-practica; for our Intellect, Will, and Practice, must be
possessed or ruled by it: But it is first Scientia, and we must know before we
can will and practice. And though all right knowledge tend to Practice, yet
forgive me for telling you, that I think that many holy Persons in Scripture
and Primitive times, loved and practiced more than you or I, who knew not how
to form an exact Logical Definition. And that he that knows the things of the
Spirit spiritually, by Scripture Notions, may practice them as fully, as he
that knows and speaks them in the Notions of Aristotle; or else the
Schoolmen excel the Apostles. Though ambling be an easy Pace, which Horses
are taught by Gives and Fetters, it follows not that a Horse cannot travel as
far in his natural pace. When you have said all, Logical defining shall be a
work of Art, and the Church should not be torn, and Souls shall not be damned,
for want of it. He that Loves, Believes, Hops, Obeys, and by doing them
has a reflecting perception what they are, and has but such a knowledge of the
Gospel as may be had without a proper Definition, shall be saved.

Page 28, 29. you say, [ Nor is the Doctrine of Justification so high and
difficult, but that the meanest Christian may understand it sufficiently to
Salvation, so far as words can make it intelligible].

Answ. Your own blows seem not to hurt you. I thank you for granting so much
hope to the meanest Christians. But what is this to your Case? 1. Do the meanest
Christians know how to define Justification, and all the Grace which they have?
2. Are they acquainted with all the [ Words that should make it intelligible?]

Page 29. you add, [ You have done little service to your weaker Christians to
persuade them otherwise (as well as to the great blessed Charter of Salvation)
and to lead them out of the plain road into Woods and Mazes, to that one Man of
extraordinary Judgment and Clearness; no body must know what his Name is, or
where he dwells, and so to whirle them about till you have made them giddy -- ].

Answ. How easy is it to talk at this rate for any Cause in the World? Is this
Disputing or Reasoning? Cannot I as easily say thus against you? But the
question is of Things visible: I willingly appeal to any intelligent impartial
Divine, who will read what you and I have written of Justifification, which of
us it is that has done more to bring Men out of Woods and Mazes, into the
plainest Road? Let them, that have leisure for no more, read but my Preface to
my Disput. of Justif. and mark which side wrongeth weak Christians, and the
Charter of Salvation.

. XVII. Page 29. you add, [ Sir, I understand something at these years, without
your Tutorage, of the duty both of Pastors and People: But I know not what you
mean to make the way to Heaven (revealed sufficiently to all, etc.) to be a
matter of high abstruse Speculation, as if none but great Scholars, and Men of
extraordinary Judgment, could by the right use of Scriptures, and other
ordinary common means, be able to find it out, till they have met with that
Elias, etc.]

Answ. Still I see we shall agree whether you will or not: O, Sir, it is just
the contrary that I wrote for: And I need but repeat your words to answer you.
I am not disparaging your understanding, otherwise than you may so call the
vindicating of needful truth: Nor did I ever presume to offer you my Tutorage:
You speak all this with too much tenderness. But that which I have written
almost all my Books of Controversy against, is this making the Way to Heaven
more difficult and be wildring, than the Scriptures make it. Therefore it is
that I have persuaded Men to lay less stress on arbitrary humane Notions: But
the question is now, whether it be your Course or mine, that is guilty of this?
Are Logical Definitions the necessary Way to Heaven? Does the Scripture
sufficiently reveal such Definitions to all? Do all ordinary Believers by the
use of the Scripture, know how to define? Do not Logicians make true defining
one of the surest signs of clear and accurate knowledge? Why should you and I
dispute thus about Matters of Fact? I know by the principles of Conformity,
that your Judgment is not like to be narrower than mine about the state of
determinate Individuals: I suppose you would take as many to the Lords Supper
as Believers, as I would, and absolve as many, and pronounce as many saved at
Buryal. Let you and I call but a dozen of the next Families together, and
desire every Man and Woman of them, to give you a Definition of Justification,
(out of the hearing of the rest) and if they all give you a true definition,
and one definition, I will write a Retractation. I know you not; but by your
now telling me, of your understanding of the duties of Pastors and People, I
may suppose that you have been a Pastor, (else --). And if so, that you have
had personal conference with most (if not all) of your Flock. If you have found
them all such able concordant Definers of Justification, you have had a more
learned Flock than I had. I doubt your Learned Scholars could not do it, till
they met with some such Elias or Aristotle, as you! Yea, let us take only such
as by their Lives we commonly judge truly Godly Christians: And if all these
give you one and a true definition of Justification, then do you tell them that
Defining is no such difficult work, but ordinary Christians may and do attain
it, and I that make it difficult, make the way to Heaven difficult, for
Defining is the way to Heaven: But if not one of many Score or Hundred (till
you teach them anew) do give you a true and the same Definition; I will go on
and still say, that They wrong Souls, the Gospel, and the Church, who pretend
such necessity and facility of defining, and will censure, reproach, or damn
all that agree not with them in a Definition, when they have as real though
less distinct a knowledge of the thing.

I doubt not but you know how much difference there is among Learned Men about
Definitions themselves in general: Whether they belong to Metaphysics,
Logicks, or Physics? Whether Definitio Physica (as Man is defined per Animam,
Corpus and Vnionem) be a proper Definition? Whether a true Logical and Physical
definition should not be the same? Whether Definitio objectiva be properly
called Definitio, or only Formalis? Whether Accidents may be properly defined?
An Genus definiri possit? An pars Logica definiri possit? An individua possint
definiri? (Inquit Hurtado, Negari non potest Individuis definitio
substantialis; and quidem essentialis Physice; est enim de essentia hujus
hominis haec anima cum hoc Corpore; Imo and essentialis Metaphysice -- si
individua recte possent penetrari, illorum definitio esset omnium perfectissima
An ea quae differunt definitione distinguantur realiter? With a multitude such.
And is the Art of Defining so easy, as that ordinary Christians salvation must
lie upon it, when so many things about Defining are among the subtilest Doctors
undetermined?

And as Ignorant as I am, while you suppose me unable to define Justification,
I would wish you (not for my sake, but theirs) that you will not sentence all
as unjustified to Damnation, that are not more skilful in defining than I, and
that you will not reject all such from the Sacrament and Communion of the
Church.

. XVIII. Yet again, page 30. you tell me, [ I cannot well swallow down in the
lump, what you would have me and others to do, when you direct us to prefer
that one Man before the Rulers and majority of Votes, till you acquaint us who
that Gentleman is, and what sort of Rulers and Majorities you mean].

Answ. What you cannot swallow you must leave: I will not cram or drench you. I
could wish for your own sake, that you had not thus often told the World of
such a Malady, as that must needs be which hinders your swallow: When, 1. You
your self receive the same Rule in other Instances, and make all this stir
against it only, as to the Definition of Justification, even the Logical
definition, which is Actus definientis, called Definitio formalis, and not the
Definitio objectiva, as the Ipsum definitum is by some improperly called. 2.
And when the words in that Instance are not [ ONE MAN] but [ a few Men] which
your Eyes may still see; and when in the General direction where one Man is
mentioned, there is no such word as [ that one Man], or the least intimation of
an Individuum determinatum; You greatly wrong your Honor by such dealing; As
you do by adding,

1. [ For the single Person (that Monarch in Divinity) to whom we are upon
differences to make our Appeals, etc.]

Answ. If you hold on thus to talk as in your sleep, and will not shut your
Chamber Door, but commission the Press to report your words to the World, how
can your best Friends secure your reputation? Is not all this talk of single
Person, and Monarch in Divinity, and Appeals, the effects of a Dream, or
somewhat worse? These Fictions will serve no honest ends. But you next come
indeed to the true difficulty of the Case, and ask:

[ I beseech you Sir, how shall your ignorant or weaker Christian be able to
judge of fitness? -- He had need to have a very competent measure of Abilities
himself, who is to give his verdict of another, etc.]

This is very true and rational: But it concerns you as much as me to answer
it, unless you will renounce the Rule. And seeing you grant it in other
Instances, if you please to answer your own question as to those other, you
have answered it as to this: And if you will not learn of your self, I am not
so vain as to think, that you will learn of me.

In case of Subtilties which depend upon Wit, and Art, and Industry, in that
proportion which few, even faithful Men attain, I remember but one of these
ways that can be taken; Either wholly to suspend our Judgments, and not to
meddle with them, till we can reach them our selves; Or to take them fide
humana, or as probabilities on the Credit of some Men, rather than others: As
to the first, I am for as much suspension of Judgment* as will stand with the
part of a Learner (where we must learn; and in useless things for a total
suspension). But where Learning is a duty, all Men come to Knowledge by degrees,
and things usually appear to them in their probability, before they appear in
ascertaining evidence. Therefore here the Question is, Whose judgment I shall
take as most probable? (Were the case only, how far we should Preach our
Judgment to others, there Rulers must more determine; or if it were, How to
manage our Judgment so as to keep Unity and Concord, the Church, or major Vote
must overruled us). But it being the mere Judgment or Opinion that is in
question, either we must adhere to the Judgment, 1. Of Rulers as such, 2. Or
the major Vote as such, 3. Or to those that are most Excellent in that part of
Knowledge: Why should I waste time to give you the Reasons against the two
first, which are commonly received? When even the Papists, who go as far as any
I know living in ascribing to One Man, and to major Votes, yet all agree, that
a few subtle Doctors, yea one in the things in which he excels, is to be
preferred before Pope or Council: And therefore the Scotists prefer one Scotus,
Lychetus, Memisse, Rada, etc. before a Pope or Multitude, and so do the
Nominals, one Ockam, Gregory, Gabriel, Hurtado, etc. and so the other Sects.

The thing then being* such as neither you, nor any Man can deny, the
difficulty which you urge, does press you and all Men: And it is indeed one
grand calamity of Mankind, and not the least hinderance of Knowledge in the
World; that he that has it not, knows not what another has, but by dark
Conjectures. 4. And therefore Parents and Pupils know not who is their best
Tutor: The hearers that are to choose a Teacher, hardly know whom to choose; for,
as you say truly, he must know much that must judge of a knowing Man.

God has in all Arts and Sciences given some few Men an excellency of Wit and
Reach above the generality of their Profession, and they have a more clear and
solid Judgment. If all Men could but know who these be, the World would in one
Age be more recovered from Ignorance than it has been in ten. But the power of
the Proud, and the confidence of the Ignorant, and the number of all th^se, and
the Slanders and Scorn, and peevish Wranglings of the common Pride and
Ignorance against those few that know what they know not, is the Devils great
means to frustrate their endeavors, and keep the World from having knowledge.
T^is is certain and weighty Truth, and such as you should make no Malignant
applications of, nor strive against. Mankind must needs acknowledge it. Your
urgent questioning here [ Do you not mean your self?] does but expose you to
pity, by opening that which you might have concealed.

And to your Question I say, could I enable all Ignorant Men to know who are
the best Teachers, I should be the grand Benefactor of the World: But both the
blessing of excellent Teachers, and also of acquaintance with them and their
worth, is given by God, partly as it pleases Him, freely, even to the
unworthy, and partly as a Reward to those that have been faithful in a little,
and obeyed lower helps; (for there is a Worthiness to be found in some Houses,
where the Preacher comes with the voice of Peace, and unworthiness, which often
depriveth Men of such Mercies.) Both absolutely Free Grace, and also
Rewarding-Grace, do here show themselves.

But yet I add, 1. That Light is a self-demonstrating thing; and will not
easily be hid. 2. And those that are the Children of Light, and have been true
to former helps and convictions, and are willing to sell all for the Pearl, and
fear not being losers by the price of Knowledge, but would have it whatever
Labor or Suffering it must cost, and who search for it impartially and
diligently, and forfeit it not by Sloth, or a fleshly, proud, or worldly Mind,
these, I say, are prepared to discern the Light; when others fall under the
heavy Judgment of being deceived by the Wranglings, Scorns, Clamours and
Threatenings of PROUD IGNORANCE. And thus one Augustine was a Light in his time,
and though such as Prosper, Fulgentius, etc. knew him, Pelagius and the
Massilienses wrangled against him: And Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, Phagius,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Musculus, Zanchius were such in their times; and some
discerned them to be so, and more did not: If Men must have gone by the
judgment of Rulers, or the major Vote of Teachers, what had become of the
Reformation? If you can better direct Men how to discern Gods Gifts and Graces
in His Servants, do it, and do not cavil against it.

As for your [ One single Protestant in such a case as Justification], and your
[ I wish it be not your meaning] Page 31. they deserve no further answer, nor I
all the anger, page 31, 32, 33.

. XIX. But page 34. Note again, 1. That it is not Objective Definitions, (as
some call them) but [ Logical, Artificial Definitions,] supposed to be Men's
needful Acts, which you say are Re, the same with the Definitum. 2. And that
yet you must have it [ supposed that these Definitions are true]. And I suppose
that few Good Christians comparatively know a true one, no, nor what a
Definition, (or the Genus and Differentia which constitute it) is.

You say, [ I absolutely deny what you so rashly avow, that the Definition of
Justification is controverted by the greatest Divines: This is one of your
liberal Dictates: The Reformed Divines are all, I think, before you, agreed
about the nature of Justification, its Causes, etc. and consequently cannot
differ about the Definition].

Answ. 1. But what if all Divines were so agreed? So are not all honest Men and
Women that must have Communion with us: Therefore make not Definitions more
necessary than they are, nor as necessary as the Thing.

2. You must be constrained for the defending of these words, to come off by
saying, that you meant, That though they agree not in the Words, or Logical
terms of the Definition; but one says, This is the Genus, and this is the
Differentia, and another that it is not this but that; one says this, and
another that is the Formal, or Material Cause, etc. yet de re, they mean the
same thing, were they so happy as to agree in their Logical defining terms and
notions: And if you will do in this, as you have done in your other Quarrels,
come off by saying as I say, and showing Men the power of Truth, though you do
it with never so much anger, that you must agree, I shall be satisfied, that
the Reader is delivered from your snare, and that Truth prevails, what ever
you think or say of me.

3. But because I must now answer what you say, and not what I foresee you will
or must say, I must add, that this passage seems to suppose that your Reader
lives in the dark, and has read very little of Justification. 1. Do all those
great Divines, who deny the Imputation of Christ's active Righteousness, and
take it to be but Justitia Personae, non Meriti, and that we are Justified by
the Passive only, agree with their Adversaries, who have written against them,
about the Definition and Causes of Justification? Will any Man believe you, who
has read Olevian, Vrsine, Paraeus, Scultetus, Piscator, Carolus Molinaeus,
Wendeline, Beckman, Alstedius, Camero, with his followers in France, Forbes,
with abundance more, who are for the Imputation of the Passive Righteousness
only? Were Mr. Anth. Wotton, and Mr. Balmford, and his other Adversaries, of
the same Opinion in this? Was Mr. Bradshaw so sottish as to write his
Reconciling Treatise of Justification in Latin and English, to reduce Men of
differing minds to Concord, while he knew that there was no difference, so much
as in the Definition? Was he mistaken in reciting the great differences about
their Senses of Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, if there were none at all?
Did Mr. Gataker agree with Lucius and Piscator, when he wrote against both (as
the extremes)? Did Mr. Wotton, and John Goodwin, agree with Mr. G. Walker, and
Mr. Roborough? Does Mr. Lawson, in his Theopolitica agree with you, and such
others? Does not Mr. Cartwright here differ from those that hold the Imputation
of the Active Righteousness?

What abundance of Protestants do place Justification only in Fogiveness of
Sins? And yet as many (I know not which is the greater side) do make that
Forgiveness but one part, and Imputation of Righteousness another. And how many
make Forgiveness no part of Justification, but a Concomitant? And many instead
of [ Imputation of Righteousness] put [ Accepting us as Righteous, for the
sake, or merit of Christ's Righteousness imputed] (viz. as the Meritorious
Cause). And Paraeus tells us, that they are of four Opinions, who are for
Christ's Righteousness imputed; some for the Passive only; some for the Passive
and Active; some for the Passive, Active, and Habitual, some for these three
and the Divine. And who knows not that some here so distinguish Causes and
Effects, as that our Original Sin (or Habitual say some) is pardoned for
Christ's Original (and Habitual) Holiness: Our Omissions for Christ's Active
Obedience, and our Commissions for His Passive? Or as more say that Christ's
Passive Righteousness as Satisfaction, saves us from Hell or Punishment, and
His Active as meritorious, procures Life as the reward? When many others,
rejecting that Division, say; That both freedom from Punishment, and right to
Glory are the conjunct effects of His Habitual, Active, and Passive
Righteousness, as an entire Cause (in its kind); as Guil. Forbes, Grotius,
Bradshaw, and others truly say: Besides that many conclude with Gataker, that
these* are indeed but one thing and effect, (to be Glorified, and not to be
Damned or Punished)* seeing not to be Glorified is the Paena damni, and that
the remitting of the whole Penalty damni and sensus, and so of all Sin of
Omission and Commission, is our whole Justification.

And I need not tell any Man that has read such Writers, that they ordinarily
distinguish of Justification, and give not the same Definition of one sort as
of another, nor of the Name in one Sense as in another.

Many confess (whom you may read in Guil. Forbes, and Vinc. le Blanck) that the
word [ Justifie] is diverse times taken in Scripture (as the Papists do) as
including Sanctification: And so says Beza against Illyricus, page 218. as
cited by G. Forbes, [Si Justificationem generaliter accipias, ut interdum
usurpatur ab Apostolo, Sanctificatio non erit ejus effectus, sed pars aut
species]: And as I find him ( mihi) page 179. Quamvis Justificationis nomen
interdum generaliter accipiatur pro omni illius Justitiae dono quam a patre in
Christo accipimus, etc.

And how little are we agreed whether Reconciliation be a part of Justification
or not? Yea, or Adoption either? Says Illyricus [Hoc affirmo, recte posse dici
Justificationem esse Causam omnium beneficiorum sequentium: Nam justificatio
est plena Reconciliatio cum Deo, quae nos facit ex hostibus filios Dei:] To
which Beza ibid. says, (distinguishing of Reconciliation) Neutro modo idem est
Reconciliatio ac Justificatio. -- Si Remissio peccatorum est Justificationis
Definitio, quod negare non ausis, etc.

Of the three sorts or parts of Christ's Righteousness imputed to make up three
parts of our Justification, see him de Predest. page 405. Col. 2. which Perkins
and some others also follow.

Olevian (as all others that grossly mistake not herein) did hold, that God did
not judge us to have fulfilled all the Law in Christ; and that our righteousness
consists only in the Remission of Sin, and right to Life as freely given us
for another Merits: But Beza insisteth still on the contrary, and in his
Epistle to Olevian, (page 248. Epist. 35.) says, Quid vanius est quam Justum
arbitrari, qui Legem non impleverit? Atqui lex non tantum prohibet fieri quod
vetat, -- verum praecipit quod jubet. -- Ergo qui pro non peccatore censetur in
Christo, mortem quidem effugerit; sed quo jure vitam praeterea petet, nisi
omnem justitiam Legis in eodem Christo impleverit? (This is the Doctrine which
Wotton and Gataker (in diverse Books largely) and Bradshaw, after many others do
Confute. Yet says he, N^que vero id obstat, quominus nostra Justificatio
Remissione peccatorum apt and recte definiatur], Which is a contradiction. Yet
was he for Love and Gentleness in these differences; ibid.

Yet Qu. and Resp. Christ. page 670. He leaves out Christ's Original Habitual
Righteousness, [ Non illa essentialis quae Deitatis est, nec illa Habitualis,
ut ita loquar, Puritas Carnis Christi. -- Quae quum non distingueret Osiander
faedissime est hallucinatus.

And ibid. 670. he gives us this description of Justification.

Qu. Quid Justificationem vocat Paulus hoc loco? R. Illud quo Justi fimus, id
est, eousque perfecti, integri, (...), ut plenissime, non tantum aboleatur
quicquid in nobis totis in est turpitudinis, qua Deus sum purus offendi ullo
modo possit, verum etiam in nos comperiatur quicquid in ha^ humana naturae
usque adeo potest eum delectare, ut illud vita aeterna pro bona sua voluntate
coronet].

Yet (as in his Annot. in Romans 8.30. and alibi) he confesses that
Justification in Scripture, sometime is taken for Sanctification, (or as
including it) so he takes our Sanctification to contain the Imputation of
Christ's Sanctity to us. (Qu. and Resp. page 671.) 1. Dico nostras Personas,
imputata ipsius perfecta sanctitate and integritate, plene sanctas and
integras, ac proinde Patri acceptas, non in nobis sed in Christo censemur. 2.
And next the Spirits Sanctification; and thus Christ is made Sanctification to
us.

Dr. Twisse, and Mr. Pemble, Vind. Great. distinguish of Justification as an
Immanent Act in God from Eternity, and as it is the notice of the former in our
Consciences: But doubtless the commonest Definitions of Justification agree
with neither of these: And Pemble of Justification otherwise defines it (as
Mr. Jessop says Dr. Twisse did).

Lud. Crocius Syntag. page 1219. thus defines it, [ Justificatio Evangelica
est actus Divinae gratiae, qua Deus adoptat peccatorem per approbationem
obedientiae Legis in sponsore atque intercessore Christo, and per Remissionem
peccatorum ac Justitiae imputationem in eo qui per fidem Christo est insitus].
And says, page 1223. [ Fides sola justificat quatenus notat Obedientiam
quandam expectantem promissionem ut donum gratuitum -- and apponitur illi
Obedientiae quae non expectat promissionem ut donum omnino gratuitum sed ut
mercedem propositam sub Condition operis alicu^us praeter acceptationem and
gratitudinem debitam, quae sua Natura in omni donatione quamvis gratuita
requiri solet. Et ejusmodi Obedientia peculiariter opus ab Apostolo, and
Latinis proprie Meritum dicitur; and qui sub hac condition obediunt Operantes
vocantur, Romans 4.4. and 11.6. This is the truth which I assert.

Conrad. Bergius Prax. Cathol. dis. 7. page 983. tells us that the Breme
Cat^chism thus opens the Matter: [Qu. Quomodo Justificatur Homo coram Deo? R.
Accipit Homo Remissionem peccatorum and Justificatur, hoc est, Gratus fit coram
Deo in vera Conversione, persolam fidem, per Christum, sine proprio Merito and
dignitate.

Cocceius disp. de via salut. de Just. page 189. Originalis Christi Justitia
correspondet nostro Originali peccato, etc. vid. coet. plura vid. de foeder.

Macovius Colleg. de Justif. distinguishes Justification into Active and
Passive, and says, Justificatio Activa significat absolu^ionem Dei, que
Hominem reum a reatu absolvit: And he would prove this to be before Faith, and
cites for it (abusively) Paraeus and Tessanus, and thinks that we were
absolved from Guilt from Christ's undertaking our Debt, These. 12. thus arguing,
[ Cujus debita apud Creditorem aliquis recepit exsolvenda, and Creditor istius
sponsionem ita acceptat, ut in ea acquiescat, ille jam ex part Creditoris
liber est a debitis: Atque Electorum omnium in singulari debita apud Deum
Patrem Christus, ex quo factus est Mediator, recepit exolvenda, and Deus Pater
illam sponsionem acceptavit, etc. Passive Justification, which he supposes to
be our application of Christ's Righteousness to our daily as often as we offend.
Th. 5. (And part 4. disp. 22. he maintains, that There are no Dispositions to
Regeneration). Others of his mind I pass by.

Spanhemius Disput. de Justif. says, that [The Form of Passive Justification
consists in the apprehension and sense of Remission of Sin and Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness in capable Subjects] grossly: Whereas Active Justification
( Justificantis) ever immediately causes Passive (Justificationem justificati)
which is nothing but the effect of the Active, (or as most call it, Actio ut in
patiente): And if this were the Apprehension and Sense (as aforesaid) of Pardon
and imputed Righteousness, then a Man in his sleep were unjustified, and so of
Infants, etc. For he that is not Passively justified, is not at all justified.

I told you elsewhere, that the Synops. Leidens. de Justif. page 413. Th. 23.
says, That Christ's Righteousness is both the Meritorious, Material, and Formal
Cause of our Justification.

What Fayus, and Davenant, and others say of the Formal Cause, viz. Christ's
Righteousness imputed, I there showed: And how Paraeus, Joh. Crocius, and many
others, deny Christ's Righteousness to be the Formal Cause.

Wendeline defines Justification thus (Theol. Lib. 1. c. 25. p. 603.)
Justificatio est actio Dei gratuita, qua peccatores Electi, maledictioni legis
obnoxii, propter justitiam seu satisfactionem Christi fide applicatam and a Deo
imputatam, coram tribunali Divino, remssis peccatis, a maledictione Legis
absolvuntur and justi censentur. And page 615, 616. He maintains that [
Obedientia activa, si proprie and accurate loquamur, non est materia nostrae
Justificationis, nec imputatur nobis, ita ut nostra censeatur, and nobis
propter eam peccata remittantur, and debitum legis pro nobis solvatur;
quemadmodum Passiva per imputationem censetur nostra, etc. Et post [Si dicus
Christum factum esse hominem pro nobis, hoc est, nostro bono, conceditur: Si
pro nobis, hoc est, nostro loco, negatur: Quod enim Christus nostro loco fecit,
and factus est, id nos non tenemur facere and fieri, etc.

Rob. Abbot approves of Thompsons Definition of Evangelical Justification,
(page 153.) that it is, Qua poenitenti and Credenti remittuntur peccata, and
jus vitae aeternae conceditur per and propter Christi obedientiam illi
imputatam: (Which is sound, taking Imputatam soundly, as he does).

Joh. Cr^cius, Disp. 1. p. 5. thus defines it, [ Actio Dei qua ex gratia
propter satisfactionem Christi peccatoribus in Christum totius Mundi
redemptorem unicum, vere credentibus gratis sine operibus aut meritis propriis
omnia peccata remittit, and justitiam Christi imputat ad sui nominis gloriam
and illorum salutem aeternam. And he makes only [ Christ's full satisfaction
for Sin, to be the Impulsive-External, Meritorious, and Material, Cause, as
being that which is imputed to us; and the Form of Justification to be the
Remission of Sin, Original and Actual, or the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness (which he makes to be all one) or the Imputation of Faith for
Righteousness].

Says Bishop Downame of Justif. p. 305. [To be Formally Righteous by Christ's
Righteousness imputed, never any of us, for ought I know, affirmed. The like
says Dr. Pride^aux, when yet very many Protestants affirm it.

Should I here set together forty or sixty Definitions of Protestants verbatim,
and show you how much they differ, it would be unpleasant, and tedious, and
unnecessary.

And as to those same Divines that Dr. Tully names as agreed, Dr. Davenants
and Dr. Fields words I have cited at large in my Confess. saying the same in
substance as I do; as also Mr. Scudders, and an hundred more, as is before said.

And let any sober Reader decide this Controversy between us, upon these two
further Considerations.

1. Peruse all the Corpus Confessionum, and see whether all the Reformed
Churches give us a Definition of Justification, and agree in that Definition:
Yea, whether the Church of England in its Catechism, or its Articles, have any
proper Definition: Or if you will call their words a Definition, I am sure it is
none but what I do consent to. And if a Logical Definition were by the Church
of England and other Churches held necessary to Salvation, it would be in their
Catechisms (if not in the Creed): Or if it were held necessary to
Church-Concord, and Peace, and Love, it would be in their Articles of Religion,
which they subscribe.

2. How can all Protestants agree of the Logical Definition of Justification,
when 1. They agree not of the sense of the word [ Justify,] and of the species
of that Justification which Paul and James speak of? Some make Justification to
include Pardon and Sanctification, (see their words in G. Forbes, and Le
Blank); many say otherwise. Most say that Paul speaks most usually of
Justification in sensu forensi, but whether it include [ Making just] as some
say, or only [ Judging just] as others, or Nolle punire, be the act as Dr.
Twisse, they agree not. And some hold that in James Justification is that which
is eoram hominibus, when said to be by Works; but others ( truly) say, it is
they coram Deo.

2. They are not agreed in their very Logical Rules, and Notions, to which
their Definitions are reduced; no not so much as of the number and nature of
Causes, nor of Definitions (as is aforesaid): And as I will not undertake to
prove that all the Apostles, Evangelists and Primitive Pastors, knew how to
define Efficient, Material, Formal and Final Causes in general, so I am sure
that all good Christians do not.

3. And when Justification is defined by Divines, is either the Actus
Justificantis, and this being in the predicament of Action, what wonder if they
disagree about the Material and Formal Causes of it?

Nay, it being an Act of God, there are few Divines that tell us what that Act
is: Deus operatur per essentiam: And Ex part agentis, his Acts are his
Essence, and all but one. And who will thus dispute of the Definition and
Causes of them, Efficient, Material, Formal, Final? when I presumed to declare,
that this Act of Justifying is not an immanent Act in God, nor without a
Medium, but Gods Act by the Instrumentality of his Gospel Covenant or Promise,
many read it as a new thing; and if that hold true that the First Justification
by Faith, is that which Gods Gospel-Donation is the Instrument of, as the
Titulus seu Fundamentum Juris, being but a Virtual and not an Actual Sentence,
then the Definition of it, as to the Causes, must differ much from the most
common Definitions.

But most Protestants say that Justification is Sententia Judicis. (And no
doubt but there are three several sorts, or Acts called Justification, 1.
Constitutive by the Donative Covenant, 2. Sentential, 3. Executive.) And here
they are greatly at a loss, for the decision of the Case, what Act of God this
Sententia Jucis is. What it will be after death, we do not much disagree: But
what it is immediately upon our believing. It must be an Act as in patiente, or
the Divine essence denominated from such an effect. And what Judgment and
Sentence God has upon our believing, few open, and fewer agreee. Mr. Tombs
says it is a Sentence in Heaven notifying it to the Angels: But that is not
all, or the chief: some run back to an Immanent Act; most leave it
undetermined: And sure the Name of Sentence in general, signifies no true
Conception of it at all, in him that knows not what that Sentence is, seeing
Universals are Nothing (out of us) but as they exist in individuals. Mr. Lawson
has said that wihch would reconcile Protestants, and some Papists, as to the
Name, viz. that Gods Execution is his Sentence; He Judges by Executing: And so
as the chief punishment is the Privation of the Spirit, so the Justifying Act,
is the executive donation of the Spirit. Thus are we disagreed about Active
Justification (which I have often endeavored Conciliatorily fullier to open.)

And as to Passive Justification (or as it is Status Justificati) which is
indeed that which it concerns us in this Controversy to open, I have told
you how grossly some describe it here before. And all agree not what Predicament
it is in: some take it to be in that of Action, ut recipitur in passo; and some
in that of Quality and Relation Conjunct: But most place it in Relation; And
will you wonder if all Christian Women, yea or Divines, cannot define that
Relation aright. And if they agree not in the notions of the Efficient,
Material, Formal and Final Causes, of that which must be defined (as it is
capable) by its subjectum, fundamentum and terminus.

I would not wish that the Salvation of any Friend of mine (or any one) should
be laid on the true Logical Definition of Justification, Active or Passive,
Constitutive, Sentential or Executive.

And now the Judicious will see, whether the Church and Souls of Men be well
used by this pretense, that all Protestants are agreed in the Nature, Causes
and Definition of Justification; and that to depart from that one Definition
(where is it?) is so dangerous as the Doctor pretends, because the Definition
and the Definitum are the same.

XX. P. 34. You say [ You tremble not in the audience of God and Man to suggest
again that hard-fronted Calumny, viz. that I prefer a Majority of Ignorants
before a Learned man in his own profession.

Answ. I laid it down as a Rule, that They are not to be preferred: You assault
that Rule with bitter accusations, as if it were unsound (or else to this day I
understand you not.) Is it then [ a hard-fronted Calumny] to defend it, and to
tell you what is contained in the denying of it. The audience of God must be so
dreadful to (you and) me, that (without calling you to consider whether the
Calumny be not notoriously yours) I heartily desire any judicious person to
help me to see, that I am here guilty, if it be so. But you add,

[You know not what the Event of all this may be* For suppose now, being dragged
in my Scarlet, (a habit more suitable for him that Triumphs) at the Wheel of
your Chariot in the view of all men, I should happen to be degraded and turned
out of my literate Society; would it not trouble you? no doubt: but then it
might happen to be too late.

Answ. 1. It would trouble me: because (though I know you not) our fame here
says that you are an honest, and very modest man, and those that are Nicknamed
Calvinists prefer you before most others of your rank. But alas, what is Man,
and what may Temptation do?

2. did you think that your Scarlet or Mastership did allow you to write
copiously, as you did, against your Neighbor who never meddled with you, and
made it a crime in him, whom you accuse, to defend himself, and a righteous
cause? I see in this age we deal on hard unequal terms with some Men that can
but get into Scarlet.

3. You would make your Reader believe by these words that you are really
Melancholy, and fear where no fear is* A Reverend Doctor, whose Book has the
Patronage of one of the greatest Bps. of England writes against one of no
Academical degree, who has these 13. years and more been judged unworthy to
preach to the most ignorant Congregation in the Land, and by the (Contrived)
distinction of Nonconformists from Conformists, goes under the scorn and
hatred of such, as you pretend to be in danger of, and has himself no security
for his liberty in the open Air; that this Learned man in his honor, should
conceit that an Answer from this hated person might endanger his degradation
and turning out of his place, is so strange a fancy, as will make your Readers
wonder.

4. But whether you are Melancholy or no I know not; but if you are not
unrighteous, I know not what unrighteousness is. Will you bear with the
diversion of a story?

When the Moors were sentenced to ruin in Spain, one of the Disciples of
Valdesso (a Scholar) fell into the displeasure of the Bp. of Toledo: A
Neighbor Doctor knowing that the Bps. favor might bestead him -- (whether
accidentally or contrivedly I know not) hit upon this happy course: The Scholar
and he being together in a solemn Convention, the Scholar was taking Tobacco,
and the Dr. seeing the smok threw first a Glass of Beer in his face, and cried
Fire, Fire; The Scholar wiped his face, and went on; The Doctor next threw an
Ink-bottle in his Face, crying still Fire, Fire; The Scholar being thus blackt,
perceived that he was like to be taken for a Moor, and ruined, and he went out
and carefully washed his face: the Doctor charged him openly for affronting him
(yea and injuriously calumniating him) by the fact: For says he, there was
necessary Cause for what I did: There is no smoke without some fire: that which
fired you might next have fired the House, and that the next House, and so have
burnt down all the City: and your action intimates as if I had done causelessly
what I did, and done you wrong: The Scholar answered him; I knew not, Sir, that
it was unlawful to wash me, but I will take no more Tobacco that I may no more
offend you; But if in this frosty weather the thickness of my breath should be
called smoke* may I not wash my face, if you again cast your Ink upon it? No,
says the Doctor, It is not you, nor any private man that must be judge whether
you are on Fire or not, in a public danger: Must the City be hazarded, if you
say that it is not Fire? The Scholar asks, may I not refer the case to the
standers-by, and wash my face if they say, It was no Fire? No, says the Dr.
that is but to call in your Associates to your help, and to add Rebellion and
Schism to your disobedience: I perceive what principles you are of. Why then,
says the Scholar, if I must needs be a Moor, my face and I are at your mercy.

But pardon this digression, and let you and I stand to the judgment of any
righteous and competent Judge, whether you deal not with me in notorious
injustice, so be it the Case be truly stated.

The person whom you assaulted is one, that attempted (with success) the
subversion of Antinomianism and the clearing of truth; their Ignorance of which
was the Cause of their other Errors. But having let fall, (for want of use in
writing) some incongruous words (as Covenant for Law, etc.) and that somewhat
often, and some excepting against the Book, he craved their animaversions, and
promised to suspend the Book till it were corrected; and purposely wrote a far
greater Volumn in explication of what was dark, and defense of what was
wrongfully accused, and many other Volumns of full defense: No man answers
any of these: but after twenty years, or thereabout, (though I protested in
print against any that would write against the Aphorisms, without regard to the
said Explications) you publish your Confutation of part of those Aphorisms, and
that with most notorious untruth, charging me to deny all Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, when I had there professed the Contrary, and taking no notice of
any after-explication or defense, and parallelling me with Bellarmine, if not
with Heretics or Infidels (for I suppose you take the denyers of all
Imputation to be little better.) This Book you publish without the least
provocation with other quarrels, dedicating it to that R. Rd. B. who first
silenced me; (as if I must go write over again all the Explications and
Defenses I had before written, because you (that are bound to accuse me) are
not bound to read them:) and this you do against one that at that time had been
about 13 years silenced, ejected, and deprived of all Ministerial maintenance,
and of almost all his own personal Estate, desiring no greater preferment than
leave to have preached for nothing, where is notorious necessity, could I have
obtained it, sometimes laid in the common Jail among Malefactors, for preaching
in my own house, and dwelling within five miles of it: after fined at forty
pound a Sermon for preaching for nothing; looking when my Books and Bed are
taken from me by distress, though I live in constant pain and langour, the
Constable but yesterday coming to have distrained for sixty pound for two
Sermons; hunted and hurryed about to Justices at the will of any ignorant --
Agent of -- that will be an Informer, and even fain to keep my doors daily
locked, if it may be to save my Books a while: Yet the exciting of wroth by
public Calumny against one so low already, and under the persecuting wrath of
your friends, was no fault, no injustice in you at all! (nor indeed did I much
feel it.)

But for me who am thus publicly by visible Calumny traduced, truly to tell
you where you mistake, and how you wrong Gods Church and Truth more than me,
and if also I offer peaceably to wash my own face, this is hard fronted
Calumny, dragging a Doctor in Scarlet at the Wheels of my Chariot, which might
occasion his degrading and turning out, etc.

This over-tenderness of your honor as to other men's words, (and too little
care of the means of it, as to your own) has a cause that it concerns you to
find out. Had you the tenth part as many Books written against you, as are
against me (by Quakers, Seekers, Infidels, Antinomians, Millenaries,
Anabaptists, Separatists, Semi-separatists, Papists, Pseudo-Tilenus, Diocesans,
Conformists, and many Enemies of Peace, (to whom it was not I, but your self
that joined you) it would have hardened you into some more patience. If you
will needs be militant you must expect replies: And he that will injuriously
speak to the World what he should not speak, must look to hear what he would
not hear. But you add;

Sir, the Name and Quality of a DOCTOR and Master of a Literate Society, might
have been treated more civilly by you.

Answ. 1. I am ready to ask you forgiveness for any word that any impartial man
(yea or your Reverend Brethren of that Academy themselves, whom I will allow to
be somewhat partial for you) shall notify to me to be uncivil or any way
injurious. 2. But to be free with you, neither Doctorship, Mastership nor
^carlet will Privilege you to fight against Truth, Right, and Peace, and to
vent gross mistakes, and by gross untruths in matter of fact, such as is your [
Omnem ludibrio habet imputationem] to abuse your poor Brethren, and keep the
longconsuming flames still burning, by false representing those as Popish, and
I know not what, who speak not as unaptly as your self, and all this without
contradiction. Were you a Bp. my Body and Estate might be in your power, but
Truth, Justice and the Love of Christians, and the Churches peace, should not
be cowardly betrayed by me on pretense of reverence to your Name and Quality. I
am heartily desirous that for ORDER-sake the Name and Honor of my Superiors
may be very reverently used. But if they, will think that Error, Injustice,
and Confusion must take sanctuary under bare Ecclesiastical or Academical Names
and robes, they will find themselves mistaken: Truth and Honesty will conquer
when they pass through Smithfield flames: Prisons confine them not; Death kills
them not; No siege will force an honest Conscience by famine to give up. He
that cannot endure the sight of his own excrements must not dish them up to
another man's Table, lest they be sent him back again. And more freedom is
allowed against Peace-Breakers in Frays and Wars, than toward men that are in
a quieter sort of Controversy.

XX. P. 36.37. You say [ For your various Definitions of Justification,
Constitutive, Sentential, Executive, in Foro Dei, in foro Conscientiae, etc. --
What need this heap of distinctions here, when you know the question betwixt us
is of no other Justification, but the Constitutive in foro Dei, that which
makes us righteous in the Court of Heaven? I have nothing to do with you yet
in any else, as your own Conscience will tell you when you please: If you have
not more Justice and civility for your intelligent Readers, I wish you would
show more Compassion to your Ignorant Homagers, and not thus abuse them with
your palpable Evasions.

Answ. Does the question, Whether the several sorts of Justification will bear
one and the same Definition, deserve all this anger (and the much greater that
follows)?

1. Seeing I am turned to my Reader, I will crave his impartial judgment: I
never received and agreed on a state of the question with this Doctor: He
writes against my books: In those Books I over and over and over distinguish
of Justification, Constitutive, Sentential, and Executive (besides those
subordinate sorts, by Witness, Evidence, Apology, etc.) I often open their
differences: He writes against me, as denying all Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and holding Popish Justification by works, and never tells me
whether he take the word [ Justification] in the same sense that I do, or in
which of those that I had opened: And now he passionately appealeth to my
Conscience that I knew his sense: What he says [ my Conscience will tell me]
it is not true. It will tell me no such thing: but the clean contrary, that
even after all his Disputes and Anger, and these words, I profess I know not
what he means by [ Justification.]

2. What [ Constitutive in foro Dei, that which makes us Righteous in the
Court of Heaven] means with him, I cannot conjecture. He denies not my
Distinctions, but says, what need they: I ever distinguished Making Righteous,
Judging Righteous. Executively useing as Righteous: The first is in our selves;
The second is by Divines said to be in foro Dei, an act of Judgment; the third
is upon us after both: now he seems to confound the two first, and yet
denies not their difference; and says, he means [ Constitutive in foro:] He
that is made Righteous is such in se; and as such is Justifiable in foro:] We
are Made Righteous by God as free Donor and Imputer, antecedently to judgment:
We are in foro sentenced Righteous by God as Judge: so that this by sentence
presupposes the former: God never Judges us Righteous and Justifies us
against Accusation, till he have first Made us Righteous and Justified us from
adherent Guilt by Pardon and Donation. Which of these means he? I ask not my
Ignorant homagers who know no more than I, but his Intelligent Reader. He
takes on him to go the Commonest way of Protestants: And the Commonest way is
to acknowledge that a Constitutive Justification, or making the man Just,
(antecedent to the Actus forensis) must need go first: but that it is the
second which Paul usually means, which is the actus forensis, the sentence of
the Judge in foro, contrary to Condemnation: And does the Doctor think that to
make Righteous and to sentence as Righteous are all one? and that we are made
Righteous in foro otherwise than to be just in our selves, and so Justifiable
in foro, before the Sentence? or do Protestants take the Sentence to be
Constituting or Making us Righteous? All this is such talk as had I read it in
Mr. Bunnyan of the Covenants, or any of my Ignorant Homagers, I should have
said, the Author is a stranger to the Controversy, into which he has rashly
plunged himself: but I have more reverence to so learned a man, and therefore
blame my dull understanding.

3. But what if I had known (as I do not yet) what sort of Justification he
means? Does he not know that I was then debating the Case with him, whether
the Logical Definitions of Justification, Faith, etc. are not a work of Art, in
which a few well-studied judicious Divines (these were my words) are to be
preferred before Authority, or Majority of Votes. And Reader, what Reason bound
me to confine this Case, to one only sort of Justification? And why, (I say,
why) must I confine it to a sort which Dr. Tully means, when my Rule and Book
was written before his, and when to this day I know not what he means? Though
he at once chide at my Distinguishing, and tell me that All Protestants agree
in the Nature, Causes, and Definition, (and if all agreed, I might know by
other Men's words what he means) yet to all before-said, I will add but one
contrary Instance of many.

Cluto, in his very Methodical but unsound Idea Theol. (signalized in Voetii
Biblioth.) defines Justification so, as I suppose, best pleases the Doctor,
viz. [Est Actio Dei Judicialis, qua redemptos propter passiones justitiae
Divinae satifactorias a Christo sustentatas, redemptisque imputatas, a peccatis
puros, and consequenter a poenis liberos, itemque propter Obedientiam a Christo
Legi Divinae praestitam redemptisque imputatam, justitia praeditos, and
consequenter vita aeterna dignos, ex miserecordia pronunciat]. In the opening
of which he tells us, page 243. (against multitudes of the greatest
Protestants Definitions.) [ Male, alteram Justificationis partem, ipsam
Justitiae Imputationem statui, cum Justificatio non sit ipsa Imputatio, sed
Pronunciatio quae Imputatione, tanquam fundamento jacto, nititur.

And he knew no sense of Justification, but [ Vel ipsam sententiae
Justificatoriae in mente Divina prolationem, sive Constitutionem, vel ejus in
Cordibus redemptorum manifestantem Revelationem: And says, Priori modo factum
est autem omnem fidem, cum Deus omnes, quibus passiones and justitiam Christi
imputabat, innocents and justos reputaret, cum ejus inimici, adeoque sine fide
essent, (so that here is a Justification of Infidels, as innocent for Christ's
Righteousness imputed to them): Quare etiam ut jam facta fide apprehendenda
est. The second which follows Faith, is Faith, ingenerating a firm persuasion
of it. Is not here sad defining, when neither of these are the Scripture-
Justification by Christ and Faith?

And so. 32. the time of Justification by Faith he makes to be the time when
we receive the feeling of the former: And the time of the former is presently
after the Fall; of all at once: And hence gathers that [ Ex eo quod
Justificatio dicitur fieri propter passiones and obedientiam Christi, quibus ad
perfectionem nihil deest, nobis imputatas (before Faith or Birth) consequitur
innocentiam and justitiam in Redemptis quam primum perfectas and ab omni macula
puras esse -- ] and so that neither the pronunciation in mente Divina, or
imputation ullis gradibus ad perfectionem exsurgat.

But what is this pronunciation in mente Divina? He well and truly notes,. 29.
that [ Omnes actiones Divinae, fi ex eo aestimentur quod re ipsa in Deo sunt,
idem sunt cum ipso Deo, ideoque dependentiam a Causa externa non admittant: Si
tamen considerentur quoad rationem formalem hujus vel illius denominationis
ipsis impositae in relatione ad Creaturas consistentem, ipsis causae impulsivae
assignare possunt, etc. This distinction well opens, how God may be said to
justify in His own Mind: But what is that effect, Vnde essentia vel men's
Divina ita denominatur justificans? Here he is at a loss, neither truly telling
us what is Justication Constitutive, Sentential, nor Executive (but in the
little part of [ Feeling] Gods secret Act) yet this dark Definer truly says [
Ex sensu Scripturae verissime affirmetur hominem per fidem solam justificari,
quia ex nostra part nihil ad Justificationem conferendum Deus requirit, quam
ut Justificationem in Christo fundatam credamus, and fide non producamus, sed
recipiamus.

If yet you would see whether all Protestants agree in the Definition of
Justification, read the multitude of Definitions of it in several senses; in
Learnrd Alstedius his Definit. Theol. c. 24.. 2. page 97. etc. [ Justificatio
hominis coram Deo est qua homo in foro Divino absolvitur, seu justus esse
evincitur contra quemvis actorem, Deo ipso judice, and pro eo sententiam
ferente]. But what is this Forum? Forum Divinum est ubi Deus ipse judicis
parts agit, and fert sententiam secundum leges a se latas? But where is that
Est internum vel externum? Forum divinum internum est in ipsa hominis
Conscientia, in qua Deus Thronum justitiae erigit in hac vita ibi agendo parts
actoris and judicis: Forum Conscientiae. (But it is not this that is meant by
the Justification by Faith). Forum divinum externum est, in qua Deus post hanc
vitam extra hominem exercet judicium, 1. Particulare, 2. Universal. This is
true and well: But are we no where Justified by Faith but in Conscience, till
after Death? This is by not considering, 1. The Jus ad impunitatem and vitam
donatum per foedus Evangelicum upon our Believing, which supposing Faith and
Repentance is our Constitutive Justification, (virtually only sentential). 2.
And the Judgment of God begun in this Life, pronounced specially by Execution.
Abundance of useful Definitions subordinate you may further there see in
Alstedius, and some wrong, and the chief omitted.

The vehement passages of the Doctors Conclusion I pass over; his deep sense of
unsufferable Provocations, I must leave to himself; his warning of the dreadful
Tribunal which I am near, it greatly concerns me to regard: And Reader, I shall
think yet that his Contest (though troublesome to me that was falsely assaulted,
and more to him whose detected Miscarriages are so painful to him) has yet
been Profitable beyond the Charges of it to him or me, if I have but convinced
thee, that 1. Sound mental Conceptions of so much as is necessary to our own
Justification, much differ from proper Logical Definitions: And that, 2. Many
millions are Justified that cannot define it: 3. And that Logical Definitions
are Works of Art more than of Grace, which require so much Acuteness and Skill,
that even worthy and excellent Teachers may be, and are disagreed about them,
especially through the great ambiguity of Words; which all understand not in
the same sense, and few are sufficiently suspicious of, and diligent to
explain. 4. And therefore that our Christian Love, Peace, and Concord, should
not be laid upon such Artificial things. 5. And that really the Generality of
Protestants are agreed mostly in the Matter, when they quarrel sharply about
many Artificial Notions and Terms in the point of Justification. (And yet after
all this, I shall as earnestly as this Doctor, desire and labor for
accurateness in Distinguishing, Defining and Method, though I will not have
such things to be Engines of Church-Division.)

And lastly, Because he so often and earnestly presses me with his Quem quibus,
who is the Man, I profess I dreamed not of any particular Man: But I will again
tell you whom my Judgment magnifies in this Controversy above all others, and
who truly tell you how far Papists and Protestants agree, viz. Vinc. le Blank,
and Guil. Forbes, (I meddle not with his other Subjects), Placeus (in These.
Salmur.) Davenant, Dr. Field, Mr. Scudder (his daily Walk, fit for all
families) Mr. Wotton, Mr. Bradshaw, and Mr. Gataker, Dr. Preston, Dr. Hammond,
(Pract. Cat.) and Mr. Lawson (in the main) Abundance of the French and Breme
Divines are also very clear. And though I must not provoke him again by naming
some late English men, to reproach them by calling them my disciples, I will
venture to tell the plain man that loves not our wrangling tediousness, that
Mr. Trumans Great Propit. and Mr. Gibbons sermon. of Justif. may serve him well
without any more.

And while this worthy Doctor and I do both concord with such as Davenant and
Field as to Justification by Faith or Works, judge whether we differ between our
selves as far as he would persuade the World, who agree in tertio? And whether
as he has angrily professed his concord in the two other Controversies which he
raised ( our Guilt of nearer Parents sin, and our preferring the judgment of
the wisest, etc.) it be not likely that he will do so also in this, when he
has leisure to read and know what it is that I say and hold, and when we both
understand our selves and one another. And whether it be a work worthy of Good
and Learned men, to allarm Christians against one another for the sake of
arbitrary words and notions (which one partly uses less aptly and skilfully
than the other) in matters wherein they really agree.

2 Timothy 2. 14. Charging them before the Lord that they strive not about words,
to no profit, but to the subverting of the Hearers (yet) study to show thy self
approved unto God, a workman that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the
word of Truth


Two Sparks more quenched, which fled after the rest from the Forge of Dr. Tho.
Tully.
. 1.

DId I not find that some Men's Ignorance and factious Jealousy is great enough
to make them combustible Recipients of such Wildfire as those Strictures are;
and did not Charity oblige me to do what I have here done, to save the
assaulted Charity of such Persons, more than to save any Reputation of my own,
I should repent that I had written one Line in answer to such Writings as I
have here had to do with: I have been so wearied with the haunts of the like
Spirit, in Mr. Crandon, Mr. Bagshaw, Mr. Danvers, and others, that it is a work
I have not patience to be much longer in, unless it were more necessary.

Two sheets more tell us that the Doctor is yet angry; And little that is better
that I can find. In the first, he says again, that [ I am busy in smoothing
my way where none can stumble in, a thing never questioned by him, nor by any
Man else, he thinks, who owns the Authority of the second Commandment]. And
have I not then good Company and Encouragement not to change my Mind?

But, 1. He feigneth a Case stated between him and me, who never had to do with
him before, but as with others in my Writings, where I state my Case my self.
2. He never so much as touches either of my Disputations of Original Sin, in
which I state my Case and defend it. 3. And he falsely feigneth the Case stated,
in words (and he supposes in a sense) that I never had do do with: Saying, [ I
charge you with a new secondary Original Sin, whose Pedigree is not from Adam:
I engage not a syllable further]. And page 8. [ You have asserted that this
Novel Original Sin is not derived from our Original Father; no line of
Communication between them; a sin besides that which is derived from Adam, as
you plainly and possitively affirm]. I never said that it had no Pedigree, no
line of Communication, no kind of derivation from Adam. 4. Yea, if he would not
touch the Disputation where I state my Case, he should have noted it as stated
in the very Preface which he writes against; and yet there also he totally
overlooketh it, though opened in diverse Propositions. 5. And the words in an
Epistle to another Man's Book, which he fasteneth still on were these; [
Over-looking the Interest of Children in the Actions of their nearer Parents,
and think that they participate of no Guilt, and suffer for no Original Sin,
but Adams only]. And after, [ They had more Original Sin than what they had
from Adam]. 6. He tells me, that [ I seem not to understand my own Question,
nor to know well how to set about my Work]; and he will teach me how to manage
the Business that I have undertaken, and so he tells me how I MUST state the
Question hereafter, (see his words). Reader, some Reasons may put a better
Title on this Learned Doctors actions; but if ever I write at this rate, I
heartily desire thee to cast it away as utter DISHONESTY and IMPUDENCE.

It troubles me to trouble thee with Repetitions. I hold, 1. That Adams Sin is
imputed (as I opened) to his Posterity. 2. That the degree of Pravity which
Cains nature received from Adam, was the dispositive enclining Cause of all his
Actual Sin: 3. But not a necessitating Cause of all those Acts; for he might
possibly have done less evil and more good than he did. 4. Therefore not the
Total principal Cause; for Cains free will was part of that. 5 Cains actual sin
increased the pravity of his nature. 6. And Cains Posterity were (as I opened
it) guilty of Cains actual sin; and their Natures were the more depraved by his
additional pravity, than they would have been by Adams sin alone (unless Grace
preserved or healed any of them).

The Doctor in this Paper, would make his Reader believe that he is [ for no
mere Logomachies] and that the difference is not in words only, but the thing.
And do you think that he differs from me in any of these Propositions, or how
this sin is derived from Adam? Yet this now must be the Controversy de re.

Do you think (for I must go by thinking) that he holds any other Derivation
than this? Or did I ever deny any of this? But it is vain to state the Case to
him: He will over*look it, and tell me what I should have held, that he may not
be thought to make all this Noise for nothing.

He says page 8. [ If it derive in a direct line from the first Transgression,
and have its whole Root fastened there, what then? why then some words which he
sets together are not the best sense that can be spoken. It is then but words,
and yet it is the thing: What he may mean by [a direct Line], and what by [
whole Root fastened] I know not; but I have told the World often enough what I
mean; and what he means, I have little to do with.

But if he think, 1. That Adams Person did commit the sin of Cain, and of all
that ever were since committed; and that Judas his act, was Adams personal act.
2. Or that Adams sin was a total or necessitating Cause of all the evil since
committed; so do not I, (nor does he, I doubt not). And now I am cast by him on
the strait, either to accuse him of differing de re, and so of Doctrinal
error, or else that he knows not when the difference is de re, and when de
nomine, but is so used to confusion, that Names and Things do come
promiscuously into the Question with him: And which of these to choose, I know
not.

The Reader may see that I mentioned [ Actual Sin, and Guilt]: And I think few
will doubt, but Adams [ Actual sin, and Cains,] were diverse; and that
therefore, the Guilt that Cains Children had of Adams sin and of Cains was not
the same: But that Causa causae is Causa causati, and so that all following Sin
was partly (but partly) caused by Adam's, we shall soon agree.

He adds that I must make good that new Original Sin (for he can make use of
the word New, and therefore made it) does mutare naturam, as the Old does. Ans.
And how far it changes it, I told him, and he takes no notice of it: The
first sin changed Nature from Innocent into Nocent; the Second changes it from
Nocent into more Nocent: Does he deny this? Or why must I prove any more? Or
does nothing but Confusion please him?

3. He says, I must prove that the Derivation of Progenitors sins is constant
and necessary, not uncertain and contingent. Ans. Of this also I fully said
what I held, and he dissembleth it all, as if I had never done it: And why must
I prove more? By what Law can he impose on me what to hold?

But really does he deny that the Reatus culpae, yea and ad Poenam, the Guilt
of nearer Parents sins is necessarily and certainly the Child's, though Grace
may pardon it? If he do not, why does he call on me to prove it? If he do
confess the Guilt, and deny it necessary, when will he tell us what is the
Contingent uncertain Cause? For we take a Relation (such as Guilt is)
necessarily to result a posito fundamento.

. 2. He next cavilleth at my Citations, about which I only say, either the
Reader will peruse the cited words, and my words, which show to what end I
cited them (to prove our Guilt of our nearer Parents sins) or he will not. If
he will not, I cannot expect that he will read a further Vindication. If he
will, he needs not.

. 3. His second Spark is Animadversions on a sheet of mine, before mentioned,
which are such as I am not willing to meddle with, seeing I cannot either
handle them, or name them as the nature of them does require, without offending
him: And if what is here said (of Imputation and Representation) be not enough,
I will add no more, nor write over and over still the same things, because a
Man that will take no notice of the many Volumns which answer all his
Objections long ago, will call for more, and will write his Animadversions upon
a single Sheet that was written on another particular occasion, and pretend to
his discoveries of my Deceits from the Silence of that Sheet, and from my
naming the Antinomians.

I only say, 1. If this Man's way of Disputing were the common way, I would
abhor Disputing, and be ashamed of the Name.

2. I do friendly desire the Author of the Friendly Debate, Mr. Sherlock, and
all others that would fasten such Doctrines on the Non-Conformists, as a
Character of the Party, to observe that this Doctor sufficiently confuteth
their partiality; and that their Academical Church-Doctors, are as Confused, as
Vehement maintainers of such expressions as they account most unsavory, as any
even of the Independants cited by them: Yea, that this Doctor would make us
question whether there be now any Antinomians among us, and so whether all the
Conformists that have charged the Conformists, yea or the Sectaries, with
having among them Men of such unsound Principles, have not wronged them, it
being indeed the Doctrine of the Church of England which they maintain, whom I
and others call Antinomians and Libertines: And I hope at least the sober and
sound Non-Conformists are Orthodox, when the vehementest Sectaries that
calumniated my Sermon at Pinners Hall, are vindicated by such a Doctor of the
Church.

3. I yet conclude, that if this One Man's Writings do not convince the Reader,
of the Sin and Danger of Allarming Christians against one another, as
Adversaries to great and necessary Doctrines, on the account of mere Words not
understood, for want of accurateness and skill in the expressive Art, I take
him to be utterly unexcusable.

Pemble Vind. Gra^. p. 25. It were somewhat if it were in Learning as it is in
bearing of a Burden; where many weak Men may bear that which One or few
cannot: But in the search of Knowledge, it fares as in discrying a thing afar
off; where one quick-sight will see further than a thousand clear Eyes. FINIS.
I had not time to gather the Errata of any but the First Book: Correct these
Greater, or you will misunderstand the Matter.
PAge, 27. Line 2. Read self, the Act. p. 54. l. 30. r. as obliging. p. 58. l.
20. for of r. or, p. 59. l. 1, and 2. r. who is not. p. 86. l. 32. for OURS r.
OUR Righteousness. p. 88. l. 7. for Covenanted r. Connoted. p. 97. l. 31. r.
and suffering. p. 103. l. 9, 10. for have us Holy, r. leave us unholy. p. 110.
l. 10. for we, r. were. p. 111. l. penult. and p. 112. l. 5. and 10. for our,
r. one. l. 21. for but, r. must. p. 115. l. 25. for raze out, r. rake up, p.
117. l. 18. r. personating Representation. p. 118. l. 2. for Minister, r.
Meriter. p. 119. l. 16. for are, r. are not. p. 140. l. 23. for if, r. that. p.
126. l. 23. for arrive, r. arm. p. 149. l. 19. r. and the. p. 153. l. 23. r.
and will. p. 154. l. 26. r. our own-innocency, it. p. 157. l. 29. r. Private,
but. p. 169. l. 2. r. conditional. p. 177. l. 9. r. sufficiency, p. 181. l. 27.
for argument, r. agreement.

The Lesser Errata.
PReface p. 3. l. 16. r. eternal. Contents, p. 2. l. 21. r. Wotton. p. 11. l.
4. for no, r. in. l. 17. r. praetendit. l. 27. r. sufficere. p. 12. l. 1. r.
ficantur: l. 16. r. impetrando, l. antipen. r. Credimus. p. 13. l. 2. r.
praecedit. p. 16. l. 26. r. Schlussel Burgius. p. 22. l. 9. for that, r. the p.
36. l. antipen. dele by. p. 55. l. 10. for no, r. not. p. 60. l. 15. for then,
r. there. p. 64. l. 5. for of, r. or. p. 68. l. 28. r. so to. p. 80. l. 17. r.
if you will sontes. p. 91. l. 20. dele the. p. 94. l. 2. for but, r. as. l. 11.
dele and. p. 102. l. 1. r. per. p. 104. l. antipen. r. Albericus. p. 135. l.
20. r. praeditus- l. 23. r. aliquem. p. 112. l. 28. r. relatione. p. 116. l.
21. r. fulfillers. p. 120. l. 11. r. Vasquez. p. 150. l. 26. r. indebitae. p.
167. l. 29. for if, r. is. p. 184. l. penult. for as, r. and.

In a Cursory view of some Pages, I since see these faults.
PReface, Page 8. Line 22. for and, r. as. Book 1. P. 172. l. 1. r. is it true.

Answer to the Letter, P. 93. l. ult. for Conformists; r. Nonconformists. Book
2. Part 3. P. 16. l. 20. for tum, r. tu. P. 54. l. 14. for apt, r. yet, l. 28.
for produces, r. proceeds. P. 56. l. 13. for still, r. not. P. 65. l. 13.
for Guilt, r. Gift. Book 2. Part 1. P. 259. l. 8. r. Causas. P. 268. l. 4. for
first, r. full. P. 269. l. 28 fore Jure, r. iu re.

And I must tell the Reader that it is so long since the Papers to Mr.
Cartwright were written, that if there be any passage which in my later
Writings I correct, I must desire him to take the latter as my Judgment: For I
am none of those that pretend my Youthful Writings to be sufficiently Accurate,
much less Faultless, or that to avoid the Imputation of Mutability, profess to
be no wiser than I was between twenty and thirty Years ago. I find somewhat,
Book 2. Part 3. P. 51, 52. which needs this Explication, viz.

[ God as Judge of lapsed Man, when He was judging him, added an Act of Grace,
which in several respects is, 1. A Promise. 2. A Deed of Gift. 3. An Act of
Oblivion or universal conditional Pardon. 4. A Law. 5. And as it has respect
to Christ's absolutely promised and foreseen Merits, it may be said, to be like
or Equivolent to an universal conditional Sentence: But taking the word
[Sentence] strictly as it is [a Sentence of the Individuals according to the
Rule of a Law as kept or broken], so it is not properly a Sentence as to us (as
is after proved.)

A POSTSCRIPT, ABOUT Mr. DANVERS' s Last BOOK.
WHen this Book was coming out of the Press, I received another Book of Mr.
Danvers against Infants Baptism, in which he mentions Dr. Tullies proving
what a Papist I am, in his Justif Paul. (with Dr. Pierces former Charges) and
lamenting that no more yet but one Dr. Tully has come forth to Encounter me,
Epist. and Page 224. The perusal of that Book (with Mr. Tombs short
Reflections) directs me to say but this instead of any further Confutation.

That it is (as the former) so full of false Allegations set off with the
greatest Audacity (even a few Lines of my own about our meeting at Saint
James's left with the Clerk, grossly falsified) and former falsifications partly
justified, and partly past over, and his most passionate Charges grounded upon
Mistakes, and managed by Misreports, sometime of Words, sometime of the Sense,
and sometime of Matters of Fact; in short, it is such a bundle of Mistake,
Fierceness and Confidence, that I take it for too useless and unpleasant a Work
to give the World a particular Detection of these Evils. If I had so little to
do with my Time as to write it, I suppose that few would find leisure to read
it: And I desire no more of the willing Reader, then seriously to peruse my
Book ( More Reasons for Infants Church Membership) with his, and to examine the
Authors about whose Words or Sense we differ. Or if any would be Informed at a
cheaper rate, he may read Mr. Barrets Fifty Queries in two sheets. And if Mr.
Tombs revile me, for not transcribing or answering more of his Great Book,
when I tell the Reader that I suppose him to have the Book before him, and am
not bound to transcribe such a Volume already in Print, and that I answer as
much as I think needs an Answer, leaving the rest as I found it to the Judgment
of each Reader, he may himself take this for a Reply; but I must judge of it as
it is.

I find but one thing in the Book that needs any other Answer, than to peruse
what is already Writt^n: And that is about Baptizing Naked: My Book was written
1649. A little before, common uncontrolled Fame was, that not far from us in
one place many of them were Baptized naked, reproving the Clothing way as
Antiscriptural: I never heard (...) deny this Report: I conversed with diverse
of (...) Church, who denied it not: As (...) denied it to me, so I never read
one that did (...) to my knowledge: He now tells me Mr. Fisher, Mr. Haggar, and
Mr. Tombs did: Let any Man read Mr. Tombs Answer to me, yea and that Passage
by him now cited, and see whether there be a word of denial: Mr. Fisher or
Haggar I never saw: Their Books I had seen, but never read two Leaves to my
remembrance of Mr. Fishers, though I numbered it with those that were written
on that Subject, as well I might: I knew his Education and his Friends, and I
saw the Great Volume before he turned Quaker, but I thought it enough to read
Mr. Tombs and others that wrote before him, but I read not him, nor all Mr.
Haggars: If I had, I had not taken them for competent Judges of a fact far from
them, and that three years after: Could they say, that no one ever did so? The
truth is that three years after, mistaking my words, as if I had affirmed it to
be their ordinary practice (as you may read in them) which I never did, nor
thought, they vehemently deny this: (And such heedless reading occasioneth many
of Mr. Danvers Accusations). I never said that no Man ever denied it* for I
have not read all that ever was written, nor spoken with all the World: But no
Man ever denied it to me, nor did I ever read any that denied it. And in a
matter of Fact, if that Fame be not credible, which is of things Late and Near,
and not Contradicted by any one of the most interessed Persons themselves, no
not by Mr. Tombs himself, we must surcease humane Converse: Yet do I not
thence undertake that the same was true, either of those Persons, or such as
other Writers beyond Sea have said it off. I saw not any one Baptized by Mr.
Tombs or any other in River or elsewhere by Dipping at Age: If you do no such
thing, I am sorry that I believed it, and will recant it. Had I not seen a
Quaker go naked through Worcester at the Assizes, and read the Ranters Letters
full of Oaths, I could have proved neither of them. And yet I know not where
so long after to find my Witnesses: I abhor Slanders, and receiving ill Reports
unwarrantably: I well know that this is not their ordinary Practice: The
Quakers do not those things now, which many did at the rising of the Sect; and
if I could, I would believe they never did them.

2. This Book of Mr. Danvers, with the rest of the same kind, increase my
hatred of the Disputing Contentious way of writing, and my trouble that the
Cause of the Church and Truth has so often put on me a necessity to write in a
Disputing way, against the Writings of so many Assailants.

3. It increases my Grief for the Case of Mankind, yea of well-meaning godly
Christians, who are unable to judge of many Controversies agitated, otherwise
than by some Glimpses of poor Probability, and the esteem which they have of
the Persons which do manage them, and indeed take their Opinions upon trust
from those whom they most reverence and value; and yet can so hardly know whom
to follow, whilst the grossest Mistakes are set off with as great confidence
and holy pretense, as the greatest Truths. O how much should Christians be
pitied, that must go through so great Temptations!

4. It increases my Resolution, had I longer to live, to converse with Men
that I would profit, or profit by, either as a Learner hearing what they have
to say, without importunate Contradiction, or as a Teacher if they desire to
Learn* of me: A School way may do something to increase Knowledge; but drenching
Men, and striving with them, does but set them on a fiercer striving against
the Truth: And when they that have need of seven and seven years Schooling
more, under some clear well studied Teacher, are made Teachers themselves, and
then turned loose into the World (as Sampsons Foxes) to militate for and with
their Ignorance, what must the Church suffer by such Contenders?

5. It increases my dislike of that Sectarian dividing hurtful Zeal, which is
described James 3. and abateth my wonder at the rage of Persecutors: For I see
that the same Spirit makes the same kind of Men, even when they most cry out
against Persecutors, and separate furthest from them.

6. It resolves me more to enquire less after the Answers to Men's Books than I
have done: And I shall hereafter think never the worse of a Man's writings, for
hearing that they are answered: For I see it is not only easy for a Talking
Man to talk on, and to say something for or against any thing, but it is hard
for them to do otherwise, even to hold their Tongues, or Pens, or Peace: And
when I change this Mind, I must give the greatest belief to Women that will
talk most, or to them that live longest, and so are like to have the last word,
or to them that can train up militant Heirs and Successors to defend them when
they are dead, and so propagate the Contention. If a sober Consideration of the
first and second writing (yea of positive Principles) will not inform me, I
shall have little hope to be much the wiser for all the rest.

7. I am fully satisfied that even good (...) are here so far from Perfection,
that they must bear with odious faults and injuries in one another, and be
habituated to a ready and easy forbearing and forgiving one another. I will
not so much as describe or denominate Mr. Danvers Citations of Dr. Pierce, to
prove my Popery and Crimes, nor his passages about the Wars, and about my
Changes, Self-contradictions, and Repentances, lest I do that which savoureth
not of Forgiveness: O what need have we all of Divine Forgiveness!

8. I shall yet less believe what any Man's Opinion (yea or Practice) is by his
Adversaries Sayings, Collections, Citations, or most vehement Asseverations,
than ever I have done, though the Reporters pretend to never so much Truth, and
pious Zeal.

9. I shall less trust a confounding ignorant Reader or Writer, that has not
an accurate defining and distinguishing Understanding, and has not a mature,
exercised, discerning Knowledge than ever I have done; and especially if he be
engaged in a Sect (which alas, how few parts of the Christian World escape!)
For I here (and in many others) see, that you have no way to seem Orthodox with
such, but to run quite into the contrary Extreme: And if I write against both
Extremes, I am taken by such Men as this, but to be for both and against both,
and to contradict my self. When I write against the Persecutors, I am one of
the Sectaries, and when I write against the Sectaries, I am of the Persecutors
side: If I belie not the Prelatists, I am a Conformist: If I belie not the
Anabaptists, Independants, etc. I am one of them: If I belie not the ^^pists, I
am a Papist; if I belie not the Arminians, I am an Arminian; if I belie not the
Calvinists, I am with Pseudo-Tilenus and his Brother, purus putus Puritanus,
and one Qui totum Puritanismum totus spirat (which Joseph Allen too kindly
interprets): If I be for lawful Episcopacy, and lawful Liturgies and
Circumstances of Worship, I am a temporizing Conformist: If I be for no more, I
am an intolerable Nonconformist (at this time forced to part with House, and
Goods, and Library, and all save my Clothes, and to possess nothing, and yet my
Death (by six months Imprisonment in the Common Goal) is sought after and
continually expected. If I be as very a Fool, and as little understand my self,
and as much contradict my self, as all these Confounders and Men of Violence
would have the World believe, it is much to my cost, being hated by them all
while I seek but for the common peace.

10. But I have also further learned hence to take up my content in Gods
Approbation, and (having done my duty, and pitying their own and the Peoples
snares) to make but small account of all the Reproaches of all sorts of
Sectaries; what they will say against me living or dead, I leave to themselves
and God, and shall not to please a Censorious Sect, or any Men whatever, be
false to my Conscience and the Truth: If the Cause I defend be not of God, I
desire it may fall: If it be, I leave it to God how far He will prosper it, and
what Men shall think or say of me: And I will pray for Peace to him that will
not hate and revile me for so doing. Farewell.

September. 4. 1675.
FINIS.

