A Key for Catholics, To open the Juggling of the Jesuits, and satisfy all
that are but truly willing to understand, whether the Cause of the Roman or
Reformed Churches be of God; and to leave the Reader utterly unexcusable that
after this will be a Papist.

The first Part.

Containing some Arguments by which the meanest may see the Vanity of Popery;
and 40. Detections of their Fraud; with Directions, and Materials sufficient
for the Confutation of their Voluminous Deceits: particularly refelling
Boverius, Richlieu, H. Ts. Manual, some Manuscripts, etc. With some Proposals
for a (hopeless) Peace.

The Second Part shows (especially against the French, and Grotians) that the
Catholic Church is not United in any merely Humane Head, either Pope or
Council.

By Richard Baxter a Catholic Christian, and Pastor of a Church of such at
Kederminster.

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in Kederminster, and are
to be sold by him there, and by Thomas Johnson at the Golden Key in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659. At 4. s. bound.

To his Highness RICHARD Lord Protector OF THE Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, etc.
SIR,
THese Papers presume to tender you their service, because the Subject of them
is such, as it most nearly concerns both us and you that you be well
acquainted with. The Roman Canons that batter the Unity, Catholicism and Purity
of the Church of Christ, are mounted on the frame which I have here demolished.
The swords, and pens, and tongues that you are now engaged against, and which
you must expect from henceforth to assault you, are whetted and managed by the
senseless, tyrannous, ungodly principles, which I have here Detected. As
unreasonable as they appear to the unprejudiced, they are such as have animated
the studies and diligent endeavors of thousands to captivate the Princes and
Nations of the Earth to the Roman yoke. As vain as they appear to us that see
them naked, they are such as have divided and distracted the Churches of
Christ, and troubled and dethroned Princes, and laid them at the feet of the
Roman Pope; They have absolved subjects from their Oaths and other obligations
to fidelity: They have involved many a Nation in blood: O the streams of the
blood of Saints that have been shed by these Roman Principles, in Savoy,
France, Bohemia, Poland, Germany, Ireland, England, and many other Lands! As
easy a war as here I manage, it is against those adverse Principles that have
armed Thousands and Millions against the innocent, or against their lawful
Sovereigns, whom God had bound them to obey: They have fastened knives in the
breasts of the greatest Kings, as the lamentable case of Henry the third and
fourth of France does testify: They have in a few days time in Paris, and the
adjoining parts of France, perfidiously butchered Nobles and other persons of
eminency, and people of all sorts, to the number of near thirty thousand (as
Thuanus reckons them, if not forty thousand, as Davilah.) The Doctrines which
I here confound, have invaded England by a Spanish Armado, (whether by the
Popes consent, and upon the account of Religion, I have after showed out of
their own Writers:) they have prepared knives and poison for our Princes, which
God did frustrate: they have laid Gunpowder to blowup King and Parliament, and
hellishly execute the fury of the deluded zealots in a moment, and then to have
charged the Puritans with the fact: They have in a time of Peace, by a sudden
insurrection, murdered so many thousands in Ireland in a few days or weeks, as
posterity will scare believe. They are dreadful Practicals, and not mere
speculations that we dispute against. I beseech you therefore that you receive
not this as you would do a Scholastic or Philosophical Disputation about such
things as seem not to concern you; but as you would interess your self in a
Disputation upon the Question, Whether you should be deposed or murdered as an
Heretic? And whether we should be Tormented and burnt as Heretics? And
whether the lives of all the Princes and People upon earth whom the Pope
judges Heretics, should be at his mercy? etc. so do in this cause. I speak
not this to provoke you to deal bloodily with them, as they do with the
servants of the Lord! I abhor the thoughts of imitating their cruelty! It is
only the Necessary Defense of your Life, and Dignity, and the Lives of all the
Protestants that are under your Protection and Government, and the souls of
men, that I desire. On what terms we stand with those men whose Religion
teaches them to kill us if they can; and to venture their lives for it, is
easy to understand. When we have no security from them for our lives, but
their disability to destroy us, we must disable them or die. I utter no
melancholy dreams nor slanders: I have here showed it in the too plain and
cepious Decrees of the approved General Council at Lateran, that the deposing
of Princes, and absolving their Subjects from their fidelity and giving their
Dominions to others, not only for supposed Heresy, but for not exterminating
such as deny Transubstantiation, etc. is an Article of their Faith; and no man
can disown it, without disowning Popery in the Essentials. If once they will
renounce the Decrees of General Councils approved by the Pope, we shall be soon
agreed. Says Costerus Enchirid. cap. 1. p. 46. Quae sanc Decreta si veritatem,
si obsignationem Spiritus Sancti, si praesentiam Christi spectes, idem habent
pondus and momentum quod Sancta Dei Evangelia. They believe these Decrees to be
as true as the Gospel. I need not therefore tell you that Bozius Hostiensis,
and many more of them make the Pope to be the Lord of all the World: Or that
Bellarmine and the stronger side do carry it, as [The common judgment of all
Catholic Divines, (see what a rabble he heaps up De Pontif. Romans li. 5. c. 1.)
that the Pope, ratione spiritualis, habet saltem indirecte potestatem quandam,
eamque summam in temporalibus. Which cap. 6. he says, [is just such over
Princes as the soul has over the body or sensitive appetite; and that thus he
may change Kingdoms, and take them from one and give to another, as the chief
Spiritual Prince, if it be but necessary to the safety of souls.] cap. 78. He
gives us his proof of this. And whether the Pope do take your Government to be
for the good of souls, I need not tell you. It is the stupendous judgment of
God on Christian Princes for their sins, that they have been so far blinded as
to endure such an usurper so long, and have not before this blotted out his
name from among the sons of men. [Non licet, etc. It is not lawful (says
Bellarmine ib. c. 7.) for Christians to Tolerate an Infidel, or Heretical King,
if he endeavor to draw his Subjects to his Heresy or unbelief: but to judge
whether a King do draw to Heresy or not, belongs to the Pope, to whom the
care of Religion is committed: therefore it belongs to the Pope to judge a King
to be deposed, or not deposed.] You see here it is not Lawful for such
Christians as the Papists to Tolerate you: which may help your judgment in the
point of their Toleration. Si Christiani (says Bellarib.) olim non deposuerunt
Neronem -- Valentem Arianum and similes, id fuit quia deerant vires temporales
Christianis.] You have your Government and we our Lives, because the Papists
are not strong enough. They tell you what to trust to. Says Tollet (one of the
best of the Jesuits, li 1. de Instruct. Sacerd. c. 13.) [They that were bound
by the bond of fidelity or Oath, shall be freed from such a bond, if he fall
into Excommunication: and during that, Debtors are absolved from the obligation
of paying to the Creditor that debt that is contracted by words -- ] These are
no private uneffectual Opinions. Says Pope Pius the 5th himself in his Bull
against our Queen Elizabeth, [Volumus and mandamus, We will and command that
the Subjects take Arms against that Heretical and Excommunicate Queen.]

But their cruelty to men's souls, and the Church of Christ, does yet much more
declare their uncharitableness. It is a point of their Religion to believe,
that no man can be saved but the Subjects of their Pope, as I have after
proved, and is to be seen in many of their writings, (as Knot, and a late
Pamphlet called Questions for Resolution of Unlearned Protestants, etc.) and
Bishop Morton has recited the words of Lindanus, Valentia and Vasquez. (Apol.
lib. 2. c. 1.) [defining is to be of Necessity to Salvation to be subject to
the Roman Bishop.] And would not a man think that for such horrid doctrines, as
damn the far greatest part of Christians in the world, they should produce at
least some probable Arguments? But what they have to say, I have here
faithfully detected. If we will dispute with them, or turn to them, the
Scripture must be no further Judge then as their Church expounds it: The
Judgment of the Ancient, yea or present Church, they utterly renounce; for the
far greatest part is known to be against the Headship of their Pope; and
therefore they must stand by for Heretics. Tradition it self they dare not
stand to, except themselves be Judges of it; for the greatest part of
Christians profess that Tradition is against the Roman Vice-christ. The
internal sense and experience of Christians they gainsay; concluding all
besides themselves to be void of charity or saving grace, which many a thousand
holy souls do find within them, that never believed in the Pope. Yea when we
are content to lay our lives on it, that we will show them the deceit of
Popery, as certainly and plainly as Bread is known to be Bread when we see it,
feel and taste it, and as Wine is known to be Wine when we see and drink it;
yet do they refuse even the judgment of sense, of all men's senses, even their
own and others. So that we must renounce our honesty, our Knowledge of our
selves, our senses, our reason, the common experience and senses of all men,
the Judgment and Tradition of the far greatest part of the present Church or
else by the judgment of the Papists we must all be damned.

Whether such opinions as these should by us be uncontradicted, or by you be
suffered to be taught your Subjects, is easy to discern. If they had strength,
they would little trouble us with Disputing. Nothing more common in their
Writers scarce, then that the Sword or Fire is fitter for Heretics then
Disputes. This is hut their after-game. Though their Church must rule Princes,
as the soul, rules the body, yet it must be by Secular Power; excommunication
does but give fire: it is Lead and Iron that must do the execution. And when
they are themselves disabled, it is their way to strike us by the hands and
swords of one another. He that saw England, Scatland and Ireland a while ago in
blood; and now sees the lamentable case of so many Protestant Princes and
Nations destroying one another, and thinks that Papists have no hand in
contriving, counselling, instigating, or executing, is much a stranger to their
Principles and Practices.

Observing therefore that of all the Sects that we are troubled with, there is
none but the Papist that disputes with us with flames and Gunpowder, with
Armies and Navies at their backs, having so many Princes, and so great revenews
for their provision, I have judged it my duty to God and his Church, 1. To
Detect the vanity of their cause, that their shame may appear to all that are
impartial; and to do my part of that necessary work for which Vell. Paterculus
so much honored Cicero (Hist. lib. 2. c. 34.) Ne quorum arma viceramus, little
ingenio vinceremur] And 2. To present with greatest earnestness these following
Requests to your Highness on the behalf of the cause and people of the Lord
(wherein the Papists also shall see, that it is not their suffering, but only
our Necessary Defense that we desire.)

1. We earnestly request that you will Resolvedly adhere to the cause of Truth
and Holiness, and afford the Reformed Churches abroad the utmost of your help
for their Concord and Defense, and never be tempted to own an Interest that
crosses the Interest of Christ. How many thousands are studiously contriving
the extirpation of the Protestant Churches from the Earth? How many Princes are
consederate against them? The more will be required of you for their aid. The
serious endeavors of your Renowned Father for the Protestants of Savoy,
discovered to the world by Mr. Morland in his Letters, etc. has won him more
esteem in the hearts of many that fear the Lord, then all his victories in
themselves considered. We pray that you may inherit a tender care of the cause
of Christ.

2. We humbly request that you will faithfully adhere to those that fear the
Lord in your Dominions. In your eyes let a vile person be contemned; but honor
them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4. Know not the wicked; but let your eyes be
upon the faithful of the Land, Psalm. 101. 4, 6. Compassionate the weak and
curable, Punish the uncurable; restrain the froward; but Love and cherish the
servants of the Lord. They are under Christ the honor and the strength of the
Commonwealth; It was a wise and happy King that professed that his Good should
extend to the Saints on earth, and the excellent in whom was his delight, Psalm.
16. 2, 3. This strengthening the vitals is one of the chief means to keep out
Popery and all other dangerous diseases. We see few understanding Godly people
receive the Roman infection, but the profane, licentious, ignorant or
malignant that are prepared for it.

3. We earnestly request your utmost care, that we may be ruled by Godly,
Faithful Magistrates under you: and that your Wisdom and Vigilance may
frustrate the subtilty of Masked Papists or Infidels that would creep into
places of Council, Command, or Justice, or any public office. If ever such as
these should have a hand in your affairs, or be our Rulers, we know what we
must expect. The Reasons of our jealousies of such men are, because we know
that the design is agreeable to their principles and interests: and we know it
is their usual course: and we find that such men swarm among us: we hear their
words, we read their writings, we see their practices for Popery and
Infidelity. The jealousies of many wise men in England are very great
concerning the present designs of this Generation of men; and not without
cause. We fear the Masked Papists and Infidels, more then the barefaced, or
then any enemy. The men that we are jealous of, and over whom we desire you to
be Vigilant, are these Hiders that purposely obscure and cover their Religion.
He that wilfully concealeth his Faith, allows me to suspect it to be naught:
The chief of them are, 1. The Seekers that have not yet found a Church, a
Ministry, Ordinances, or Scripture, nor some of them a Christ to believe in. 2.
The Paracelsians, Behmenists, and other Enthusiasts, that purposely hide
themselves in self-devised, uncouth, cloudy terms, and pretend to visible
familiarity with spirits. 3. The Vani, whom God by wonders confounded in New
England, but have here prevailed far in the dark. 4. The secret guides of the
Quakers. 5. Those that make it their business to argue against the Religion of
all others, but assert little of their own, endeavoring to bring all men to
uncertainties, and loose them from the faith. 6. Those that are still vilifying
or undermining the faithful Godly Ministry. 7. Those that do secretly or
openly plead the cause of Infidels: (which are alas, too many: whether ex
animo, or for promoting Popery, time will disclose:) that deride the
Scriptures, and deny the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of the body,
or that there are any Devils, or is any Hell. 8. The Libertines, that would
have liberty for all that they can call Religion, though against the certain
Principles of Christianity; and that tell us the Magistrate has nothing to do
with men's Religion (of which anon.) 9. The Democratical Polititions, that are
busy about the change of Government, and would bring all into confusion under
pretense of the Peoples Liberty or Power, and would have the Major Part of the
Subjects to be the Sovereign of the rest; that is, the worst, that are still
the most; and the ignorant, that cannot Rule themselves; and the vicious, that
are enemies and hinderers of piety; and the worldlings, that mind nothing but
what is under their feet, and have no time to think of Heaven, they have so
much to do on earth; and as Augustine says, had rather there were one Star
less in Heaven, then One Cow loss in their Pastures: these must be our
Sovereigns. 10. Those that under pretense of defending Prelacy, and of uniting
us with Rome, do adhere to the course of Grotius and Sancta Clara, and Unchurch
all the Reformed Churches, degrade all the Ministers that are not of their way,
while they maintain the verity of the Church of Rome, and the validity of her
Ordination, and would have the Pope to be the Principium Unitatis to all the
Church, and the Western Parts to obey him as their Patriatch, yea and himself
to be the Ruler of the whole, so he do it by the Laws of General Councils, and
deprive not inferior Bishops of their Privileges. These ten sorts of men we
are Jealous of; and if ever you advance them into places of Command or Power,
it will increase our jealousies. God knows, I have no personal grudge to any of
them. But the Gospel and the souls of men, and the hopes of our posterity, are
not so contemptible as to be given away as a bribe to purchase these men's good
will, or to stop their mouths lest they should reproach us. As it is the
common, but a poor redress, that after the Massacres of thousands, the
surviving Protestants have still had from the Papists, viz. to disclaim the
fact, or cast it upon some rash discontented men (which will not make dead men
alive again.) So will it be a poor relief to us, when these men are our
Masters, and have deprived us of all that was dear to us in the world, that we
escaped their ill language while the work was doing.

4. We also humbly beseech you, that you will go on with the purging, and
encouraging of the Ministry: Casting out the Ignorant and Ungodly; and
countenancing those that are Able, and Faithful. They deny their ease, and
dignity and the riches of the world (which other employments would afford) to
encounter with Satan and the worlds corruptions, for the happiness of souls!
And therefore the more oppose them and revile them, and unthankfully requite
them, the more are you obliged for the sake of Christ, and men's salvation, to
assist them. All their enemies contending to surpass the Devil in impudency,
accuse them of Covetousness, Idleness and Ambition, as if these were the things
that they seek after in the world. If our practice seconding our profession, be
not enough to confute these calumnies of malignant men, let this be added to
confute them, that we make it our earnest request to your Highness, that all
such Ambitious, Idle, Covetous, or otherwise scandalous Ministers may be cast
out. You have Commissioners in every County for this work: Require them to do
it faithfully: If we desired this much against our Reproachers, they would say
we persecuted them: We desire you therefore but to turn this persecution
against our selves. We also desire you, that you will not advance us to
Temporal Honors, or Dignities, or Power; nor make us Lord Bishops, nor to
abound with the riches of this world: These things agree not with our caling:
We only desire food, and raiment, and necessaries to furnish us for our work,
and express some charity to the needy that daily expect it from us; and we
crave of you that we may be no richer. We also desire you, never to put the
sword into our hands, nor enable us to execute any of our private passions upon
any, nor yet to touch men's Bodies or Estates; but only to manage the word and
Keys of the Kingdom of Christ upon men's Consciences, and Guide his Church
according to our office, and let it prevail as God shall bless it. This is all
the advancement we desire. We have doubly renounced all the world, as
Christians, and as Ministers of Christ; we have given up our selves to a
difficult flesh-displeasing work: we crave no more of you but so far to
countenance us as Christ commands you, and the good of our peoples souls
requires. And God will be judge between us and our malicious reproachers,
whether these requests are Covetous, Ambitious, or Unreasonable.

5. We also humbly crave your aid, for the procuring and maintaining an Union
and Concord among all the Pastors and Churches in your Dominion. All that fear
God are Agreed in the main: and they have a special Love to one another; and
these are good preparatives to their fuller reconcilement. I know that there is
no such distance in their principles, but that they may in blessed Concord
carry on the work of God: Our poor people need this, that are offended at our
smallest distances: All our strength united is too little to bear down the
oppositions of Hell and Earth that we must daily encounter in our work. Your
help may do much to procure our Concord, of which I shall presume to say more
to you in another address.

6. Lastly we beseech you that Toleration may be limited by Execution as well
as by Law; And therefore that as the Approved Ministers must have an Instrument
of Approbation, and must be responsible before the Commissioners of ejection,
for any thing that forfeiteth it; so the Tolerated may be tried according to
your Laws of Toleration, and may have an Instrument for their Toleration,
before they have Liberty publicly to propagate their Opinions to others: and
that they may be as responsible before the Commissioners for ejection as we.
And that publicly nor privately Papists, nor Infidels, nor any that deny the
essentials of the faith may not be suffered to seduce the people. If any think
that this is desired by us, because we fear the power of truth, or would
deprive them of any just freedom of debate, I provoke them solidly to answer
what is here said in the following Dispute; and we dissuade not your Highness
if you were in any doubt (which we do not imagine) of the truth of the
Christian or Reformed Doctrine, to invite us to an equal Disputation, and try
whether we shall not open the shame of Infidelity and Popery (the two great
evils that threaten this land) at any time. But if you are resolved of the
wickedness of both these ways, we have reason to expect that you suffer not
the poison to be administered to your people. Give not leave to every seducer to
do his worst to damn men's souls; When you will not tolerate every Traitor to
draw your Armies or people into Rebellion; nor to every wicked man to solicit
others to whoredom, murder, theft or deceit. And verily if men have leave to
preach against the Scripture, Churches, Ministry, Ordinances, yea and against
the life to come under the name of Seekers, Quakers or such other Sects, we had
far rather that they had leave to pull off their vizor, and do it openly in the
name of Papists. For as Papists they will disown abundance of the abominations,
which as Seekers, etc. they propagate on design: And as plain dealing in
Religion is better then juggling, so we had rather that open quiet Papists were
tolerated, then these juggling deceivers. They that pretend to know the Jesuits
and Friars, do profess that they are more common in Princes Councils and
Families, and in the houses, if not the closets of Noble men, Commanders, and
persons of public trust or service, then we that live and mean simply do
imagine. And who would have thought that had not know it, that they had so
insinuated into the several sects among us, and that they were so industrious
in their work, as the Newcastle Scottish Jew was, to be circumcised or become
Jew, and then rebaptized, etc. and all to decieve?

Judge I beseech you by these three Reasons, how far their seduction is to be
tolerated. 1. That they preach Treason against Princes and States, I have
showed undenyably, is part, and a principal part of their Religion.

2. Their doctrine corrupts almost all Morality: What need we fuller clearer
proof, then the Jansenian has given us in his Mystery of Jesuitism? and much
more may be added. Morton has long ago produced enough to tell us what to
expect from such men: Apolog. Part. 1. l. 2. c. 13. As from Tollet himself l.
4. de instruct. sacerd. c. 9. [Quantum ad intentionem dilectionis, non tenemur
sub praecepto Deum plus omnibus diligere] Stapleton l. 6. de justif. c. 10. and
Valent. l. de Votis c. 3. [Hoc praeceptum diligendi Deum ex tota mente,
doctrinale est, non obligatorium] See here, a precept, and the greatest
precept, even to Love God above all, is not Obligatory? A strange precept! And
p. 322. he recites the words of Tollet, ibid. l. 4. c. 21. and 22. teaching
Equivocation upon oath before a Magistrate, and so maintaining perjury. And p
327. he cites the same Author maintaining that Murder, and Blasphemy in a
passion and not deliberate, is no mortal sin, unless in one that is used to
Blaspheme. And p. 329. how Bellarm. Costerus, Valentia maintain that
Fornication in a Priest is better, or a smaller sin then to marry. The like he
shows of their doctrine of Theft, False witness, etc. p. 332, 333, etc. This
from him.

3. But above all their other mischiefs, the Propagating of Infidelity by them
is the greatest: Which they do in two ways. 1. Under the Vizard of Infidels
and Seekers they plead against Scripture and Christianity, in design to loosen
men from all Religion, and persuade them that they must needs be Infidels or
Papists: Veron and his followers have given them full Directions to manage this
design. And while (with debauched Consciences) they thus persuade men to be
Infidels in jest, they have made abundance such in good sadness: so that upon
my knowledge there are many such swarm among us, that sometime seemed pious
persons, that plead against Christianity it self. 2. And no wonder, when some
of the leading Papists do seem to be Christians in jest, and Infidels in good
sadness themselves. I shall instance now but in their Champion, Tho. White, who
in his Euclid. Metaphys. Stoech. K. pr. 16. maintains that in a manner, or
almost all incorporated souls shall be saved by the world as the Instrument, or
else the world were substantially evil, and the souls that fail of Blessedness,
non sint sufficientes ad partem considerabilem totius multitudinis
constituendam. He that believes this, cannot believe Christ, nor well persuade
men to believe in Christ. This happy news to the Pagans and Mahometans, might
somewhat affright the Christians being the fewest, lest they should be that
inconsiderable number, but that he that talks of the damnation of so few, its
like by his Arguments believes it of none. The same he asserts in his Treatise
of the middle state of souls, Rat. 5. p. 41. And Rat. 10. he disputes against
Vindictive Justice as a thing not becoming God: and p. 88. denies that sinners
injure God, forsooth because he suffers it willingly. Page 95 (Translat.) he
says that souls are exempt from all such pains as may be caused by any outward
agent: And page 111. That God Governs not the world as a Monarch, but as an
Engineer; And page 134. he says [the punishment of sin whether external or
internal, is nothing else but the increase and exaggeration of sins in those
who are perverse, and the decrease and diminution of them in those who amend]
And page 90. that [the defect of Gods honor occasioned by Peter, was not
supplied and repaired by any other] and so not by Christ. And page 146. [that
Gods aim is always the utmost good of every creature] And he often enough tells
us that God attaineth all his will. And is this man a Papist? or are Papists in
good sadness, that tell the world that none but the subjects of the Pope can be
saved? and yet now the number that perish will be inconsiderable; and God
aims at the utmost Good of every creature. Sure he thinks that all the Toads
must be made men: and all men made Angels; and every star must be made a Sun! I
shall pass by the Books that are written against the Creation, and against
Scripture, and against Hell, etc. which swarm among us; only advising your
Highness to take heed that you venture not upon any worldly motives, to stand
guilty before the living God of allowing or tolerating such Books to be
published, and such doctrines as these to be preached to your People, to the
everlasting undoing of their precious souls.

If you ask who it is that presumes thus to be your Monitor? It is one that
serves so great a Master that he thinks it no unwarrantable presumption, in
such a case to be faithfully plain with the greatest Prince. It is one that
stands so near Eternity, where Lazarus shall wear the Crown, that unfaithful
man-pleasing would be to him a double crime: it is one that rejoices in the
present happiness of England, and earnestly wishes that it were but as well
with the rest of the world; and that honors all the providence of God by
which we have been brought to what we are; but dare not own all the actions of
men that have been the Instruments, as he has thought meet to manifest in this
writing, and leave upon record. And he is one that concurring in the Common
Hopes of greater Blessings yet to these Nations under your Government, and
observing your Acceptance of the frequent Addresses that from all parts of the
Land are made unto you, was encouraged to do what you daily allow your
Preachers to do, and to concur with the rest, in the tenders (and some
performance) of his service; and particularly the County of Wilts who have
Petitioned you for the Sum of what I have here expressed; and whose Petitions I
desire may be written upon your heart. That the Lord will make you a healer and
preserver of his Chucrhes here at home, and a successful helper to his
Churches abroad, is the earnest prayer of

Your Highnesses faithful Subject Rich. Baxter.

Reader,
IF thou come hither with a practical esteem of Truth, desiring to know it that
thou may obey it, and with an humble mind do study and pray to the Father
of Lights, and art impartially willing to receive the Truth in the Love of it
that thou may be saved, and with diligence and meekness to read and weigh the
Evidences that I bring thee, thou art then the person to whom I recommend these
Papers with confident expectation of success. The Controversies here handled
are those that have made, and still are making, the greatest comhustions in the
Christian world. And yet to almost all men of learning on both sides they seem
exceeding easy. I seldom meet with a Learned Protestant but takes Popery for
such transparent fallacies, that he is little or no whit troubled with any
doubtings in the business: And I seldom meet with a Learned Papist but is as
confident on the other side, as if besides them, all the Christian world were
blind and mad. Interest and prejudice must needs do much then on one side at
least. And which side has the greatest worldly interest to by as their
understanding, is soon discerned by one that knows the Papalpower, their
Cardinals, Prelates, and the Riches, Honors and privileges of their Clergy,
and that knows our state. And if thou will hear the Reasons of the confidence
of both sides, I will tell it thee here as briesly and plainly as I can.

We are confident of our own Religion, because we believe the Gospel: and we
have no other Rule and Jest of our Religion: And we are confident that Popery
is a deceit, because we both believe the Gospel and the judgment of the
ancient and present Churches, and because we believe our sense it self: As sure
as we know Bread from Flesh, and Wine from Blood, by seeing, tasting, etc. so
sure know we that Popery is false. And if a Controversy is not at an End when
it is brought to the judgment of all the senses of all the sound men in the
world (it being about the object of sense) then we are past hope of ending
controversies: And therefore as we will not waste our time with every fellow
that will dispute with us that Snow is black, or the Fire cold, no more will we
trouble our selves with these men that tell us that Bread is not bread, and
Wine is not wine.

And if you would know the Reasons of the confidence of the Papists, I know no
more of them but what their Writings and speeches do express, and those I have
hereafter given you. Two things they are still harping on: the first is, that
in our way we have no assurance that the Christian Religion is true, or that
Scripture is the word of God. Save me the labor of repetitions, and read but
what I have witten in the Preface to the second Part of the Saints Rest (Edit.
2. etc.) where I give you the Resolution of our faith, and in my Safe Religion,
Disp. 3. and then believe them if thou can.

Their second is, that threadbare Question [Where was your Church before
Luther? Where has it been successively in each age?] And here mere Sophistry
carries it through the Papal world, to the deluding of the simple that will be
caught with chafe, and are not able to see things for Names. I have dealt with
some of them that harped on this string, and never met with any thing from them
that should seem considerable to a discerning man, save only the two
unanswerable arguments of Confidence (that I say not Impudence) and Loquacity.
Though I have more fully shamed this Question in this Book, I will here also
give you at the entrance, a short view of the case.

The men that ask us, where our Church and Religion was, either know not
(through ignorance) or will not let others know (through wickedness) what our
Church and Religion is. [Shew us (say they) a Church in all ages that held the
thirty nine Articles, or that held all that the Protestants hold, or else they
were not Protestants?] Forsooth, we must receive from them a Definition of a
Protestant, and then we must prove the succession of such. Know therefore
before you dispute about the succession, what is the thing whose succession is
questioned. [A Protestant is a Christian that holds to the holy Scriptures as
the sufficient Rule of faith and holy living, and protests against Popery.]
The Protestant Churches are Societies professing the Protestants Religion. [The
Protestant Religion] is an improper speech, but [the Protestants Religion] is a
phrase that we shall own. For [Protestancy] is not our Religion it self, but
the Rejection of Popish corruptions of Religions or defiling Additions. If my
Rejections of other men's Additions be themselves Additions, then is it in the
power of any Heretic in the world to force me to Add to my Religion at his
Pleasure. A thousand new Articles and Forms of Worship he may devise, and then
must I add to my Religion by rejecting them all: even as I add to my Apple by
wiping the dirt of it, or to my Clothes, by brushing them. The Protestants
Religion is only the Christian Religion the naked Christian Religion alone: The
Papists the Christian Religion corrupted with abundance of additions. The
Protestants ever disavowed any Confessions of men as pretended to be the Rule
or Law of their Religion. The Protestants Religion is the Holy Scriptures
alone] The Papists Religion is all that is decreed by the Pope and Councils.
Our Religion containtd in the Scoipture has its Essentials and Integrals. All
the Essentials and as much of the Integrals as (in the use of means) we are
able to understand, we believe particularly and explicitly: the rest we
believe generally and implicitly to be all true. So that as the Papists will
not give us leave to take the writings of Gre^ser, Bellarmine or any of their
Doctors, yea the Articles of their Divines at Thoren, Ratisbone, etc. to be
therefore Articles of their faith, but only those that are contained in General
Councils approved by the Pope; so we require the same justice of them that they
call Nothing the Articles of our Faith, but what is contained in the Holy
Scripture, which is the only Rule of our Religion. Do they know our Religion
better then we do? This is our Religion, and this we stand to.

Well! Consider now whether any thing be easier then for a Protestant to show
you a visible Church that has successively been of his Religion.

1. The Christian Religion has been in all ages since Christ in visible
Societies: The Religion of Protestants is the Christian Religion: therefore the
Religion of Protestants has been in all ages since Christ in visible Societies.

2. That Religion which is contained in the Holy Scripture as its Rule or
sufficient Revelation, has been professed in all ages in visible Churches. But
the Religion of Protestants is contained in the Holy Scriptures as its Rule or
sufficient Revelation: therefore the Religion of Protestants has been
professed in all ages in visible Churches.

We name the Societies from the places of their residence: Our Church (as
Augustine tells the Donatists) begun at Jerusalem, and thence was dispersed
into Asia, Africa and Europe; it has continued in Syria, Aethiopia, Egypt,
India, Greece, etc. If I could name but one Nation that had been of my
Religion, I should suspect it were not the true Religion. It is the Christian
world that is instead of a Catalogue to us.

O but, say the Juglers, This is a General answer, to say you are Christians:
there are more sorts of Christians then One. I Reply; It is the General or
Catholic that we are speaking of; and therefore if it were not such a General
answer, it were not pertinent to the Question: There are no more sorts of
Christians but One; that is, there is no Essential difference among them; but
there is a gradual, integral and modal difference. But may not Christians of
several Degrees of Knowledge be in the same Catholic Church? Our question is
not, [Where any Sect, or any particular Church has had its succession:] but
[where that Catholic Church has been, of which we are members.] And surely
Christ has but One Catholic Church.

O but, say they, would you make men believe that Ethiopians, Armenians,
Greeks, etc. are Protestants? you may be ashamed of so gross a fiction.

I answer, Is it the Name of Protestants, or their Religion, that you would
have us prove a succession of? These deceivers cheat abundance of poor souls by
this one device, even supposing that the word [Protestant] does denominate our
Church from its Essential parts, and so call for a Catalogue of Protestants.
But I would ask them, whether we or they do better know our Religion? and
consequently what a Protestant is? If they know it at all, it is from our
writings or expressions; For sure they will not pretend without signs to know
our hearts, and that better then our selves. You must take it from us, if you
will know what our Religion is, as we must take it from you, if we will know
yours. And therefore delude not silly souls by persuading them that you know
what our Religion is better then we. If you will believe our Books that tell
you, believe our sayings also, and believe me that here tell you my own
Religion. [A Protestant is a Christian that protests against Popery
]Christianity is our Religion: Protesting against Popery is our Negation or
Rejection of your Corruptions of Religion. Men that never heard of the name of
Papist or Protestants, may be of the same Religion with us. If many Nations of
the world never received Popery, and we reject it; if they never knew it, and
we know it and disown it, are we not both of one Religion, even in the
Integrals? One man never heard of the Leprosy: another catches it and is
cured of it; and a third flies from it and preventeth it; And I think all
these are truly men; yea and (in tantum) sound men. When you call to us for a
proof of our succession, either you mean it, of the Essentials of our Religion
and Church, or of the Negation of your Corruptions: Either you mean it of the
points that we are Agreed in, or of those we differ in: Christianity is it that
we are Agreed in; and that is our Religion, and nothing but that: Protestancy
as such, is but our wiping off the dirt, or curing the scab that you have
brought upon our Religion, Is he not a man as well as you that will not tumble
with you in the dirt, or come into your Pesthouse? If we know not our own
Religion, then we cannot tell it you; and then you cannot know it: And if we do
know it, believe us, when we profess our own Belief: We still profess before
men and Angels, that we own no Religion but the Christian Religion, nor any
Church but the Christian Church, nor dream of any Catholic Church but one,
containing all the true Christians in the world, united in Jesus Christ the
Head. We protest before men and Angels that it is the Holy Scriptures that are
the Law and Rule and Test of our Religion; And why are we not to be Believed in
this our own Profession, as well as you are in yours, when you make the Decrees
of Popes and Councils to be your Law and Rule and Tests?

We perform therefore more then you demand. You ask us Where was our Church
before Luther? And we answer, Where our Religion was. You ask us, Where was
that? and we tell you Where ever the Christian Religion was, and the Holy
Scriptures were received. This were enough for us in answer to your Question:
But we do more: We tell you not only where our Church and Religion was, but
where there were men that owned not your grand Corruptions, no more then we:
What can you demand more of us, when you call for a succession of Protestants,
then that we tell you of a succession of Christians (which are of our Religion)
and which were no Papists, yea against Popery, (which therefore were of our
integrity) And who knows not that the foresaid Abassines, Armenians,
Egyptians, Greeks, etc. are against your Papal Sovereignty, Infallibility, and
all that is by us renounced as Essential to Popery?

O but, say the Juglers, these are not Protestants; they differ from you in
many particulars.] I answer, Call them by what name you please; they are not
only Christians, but also Anti-papists, or free from Popery, and then they are
of our Religion and Church. But indeed, must the world be made believe that all
that we Believe is essential to our Religion, and that no man that differs
from us can be of our Religion, be the difference never so small?

But say they, tell us of a Church that professes your 39 Articles. Silly
deceivers! Do not those very Articles profess that [The Holy Scripture
contains all things necessary to salvation, so that whatever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man that it
should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought requsite or
necessary to Salvation.] Art. 6. We never took these Articles instead of the
Scripture, but the Articles and all Protestants profess the Scripture to be the
only Rule and Test of their Faith and Religion. The substance of the 39
Articles may easily be proved to have been successively held by the Church from
the beginning; but it is not incumbent on us to prove that every word in the
writings of every Divine, or Church, has been so continued; no more then you
will own the writings of any Divines or Provincial Synods of your own, as being
the Rule of your Faith. As you profess that the Decrees of Popes and general
Councils approved by him, besides the Scriptures, are the Rule and Test of your
Religion; so do we profess that the Scriptures alone (with the Law of Nature)
is the Rule of ours.

But, what (say they) will you be of the same Church with Nestorians,
Eutichians, and other Heretics? I Answ. 1. We will not take all for
Nestorians, or Eutichians, that a railer can call such, that never knew them,
nor can prove it. 2. Heretics indeed that deny any essential part of
Christianity, are no Christians, anh therefore none of the Church that we are
of: but if you will call those Heretics that have all the essentials of
Christianity, because they err in lesser points, we know that there are such in
the Catholic Church: We will be none of them our selves, if we can escape it
(yet indeed have no hope of escaping all error till we are perfect in
knowledge:) But we will not run out of the family of God, because there are
children and sick persons in it: Nor will we for sake the Catholic Church
because there are erring persons in it.

O but, says the Papist, We acknowledge not your distinction of points
Essential and not Essential; all points of Faith are Essential with us, and of
necessity to Salvation.] Answ. Reader, thou shall see here such impudent and
faithless juggling, as may make thee blush to think that Christianity has such
professors. 1. The Outside of their assertion damneth no aess then all the
world (that live to the use of Reason) 2. The Inside of their deceitful meaning
is almost clean contrary, and leaves Heathens and Infidels in the Church, or
in a state of salvation as well as Christians. 3. It leaves no one Article of
faith essential to a Christian, or to one that shall be saved; and leaves the
Church an Invisible thing, clean contrary to their own assertions of its
Visibility. 4. And when they have thus wrangled themselves into a wood of
contradictions and Unchristian absurdities, the wisest of them say as we say,
in the main point. All this I will now manifest to thee.

1. The Outside of their assertion is that Every point that we are bound to
belive by a Divine faith, is fundamental, or essential to Christian faith, or
of necessity to salvation. And if so, then no man breathing can be saved: For
no man knows all that he is bound to know. And no man believes that which he
understands not: It is impossible to believe that such a Proposition is a
truth distinctly and actually, when I understand not what the Proposition is.
And that we all know but in part, even what we are obliged to know, no man will
deny, but he that is mad by pride or faction: All that God has revealed in his
word, is the matter of our faith: There is to man can say, I have no culpable
ignorance of any one Truth of God that I should believe. Had we been more
perfect in our diligent studies, and prayers, and use of all means; and had we
never sinfully grieved the spirit that should illuminate us, (to say nothing of
our Original sinful darkness) there is not one of us but might have known more
then we do. If sin of the will and life be consistent with true faith, then
some sin in the understanding is consistent with faith. But the former is true:
therefore, etc. But according to the outside of their doctrine, no man that
has any sinful ignorance (and consequently unbelief) in his understanding can
be saved; that is, no man in the world. If he that thinks he knowth any thing,
knows nothing as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. what shall be said of these
men, that think they and all the Church do know all things that they ought to
know, and that their understandings have no sin? And must we needs be of that
faith that damneth all men, and of that Church where none are saved?

2. As the Outside of their Assertions is made for a bugbear to frighten
fools, so that the Inside (as expounded by many of them) is that Heathens and
Infidels may be of their Church or saved, and that nothing of the Chrian faith
at all is necessary to salvation, is plain: For they 'tell us that they mean,
that all points are of necessity, where they are sufficiently proposed, and
men's ignorance is not invincible; but where there is no sufficient proposal,
but men's ignorance is invincible, or such as comes not from a wilful neglect
of means, there no ignorance of the articles of faith is damnable, and so no
article absolutely necessary: so that the question indeed is not Whether men
believe or not? but Whether they are Unbelievers or Heathens or ignorant
persons, by a wilful neglect of sufficiently proposed Truth, or not? So that
all that part of the Heathen or Infidel world (O how great) that have no such
proposals of the Gospel, may not only be saved, but be better and safer then
most Christians (if not all) who certainly are sinfully ignorant of some truth
which they ought to know.

Obj. But (say they) it will not stand with faith to deny belief to God in any
thing, sufficiently revealed: for he that believes him in one thing, believes
him in all.]

Answ. Very true, if they know it to be the Word of God. And if this be all,
the Protestants are ready to aver upon their most solemn Oaths, that they
believe every thing without exception which they know to be a Divine
Revelation: and no wonder; for so does every man that believes that there is a
God and that he is no liar. If this will serve your turn, you have no more to
say against us; your mouths are stopped. But may it not stand with faith to be
ignorant, and that through sinful neglect, of some revealed truth of God, or
of the meaning of his word? If you are so proud as to think that all the
justified are perfect and have no sin, yet at last consider whether a man that
lives in Heathenism til fourscore years of age, and then turns Christian, is
not afterward ignorant through his former sinful negligene? But dare you say
that you have no sinful ignorance to bewail? Will you confess none, nor beg
pardon, or be beholden to Christ to pardon it?

That they make no point of faith necessary, while they seem to make all
necssary, see but what I have after cited from Frans. a S. Clara probl. 15, 16,
17. and abundance more that are mentioned there by him.

3. And that by this Protean juggling, they make the Church invisible, is
apparent. For what man breathing knows the secrets of the souls of others,
whether they have resisted or not resisted the light? and whether they are
ignorant of the articles of faith upon sinful contempt, or for want of some
due means of faith, or internal capacity, or opportunity? We are as sure that
all men are ignorant of some thing that God has revealed to be known (in
nature and Scripture) as that they are men: But now whether any one of these
men be free from those aggravations of his ignorance (and that in every point)
upon which the Papists make him an unbeliever, is unknown to others: When the
Faith or Infidelity of men, and so their being in the Church or out of it, must
not be known by the Matter of Faith which they profess, but by the secret
passages of their hearts, their willingness or unwillingness, resistance or not
resistance, and such like, the Church then is invisible; no man can say which
is it, nor who is of it: He that professes not the Faith, may be a Catholic;
and he that professes it, for ought they know, may be an Infidel, as being
sinfully yet ignorant of some one truth that is not in his express confession:
thus by confusion the bulders of Babel mar their work.

4. And that the wisest of them, say in the main as we say, see here in some
proofs. Bellarm. de Verbo Dei, lib. 4. cap. 11. [In the Christian Doctrine both
of Faith and Manners, some things are simply necessary to salvation to all; as
the Knowledge of the Articles of the Apostles Creed, of the ten Commandments,
and of some Sacraments. The restore not so necessary, that a man cannot be
saved without the explicit Knowledge, belief and profession of them -- These
things that are simply necessary and are profitable to all, the Apostles
preached to all -- Allthings are Written by the Apostles which are Necessary to
all, and which they openly preached to all] see the place.

Costerus Echirid. c. 1. p. 49. Non inficiamur praecipua illa fidei capita quae
omnibus Christianis cognitu sunt ad salutem Necessaria, perspicue satis esse
Apostolicis scriptis comprehensa] That is; We deny not that those Chief Heads
of the Faith which are to all Christians necessary to be known to salvation,
are perspicuously enough comprehended in the Writings of the Apostles.] Judge
by these two (to spare the trouble of citing more) whether they be not forced
after all their Cavils, to say as we, in distinguishing of Articles of Faith.
And they cannot be ignorant, that the Church has still had Forms of
Profession, which were called her Symbols, as being the Badge of her Members;
and did not suspend all upon uncertain conjectures about the frame and temper
of the Professors minds.

But if indeed it be not the want of Necessary Articles of Faith that they
accuse us of, but the want of willingness or diligence to know the truth, let
them prove their accusations, and let those persons that they prove guilty bear
the blame. Do they think we would not as willingly know the truth as they? and
that we do not pray as earnestly for Divine illumination? Do we not read their
Books? (I verily think incomparably more then they do ours,) and are we not
willing to confer with the wisest of them that can inform us? I have often
privately and publicly desired you that if any of them can say more then all
these Schoolmen, Friars and Jesuits say, which I have read, they would let me
hear it, that I may want no means they can afford me for my fuller information.

But yet they have not done with us. When we prove a succession of our
Religion, by proving a succession of such as adhered to the Scriptures, which
are the Doctrine of our Religion (an Argument that no Papist under heaven can
confute,) they vainly tell us, that All Heretics pretend to Scripture, and
therefore that will not prove the point.

But 1. Does it follow that Scripture is not a sufficient Rule of our Religion,
because Heretics may pretend to it? You take the 39 Articles for our Religion,
and yet may Heretics that are far from our minds, pretend to them. It Is the
liker to be the Rule because all Heretics pretend it, and would borrow credit
from it to their Heresies. The Law of the Land is the Rule of our Justice; and
yet Lawyers and their Clients that are contrary to each other, do plead it for
their contrary Causes. The Creed it self is pretended by Arrians for their
Heresy. What must we have no Rule or Test or discovery of our Religion which a
Heretic can pretend for his impiety. What words of God or man are not capable
of being misinterpreted? If we should give you every day a confession of Faith,
some Heretics might pretend to hold the same: No wonder then if they do so by
the Scriptures.

2. And can any Learned Papists be so ignorant, as not to know that the Arrians
pretended the Authority of General Councils? and so do many other Heretics;
and that the Authority of Pope and Councils are frequently pretended for
contrary opinions among them, and may be pretended by many an Heretic? And
will they therefore grant that the Decrees of Popes and Councils are no
sufficient discovery of their Faith? If Heretics pretending to your Test of
Faith, disprove not that to be your Faith, then Heretics pretending to our
Rule and Test of Faith (which is the Holy Scripture) is no proof that it is not
our Rule of Faith.

I do therefore conclude, that the Proof of a Succession of such Churches as
have received the Holy Scriptures, is a valid proof of a succession of Churches
of our Religion, seeing we have no Religion (doctrinally) but the Holy
Scriptures. And this as far as modesty will permit, I challenge all the
Jesuits on Earth to confute with any solid Reasons: yet adding that we do ex
superabundanti prove a succession also of Churches that never owned Popery,
even the greatest part of the Christian world. But let these men themselves but
prove to us a succession of their Church, even such as they require of us; Let
them prove that from the Apostles days the Catholic Church (or any one
Congregation of twenty men) did hold all that now their Councils and Popes have
Decreed, and are esteemed Articles of their Faith, and I am contented to be
their bondslave for ever, or to bear a faggot, or be used by them as cruelly as
their malice can invent, or flames or their strappado's execute. Let my Head be
at their Mercy if they can but prove that Succession of Popery, as they require
us to do of Protestancy, or as I have produced of our Churches and Religion. In
the 15th and 16th Detection I have more largely spoken to them of this point,
to which I refer the Reader.

In the very principal point of their Papal Sovereignty, they have nothing but
this gross deceit to cheat the world with: The Roman Emperors diverse ages after
Christ, did give the Bishop of Rome a Primacy in their Empire, and hence these
men would persuade us, that even from Christ they have had a Sovereignty over
all the Christian world. Wink but at these small mistakes, and they have won
the Cause: 1. Suppose but Christ's Institution to stand in stead of the
Emperors. 2. Suppose diverse hundred years after Christ, to have been in the
Apostles days. 3. Suppose Primacy to be Sovereignty or Universal Government. 4.
But especially grant them, that the Roman Empire was all the Christian world;
and then they have made good that part of their Cause.

That there were many Nations without the reach of the Roman Empire, that had
received the Christian Faith, is past doubt. Socrates lib. 1. c. 15. says that
Thomas chose Parthia, Bartholomew chose India, Matthew Ethiopia, to plant the
Gospel in; but the middle India was not converted till Constantines days, by
Frumentius and Edesius; and Iberia by a Maid.] So Eusebius. l. 3. c. 3. tells us
of Thomas his Preaching to the Parthians, and Andrew to the Scythians. ] Et in
vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 8. that there were many Churches in Persia, and cap. 91.
how Constantine wrote for them to the King.] Godignus and others of them
maintain that the Abassines did receive the Gospel from the beginning. Besides
Scotland and many other Countries that were not under the Roman Power. And none
of these were Governed by the Pope.

These three Arguments against the Papal Cause, I shall here premise to more
that follow.

1. If all that part of the Christian world that was out of the reach of the
Roman Empire, did never submit to the Sovereignty of the Pope, then has he not
been successively (or at any time) the actual Head of the Universal Church: But
the Antecedent is most certain: therefore so is the Consequent.

How an old woman, the Emperors Mother of Habassia, did baffle their Jesuits,
by asking them [ How it came to pass, if obedience to the Pope be necessary to
salvation, that they never had heard from him till now? ] I have told you after
from themselves.

If Primacy were Sovereignty, and Emperors and Councils were Gods, yet the
Indians, Abassines, Persians, and many more in the East, and the Scots, and
Irish, and Danes, and Sweeds, and Poles, and Muscovites, and most of Germany in
the West and North, should be no subjects of the Pope.

2. If the Rule and Test of the Faith of Papists never had a Real Being, or no
succession from the Apostles, then their Faith and Church has either no Real
Being, or no such Succession: But the Antecedent is true: as I prove.

It is either General Councils, or Popes, or the Church Essential (as they use
to call it, that is, the Whole Body) that is the Rule of their Faith. If it be
General Councils, 1. They had no being from the Apostles till the Council of
Nice; therefore the Rule of the Papists Faith was then unborn. 2. Yea they
never had a being in the world: There was never any thing like a General
Council since the days of the Apostles to this day. The first at Nice had none,
(save one John of Persia, who its like was some persecuted Bishop that was
fled, or if one or two more its not material), but the Bishops of the Empire,
and out of the Western parts so few as was next to none: The following
Councils, as Constantinop. 1. etc. were only out of one piece of the Empire:
The Council of Trent I disdain to reckon among the modester pretenders to an
Universality.

2. And if it be not General Councils, but the Pope that is the Rule of their
Faith; then, 1. Their Faith has been interrupted, yea and turned to Heresy
and to Infidelity when the Pope has so turned. 2. And why then do they tell
our people, that they take not the Pope for the Rule of their Faith?

3. If it be the Major part of the Universal Church, 1. It Is known that two to
one are against them, or at least the Greater part: therefore by that Rule
their Faith in the Papal Sovereignty is false. 2. And yet it would be hard, if
a man must be of no Belief, till he have brought the world to the pole for it.

Argum. 3. If all the stir that the Papists make in the world for the Papal
Government be but to rob Christian Princes and Magistrates of their Power, then
are they but a seditious Sect: But the Antecedent is apparent: For there are
but two sorts of Government in the Church: The one is by the Word applied unto
the Conscience, which works only on the willing; either by General
exhortations as in Preaching; or by personal application, as in Sacraments,
Excommunication and Absolution: And this is the work of the present Pastors,
and cannot be performed by the Pope: Nor would he be content with this, to
govern Volunteers. The other is by Commands, that shall be seconded with force:
And this is proper to the Magistrate. But if they will be deluded to give up
their Crowns and Scepters to the Pope, let them stand as the objects of the
compassion of Spectators.

Much more then I have here given you, I had prepared of the Testimony of
Antiquity against them. But here is more then they are able solidly to answer,
and I was afraid of overwhelming the capacity of ordinary Readers. I
understand not the French Tongue; but by the Testimony of Learned men that
understand them, and especially by the help The Right Honorable the Earl of
Lauderdaile: a person whose eminent Godliness and Learning occasioneth the
sorrow of his Country, that is deprived of him, in such days as these when
Piety is so much esteemed.
of a Noble friend that has vouchsafed to translate some part of them for my
use, I am imboldened to a confidence, that the two famous Confutations of the
great Perron, will stand to the perpetual shame of Popery, which none of them
will be ever able to Reply to, without as great a dishonor to their Cause as
will follow their not daring to Reply: I mean, Blondell's Book De Primatu in
Ecclesia (which overwhelms them utterly with the witness of Antiquity) and Pet.
Molinaeus de Novitate Papismi (which I hope his Reverend Son of his name may
live to help us to in English.) But if any of the Romanists that dare not
meddle with those Champions, nor dash themselves upon those Pillars, shall yet
vouchsafe an Answer to this smaller work, I do hereby assure him, that if he
will do it soberly, in the fear of God, in a way of close and solid Arguing, he
will perform a task that will be very acceptable to me. But niblers, snarlers,
cavillers, and senseless praters I shall contemn.

Richard Baxter.

The Contents.
CHap. 1. Popery no way to Unity, page 1. Chap. 2. Directions for them that
will deal with a Papist, p. 5. Chap. 3. Argum. 1. Against Popery, by which
every honest godly man is secured from them, p. 9. Chap. 4. The second
Argument, p. 16. Chap. 5. Argum. 3. That deposing Kings that will not
exterminate us, and absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, and giving their
Dominions to others, is an Article of the Papists Faith, p. 17, 18. Chap. 6.
Argum. 4. The Church of Rome unholy in its Essentials, p. 21, 22, etc. Chap. 7.
Argum. 5. The Papists of more then One Church, yet each part pretending to be
the Catholic Church, p. 26. Chap. 8. Argum. 6. The Church of Rome has
discontinued, p. 31. Chap. 9. Argum. 7. From sense; securing all men from
Popery that will believe their eyes, or any of their or others senses, -- p.
32. H. T's frivolous answer refelled, p. 34. Chap. 10. Detect. 1. Prove them
but guilty of one Error in Faith, and all Popery is confuted, p. 38. Chap. 11.
Detect. 2. A Doctrine so contrary to Scripture and it self, cannot be free from
Error, p. 39. Chap. 12. Detect. 3. Agree on the way of proof, before you
dispute: Papists will take neither Sense, Reason, Scripture, nor the Tradition
or Judgment of the greater part of the Church for judge or proof, p. 41. Chap.
13. Detect. 4. Understand what they mean, when they call to you for a Judge of
Controversies. How far a Judge is necessary, and who. p. 43. Chap. 14. Detect.
5. They pretend, that in their way there is an End of Controversies, but in
ours there is none: Detected, p. 46. Chap. 15. Detect. 6. Their boast of Unity,
and reproaching us with Divisions, Detected, p. 52. Chap. 16. Detect. 7. Their
confounding the Essentials and Integrals of Christianity Detected, p. 63. Chap.
17. Detect. 8. Their extolling the judgment of the Catholic Church Detected:
It is against them, p. 71. Chap. 18. Detect. 9. Some of their deluding
Ambiguities Detected. 1. In the word [Church] 2. In the word [Pope.] 3. [A
General Council.] Bring them to Define what they mean by these, and you break
them, p. 73. Chap. 19. Detect. 10. Their Confounding 1. An humane Ordinance,
and a Divine. 2. Mere Primacy with Sovereignty. 3. An alterable Order with an
unalterable Essential, Detected, p. 81. Chap. 20. Detect. 11. The vanity of
their pretending Tradition detected, p. 86. How far we are for Tradition, p.
87. Tradition confounds Popery, p. 98. Chap. 21. Detect. 12. Their pretense
that the Greeks and all other Churches were once under the Pope, Detected, p.
102. Chap. 22. Detect. 13. Their plea that the Church of Rome is a True Church,
and therefore we are Schismatics for separating from it, Detected, p. 103.
Chap. 23. Detect. 14. Their pretending to fixed Unity and settledness, and that
we are at uncertainty, incoherent, and changelings, Detected, p. 107. Chap. 24.
Detect. 15. Their plea that our Church and Religion is new, and theirs old; and
their calling for a Catalogue, and proof of the Succession of our Church before
Luther, Detected; and our Church made known to them, p. 115. And vindicated
from H. Turbervile's exceptions. Proved fully that persons differing in points
of Faith are Christians, and of the same Church, p. 125, 127, etc. And that the
Abassines, Armenians, Copties, Greeks, etc. are of the same Church with us,
proved. H. T's proof of their Succession confuted, to* p. 141. Chap. 25.
Detect. 16. Their jumbling all our differences together, and then making lesser
or common differences to be the Protestant Religion, Detected, p. 141. Thirty
two points of Popery named, which they are challenged to prove a Succession of,
with my promise to receive what is so proved, p. 142. H. T's Arguments for the
Succession of their Doctrine confuted to p. 155. Papists have those in their
Church that differ in point of Faith, p. 155. No such difference between us and
the most of the Christian world as can prove us not of the same Catholic
Church, proved against H. T. in the instances, 1. Of Invocation of Saints, p.
157. 2. Praying for the dead, p. 160. 3. Veneration or Adoration of Images,
Cross and Relics, p. 162. 4. Transubstantiation, 5. Satisfaction and
Purgatory, 6. Of Fasts, Free Will, etc.
Chap. 26. Detect. 17. Their false interpretation of the sayings of Ancients,
from whence they would extort a proof of their Sovereignty, Detected in eight
instances, p. 169. Chap. 27. Detect. 18. Their corrupting Councils and Fathers,
and citing such, Detected, p. 176. Chap. 28. Detect. 19. Their persuading the
people that we are all Liars, that nothing we say and write may be regarded, p.
182. Chap. 29. Detect. 20. Their feigned Miracles: 184. The story of the Boy of
Bilson, p. 185. Chap. 30. Detect. 21. Their Impudent slanders. The horrid Lies
against Luther and Calvin, insisted on by the Marquess of Worcester, and their
common Writers, fully detected, p. 189. Chap. 31. Detect. 22. Their quarrels at
our Translations of Scripture, p. 200. Chap. 32. Detect. 23. Their design to
make the Ministers odious to the people. Their riches and ours compared, p.
201. Chap. 33. Detect. 24. Their cavils against our Ministry, Ordination and
Succession, confuted, p. 205. Chap. 34. Detect. 25. Their pretense of the
Holiness of their Church, and the unholiness of ours: And 1. Of their Canonized
Saints, p. 214, 217. 2. Of the strictness of their Religious Orders. 3. Of
their unmarryed Clergy, p. 227. 4. Their Holy Ceremonies. Chap. 35. Detect.
26. Their demanding of us to tell them when every one of their Corruptions did
begin, p. 233. Their Novelty proved, p. 234, etc. A Confutation of a Papists M.
S. on this point, which was sent to Mr. Millard, near Sturbridge, p. 244.
Chap. 36. Detect. 27. They charge us with New Articles, for denying their new
Articles of Faith, and then bid us prove the Succession of our Negatives, p.
258. Chap. 37. Detect. 28. They conclude that theirs is the safer Religion,
because it is most uncharitable and damneth others, and ours the less safe
because the more charitable, p. 261. They admit or save Heathens while they
would damn Protestants, proved, p. 265. Chap. 38. Detect. 29. They win the
Great ones and multitude by suiting their Doctrine and Worship to the fleshly
conceits and inclinations of ungodly men, p. 271. showed in twenty instances.
Chap. 39. Detect. 30. They pick up the mistakes or harsh passages of some
particular Divines, and persuade men that these are the Protestant Religion, p.
279. A Confutation of Cardinal Richlieu's twelve Accusations or Arguments
against the Protestants, p. 280, 281, etc. Chap. 42. Detect. 33. Their pretense
of a Divine institution, and Natural Excellency of a visible Monarchical
Government of the whole Church Detected, p. 297. An Answer to the ridiculous
Reasons of Cardinal Boverius to Prince Charles, p. 297. Chap. 43. Detect. 34.
Their new device of receiving nothing as Scripture Evidence; but the express
words, p 307. Chap. 44. Detect. 35. They choose such persons to dispute with
against whom they have some notable advantage, p. 312. Chap. 45. Detect. 36.
Their designs to divide us, or sow Heresies among the Vulgar, and then draw
them to some odious practices, p. 313. About our late changes and wars, and
Heresies in England. The Protestants, and particularly the Presbyterians
vindicated from their charge of killing the late King, p. 321. Yet the case
different from theirs, p. 323. How Papists have crept into most parties, p.
327. What Heresies and Sects are their proper spawn, p. 330. Chap. 46. Detect.
37. They Hide themselves (in their Agents and new Converts:) The means: Our
danger by the Hiders: The Detection, p. 337. to 345. Chap. 47. Detect. 38.
Their exceeding industry to pervert men of Interest and power, p. 345. Chap.
48. Detect. 39. Their Treasons against the lives of Princes and the Peace of
Nations, and their dissolving the bond of Oaths and Covenants, and making
Perjury and Rebellion to seem Duties and Meritorius, p. 348. proved from
themselves; their recrimination about the late Kings death further refelled, p.
355. Chap. 49. Detect. 40. Their last course is to turn to open Hostility, and
stir up Princes to war and blood, p. 356. Chap. 50. Some Proposals to the
Papists for a (Hopeless) Peace, p. 364.
The Contents of the Second Part.
Quest. WHether the way to heal the Divisions in the Churches of Christ, be by
drawing them all into One Universal Visible Political body, under One Universal
visible Head or Government? Or whether the Catholic Church be a body so United
and Governed? Neg. Chap. 1. Showing the Occasions and reasons of this writing,
especially as from the Grotians: Mr. Pierce's exceptions manifested to be
frivelous, p. 379. Grotius speaking English to gratify Mr. Pierce, p. 383.
Chap. 2. The true state of the Controversy: and what Consociations of Pastors,
and union of Churches we grant, p. 394. Chap. 3. Our Arguments for the
Negative. Fifteen Reasons against the Popes Sovereignty briefly named, p. 402.
Against the Headship of Pope or General Councils. Argum. 1. From the
nonexistence of an universal Head, p. 404. Argum. 2. It never did exist, much
less in continued succession, p. 406. Argum. 3. A General Council unnecessary,
impossible, and would be unjust, p. 409. proved to p. 421. Argum. 4. If
assembled, it could not possibly do the work of the Head or Sovereign, p. 421.
Argum. 5. None has power to summon a General Council, p. 421. Argum. 6. Pope
nor Council have not the Legislative Power, to the Church Universal, p. 423.
Argum. 7. Pope nor Council are not the Fountain of Power to all
Church Officers, p. 425. Argum. 8. In great Causes all may not appeal to them,
nor can they finally decide, p. 425. Argum. 9. They cannot put down other
inferior officers through the world, p. 426. Argum. 10. and 11. Our Relation to
such a Head not Essential to our Christianity, nor are we baptized into such a
Head, p. 127. Argum. 12. This Head no Principle anciently taught the
Catechized, p. 428. Argum. 13. and 14. It is no Treason or damning sin to deny
this Head. Nor are all Christians bound to study the Laws of Popes and
Councils, p. 428, 429. Argum. 15. and 16. The Head of the Church must be
evident to all the members: and his Laws certain, p. 430. Argum. 17. and 18.
Councils and Decretals must not be usually preached. A Visible Head not agreed
on among Papists: and therefore as none, p. 431. Argum. 19. No such Head
revealed in Scripture, p. 432. Argum. 20. The Scripture appropriates the
Sovereignty to Christ only, p. 433. Proved; and the Objections answered.
Chap. 4. Opening the true grounds on which the Churches Unity and Peace must
be sought, and the means that must be used to attain so much as is here to be
expected. 1. The General Grounds, p. 440. The true particular Grounds of Peace,
in twenty Propositions, p. 442. What unity to be here expected, p. 443. The
Applications of the foresaid Grounds, or the reduction of them into practice,
p. 453. The Conclusion, p. 455.

ERRATA.
PAge 24. l. 9. r. Platina. p. 30. l. 9. r. Formosus. p. 31. l. 19. r.
Cardinals. p. 58. l. 13. r. mean time. p. 59. l. 5. and 16. r. Filiutius. and
l. 9. and 25. r. Bauny. and l. 13. r. a man may do. p. 61. l. 7. r. Baldellus.
l. 23. r. Escobar. p. 78. l. 15. blot out too. p. 82. l. 3 blot out not. p.
104. l. 15. for reasoned, r. ceased. p. 126. l. penult. for of r. take. p. 131.
l. penult. r. Vignerius. p. 134. l. 36. for five Acts, r. the fifth Act. p.
145. l. 9. r. to receive so many. and l. 19. r. when he has. p. 157. l. 34.
for Jus. r. Jos. p. 170. l. 9. for which, r. with. p. 195. l. 35. for this, r.
his. p. 196. l. 36. r. Baldwin. p. 206. l. 27. for of, r. or. and l. 28. for
Dr. r. D. p. 213. l. 7. r. when we do. p. 220. l. 36. r. Dan tes. p. 224. l. 2.
and 3, 4. r. the names in the Accus. case. p. 225. l. 8. r. your self. p. 259.
l. 31. r. Anathema's. p. 261. l. 35. r. not, for nor. p. 266. l. 17. r. that it
is. l. 28. r. Canus. p. 267. l. 10. r. to end the. p. 288. l. 24. for left, r.
lest. p. 297. l. 17. for them, r. the. p. 314. r. Paulus 5. p. 356. l. 31. r.
hatchets. p. 362. l. 28. r. at last. p. 365. l. 8. for may, r. many. and l. 33.
r. Maldonate. p. 397. l. 30. r. the other of. l. 32. for parties, r. straw. p.
409. l. 32. r. in the. l. 36. blot out none. p. 422. l. 13. r. presided. p.
426. l. 17. blot out of. p. 432. l. 33. for had, r. had not. p. 434. l. 4. for
to, r. as, p. 435. l. 1. r. members. p. 433. l. 29. blot out a. p. 452. l. 20.
r. But when the.

A Key for Catholics, To open the juglings of the Jesuits, and satisfy all
that are but truly willing to understand, whether the cause of the Roman, or
the Reformed Churches, be of God: and to leave the Reader utterly unexcusable,
if after this he will be a Papist.
CHAP. I.
THE thoughts of the divided state of Christians have brought one of the
greatest and constantest sadness to my Soul, that ever it was acquainted with;
especially to remember, that while we are quarrelling, and plotting, and
writing, and fighting against each other, so many parts of the world (about
five of six) remain in the Infidelity of Heathenism, Judaism or Mahometanism,
where millions of poor souls do need our help; and if all our strength were
joined together for their Illumination and Salvation, it would be too little.
Oh horrible shame to the face of Christendom, that the Nations are quietly
serving the Devil, and the Turk is in possession of so many Countries, that
once were the Inheritance of Christ, and that his Iron yoke is still upon the
necks of the persecuted Greeks, and that he stands up at our doors in so
formidable a posture, still ready to devour the rest of the Christian world;
and yet that instead of combining to resist him, and vindicate the cause and
people of the Lord, we are greedily sucking the blood of one another, and
tearing in pieces the body of Christ with furious hands, and destroying our
selves to save the enemy a labor, and spending that wit, that treasure, that
labor and that blood, to dash our selves in pieces on one another, which might
be nobly, and honestly, and happily spent in the cause of God.

These thoughts provoked me to many an hours consideration, How the wounds of
the Church might be yet healed; And have made it long a principal part of my
daily Prayers, that the Reconciling Light might shine from Heaven, that might
in some good measure take up our differences; and that God would at last give
healing Principles and dispositions unto men, especially to Princes and the
Pastors of the Church. But the more I studied how it might be done, the more
difficult, if not impossible it appeared, and all because of the Roman
Tyranny, the Vice-Christ or pretended Head of the Church, being with them
become an essential part of it, and the Subjection to him essential to our
Christianity it self. So that (says Bellarmine de Eccles. l. 3. c. 5.) No man,
though he would, can be a Subject of Christ, that is not subject to the Pope;
and this with abundance of intolerable corruptions they have fixed by the fancy
of their own Infallibility, and built upon this foundation a worldly Kingdom,
and the temporal Riches and Dignity of a numerous Clergy, twisting some Princes
also into the Interest; so that they cannot possibly yield to us in the very
principal points of difference, unless they will deny the very Essence of their
New Christianity and Church, and pluck up the foundations which they have so
industriously laid, and leave men to a suspicion that they are fallible
hereafter, if they shall confess themselves mistaken in any thing now; and
unless they will be so admirably self-denying, as to let go the temporal
advantages which so many thousands of them are interested in: And whether so
much light may be hoped for in so dark a generation, or so much love to God,
and self-denial in millions of men so void of self-denial, is easy to
conjecture: And we cannot in these greatest matters come over to them, unless
we will flatly betray our Souls, and depart from the Unity of the Catholic
Church, and from the Center of that Unity, to unite with another called the
Roman Catholic Church, in another Center. And if we should thus cast away the
Truth and Favor of God, and sin against our Knowledge and Conscience, and so
prove men of no Faith or Religion, under pretense of desiring a Unity in Faith
and Religion, yet all would not do the thing intended, but we should certainly
miss of these very ends which we seek, when we had sold the Truth and our Souls
to obtain them. For there is nothing more certain, then that the Christian
World will never unite in the Roman Vice-Christ, nor agree with them in their
Corruptions, against plain Scripture, Tradition, Consent of the ancient Church,
against the Reason and common sense of Mankind, This is not by any wise man to
be expected. Never did the universal Church, or one half of it center to this
day in the Roman Sovereignty: And why should they hope for that which never
yet was done? When they had their Primacy of Place (to be the Bishop of the
first Seat, and first of the Patriarcks) it made the Pope no more a Sovereign
and a Vice-Christ, then the King of France is Sovereign to the Duke of Saxony
or Bavaria; or then the Senior Justice on the Bench is the Sovereign of the
rest: and yet even this much he never had but from the Roman Empire: What
claim did he ever lay in his first Usurpations, to any Church without those
bounds? It was the Empire that raised him, and the Empire limited his own
Usurpations. Says their own Reinerius, (or whoever else) Cont. Waldens. Catal.
in Biblioth. Patr. To. 4. page 773. [The Churches of the Armenians, and
Aethiopians, and Indians, and the rest which the Apostles converted, are not
under the Church of Rome.] Yea in Gregory's days, they found the Churches of
Britain and Ireland both strangers and adversaries to their Sovereignty;
insomuch as they could not procure them to receive their Government, nor change
so much as the time of Easter for them, no nor to have Communion with them at
last: Anno 614. Laurentius their Archbishop here wrote this Letter (with
Mellitus and Justus) to the Bishops and Abbots in all Scotland (that is,
Ireland) [While the Sea Apostolic after its manner directed us to preach to
the Pagan Nations in these Western parts, as in the whole world; and we
happened to enter this Island, called Britain, before we knew them, believing
that they walked after the manner of the universal Church, we reverenced both
the Britains and the Scots in great Reverence of their Sanctity. But when we
knew the Britains, we thought the Scots were better. But we have learnt by
Daganus the Bishop in this forementioned Island, and by Columbanus the Abbot
coming into France, that the Scots do nothing differ from the Britains in
their Conversation. For Bishop Daganus coming to us, refused not only to eat
with us, but even to eat in the same House where we did eat.] Usher Epist.
Hibern. 7. p. 18.

Our most peaceable Bishop Hall was forct to write a [Roma irreconciliabilis.]
While we are thinking of Reconciliation, they are about our ears with Plots and
violence, and with swarms of Rome-bred Sects, and are day and night
industriously undermining us; so that by their continual Alarms, I am called
off to these defensive wars which here I have undertaken; yet still resolving
that the Desperateness of the Cure shall not make me run from them into a
contrary extreme, nor be out of the way of Peace, nor neglect any necessary
means, how hopeless soever of success.

The Work that here I have undertaken, is, 1. To give you briefly those Grounds
on which you must go, if you will keep your ground against a Papist. 2. To give
a few invincible Arguments, which the weakest may be able to use, to overthrow
the principal grounds of the Papists. 3. To detect their Frauds, and give to
the younger sort of Ministers, sufficient Directions for the Confutation of all
the Papists in the world. 4. To propound (though in vain) such terms of Peace
as we can yield to.

CHAP. II.
BEfore I mention the Grounds or Cause that you must maintain, I must premise
this Advice to the Common People.

1. Wrong not the Truth and your selves by an unequal conflict. Enter not
rashly upon Disputes with those that are Learned and of nimble tongues, if you
be ignorant, or of weak capacities your selves. Though I shall here show you
that Scripture, Church, Tradition, Reason and Sense are on your side, yet
experience tells us how the words of Juglers have made millions of men deny
belief to their eyes, their taste and other senses. An ignorant man is soon
silenced by a subtle wit; and many think that when they cannot answer, they
must yield, though they deny both Sense and Reason by it. If any of them
secretly entice you, desire them to debate the case with some able, learned,
experienced Minister in your hearing. It is the office of your Pastors to
defend you from the wolves: If you once despise them or straggle from them and
the Flocks, and trust to your own Reason that is unfurnished and unprepared for
such work, you may take that you get by it, if you be undone. You need the help
of Pastors for your souls, as well as of Physicians for your Bodies, and
Lawyers for your Estates: or else God would never have set them over you in his
Church. Let them but come on equal terms, and you shall see what Truth can do.
In this way we will not avoid a Conference with any of them. But alas! with
ignorant unlearned people, what may not such Deceivers do? that can persuade so
many thousand souls to give no Credit to their own eyes, or taste, or feeling,
but to believe a Priest, that Bread is not Bread, and Wine is not Wine.

2. Yet I would have the weakest to endeavor to understand the reasons of
their Profession, and to be able to repel Deceivers: And to that end, I shall
here give you first some Directions concerning the cause which you must defend.

And concerning this, Observe these things following 1. Understand what the
Religion is that you must hold and maintain: It is the ancient Christian
Religion. Do not put every Truth among the Essentials of your Religion: Our
Religion does not stand or fall with every Controversy that is raised about
it. That which was the true Religion in the Apostles days is ours now: that
which all were baptized into the Profession of, and the Churches openly held
forth as their Belief. Reformation brings us not a new Religion: but cleanses
the old from the dross of Popery, which by innovation they had brought in. A
man that cannot confute a Papist, may yet be a Christian, and so hold fast the
true Religion. It follows not that our Religion is questionable or unsafe, if
some point in Controversy between them and us be questionable or hard. The
Papists would fain bring you to believe that our Religion must lie upon some of
these Controversies: but its no such matter Perhaps you will say, That then it
is not about Religion that we differ from them. I answer; yes: it is about the
Essentials of their Religion, but it is but for the preserving the Integrity of
ours against the Consequences and additions of theirs. They have made them a
New Religion (which we call Popery) and joined this to the Old Religion (which
we call Christianity.) Now we stick to the old Religion alone; and therefore
there is more essential to their Religion, then is to ours; so that our own
Religion, even the ancient Christianity, is out of Controversy between us. The
Papists do confess that the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments are
true, yea that all the Scripture is the word of God, and certainly true: so
that our Religion is granted us as past dispute: And therefore it is only the
Papists Religion that is in question between us, and not ours. If you will make
those lower Truths to be of the Essence of your Religion which are not, you
will give the Papists the advantage which they desire.

2. If the Papists call for a Rule, or Test of your Religion, and ask you where
they may find it, assign them to the Holy Scriptures, and not to any
Confessions of Churches, further then as they agree with that. We know of no
Divine Rules and Laws of Faith and Life, but the holy Scripture (and the hearts
of Believers have an imperfect Transcript of them.) The Confessions of Churches
are but part of the Holy Scripture, or Collections out of them, containing the
points of greatest weight: And if in phrase or order (much more in matter)
there be any thing humane, we make it not our Rule, nor are we bound to make it
good, no more then the Writings of godly men. A point is not therefore with us
an Article of Faith, because our Churches or a Synod put it into a Confession,
but because it is in the Word of God. For a Councils determinations do with us
differ but gradually from the Judgment of a single man, in this respect. And
therefore we give them the Scripture only as the full Doctrine of our Faith,
and the perfect Law of God; And those points in it, which Life or Death is laid
upon, and God has told us, we cannot be saved without, we take as the
Essentials of our Religion, and the rest as the Integrals only.

If they ask, Why then we do draw up Confessions of Faith? I answer, 1. To
teach and help the people by gathering to their hands the most necessary
points, and giving them sometimes an explication of them. 2. To let our
Accusers see that we misunderstand not the Scriptures. 3. To let Pastors and
other Subjects know what sense of Scripture the Magistrate will own within his
Dominions. 4. And to let the Pastors and the world know what sense in the
principal Points we are agreed in. But still we take not our Confessions for
our Divine Rule; and therefore if there be any error in a Confession, there is
none in the Rule of our Religion, and consequently none in the Religion which
we all agree in; but only in such a persons or Churches exposition of the Rule,
which yet among Christians is not in any essential Point.

3. Understand well what is the Catholic Church, that when the Papists ask you
what Church you are of, or call to you to prove its antiquity or truth, you may
give them a sound and Catholic answer. The Catholic Church is the whole
number of true Christians upon earth (for we meddle not now with that part
which is in Heaven.) It is not tied to Protestants only, nor to the Greeks
only, much less to the Romanists only, or to any other party whatsoever; but it
comprehends all the members of Christ; and as visible, it contains all that
profess the Christian Religion by a credible profession. If the Christian
Religion may be known, then a man may know that he is a Christian, and
consequently a member of the Catholic Church. But if the Christian Religion
cannot be known, then no man can know which is the Church, or which is a
Christian. All Christians united to Christ the Head, are this Catholic Church.
If you tie the Church to your own party, and make a wrong description of it,
you will ensnare your selves, and spoil your belief, and your defense of it.

4. Run not into extremes: mix not any unsound principles with your Religion.
For if you do, the Papists will cull out those, and by disgracing them, will
seem to disgrace your Religion.

5. Use not any unsound Arguments to defend the Truth. For if you do, the truth
will suffer, and seem to be overthrown by the weakness of your Arguments.

6. Join not with those men that cast out any Ordinance of God, because the
Papists have abused it. Reformation of corrupted Institutions is not by the
Abolition of them, but by the Restoration of them. There are few things in use
among the Papists themselves as parts of worship, but may lead us up to a good
original, or tell us of some other real Duty which did degenerate into these.

7. Join not with those ignorant, unpeaceable, self-conceited, womanish,
rabious Divines, or private men, that pour out unworthy reproaches at godly men
among our selves, as if they were Heretics, or such as the Churches should
dis-own. For these are they that please the Papists, and harden them in their
Error, and offend the weak. They think they may call us Heretics or
Blasphemers by authority, when we call one another so. Such Railers teach them
what to say, and play their game more effectually then they could do their own.
When they are alluring the simple people, how soon will they prevail, if they
can but prove their charge against us from the pens of Protestants themselves?

Having told you on what grounds you must make good your cause against them, I
shall next give you three or four easy Arguments (some of them formerly given
you) by which even the weakest may prove that Popery is but deceit.

CHAP. III.
Argum. 1. IF there be any godly honest men on earth besides Papists, then
Popery is false and not of God. But there be godly honest men on earth besides
Papists: therefore Popery is false, and not of God.

The Major is proved thus. It is an Article of the Popish faith, that there are
no godly honest men on earth, besides Papists: therefore if there be any such,
Popery is false, (By godly honest men, I mean such as have true love to God,
and so are in a state of salvation.) The Antecedent I prove thus. 1. Their very
definition of the Church does make the Pope the Head, and confine the
membership only to his subjects, making the Roman Catholic Church (as they
call it) the whole. 2. But yet lest any ignorant Papists say, I may be a Roman
Catholic without believing that all others are ungodly, and shall be damned, I
will give it you in the Determination of a Pope and general Councll. Leo the
tenth, Abrog. Pragm. sanct. Bull. in the 17th. General Council at the Laterane,
says [And seeing it is of necessity to salvation, that all the faithful of
Christ be subject to the Pope of Rome, as we are taught by the testimony of
divine Scripture, and of the holy Fathers, and it is declared in the
Constitution of Pope Boniface 7. etc.] And Pope Pius the second was converted
from being Aenaeas Sylvius by this Doctrine of a Cardinal, approved by him at
large, Bull. Retract. in the Vol. 4. of Binnius, p. 514. [I came to the
Fountain of Truth, which the holy Doctors, both Greek and Latin show; who with
one voice say, that he cannot be saved that holds not the unity of the holy
Church of Rome; and that all those virtues are maimed to him that refuses to
obey the Pope of Rome; though he lie in sack cloth and ashes, and fast and pray
both day and night, and seem in the other things to fulfill the Law of God.] So
that if a Pope and General Council be false, then Popery is false. For their
infallibility is the ground of their faith, and they take it on their unerring
authority. But if the Pope and a General Council be to be believed, then no man
but a subject of the Pope can be saved: no, though he fast and pray in
sackcloth and ashes day and night, and seem to fulfill the rest of the Law of
God. Its certain therefore that if any one of you that call your selves Roman
Catholics do not believe that all the world shall be damned save your selves,
you are indeed no Romance Catholics, but are Heretics your selves in their
account; for you deny a principal Article of their faith; and deny the
Infallibility of the Pope with a General Council, which is your very Foundation.

And therefore we find that even in the great charitable work of reducing the
Abassines, the Jesuit Gonzalus Rodericus in his speech to the Emperors mother
laid so great a stress on this point, that when she professed her subjection to
Christ, he told her, that [None are subject to Christ that are not subject to
his Vicar,] [Negavi Christo subjici qui ejus vicario non subjicitur.] Godignus
de reb. Abassin. Lib. 2. c. 18. in Roderic. liter. p. 323.

And Bellarmine says (de Eccl. l. 3. c. 5.) that [no man though he would can
be subject to Christ that is not subject to the Pope] that is, he cannot be a
Christian. And therefore Card. Richlieu (then Bishop of Lusson.) tells the
Protestants that they were not to be called Christians. And Knot against
Chillingworth, with abundance more of them, asserting that Protestants cannot
be saved, do easily learn to practice this Lesson of the Pope and Council. I
come now to prove that your Pope, and Council, and Faith are false, and that
others besides you may be in a state of Charity and Salvation. (For you confess
your selves, that he that is in a state of Charity, is in a state of Salvation.)

1. If a man may know his own heart, then there are others besides Papists that
are in Charity, and are godly men: (and so in a state of Salvation) But a man
may know his own heart: therefore, etc.

The Consequence of the Major is plain by inward experience to every godly,
honest man that knows himself. If I can know my own heart, I must needs say I
love God, and am not void of sincere Godliness and Honesty. And that I may know
my own heart I can tell also by experience: For to know my own Knowledge and
Will is an ordinary certain thing, if not by intuition it self. And if a man
cannot know whether he believe and love God or not, then no man can give thanks
for it, nor make Profession of it: nay men cannot converse together, if they
cannot know their own minds. And Bellarmine confesses that we may have a moral
Conjectural certainty that we have true Love, and are justified. And then I
have a moral conjectural certainty at least, that Popery is false; because I
have at least such a certainty that I am not ungodly or unjustified. So that
look what measure of knowledge or persuasion any Protestant has that he is
truly honest and justified, that measure of knowledge must he needs have (if he
understand himself) that Popery is a deceit.

So that from hence you may gather these four conclusions; 1. That all that
have any knowledge or persuasion that they are not ungodly unjustified persons
themselves, and void of the true Love of God, are quite out of danger from
turning Papists, if they understand but what Popery is; and if they do not,
they cannot turn to it, but in part.

2. That never any honest godly man did turn Papist in the world; and this the
Papists themselves will justify: For they say (by a Pope and general Council)
that no man can be saved but a Papist: and they generally hold, that all that
have Charity and are justified, shall be saved if they so die. So that if
Popery be true, then no man had Charity or true Godliness before he was a
Papist: and therefore never did one godly man or woman turn Papist. And
therefore let them take the honor of their wicked seduced Ones. What glory is
it to them that none ever turned to them but ungodly people?

3. And it follows that the Papists do not so much as desire or invite any
godly man to turn to them. If you understand their meaning, they call you not
to turn to them, if you are not ungodly persons.

4. And hence it follows that every one that turns Papist, does thereby
confess that he was a wicked man before, and that he had not the least true
love to God; that he was not justified, but a graceless wretch.

In a word, all you that do but know or hope that you have any saving Grace,
have an Argument here against Popery, which all the Jesuits in the world
cannot confute. For you know your own hearts better then they: And they have no
way to turn you to them, but by persuading you that you are not what you are,
and that you know not what you know. So that plainly this is your Argument, [I
know, or I have good persuasions that I am not utterly void of Charity or
saving Grace; therefore I know, or have the same persuasions that Popery is
false, which determines that none have Charity or saving Grace but Papists.]

2. But I proceed to a further proof of the Minor; A man may have a very strong
Conjecture that many others that are no Papists have saving Grace; though he
had no persuasion that he has such Grace himself. And consequently he must
have as strong a conjecture that Popery is false. What abundance of holy
heavenly persons have we known of all ranks among us! Such as have lived in
daily breathings after God, spending no small part of their lives upon their
knees; and in the serious and reverent attendance upon God in holy worship,
meditating day and night upon his Law; hating all known sin, and delighting in
holiness, and longing for perfection; and living in constant Temperance and
Chastity, abhorring the very appearance of evil, and making conscience of an
idle word or thought, devoting their lives and labors, and all they have to
God, giving all their Estates (some of them) to pious and charitable uses,
except what is necessary for their daily bread, even mean clothing and food;
taming their bodies, and bringing them into subjection, and denying themselves,
and mortifying the flesh, and contemning all the Honors or Riches of the world,
resolving to suffer death it self, (as many of their Brethren have done from
the Papists) rather then sin wilfully against God and their consciences: in a
word, living to God, and longing to be with him, and manifesting these longings
to the very death; grieving more at any time, if they have but lost the sense
and persuasions of the love of God, then if they had lost all the world; and
would give a thousand worlds, if they had them, for more of the Love of God in
their souls, and fuller assurance of his Love and Communion with him. As far as
words, and groans, and tears, and the very drift of a man's life, and the
expending of all that he has, can help us to know another man's heart, so far
do we know all this by others, that have lived among us. And may we not
conjecture, and be strongly persuaded that these, or some of these, or some one
of these, was a holy justified person?

And now Reader, if ever thou be tempted to be a Papist, I will tell thee what
a task thou have: Look on one side on the Lives of holy men among us, such as
was Mr. Dodd, Mr. Paul Bayn, Mr. William Fenner, Mr. Arthur Hildersham, Mr.
Robert Bolton, Mr. Greenham, Mr. Hooker, Dr. Sibbs, Dr. Preston, Dr. Stoughton,
Mr. Perkins, with many hundreds more; Besides blessed Bradford, Glover,
Sanders, Hooper, and the rest that laid down their lives in the flames in
testimony against Popery; besides all the thousands that in other Nations have
dyed by the Papists hands, because they durst not sin against God; and besides
all the Learned holy Divines of other Nations, and the millions of Godly
Protestants there; as also look upon all the godly that are now living, men or
women, that live in most earnest seeking after God and serving him; look on
those about you, enquire of others; read the writings of holy Divines: and then
remember, you cannot turn Papist till you have concluded that all these are
damned, and are utterly void of saving Grace and the Love of God; If there be
but one Protestant that you know, or any one of all that have been, that you
take to be in a saving state, you cannot possibly turn Papist, if you know what
you do. For it is essential to Popery to contradict all this.

Nay, this is not all: but think of all the Greek Church that lies under the
tyranny of the Turk, and of all the Armenians, and Abasines, and other
Christians in the world, that are more in number far then the Papists; and you
must conclude, that not one of all these are saved before you can be a Papist.
And is this an easy task to one that has the heart of a man in his breast? If
you are no true Christians your selves, dare you conclude that not one of these
are true Christians? If you confess that you love not God your selves, dare you
say that among the far greater part of the Christians of the world, there is
not one man or woman that loves God? This you must say if you will be a Papist.

And then on the other hand, Look on the words of Jesus Christ, and see what
thanks he will give you for such a censure, Mat. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Judge not,
that ye be not judged: for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged:
and with what measure you meet, it shall be measured to you again. And why
beholdest thou the mote in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that
is in thine own eye? -- Thou hypocrite! first cast out the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy
brothers eye.] Jam. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver that is able to save and to
destroy: who art thou that Judge another?] Romans 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 10. [Him that
is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations. For one
believes that he may eat all things, another who is weak eats herbs: Let not
him that eats despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats not
judge him that eats; for God has received him. Who art thou that judge
another man's servant? to his own master he stands or falls; yea he shall be
holden up, for God is able to make him stand. One man esteems one day above
another, another esteems every day alike: Let every man be fully persuaded in
his own mind -- But why do thou judge thy brother, or why do thou set at
naught thy brother? we shall all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ. For
it is written, as I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God; so then every one of us shall give account of
himself to God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more.] Matthew. 18. 6.
[But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that be
were drowned in the depth of the Sea.] Mat. 25. 40, 45, 34, 41. [Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom -- For I was hungry and ye gave me
meat -- Verily I say unto you, in as much at you have done it unto one of the
least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.] And ver. 41. [Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire -- Verily I say unto you, in as much as you
did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to me.]

I will recite no more: Judge now by such passage as these, how Christ sets by
one of the least of his servants: and consequently, how he will take it of you,
to judge the far greatest part of his Church to be graceless and none of his
Church, but such as shall be damned. And if you dare not venture on so
unreasonable and inhumane a censure, against the experience of so much holiness
as appears in them before your eyes, then you cannot be Papists: And if you
dare venture on it, I leave you to consider, whether under pretense of being
the only Christians, you have not done violence to the common reason and nature
of man. So much for the second proof of the Minor.

3. But I have yet another proof, that many that are no Papists are good
Christians, and consequently, that Popery is a deceit, and that is the
Testimony of many of their own Writers. I will not call for their testimony
concerning our selves (for we know our selves better then they do) but
concerning other Churches whom they condemn as Heretics, or that are no
subjects of the Pope of Rome. And I will at this time content my self with one
of many that might be cited; and that is a Monk, Burchardus that lived in the
Holy Land, and having wrote a Description of it, and those that inhabit it,
says of them as follows, p. 325, 326. [And for those that we judge to be
damned Heretics, as the Nestorians, Jacobites, Maronites, Georgians, and the
like, I found them to be for the most part good and simple men, and living
sincerely toward God and men; they are of great abstinence, etc.

And of the Roman Catholics he says, page 323. [There are in the Land of
Promise men of every Nation under Heaven, and every Nation lives after their
own Rites: and, to speak the very truth, to our own great confusion, there are
none found in it, that are worse, and more corrupt in manners then Christians]
(he means Papists.)

And page 324. he tells us, that the Syrians, Greeks, Armenians, Georgians,
Nestorians, Nubians, Jubeans, Chaldaeans, Maronites, Ethiopians, Egyptians, and
many other Nations of Christians, there inhabit; and that some are schismatics
not subject to the Pope; and others called Heretics, as the Nestorians,
Jacobites, etc. but (says he) there are many in these sects that are very
simple (or sincere) knowing nothing of heresies: devoted to Christ: macerating
the flesh with fastings, and clothed with the most simple garments, so that
they far excel the very Religious of the Church of Rome.] so you hear an
Adversaries testimony.

Well then, when a Papist can prove to me, that I love not God, contrary to my
own experience of my self: and when he can make me believe that no one of all
the holy Heavenly Christians of my acquaintance, Ministers, or people, are in a
state of charity or Justification: and that no one Christian on earth shall be
saved but a Papist, then I will turn Papist: And till then they do not desire
me to turn. But I must solemnly profess that this belief is so difficult to me,
and abhorred by my reason, and my whole heart, and so contrary to my own
knowledge, and to abundant evidence, and to all Christian charity, that I think
I shall as soon be persuaded to believe that I am not a man, and that I have
not the use of sense or reason, or that Snow is black, and the Crow white, as
to believe this Essential point of Popery. I should a hundred times easier be
brought to doubt whether I have the love of God my self, then to conclude all
the Christians in the world save the Papists, to be the heirs of damnation.

CHAP. IV.
Argum. 2. THat Doctrine is not true nor of God which teaches men to renounce
all Christian Love and Works of Christian Love, toward most of the Christians
upon earth: But so does the Doctrine of Popery; therefore it is not of God.

If their Error were merely speculative, it were the less; but here we see the
fruits of it, and whither it tends. The major Proposition is plainly proved
from John 13. 35. [By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye
have love one to another.] Col. 1. 4. It must be a [Love to all the Saints.] 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you,
for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another.]

This special Love is the Commandment of Christ, the new Commandment; without
this, no man can be a Lover of God, nor be loved of him as a Member of Christ,
as you may see, 1 John 3. 11, 12, 14, 23. and 4. 7, 8, 11, 12, 20, 21. 2 John
5. John 13. 34. and 15. 12, 17. 1 Pet. 1. 22. He that loves not a Christian as
a Christian, with a special love you may see in these Texts is none of the Sons
of God. And that the Papists teach men to deny this special Christian Love to
most Christians in the world, I prove. They that teach men to take most true
Christians in the world for no true Christians, but for Heretics or ungodly
persons that shall be damned, do teach them to deny the special love and works
of love to most true Christians: But thus do the Papists; therefore, etc. How
can a man love him as a Christian or a godly man, whom he must take to be no
Christian, or an ungodly man? Its true they may yet love them as Creatures, and
so they must the Devils; and they may love them as men, and so they must the
Turks and Heathens: But no man can love him as a member of Christ, whom he
believes to be no member of Christ, but of the Devil. And all Papists are bound
to this uncharitableness by their Religion, even by the Pope and general
Council. And so as Christ binds his servants to Love one another with a
special Love; so the Pope and Council bind the Papists not to love the most
true Christians with a special Christian love: they cannot do it without being
Heretics themselves, or overthrowing the foundation of Popery.

And here you have a taste of the Popish Charity, when they boast above all
things of their Charity. I must profess, it is their horrible inhumane
uncharitableness that seems to me their most enormous crime. And also you may
see here the extent of their Good works, which they so much Glory in. He that
is bound not to love me as a Christian, is bound to do nothing for me as a
Christian. So that they will not give a cup of cold water to a Disciple in the
name of a Disciple, unless he be also a Disciple of the Pope: nor can they love
or relieve Christ in his servants, when they are bound to take them as none of
his servants: and so the special Love and Charity of a Papist extends to none
but those of their own Sect: and such a Charity the Quakers, and Anabaptists,
and Familists have as eminently as they. Let them take heed lest they hear, In
as much as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to me.

CHAP. V.
Argum. 3. THat Doctrine which teaches men to destroy or undo them whom Christ
has bound them to love as Christians, and absolveth Subjects from their
Allegiance to their Princes, and requires the deposing of them, and committing
the Government of their Dominions to others, because they are judged to be
Heretics by the Pope; yea or if they will not destroy and extirpate such as he
calls Heretics; I say this Doctrine is not of God, nor such as Christian
Princes should smile upon. But such is the Doctrine of Popery: therefore, etc.

I know that a Paper entitled An explanation of the Roman Catholics Belief,
and other the like, do seem to renounce the opinion of breaking faith with
Heretics, and of promise breaking with Magistrates (It seems they think they
owe no more obedience to their Magistrates then they promise.) But as I refer
the Reader to what King James and his defenders have said on this point
(besides many more) so I shall now give you but the words of one of their own
approved General Council 12. the fourth at the Laterane under Innocent 3. as
Binnius and others of their own record it. In the first Chapter they set down
their Catholic faith, two Articles of which are, 1. That no man can be saved
out of their Universal Church. And 2. That the bread and wine in the Sacrament
of the Altar are transubstantiate into the Body and Blood of Christ, the
appearances remaining. And in the third Chapter they say, [We excommunicate and
anathematize every heresy extolling it self against this holy orthodox
Catholic faith, which we have before exponed, condemning all heretics by what
names soever they be called -- And being condemned, let them be left to the
present secular Powers, or their Bailifs to be punished, the Clergy being first
degraded of their Orders; and let the goods of such condemned ones be
confiscate, if they be Laymen, but if they be Clergy men, let them be given to
the Churches whence they had their stipends. And those that are found notable
only by suspicion, if they do not by congruous purgation demonstrate their
innocence, according to the considerations of the suspicion and the quality of
the person, let them be smitten with the sword of Anathema, and avoided by all
men, till they have given sufficient satisfaction; and if they remain a year
excommunicate, let them then be condemned as heretics. And let the secu'ar
powers, in what Office soever, be admonished and persuaded, and if it be
necessary compelled by Ecclesiastical censure, that as they would be reputed
and accounted Believers, so for the defense of the faith, they take an Oath
publicly, that they will study in good earnest according to their power, to
exterminate all that are by the Church denoted heretics, from the Countries
subject to their Jurisdiction. So that when any one shall be taken into
Spiritual or Temporal power, he shall by his Oath make good this Chapter. But
if the temporal Lord, being required and admonished of the Church, shall
neglect to purge his Country of heretical defilement, let him by the
Metropolitan and other Comprovincial Bishops be tied by the bond of
Excommunication. And if he refuse to satisfy within a year, let it be
signified to the Pope, that he may from thenceforth denounce his Vassals
absolved from his fidelity, and may expose his Country to be seized on by
Catholics, who rooting out the heretics, may possess it without
contradiction, and may keep it in the purity of faith; saving the right of the
principal Lord, so be it that he himself do make no hinderance hereabout, and
oppose any impediment: and the same Law is to be observed with them that are
not principal Lords. And the Catholics that taking the sign of the Cross shall
set themselves to the rooting out of the heretics, shall enjoy the same
indulgences and holy privileges, which were granted to those that go to the
releif of the holy land. Moreover we Decree, that the believers, receivers,
defenders, and favorers of Heretics, shall be excommunicate; firmly
decreeing, that after any such is noted by excommunication, if he refuse to
satisfy within a year, he shall from thence forth be ipso jure infamous, and
may not be admitted to public Offices or Councils, or to the choice of such,
nor to bear witness. And he shall be intestate and not have power to make a
will, nor may come to a Succession of inheritance. And no man shall be forced
to answer him in any cause: but he shall be forced to answer others. And if he
be a Judge, his sentence shall be invalid, and no causes shall be brought to
his hearing. If he be an Advocate, his Plea shall not be admitted. If a Notary
(or Register) the Instruments made by him shall be utterly void, and damned
with the damned Author. And so in other the like cases, we command that it be
observed.] Thus they go on further commanding Bishops by themselves, or their
Archdeacons, or other fit persons, once or twice a year to search every Parish
where any Heretic is found to dwell, and put all the Neighborhood to their
Oaths, whether they know of any Heretics there, or any private meetings, or
any that in life and manners do differ from the common conversation of the
faithful, etc. And the Bishops that neglect these things are to be cast out,
and others put into their places that will do them.

And Pope Gregory 7. l. 4. Epist. 7. expressly stirs up the people to cast off
their Princes, saying [And for the conspiracy of Heretics and the King, we
believe it is not unknown to you that are near them, how it may be impugned by
the Catholic Bishops and Dukes, and many others in the German parts: for the
faithful of the Church of Rome are come to such a number, that unless the King
shall come to satisfaction, they may openly profess to choose another King, and
observing Justice, we have promised to favor them, and will keep our promise
firm, etc.]

The sum of all is, that all that the Pope calls Heretics, must be condemned
and destroyed, and all Kings, Princes or Lords, that will not execute his
sentence and root them out, must be disposessed of their Dominions, and the
subjects absolved from their fidelity (whatever Oaths they had taken) and all
others that do but favor or receive them be utterly undone.

I fetch not these things out of the writings of the Protestants, nor from any
private Doctors of their own, but from the very words of a General Council
confirmed by the Pope, and unquestionably approved by them. And abundance the
like might be produced. And many ages saw this doctrine put in execution, when
the Emperors of Germany were deposed by the Pope, and the Subjects absolved
from their Allegiance, as the many volumes written in those times, and
published together by Goldastus testify. And the King of France, or any other
that tolerate any of the supposed Heretics, may see what a censure they are
exposed to, if mere necessity were not their security.

Perhaps some will say, that this Decree was not de fide, but a temporary
precept. Answ. When a precept requires duty, it may be a point of Faith to
believe it. Precepts are the Objects of Faith, at least as they are assertions,
that the thing commanded is our duty. It is an Article of faith, that God is to
be loved and obeyed, and our Superiors to be honored, and our Neighbor to be
loved, and Charity to be exercised, etc. The Creation, the Incarnation of
Christ, his death, resurrection, ascension, glorification, intercession, his
future Judgment, the Resurrection of the body, etc. are all matters of fact,
and yet matters of faith too. If practicals be not Articles of faith, then we
have no Articles of faith at all: for all our Theology and Religion is
practical. Do Papists murder poor Christians by the thousands, and yet not fide
divina believe that it is their duty so to do? Either it is a duty, or a sin,
or indifferent. If a sin, woe to their Pope and Council (and if this be no sin
with them, I know not why the world should be troubled by them with the name of
sin.) If it be indifferent, what then shall be called sin? If they can swallow
such Camels, as the blood of many thousand Christians, what need they strain at
Gnats, and stick at private Murders, or Fornication, or Lying, or Slandering,
any more then the Jesuit. Casuists do, that are cited by the Jansenian in his
Mystery of Jesuitism? But if these Murders and deposing Kings be indeed a
duty, how can they know it to be so, but by Believing? And indeed if a General
Council and the Pope are to be believed, who give it us with a Decernimus and
firmiter statuimus, then it is doubtless a point of faith: and if they are not
to be believed, then Popery is all but a mere deceit.

Object. 2. But may we not be Roman Catholics though we join not with them in
this point? Have not many such renounced it? and so may we. Answ. If you
renounce the Decrees of a Pope and General Council, you renounce your Religion
in the very foundation of it, and cannot be Papists, if you know what you do;
but are in the Roman account as errant Heretics as those that they have
tortured and burnt to ashes: though here in England where they cannot handle
you as they would do, they dare not tell you so. And if you may renounce the
Decrees of a Pope and General Council, when they say, [It is a duty, or lawful
to extirminate all as Heretics, that believe not Transubstantiation, and to
seize upon the Lands of Princes that will not do it, and to deliver them to
others that will, and absolve their Vassals from their fidelity] I say, if you
may renounce them in this, why may not we have as free leave to renounce them
in other things, as groundless?

CHAP. VI.
Argum. 4. THE true Catholic Church is Holy: the Church of Rome has for many
generations been unholy: therefore the Church of Rome was not in any of those
Generations the true Catholic Church.

The Major Proposition is an Article of the Creed professed by themselves, as
much as by us, [I Believe the Holy Catholic Church.]

The unholiness of the Church of Rome, I prove undenyably, thus: If an
Essential part of the Church of Rome, even its Head, has been unholy through
many Generations, then the Church of Rome has been unholy for many
Generations: but an Essential part, even the Head, has been unholy:
therefore, etc.

The Consequence of the Major is past denial. Bonum est ex causis integris.
Though it will not follow that the Church is Holy, because one Essential part
is Holy, yet it clearly follows that the Church is unholy, because an
Essential part is unholy. As it follows not that the Body is sound, because
the Head is sound; yet it follows, that the man (or the body) is unsound or
sick, because the Head is unsound or sick. As it is not a Church without all
its Essential parts, so it is not an Holy Church without the Holiness of all
its Essential parts.

And that they make the Pope the Head of the Catholic Church, and an Essential
part, I am loath to prove; I would I could but entice them to deny it: for it is
the principal controversy between them and the true Catholics.

And that abundance of their Popes have been unholy, I have formerly proved,
and they dare not I hope deny it; when their own Historians describe their
Impieties, and their own Writers, even those that are bitterest against us, do
freely confess it: yea General Councils have judged them and cast them out. The
number of these Monsters is so great, that it would make a volume greater then
I intend, but to name them and recite their crimes. I will give a brief
instance of one of them.

Pope John the twenty third was accused and deposed by the General Council at
Constance, upon about seventy Articles which in Binnius take up about thirteen
columes in folio: and therefore I suppose you would give me no thanks to
trouble you with the recital of them all. The first Article was, that he was
from his youth, a man of a bad disposition, immodest, impudent, a liar, a
rebel and disobedient to his parents, and given to most vices, and then was,
and yet is commonly taken for such a one by all that knew him. The second
Article was, how by Simoniacal and unjust means he grew rich. The third
Article, that by Simony he was promoted to be a Cardinal. The fourth Article,
that being Legate at Bononia he governed Tyrannically, impiously, unjustly,
being wholly aliene from all Christian piety, and justice, divine and humane,
etc. The fifth Article, that thus he got to be Pope, and yet continued as bad,
and as a Pagan despised the worship of God, and if he performed any, it was
more lest he should be totally blamed of heresy and cast out of the Papacy,
then for any devotion, and he hudled it up like an Hunter or a Soldier. The
sixth Article was, that he was the oppressor of the poor, the persecutor of
righteousness, the pillar of the unjust, and the Simoniacal, a server of the
flesh, the dregs of vices, a stranger to virtue, flying from public
consistories, wholly given to sleep and earnal desires, wholly contrary to the
life and manners of Christ, the mirror of infamy, and the profound inventor of
all mischiefs; so far scandalizing the Church of Christ, that among Christian
Believers that knew his life and manners, he is commonly called, The Devil
incarnate. The seventh Article was, that being a vessel of all sins, repelling
the worthy, he Simonically sold Benefices, Bishoprics and Church dignities
openly to the unworthy that would give most for them.

Reader, I should but weary thee to add threescore more of these Articles.
These were all proved to be Notorious by Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and
many more. Yet I will crave thy patience while I add but two or three of the
last. Another was, that he came to be Pope by causing Pope Alexander and his
Physician Dr. Daniel de sophia to be poisoned. Another was, that he committed
incest with his brothers Wife, and with the holy Nuns, and Whoredom with
Virgins, and adultery with men's Wives, and other crimes of incontinency, for
which the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience. Another, that he
was a wicked man, notoriously guilty of Murder, Witchcraft and other grievous
crimes, a dissipater of the Church goods, a notorious Simonist, and
pertinacious Heretic. The next Article was, that often and often before diverse
Prelates and other honest men, by the Devils persuasion, he obstinately
asserted, dogmatized, and maintained, that there is no life everlasting, nor
any other after this; Moreover, he said and obstinately believed that the soul
of man does die and is extinct with the body like the bruit beasts, and that
the dead shall not rise again at the last day, contrary to the Article of the
Resurrection. The last and some other Articles are about his perfidiousness.]
And hereupon the Council deposed him.

And now Reader I leave thee to judge, whether the Roman Church had a holy
Head, when it had a Heathen and a Devil incarnate?

So the general Council at Basil deposed Pope Eugenius 4. as being [A rebel
against the holy Canons, a notorious disturber and scandalizer of the peace and
unity of the Church, a Simonist and a perjured wretch, incorrigible, a
schismatic, and an obstinate Heretic.]

Pope John 13. alias 12. was in Council convicted of ravishing Maids, Wives,
Widows at the Apostolic doors, and committing many murders: he drunk a health
to the Devil, and at Dice caled to Jupiter and Venus for help, and at last was
slain in the act of Adultery. Says Plutina [he was from his youth a man
contaminated with all dishonesty and filthiness; and if he had any time to
spare from his lusts, he spent it in hunting, and not in praying.] And after he
calls him [a most wicked man, or rather a Menster] and says that [the life of
this most wicked man being judged in a Council of Italian Bishops, for fear of
them he fled and lived like a wild beast in the woods,] till at last he got the
better again by the help of his friends at Rome; till an angry man that found
him naught with his wife, got the better of him, and sent him to answer it in
another world. And their own writers note that this was the first Pope that
changed his name, whom his followers imitated. And do you think the Head of the
Roman Church was then Holy?

If it were a disputable matter, I would prove out of abundance of their own
writers, that many others of them have been most wicked wretches, common
adulterers, and fornicators, yea Sodomites, poisoning their predecessors to get
the Popedom etc. But its needless, because they deny it not. Baronius their
flattering Champion says (Annal ad an. 912.) What then was the face of the
holy Roman Church? How exceeding filthy, when the most potent, and yet the most
sordid whores did rule at Rome? by whose Pleasure Sees were changed, Bishops
were given, and which is a thing horrid to be heard, and not to be spoken,
their Lovers (or mates) were thrust into Peter's Chair, being false Popes, who
are not to be written in the Catalogue of the Roman Popes, but only for the
marking out of such times. And what kind of Cardinals, Priests, and Deacons
think you we must imagine that these monsters did choose, when nothing is so
rooted in nature as for every one to beget his like?

And Genebrard that spleenish Papist (li. 4. Sec. 10.) says [In this one thing
that age was unhappy, that for near one hundred and fifty years about fifty
Popes did wholly fall away from the virtue of their ancestors, being rather
irregular and Apostatical, then Apostolical] So that the Church of Rome had not
then either a Holy or Apostolical Head.

And Pope Adrian the sixth himself writes (De Sacram. Confir. Art. 4.) that
there have many Popes of Rome been Heretics. And two or three several General
Councils did condemn Pope Honorius for an Heretic.

And if I should tell you but what their own writers say of the wickedness of
the Roman Clergy, in many ages; and of the wickedness of the Roman people, of
the large sums of money that the Pope has yearly for the licensed or
tolerated Whorehouses in Rome, you would think that the body of the particular
Roman Church were near kin to the Head, and therefore not the Holy Mistress of
all Churches.

But perhaps some will say, that the Pope was holy because his Office was Holy,
though his person vicious. Ans. 1. If this be the Holiness of the Catholic
Church, mentioned in the Creed, then the Institution of offices is it that
makes it Holy, and while the office continues, the Holiness cannot be lost. 2.
Then let them prove their Holiness by Saints no more. 3. Let them not then
delude the people, but speak out, and tell them that they mean such Holiness as
is consistent with Heathenism, or Infidelity, Murders, Sodomie, and may be in
an incarnate Devil! Is this the Holiness of the Catholic Church?

Object. But you may have unholy persons among you also, that yet say you are
of the true Church.

Answ. But they are no Essential part of the Catholic Church which we believe;
and therefore it may be a Holy Church, though they be unholy. But the Pope is
an Essential part of the Roman Church which they believe in; and therefore it
can not be Holy, if he be unholy.

Object. By this means you leave no room for the Church of Rome or any Papist
in the Catholic Church which is truly Holy.

Answ. Not as Papists: so they can be no members of it. But if with any of them
Christianity be predominant, and prevail against the infection of Popery, so
that it practically extinguish not Christianity, then as Christians they may be
members of the Church, and be saved too, but not as Papists.

CHAP. VII.
Argum. 5. THE true Catholic Church of Christ is but One: The pretended Roman
Catholic Church is more than One: Therefore the pretended Roman Catholic
Church is not the true Catholic Church of Christ.

The Major is confessed. The Minor I prove thus, 1. Where there are two Heads
or Sovereign Powers specifically distinct, there are two Societies, or
Churches. But those called Papists, or the Roman Catholic Church, have two
Heads or Sovereign Powers specifically distinct. Therefore they are two
Churches.

The Major is granted by all Politicians, who do without contradiction specify
Commonwealths and other Political Societies from the Sovereign Powers: and so
the Monarchical, Aristocratical and Democratical are several Species. The
Belgian Commonwealth, and the French, be not specifically the same.

The Minor has two standing proofs so visible that he must be blind indeed
that cannot see them. First there are the many Volumes that are written by both
sides for their several forms: Bellarmine, Gretsor and the rest of the Italian
faction proving that the Pope is the chief Power, and above a General Council,
and the seat of Infallibility, and not to be judged by any, being himself the
Judge of the whole world. And the other party proving that a General Council is
above the Pope, and that he is to be judged by them, and may be deposed by
them. If any say, that they are but few and no true Catholics of this Opinion,
I answer, then a General Council are but few and no true Catholics, which yet
is said by them to represent the whole Catholic Church: For the General
Council of Constance and of Basil have peremptorily asserted it, and repeat it
over and over; yea the Council of Basil say, Ses. ultim. that [Not one of the
skillful did ever doubt but that the Pope was subject to the Judgment of a
General Council, in things that concern faith. And that he cannot without their
consent dissolve or remove a General Council; yea and that this is an Article
of faith, which without destruction of salvation cannot be denied, and that the
Council is above the Pope, defide, and that it cannot be removed without their
own consent, and that he is an heretic that is against these things] See
Binnius page 43. 79. 96. And Pope Eugenius owned this Council ibid. page 42.
And for the Council of Constance, Martin the fifth was chosen by it, and
present in it, and personally confirmed it in these words [Quodomnia and
singula determinata, conclusa, and decreta, in materiis fidei per praesens
concilium, conciliariter tenere and inviolabiliter observare volebat, and
nunquam contraire quoquo modo. Ipsaque sic conciliariter facta approbat and
ratificat, and non aliter, nec alio modo] (that is, what they did as a Council,
and not what private members did) you see then even General Councils
representing the Catholic Church do not only say that a Council is above the
Pope, but make it an Article of faith, and damn those that deny it. (What then
is become of Bellarmine and the rest of their champions?)

But perhaps you will say, they are but few on the other side. I answer: yes: Not
only most Popes, and the Italian Clergy, and the predominant party of Papists,
but another General Council, even that at the Lateran, under Julius 2. and Leo
10. expressly determine on the contrary, that the Pope is above a General
Council. So that here is not only an undeniable proof that General Councils are
fallible by their contradicting each other, and that there is a Necessity of
rejecting some of them, and consequently that the Foundation of Popery is
rotten; but also here is one Representative Catholic Church against another
Representative Catholic Church, and one Council for one Species of
Sovereignty, and another for another Species of Sovereignty. So that
undoubtedly it is not the same Church, that had two heads of several sorts.

2. And the Nations that are on both sides to this day, are a proof beyond
denial of their division. The French on one side, and the Italians on the
other; and other nations divided between both. So that the thing which they
call by one name, is two indeed. But so is not the true Catholic Church.

Object. What though some in England took the King to be the Sovereign, and
some the Parliament, and soom thought it was in both Conjunct; did this prove
that you were more than one Commonwealth?

Answ. Where the Sovereignty is mixed and not in either alone, if any one shall
set up the one as the only Sovereign, and subject the other to them, they
change the form of the Commonwealth, but do not set up two Commonwealths; but
if half take one for the Sovereign, and the other half take the other for the
Sovereign, they plainly divide the Commonwealth into two: if they do it only in
mind, and the secret thoughts of their hearts, this cannot be known to others,
and so cannot be the ground of a Society: but if they do it by a public
consent and practice, they evidently make two Commonwealths. What else brought
us into a war which ended not till one party was subdued? It is not possible
that one Political body should have two Sovereigns specifically distinct.
Indeed it may have five hundred natural persons in the Sovereignty (as in a
Senate;) but they are but one Political person, or one summa potestas.

2. But I prove the Minor by another Argument. Where there are two three or
four Heads or Sovereigns at once numerically distinct, there are two or three
or four Churches. But the Roman Church pretending to be Catholic, has had two
or three or four Heads at once numerically distinct; therefore it was two or
three or four Churches.

The Major is a known truth to all that are verst in any degree in the doctrine
of Politics. It is not only two species of Sovereignty, but two individual
Sovereigns that are inconsistent with the numerical Unity of a Political body.
Two, or ten, or two hundred may join in one Sovereignty, as one Political
person (as I said) but if there be two Sovereigns, there are certainly two
Societies: for if both be Supreme, neither is Subordinate. The Minor is not to
be denied: for the Papists lay their very foundation on a supposed division:
for sooth Peter and Paul were both at once their Bishops. And there is not many
of them that adventure to tell us, that Peter only was the Supreme, and that
Paul was under him: but they make them as equals, or coordinate; and some of
them say, that Paul was the Bishop of the uncircumcision, and Peter of the
Circumcision (and then Peter's Church is confined to the Jews) And they do not
tell us, that one Headship was divided between them: For then that example
would direct them still to have two Popes, or two Bishops to a Church: so that
Peter being a Head, and Paul a Head, they had sure distinct bodies.

But whether they stand to this or not, they cannot deny their many following
divisions. The twenty third schism (as Wernerus a zealous Papist in fasciculo
tempor. reckons them) was between Felix the fifth and Eugenius: of which the
said Wernerus speaking says, [That hence arose great contention among the
writers of this matter, pro and contra, and they cannot agree to this day: for
one part says, that a Council is above the Pope, the other part on the
contrary says, No, but the 'Pope is above the Council. God grant his Church
peace, etc.]

Of the twenty second schism the same Wernerus says thus, (ad annum 1373.)
[the twenty second schism was the wo^st and most subtle schism of all that
were before it. For it was so perplexed, that the most Learned and
Conscientious men were not able to discuss (or find out) to whom they should
adhere. And it was continued for forty years, to the great scandal of the
whole (lergy, and the great loss of souls, because of Heresies and other evils
that then sprung up, because there was then no discipline in the Church against
them. And therefore from this Urbane the sixtht to the time of Martin the
fifth, I know not who was Pope]

After Nicolas the fourth there was no Pope for two years and an half, and
Celestine the fifth that succeeded him resigning it, Boniface the eighth
entered, that stilled himself Lord of the whole world in Spirituals and
Temporals, of whom it was said, He entered as a Fox, lived as a Lion, and dyed
like a Dog, says the same Wernerus.

The twentieth schism (says the same Author) was great between Alexander the
third, and four Schismatics, and it lasted seventeen years.

The nineteenth schism was between Innocent the second, and Peter Leonis: and
Innocent get the better, because he had more on his side (says he.)

The thirteenth schism (says Wernerus) was between another and Benedict the
eighth.

The fourteenth schism (says the same Author) was scandalous and full of
confusion between Benedict the ninth and five others, which Benedict (says he)
was wholly vicious, and therefore being damned, appeared in a monstrous and
horrid shape; his head and tail were like an Asses, and the rest of his body
like a Bear, saying, I thus appear, because I lived like a beast.] In this
schism (says Wernerus) there were no less then six Popes at once. 1. Benedict
was expulsed. 2. Silvester the third gets in, but is cast out again, and
Benedict restored. 3. But being again cast out, Gregory the sixth is put into
his place; who because he was ignorant of letters (and yet infallible no doubt)
caused another Pope to be Consecrated with him to perform Church Offices; which
was the fourth; which displeased many, and therefore a third is chosen, (which
was the fifth) instead of the two that were fighting with one another: but
Henry (the Emperor) coming in, deposed them all, and chose Clement the second,
(who was the sixth of all them that were alive at once)

But above all schisms that between Armosus and Sergius, and their followers,
was the fowlest, such saying and unsaying, doing and undoing there was, besides
the dismembring of the dead Pope, and casting him into the water. And of eight
Successors, says Wernerus, [I can say nothing observable of them; because I
find nothing of them but scandalous, because of the unheard of contention in
the holy Apostolic sea one against another, and together mutually against each
other.]

Reader, would thou be troubled with any more of these Relations? I tell thee
nothing but from their own Historians, and that which multitudes of them agree
in: I go not to a Protestant for a word. But one Pope in those contentious
times, I find lived in some peace, and that was Silvester the second, of whom
says Wernerus (as others commonly) [This Silvester was made Pope by the help
of the Devil to whom he did homage: that all might go as he would have it: --
but he quickly met with the usual End, as one that had placed his Hope in
deceitful Devils.]

Well! I shall now appeal to reason it self, whether this were one Church, that
for forty (or say others fifty) years together had several Heads, some of the
people following one, and some another, and the most Learned and most
Conscientious not able to know the right Pope, nor know him not to this day. If
England were forty years thus divided between two Kings, it were certainly two
Kingdoms. But the true Catholic Church of Christ is but one.

CHAP. VIII.
Argum. 6. THE true Catholic Church has never ceased or discontinued, since
the founding of it to this day. The Church of Rome has ceased or discontinued:
therefore the Church of Rome is not the true Catholic Church.

I prove the Minor (for the Major they will grant.) If the Head which is an
Essential part, has discontinued, then the Church of Rome has discontinued.
But the Head has discontinued: therefore, etc.

The Minor only needs proof: and that I prove 1. There have been many years
interregnum or vacancy, when there was no Pope at all. And where then was the
Church when it had no Head?

2. There have been long successions of such as you confess your selves, were
not Apostolical, but Apostatical. 3. Your own Popes and Councils command us to
take such for no Popes. For example, Pope Nicolas in his Decretals (see Caranza
page 393.) says [He that by money or the favor of men, or popular or military
tumults is intruded into the Apostolical seat without the Concordant and
Canonical election of the Cardinal and the following religious Clergy, let him
not be taken for a Pope, nor Apostolical, but for Apostatical.] And even of
Priests, he commands, [Let no man hear Mass of a Priest whom he certai^ly
knows to have a Concubine or woman introduced] Caranza, page 395. and ibid.
he says, [Priests that commit fornication, cannot have the honor of
Priesthood.]

4. But our greater Argument is from the authority of God, and the very nature
of the office. An infidel, or notoriously ungodly man, is not capable of being
a Pastor of the Church (in sensu composito, while he is such) But the Popes of
Rome have been Infidels, and notoriously ungodly men: therefore they were
incapable of being Pastors of the Church (and consequently that Church was
Headless, and so no Church.) The Major I prove. 1. Where there is not the
necessary matter and disposition of the matter, there can be no reception of
the form: But Infidels and notoriously ungodly men, are not matter sufficiently
disposed to receive the form of Pastoral Power: therefore they cannot receive
it.

The Minor is proved 1. As every true Church is a Christian Church (it being
only a Congregation of Christians that we so call, in our present case) so
every Pastor is a Christian Pastor: but an Infidel or notoriously ungodly man
is not a Christian Pastor: therefore not a true Pastor. 2. Otherwise a
Mohammedan, Jew, or Heathen may be a true Pope; which I think they will deny
themselves. 3. If any Disposition or Qualification at all be necessary to the
being of the Pastoral Office (besides manhood) then is it necessary, that he
own God the Father, and the Redeemer (that is, be not notoriously an Infidel,
or ungodly.) But some qualification is necessary: therefore, etc. None can be
named more necessary then this.

And that Popes have been such as I here mention, is proved before. Not to
mention Marcellinus that sacrificed to an Idol, or Liberius that subscribed to
the Arrian profession; (for I believe there is an hundred times more hope of
their Salvation by Repentance, then of an hundred of their Successors) John the
twenty second held that the soul dies with the body, of which the Parisians and
others condemned him. John the twenty third, as I showed before, denied the
life to come, and so was an Infidel. The Witchcraft, Poysonings, Simony,
Sodomy, Adulteries, Incest, etc. of others, are sufficiently recorded by their
own Historians.

CHAP. IX.
Argum. 7. TO the foregoing Arguments, I add the recital of one formerly
mentioned, for the use of all that have the use of their wits and senses.

If a man may be sure, that he knows bread to be bread, and wine to be wine,
when he sees, feels, and tastes them, then he may be sure that Popery is a
deceit. (This Consequence they cannot question) But a man may be sure that he
knows bread to be bread, and wine to be wine, when he sees, feels, and
tastes them: therefore, etc.

Note that I speak of such a knowledge as belongs to men of sound wits and
senses, and a convenient object and medium. It is the senses of the whole world
that I appeal to, and not of one or two: it is bread and wine that are near us,
in the hand or mouth that I speak of, and not at a miles distance: in the
daylight, and not in the dark. So that take the bread and wine into your hand,
and judge of it, and let this decide our Controversy. If you can tell whether
that be bread or no bread, you may tell whether the Papists or we are in the
right. Those therefore that be not learned and subtle enough to judge by
Disputations and writings of Learned men, may yet judge by their sight and
feeling. Either you know bread and wine when you see it, taste it, feel it, or
you do not. If you do, then the Controversy is at an end: for the senses of
all sound men in the world, will be against the Papists that say the bread
after Consecration is no bread, and the wine is no wine. But if you cannot know
bread when you see, feel, and eat it, then see what follows. 1. Then we are
sure that the Pope and all his Council are not at all to be trusted: for if
sense be not to be trusted, then the Pope and his Council know not when they
read the Scripture, and Canons, and Fathers, and hear Traditions, but that they
are deceived. 2. Then we are uncertain of any Judgment that Pope or Council
can give: for when they spoke or wrote it, we are uncertain whether our eyes
and ears, or reason judging by them, are not deceived in the hearing or reading
of their words. 3. How ridiculously then do they call for a Judge of
Controversies? and what a foolish quarrel is it that they make, who shall be
the Interpreter of Scriptures, or Judge of Controversies? For what can a Judge
do but speak or write his mind? and when he has done, you know not what it is
that you hear or read, because your senses may deceive you. Its a far harder
matter to understand a sentence or book of the Pope or Council when you read or
hear it, then to know bread when you see, and feel, and eat it. Many thousands
know bread, that know not the Popes sentence, nor a word of a book. 4. And by
this rule, it is uncertain whether Scripture be true, or Christianity the true
Religion. For we cannot know it but by our senses: and if they are so
uncertain, all our Religion must needs be uncertain. 5. Yea we cannot tell what
Revelation to desire that should end our Controversies and make us certain. For
if God should send an Angel or other Messenger from heaven to decide the
Controversies between us and the Papists, what could he do more but speak it to
us as from God? and we should still be uncertain of what we see or hear: so
that we are left uncurably in our ignorance and Controversies, if Popery be
true.

And here you may see upon what terms we dispute with Papists, and what hope
there is of satisfying them. We dispute with men that will not believe their
own senses, or the senses of the world. The damned man, Luke 16. thought if one
might have been sent to his brethren from the dead, they would have believed.
And if Abraham say to them, If they will not hear Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though one rise from the dead; we may say of
Papists, sure, if they will not believe their own eyes, and ears, and taste,
and know not bread when they see, and feel, and eat it, how should they be
persuaded, though one were sent to them from heaven to resolve them? Can we
think by all our Arguments to make any matter plainer to a man then that Bread
is Bread, when he sees and eats it? If this be uncertain to them, what can
you prove to them, or what way can you devise to deal with them? For indeed, if
sense be uncertain, we have no certainty of any thing in the world.

But to this H. T. (they say H. Turbervile) in his Manual of Controversies
says thus. [Answ. Substance is not the proper and immediate object of sense,
but color, quantity, etc. Nor can sense judge at all of substance though it be
under sensible accidents, unless it be the subject of those accidents, and have
a sensible and corporal manner of being, which the Body of Christ neither is,
nor has in that Sacrament. It has a spiritual manner of being, and is not the
subject of the accidents of bread; they are without a subject by Miracle;
therefore no wonder, if sense be deceived in this matter. Here Sense and Reason
must vail bonnet to faith, and submit to the Authority of God revealing, and
the Church propounding; they are no competent Judges what God can do by his
Omnipotence.] Thus H. T.

Repl. And is this all that these Rabbis have to satisfy the world that it is
not Bread and Wine which is seen, and felt, and tasted! Let us first take
notice of the by-passages of his answer, and then reply to the substance. 1. Is
not this like the rest of their contradictory imaginations? That Christ has
not a Corporal manner of Being in the Sacrament: and yet it is not Bread, but
his Body that is there: yea before page 207. he says, [We maintain not his
Corporal, but real and spiritual presence in the Sacrament. So that either they
affirm that his Body is present, and yet deny his Bodily presence; or else they
affirm his Bodily presence, but not his Corporal presence. Most learnedly! We
shall at last be taught to distinguish between Bodily and Corporal! But is not
the Juggle in the word [Manner?] Perhaps the Corporal presence is not denied,
but the Corporal manner. Answ. 1. Yes, in terms its said [We maintain not his
Corporal presence] 2. And can a Body be present, and not in a Bodily manner?
And why is [Spiritually] put as contradistinct? Sure when Paul said our Bodies
shall be raised spiritual bodies, he thought that they were nevertheless bodies
for being spiritual; and therefore it is nevertheless a Bodily manner of
presence, for being a spiritual manner. But if by the Corporal presence or
manner (denied) be meant nothing but the qualities and quantity by which it is
fit to be the Object of our senses, why had we not this plainly without
juggling? To say Christ is present in Body but not sensibly, is plainer English,
then to say that he is present in Body but not Bodily present.

2. Note also that he calls them [The accidents of bread] and yet says [they
are without a subject] And so does the Explanation of the Roman Catholic
Belief, and their ordinary writers say that the Body of Christ is under the
forms of Bread and Wine, and yet say that Bread and Wine are none of the
subject of those forms.

3. Note also that he professes Transubstantiation is a Miracle, and so every
ignorant, drunken, adulterous Priest of theirs has the gift of Miracles, which
he works as often as he consecrateth: No wonder if Miracles be the glory of
their Church, and the proof of their Infallibility; But let us come to the
substance of his Answer.

1. He tells you that substance is not the proper and immediate object of
sense, but color, quantity, etc. But 1 Is not the Mediate Object [Proper] as
well as the Immediate? 2. But what gather you hence? be it a Proper or improper
Object, I hope we may yet have leave to believe that Reason by the help of
sense does judge as infallibly of Substances as Accidents. If you think
otherwise, then all the forementioned consequences are undeniable. You know not
whether the world saw Christ on earth: or whether he were crucified, dead,
buried, rose, or ascended: It might be but color and quantity which men saw;
and when Christ told them a spirit has not flesh and blood as ye see me have,
they might have answered, We see no flesh and blood, but color and quantity:
And Thomas had then small reason to be convinced by seeing and feeling, when he
saw but color and quantity, and felt but quantity and quality. By this
reasoning the world is not sure that ever there was a Pope of Rome, but the
Color of a Pope, or other accidents. And you know not that there is any earth
under your feet, or that you are a man, or have a body, because your senses
perceive but the accidents of it.

2. But what manner of men did H. T. imagine he had to deal with, when he puts
off his Readers with such an answer as this? Mark Reader the unfaithful
dealing of these men, and how grossly they abuse poor people that follow them
with mere deceits. The Question or Objection which he undertook to answer was,
Whether sense telling us that it is Bread after the Consecration be deceived?
To this he takes on him to give an answer, and cunningly speaks to another
question, and passes this by. Its one question, Whether sense can infallibly
discern Christ in the Sacrament, if he were there, or discern that he is not
there? and another question Whether sense can infallibly discern Bread and
Wine, and know whether they be there? The last was the question in hand: but he
slily answers to the first instead of it; and tells us, that sense cannot judge
of substance, though under sensible accidents, unless it be the subject of
those accidents, and have a sensible and corporal manner of being, which the
body of Christ neither is nor has in the Sacrament.] And so goes on. And what
of all this? [therefore Christ may be in the Sacrament and you not discern him
by sense] Well: and what is that to the question? O Sir, is it not the holy truth
of God that you are about? and should you thus abuse it, and the souls of men?
you knew the question is, Whether sense (and the intellect thereby) be
infallible in judging Bread to be Bread when we see, feel and eat it? Had you
never a word to say to this? to persuade men that they have eyes and see not,
and hands and feel not, or that the world knows not certainly what they seem
to know by seeing and feeling? I pray you hereafter deal by us as fairly as
Bellarmine did (and yet we will thank you for nothing) who quite gave away the
Roman cause by granting and pleading [that sense is infallible in Positives:
and therefore we may thence say, This is a Body because I see it; (and so this
is Bread or wine because I see, feel and taste it) but not in Negatives: and
therefore we cannot say, this is not a Body because I see it not] I pray you
give over talking of the Pope, or Church, or Religion, or Men, if you are
uncertain of substances which are (suppose but per accidentia) the Objects of
your sense. And take nothing ill that I write of you, till you are more certain
that you see it, and know what you see.

3. But you will say [Sense and Reason must here vail bonnet to faith. Answ. In
the Negative case let it be granted, and any case where faith can be faith. But
if sense (and the Intellect therewith) be fallible in Positives, so that we
cannot know Bread when we see and eat it, faith cannot be faith then. What talk
you of faith, if you credit not the soundest senses of all the men in the
world, when sense and reason are presupposed to faith. How know you that faith
here contradicts sense? You Will say, because the Church or Scripture says:
This is my Body: and that there is no Bread? But how know you that there is any
such thing in Scripture? or that the Church so holds? you think you have read
or heard it: But how know you that your sense deceived you not? He that cannot
know Bread when he sees and eats it, is unlikely to know letters and their
meaning when he sees them.

See more of my answer to such Objections in a Book entitled The Safe Religion,
p. 241. to 248.

The simplest Reader that has honesty and charity, is secured against Popery
by the first Argument, which he may make good to his own soul against all the
Jesuits on earth. And he that is unable to proceed on that account, may by the
evidence of this last Argument confute any Papist living, if he be a man of
sense and reason. And having brought all our controversy so low, that sense it
self may be the judge, I shall go no further in Argument, as thinking it vain
to use any reason with that man that will not believe his own eyesight, nor
the sight, and feeling, and taste of all the world besides.

CHAP. X.
I Come now to the next and principal part of my task, which is to open to you
their Deceits, and give you Directions for the discovery and confutation of
them, that by the help of these you may see the Truth.

Detect. 1. Remember this ground which they have given you, that If you prove
them guilty but of any one Error in points of belief determined by their
Church, you thereby disprove the whole body of Popery, as such. For you pull up
the foundation which they build on, and the Authority into which they resolve
their faith. They will grant you, that if they are deceived by the Church in
one thing, they have no Certainty of any thing upon the Churches credit. So
that if you read Paul's discourse against Praying in an unknown tongue, or the
many precepts for our reading and meditating in the Law of God, or the like,
and can but perceive that the Popish Latin service, or their forbidding men to
read the Scripture, etc. are contrary hereto, or if you find out but any one of
their Errors, you cannot be a Papist, if you understand their Profession.

But it is not so with us: for though we know that the Scripture and all that
is in it is of infallible Truth, and that every true Christian (while such) is
infallible in the Essentials of Christianity; (for else he were no Christian)
yet we profess that we know but in part, and that our own Writings and
Confessions may possibly in some things be besides the sense of Scripture, and
there being much more propounded in Scripture to our faith, then what is of
absolute necessity to salvation, we may possibly after our studying and praying
mistake in some things that are not of the Essence but the Integrity of
Christianity, and are necessary to the Melius esse, the strength or comfort,
though not to the being of a Christian. So that every Error in their faith
destroys their grounds, and so their new Religion; but so does not every Error
of ours.

Or to speak more distinctly; let us distinguish between the Fides quae and
qua; their Objective faith, and our Subjective faith. 1. Their Objective Faith
has Errors in it, but ours has none by their own confession: For theirs is
all the Decrees of their Popes and Councils: and ours is only the Holy
Scripture, which they confess to be infallible. Our own writings do but show
how we understand the Scriptures, and so whether our subjective faith be right
or not. 2. We confess that it is not only possible but probable, that we are
mistaken in some lower points, about the meaning of the Scriptures, and yet our
foundation is still sure. But they have in a sort confounded their Subiective
and Objective faith: and one believes it on that account because others do
believe it; and so one age or part do but seek for the Object of their faith in
the Actual faith of the other. Yea 3. They conclude that every point which is
of faith, that is, that's determined by the Church to be so, is of such
necessity to salvation that no man can be saved that denies it, or that does
not believe it (if sufficiently proposed.) But we are assured, that though all
that is in Scripture be most true, yet through misunderstanding, some points
there proposed to our faith, may possibly be denied and disputed against by a
true believer; and yet his salvation not be overthrown by it. The Papists cry
out against us for distinguishing between the Fundamentals (or essentials) of
Religion and the Integrals: but we know it to be necessary.

CHAP. XI.
Detect. 2. WHEN you have brought the matter thus far, and see that if they
have one error in faith, their whole cause is lost, then consider, Whether it
be Possible for that Doctrine which is so contrary to Scripture, and to it
self, to be free from all Error. 1. How contrary it is to Scripture, 1. To
forbid the reading of Scripture in a known tongue: 2. And their Public Praying
in an unknown language: 3. And their administering the Lords Supper to the
People by the halves, denying them the Wine, and giving them the bread only: 4
And their affirming men to be perfect without sin in this life: 5. And their
calling some sins venial which deserve a pardon, and yet are truly no sins: 6.
And their absolute forbidding their Priests to marry, 7. And saying that there
is no Bread and Wine left after the Consecration, with abundance the like: the
very reading of the texts may satisfy you. As for the first, see Deuteronomy. 6. 7,
8, 9. Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19, 20. Isa. 34. 16. Psalm. 1. 2. Neh. 8. Jos. 8. 34, 35.
Mat. 12. 3, 5. and 19. 4. and 21. 16. and 22. 31. Mark 12. 10, 26. Acts 8. 28.
and 13. 27. and 15. 21. 1 These. 5. 27. Col. 4. 16. Deuteronomy 31. 11. Ephesians. 3. 4. Mat.
24. 15. Rev. 1. 3. 2 Timothy 3. 16. John 5 39. Act. 17. 2, 11. and 18 28. Romans 15.
4. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Isa. 8. 16, 20. and 42. 4. Romans 7. 1. James 1. 25. Hos. 8. 12.

For the second, read 1 Cor. 14. For the third, see Mat. 26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 11.
25, 26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 10. 16. For the fourth, see Eccles. 7. 20. James 3. 2. 1
John 1. 8. Phil. 3. 12. Luke 11. 4. For the fifth, see Deuteronomy. 12, 32. Gal. 3.
10. 1 John 3. 4. For the sixth, see 1 Timothy 3. 2, 4, 5, 11, 12. Tit. 1. 6. 1 Timothy 43. 1 Cor. 9. 5. For the seventh, see 1 Cor. 10. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 26,
27, 28. Act. 2. 42. Act. 20. 7. 11.

2. And that they are contrary to themselves, appears: 1. In that (as I said
before) not only several persons, but several Countries go several ways; the
French are of one way, and the Italians of another, even in the Fundamentals of
their Faith, which all the rest is resolved into. 2. Their Popes have
ordinarily been contrary to one another in their Decrees; which made Platina
say [Following Popes do still either infringe or wholly abrogate the Decrees of
the former Popes] And Erasmns says that [Pope John 22. and Pope Nicolas are
contrary one to another in their whole Decrees, and that in things that seem to
belong to matter of faith] Had we no instances but of Sergius and Formosus and
their following partakers, it were enough. And Celestines case puts Bellarmine
to silly shifts. 3. That their Councils contradict each other, I have formerly
manifested. They confess that the Arrians have had many Councils as General as
most ever the Orthodox had: and if it be only the want of the Popes approbation
that nullifieth their authority, then let them tell us no more of Councils and
of [all the Church] but say plainly that is but one man that they mean.

But even their approved Councils have been contrary; As the sixth Council at
Constantinople approved by Pope Adrian, is now confessed to have many errors.
The Council of Neocasarea confirmed by Pope Leo 4. and by the Nicen Council (as
says the Council of Florence Ses. 7.) condemned second marriages, contrary to
Scripture and the present Church. The Council at the Laterane under Leo the
tenth determines that the Pope is above a General Council; and the Councils of
Constance and Basil determine that the General Council is above the Pope, and
that this is de fide, and its heresy to deny it.

CHAP. XII.
Detect. 3. IF you enter into Dispute with any Papist, enquire first what he
will take for sufficient Proof, and what common Principles you are agreed on by
which the rest must be decided. For men that agree in nothing at all, are not
capable of a dispute. For the Principles in which they are agreed, are those
that the rest must be reduced to. And when you have made this enquiry, you
shall find that the Popish way of Disputing is to forbid you to Dispute, unless
you will first yield the cause to them as beyond dispute: and that they are not
agreed with the rest of the world in any common principles to which the
differences may be reduced for trial, and so that there is no sort of Proof
that they will admit of as sufficient: For if there be any ground of Proof at
all, it must be 1. From the senses. 2. Or from Reason. 3. Or from Scripture. 4.
Or from the Church; but they will stand to none of all these.

1. Begin at the bottom of all, and know of them whether they will take that
for a Valid Proof, which is fetched from sense, even from the soundest senses of
all men in the world, supposing a convenient object and Medium? If they will
not take this for Proof, how can you dispute with them? Or what Proof can be
admitted, if this be not admitted? We have this advantage in dealing even with
those Heathen that have blotted out much of the Law of nature it self, that yet
they will yield to an Argument from sense.

But if they would yield to the Validity of this proof, then they give away
their cause, seeing sense tells us that it is bread which we see, and feel,
and eat after the Consecration. They know this; and therefore they must disown
and deny this sort of proof.

2. But will they then admit of Proofs from Reason? No, that cannot be, if
proof from sense be not admitted. For Reason receives its object by means or
occasion of the senses, and must needs be deceived if it be deceived: And
Reason has not a principle that it holds faster, then that sense is to be
credited; that this is white or black which my own eyes and the eyes of all
other men do see to be so: and so that this is bread which we all see, and
feel, and taste to be so. And therefore the Papists tell us that Reason must
stoop to faith, that is, they will not stand to Reason when it contradicts
the doctrine of their sect. It seems they are in some parts of their Religion
unreasonable. But I would know, whether they have any Reason to be
unreasonable. If they have, then why might not our Reason be valid as well as
their Reason which they bring against Reason? by which they contradict
themselves. For if Reason be vain, why Reason they to prove its Vanity or
invalidity? But if they have no Reason against Reason, let them confess it, and
offer us none, and then their disputes will do no harm. We easily yield, that
we have Reason to believe Gods Revelations, about those things which we had no
Reason to believe if they were not Revealed: And that many of those Revelations
are above Reason, so far as that Reason cannot discern the truth of the thing
without them; yea it would rather judge the things improbable: But yet
Revelations are received by Reason, and inform Reason, and not destroy it; nor
do they so contradict Sense or Reason, as to make that credible which Sense and
Reason have sufficient ground to judge false.

So that here we must break with a Papist, even where we might join in dispute
with a heathen. And how will Papists deal with Heathens if they will deny the
proofs from sense and reason?

3. But will they stand to the Validity of Proofs from Scripture? No; For 1.
They take it to be but part of Gods word, so that we may nor argue Negatively,
[It is not in the holy Scripture: therefore it is not an Article of faith or a
Law of God] For they will presently appeal to Tradition. 2. And even so much as
is in Scripture, though they confess it to be true, yet they confess it not to
be by us intelligible, and will not admit of any proof from it, but with this
limitation, that you take it in that sense as the Church takes it. For they are
sworn by the Trent Oath [to take it in that sense as the Holy Mother Church
does hold, and has held it in, and never to take or interpret it but according
to the unanimous sense of the Fathers.] So that they must know what sense all
the Fathers are unanimous in before they can admit a proof from Scripture. And
before that can be done, above a Cart-load of books must be read over or
searched: and when that's done, they will find that most texts were never meddled
with by most of those Fathers in their writings; and in those that they did
meddle with, they disagreed in multitudes, and where they disagree they are not
unanimous; and there the Papists are sworn to believe no sense at all. And if
they would have come down to a Major vote, it is no short or easy matter to
gather the votes. And if they know the Fathers unanimous consent, yet must they
have the sense of the present Church too: And is it not all one to make your
adversary the Judge of your cause, as the Judge of your Evidences and all your
proofs?

4. Well, but at least may we not hope that they will stand to the Judgment of
the Catholic Church? And if so, we will not take it for our adversary? No:
they will not do so neither. For 1. When they deny proof from sense and reason,
they must needs deny all that's brought from the Church: For the Church cannot
judge it self but on supposition of the infallibility of sense. 2. And when you
argue from the judgment and practice of the greater part of the Church, they
presently disclaim them all as Heretics or Schismatics, and will have no man
be a Valid witness but themselves. The Greeks, the Aethiopians, the Armenians,
the Protestants, all are Heretics or Schismatics save they; and therefore may
not be witnesses in the case. So that you see upon what terms we stand with the
Papists, that will admit of no proofs upon the Infallibility of Sense or
Reason, or the sufficiency of Scripture, or the testimony of the Catholic
Church, but only from themselves.

CHAP. XIII.
Detect. 4 UNderstand what the Papists mean when they are still calling to you
for a Judge of Controversies.

If you would dispute with them, they are presently asking you, [Who shall be
the judge?] and persuading you that it is in vain to dispute without a living
Judge: for every man will be the Judge himself; and every man's cause will be
right in his own eyes, and all the world will be still at odds till we are
agreed who shall be the Judge.

To help you to see the sense of this deceit, and then to confute it; 1. You
may easily observe that this is the plain drift of all, to persuade you to make
them your judges, and yield the cause instead of disputing it. For it is no
other judge but themselves that they will admit. Yield first that the Pope or
his Council is the judge of all controversies, and then its folly to dispute
against them: so that if you will yield them the cause first, they will then
dispute with you after.

2. But what is to be said to the pretense of the Necessity of a Judge? I
answer, 1. Its against all reason and experience to think that all enquiries or
disputes are vain, unless there be a Judge to decide the case. A Judge is a
Ruling decider; not to satisfy men's minds, so much as to preserve Order, and
Peace, and Justice in the Society. But there are thousands of cases to be
privately discussed, that we never need to bring to a Judge. Every Husbandman,
and Tradesman, and Navigator, and other Artificer does meet with doubts and
difficulties in his way which he labors to Discern, and satisfies himself
with a Judgment of Discretion without a Ruling Judge. We eat, and drink, and
clothe our selves, and follow our daily labors without a Judge, though we meet
with controversies in almost all, what meat or drink is best for quality or
quantity, and a hundred like doubts. Men do marry, and build, and buy, and
sell, and take Physic, and dispatch their greatest worldly business without a
Judge. Judges are only for such controverted cases as cannot well be decided
without them, to the attaining of the Ends of Government.

2. Is it not against the daily practice of the Papists to think or say that
all disputes and controversies must have a Judge? Who is the Judge between the
Nominals, Reals and Formalists, the Dominicans, Franciscans and Jesuits, in
all those controversies which have Cartloads of Books written on them? Their
Pope or Councils dare not Judge between them. Do they not daily dispute in
their Schools among themselves without a Judge? and still write books against
one another without a Judge?

3. Understand well the use and differences of Judgment. The sentence is but a
means to the execution: and Judges cannot determine the mind and will of man:
but preserve outward Order, if men will not see the truth themselves. Me thinks
the Jesuits that are so eager for free will, should easily grant that the Pope
by his definition cannot determine the Will of man. And they see that Heretics
remain Heretics, when the Pope has said all that he can: And if he can cure
them all by his determinations, he is much too blame that he does not. And if a
man's mind be to be settled, an Infallible Teacher is fitter then a Judge.
Judgment then being for Execution, when you ask, Who shall be the Judge? I
answer that Judgment is either total, absolute and final: or it is only to a
certain particular end, limited, and subordinate, from which there is an
Appeal. In the former case, there is no Judge but Christ, and the Father by
him. No absolute decision can be made till the great Judgment come; and then
all will be fully and finally decided. And for the limited present Judgments
of men, they are of several sorts, according to their several Ends. When the
question is, Who shall be corporally punished as an Heretic? the Magistrate is
Judge; For coercive punishment being his work, the Judgment must be his also.
But when the question is, Who shall be excommunicated as an Heretic, as Gods
Law has told us who in specie, and so is the Rule of decision about
individuals: so to try individual persons, and cases according to this Law,
belongs to the Governors of the Church: but not to the Governors of other
Churches a thousand miles off, that never received such an authority, and are
not capable of the work: but to the Governors of the Church in which the party
has Communion, and into which he shall at any time intrude and seek communion.
And all men have a Judgment of discerning that are concerned in the Execution.

So that if a disputing Papist will say that his business is not to Dispute
with you, but to Excommunicate, or hang, or burn you for an Heretic, then I
confess, its all the reason in the world that you should first agree of the
Judge. But why the Pope should be the Judge, I know not, unless it be in his
own charge.

CHAP. XIV.
Detect. 5. When you have proceeded on these grounds, the Papists will tell
you, that in their way there is an End of Controversies, but in yours there is
none: For if you will not stand to ones Judgment as infallible, you may
dispute as long as you live before you come to an End.

To direct you in discussing this part of the Deceit also: 1. We confess that
on earth there will be no End of all controversies among the best: nor of the
great controversies which salvation lies on, between the believers and the
unbelievers: that is, there will be still Infidelity and Heresy in the world,
and error in the godly themselves. 1. Has it not been so in every age till
now? And why should we expect that it should now be otherwise? 2. Does not Paul
tell us that here we know but in part, and prophecy in part? and when is it
that that which is imperfect will be done away, but when that which is perfect
is come? While we know but in part, we shall differ in part.

2. Has your way put an End to controversies any more then ours? Are you not
yet at controversy with Infidels, Whether Christ be the Redeemer: and with
Heretics whether he be true eternal God? Are you not yet as full of
controversies among your selves, as any Christians on the face of the earth? I
do not believe but in the many Volumes of your Schoolmen, Casuists, and
Commentators, I can show more controversies yet depending, then you can find
amongst any sort of Christians in the world; yea then you can find among all
other Christians in the world set together.

3. And is there any thing in your way that better tends to the deciding of
controversies then in ours? Nothing at all; but contrarily, you have made more
Controversies then you have ended. For, 1. We have a Certain infallible Rule to
decide our controversies by, even such as you confess your selves to be
infallible; Even the Holy Scriptures: but you have an uncertain Rule, even the
Decrees of your Popes and Councils, and the many Volumes of the Fathers, which
are at odds among themselves; your very Rule is self-contradicting, and your
Judges are together by the ears (as has been showed.)

2. Our Faith consists in those points which are granted by your selves, and
so are beyond Controversy between us and you. But yours lies also in a
mixture of men's corruptions, which will ever be controverted and condemned.

3. Our Faith consists in the few ancient Articles by which the Church was
always known (as to its essentials.) But you confound the Essentials with the
integrals: and the Number of your necessary Articles is so great, as must needs
be matter of more controversy then ours.

4. We know our Religion, and where to find it: For it is perfect at the first,
and receives no additions or diminutions. One generation comes, and another
goes, but the word of the Lord endures for ever. But you never know when you
have all, because you know not when your Pope will have done defining: that is
an article of faith to you one year that was none the year before nor ever
before.

5. We need no Judge to decide any controversies among us in the points of
Absolute necessity to salvation: both because the Scripture is so plain in
those points, as to serve for decision without a Judge; and because we abhor to
make a controversy of any of them; and where there is no controversy, there
needs no Judge. We are all agreed, through the plainness of the Scripture, that
there is but one, Eternal, most Wise, and Good, and Omnipotent God; and that
there is one Mediator between God and man, who is himself both God and man,
that was crucified, dead, buried, went to (...), rose again, ascended,
intercedeth for us, and is King and Head of the Church: and will raise the
dead, and judge the world, some to Heaven, and some to Hell: These and all the
rest of the Essentials of our faith, and many more points that are not
essentials, are so plain in Scripture that we are past making them matter of
Controversy. If any man deny an Essential point of faith, he is none of us, no
more then of you. But you are it seems so deep in infidelity, that you must
have a judge to decide your Controversies in the necessary Articles of Faith.
For whatever is de fide, you make to be of such equal necessity, that you
deride our distinguishing the Fundamentals from the rest, (as may be seen in
Knots Infidelity unmaskt against Chillingworth) Seriously tell us, Do you think
Christians need a Judge, or must put it to a Judge to decide, whether Christ be
the Messiah or not? whether he died and rose again or not? Whether he will
judge the world or not? or any such points. If he be a Judge, he must have
power to oblige you to stand to his Determination on which side soever he
determine. And what if John 22. determine that the soul is not immortal, or
John 23. that there is no resurrection or life to come, but a man dies like a
beast: would you stand to this decision?

6. If you say that your Judge has power to oblige you only on one side, that
is, when he judges right (and so make no Judge of him, but a Teacher) we have
such Judges as well as you, even Teachers to show us the Evidence of truth.

7. If you say that you have a Judge to determine of heresies in order to the
Punishing of them by the sword: So have we as well as you, and better then you.
For your Pope is a Priest that has nothing to do with the sword, (at least out
of his own Principalities): but our Princes and other Rulers are lawful
Magistrates, that are appointed to be a terror to evil doers, Romans 13. 4, 6.

8. If you say that you have a Judge to determine of heresy in Order to
Excommunication, so have we in every Church: even the Pastors of the Churches,
who are bound to unite and assist each other in such works. What is to be
accounted Heresy, the Law of God sufficiently determines: And what particular
persons are to be Judged heretics and excommunicated according to that Law,
the particular Pastors that are on the place can better decide then a Pope that
is a thousand, or five thousand miles off, and cannot hear the witnesses. And
do you not your selves decide almost all such cases through the world (that is
of your subjection) by the present Pastors or Bishops, and not by the Pope? And
why may not we do so then as well as you?

9. But if you lay all upon your Popes or Councils Infallibility, I desire you
but to read my third Disputation in a Book against Popery, called the Safe
Religion; and then believe that Infallibility if you can. I should think my
self a miserable man, if I were not my self more Infallible then many of your
Popes have been. Every Christian (while such) is infallible in his belief of
the Christian faith; And the Scripture is an infallible ground of our belief.

10. Is it not a plain Judgment of God upon you, that while you make the
Scripture so dark and not intelligible, and cry up the Necessity of a living
Judge, you should not only swarm with differences among your selves, but should
be utterly disagreed, and at a loss to know who is this Judge of Controversies,
one saying it is the Pope, and another that its the Council; and what the
better are you for saying, There must be a Judge, as long as you cannot tell
Who it must be? Its not only uncertain among you Whether Pope or Council be
the Infallible Judge, but also which is a true Pope, and which is a lawful
General Council? For forty years at least together, the Church could not know
the true Pope, but the more learned and conscionable men were divided: Nor is
it known to this day. Frequently the strongest has carried it, and success
been his best title. Nay General Councils themselves knew not the right Pope.
The Council at Constance and Basil knew not the right Pope. They of Basil
thought Felix the fifth the true Pope, and Eugenius no Pope: But friends and
strength confuted a General Council, and proved deposed Eugenius the Pope. And
for Councils themselves, who knows which to take for current and of Authority?
What Catalogues have you of reprobated Councils, and of doubtful Councils, and
partly approved, partly reprobate, and who knows which and how far; but only
that is approved, that pleases the Pope, and that reprobate that displeased
him, and yet perhaps approved by a former Pope: So that you are all in a
confusion and uncertain about your true Popes and General Councils.

And if you knew them, yet what a loss are you at to know their Decrees and
Canons? What a Fardel of false Decretall Epistles have you thrust upon the
world, as Blondell, Dalleus, Reignolds and others have fully proved. Forsooth
decretals that use a translation of the Scripture that was formed a long time
after the death of the supposed Authors of those Epistles: And Decretals which
make mention of persons and things that were many score or hundred years after
the death of the said Authors. These are your new Scriptures, and by these our
faith must be regulated, and our controversies decided.

And your Canons are abundance of them as uncertain: some of your own will have
but twenty Canons of the first General Council at Nice: some will have the new
found rabble of additions. Much more uncertainty or certain forgery there is in
the Canons called the Apostles: and the like we may say of abundance more.

And now I appeal to all the impartial Reason in the world, whether your
voluminous, apocriphal, uncertain faith that needs a living Judge, and cannot
find one, or agree upon him, and that leaves your controversies still
undecided, be a liker way to peace and unity, then our short and plain Articles
and infallible Scripture faith, that has less matter of contention, and better
means to prevent it, even faithful Teachers and Judges in every Church and
Commonwealth, which shall so far determine as may preserve the peace of those
societies, levaing the final full Decision of all to the Eternal Judge that is
even at the door.

11. Yea and is not Gods hand of Judgment yet more observable against you,
that when your Popes and Councils have past their judgment, the several Sects
are unable to understand them? witness the late sentence against the
Jansenists, of which the persons that seem to be condemned, say, that there is
no such thing or words in all Jansenius writings, as the Pope says are in him,
and condemns as his: and the Controversy is as far from a decision, as if
the Pope had held his peace. Yea your great Disputer here in England, Thomas
White the Novelist, is the same for all the Popes determination.

Take another instance in the forementioned Case, Whether the Pope or Council
be supreme: The Councils of Constance and Basil determined it one way as de
fide, and yet that made no end of the Controversy. The Council of Lateran and
Pope Leo determined it the other way; and yet it is a Controversy after two
contrary decisions: and some say one way, and some the oath: and some say, It
is yet undecided (for fear of angring the French by casting them off as
Heretics.) Another instance. The Council at Basil Sess. 36. (page 80. in
Binnius) has fully determined the Controversy between the Franciscans and
Dominicans about the Virgin Mary's immaculate conception: and yet it is
undetermined still; and Thomas White presumes to affirm, that [Certainly there
is no Tradition for it, nor any probability that ever the Negative will be
defined. Apolog. for Tradit. page 64, 65, 66. yea he carries it as boldly out,
as if never Council had made or meddled with it. I will therefore recite the
words of the Council, which are these [A hard question has been in diverse
parts, and before this holy Synod, about the Conception of the glorious Virgin
Mary, and the beginning of her Sanctification; some saying that the Virgin and
her soul was for some time or instant of time actually under Original sin:
others on the contrary, saying, that from the beginning of her Creation, God
loving her, gave her grace by which preserving and freeing that blessed person
from the Original spot -- we, having diligently look into the authorities and
reasons, which for many years past have in public relation on both sides been
alleged before this holy Synod, and having seen many other things about it,
and weighed them by mature consideration, do Define and Declare, that the
doctrine affirming that the glorious Virgin Mary the Mother of God, by the
singular preventing and operating grace of God, was never actually under
Original sin, but was ever free from all Original and actual sin, and was holy
and immaculate, is to be approved, held and embraced of all Catholics as godly
and Consonant to Church-worship, Catholic faith, right reason, and sacred
Scripture: and that henceforth it shall be lawful for no man to preach and
teach the contrary] Is not this plain Defining?

Obj. But this was not an approved Council. Answ. 1. It was owned by Pope
Eugenius himself. And here once for all I prove that the Council of Basil was
approved by the Pope: for Pope Felix the fifth (one of the best Popes that ever
Rome had this thousand years) approved it in this point: not only by accepting
their election, but in express terms [professing firmly to hold the faith of
the Councils of Constance and Basil, and to keep it inviolate to a tittle, and
confirm it with his soul and blood: promising faithfully to labor to defend
the Catholic faith, and for the execution and observation of the Decrees of
the Councils of Constance and Basil, swearing to prosecute the celebration of
General Councils, and confirmation of Elections, according to the Decrees of
the Holy Council of Basil] See Binnius Ses. 40. page 87. If they say that Felix
was not a true Pope: I answer, then Martin the fifth chosen by the Council at
Constance was no true Pope; and then where is your succession? These things are
plain and cannot be denied, though unconscionable shifters, that argue
according to their Wills, may find words to be guile the simple.

2 It seems then your Catholic Church representative is nothing if one man
like it not.

One more instance: How largely has the Council of Trent dealt about original
sin: And yet the foresaid Thomas White ibid. says thus [If the People were
taught Original sin is nothing but a Disposition to evil, or a natural
weakness, which unless prevented brings infallibly sin and damnation: and that
in it self it deserves neither reproach nor punishment, as long as it proceeds
not to actual sin, the heat of vulgar devotion would be cooled, etc.] See here
a mere Pelagian issue of all the Determinations about Original sin, which they
should swear to believe.

CHAP. XV.
Detect. 6. AND by this that has been said, you may see what to think of their
glorying in their Unity, and accusing our Divisions. One of the principal
arguments that they prevail by, is by telling the people into how many sects we
are divided, and that the Catholic Church is but one: but we are many: and
here they will tell you of all the names they can reckon up, Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Arminians, Socinians, Quakers, and what
not. And they will tell you that all this Division comes by departing from the
Roman Catholic Church; every man being left to be of what Religion his fancy
leads him to, for want of an universal Judge of controversies. And they will
ask you what reason you have among all these Sects to believe one of them
rather then another? So that they would persuade you that there is no way for
Unity but by turning to be Papists, that we may be united in the Pope of Rome.

To all this deceit (for it is no better) we give them our full answer in these
Propositions. 1. It is not every kind of unity that is desirable: but Unity
with truth, and honesty, and safety. Its easier to agree in evil then in good:
for evil finds more friendship with corrupted nature, and has more servants
in the world. The wicked are more agreed, and far more in number, of one mind,
then the Godly are. The Mahometans are far more agreed; and that in a far
greater number, then the Papists are. The Devils have some agreement in their
way: They are all agreed to hate Christ and his members, and to seek night and
day whom they may devour. It is easier to agree in a Papists work then in ours:
To ceater carnally in a sinful (and often a most wicked) man; to agree in
certain forms and ceremonies, which flesh and blood is glad to delude
themselves with, instead of the Life of faith and Love; its easy to agree in
such a carnal religion. To spare the labor and time of study and searching
after truth, and to cast their souls upon the faith of others, even the Pope or
a Council, this is an easy thing for lazy ungodly men to agree in: But to make
the Truth our Own, and get the Law of Christ written in our own hearts, and to
live upon it, and walk in the light, and embrace all those truths that are most
against our fleshly inclination and interest, this is not so easy for
corrupted nature to agree upon.

2. Christ has told us that it is a little flock to whom he gives the Kingdom,
Luke 12. 32. and that the gate is strait, and the way narrow that leads to
life, and few there be that find it; and the gate is wide and the way broad
that leads to destruction, and many there be that enter at it. And therefore it
is no great wonder if error and sin have the greater number.

3. And yet for all this I dare boldly say that there is a far more excellent
Unity and Concord among the true Reformed Catholics, then among the Papists,
and that they do but cheat poor souls with the falfe pretense of unity. And
this I shall make appear to you as follows.

1. As I have said before, they are utterly divided and disagreed about that
very power in which they should unite, and which they pretend must agree them
in all other things. One half of them are for the Sovereignty of a Pope, and
the other of a General Council: and that as a point of faith. So that there is
no possibility of Union with them, that are divided in the very point in which
they invite us to Unite with them. If the eye be dark how shall the body see?
If they cannot agree about that power that they say must agree them in all
things else, what hope of an agreement with them?

But for our parts we are all agreed that Christ only is the head of the
Church, and in him we all unite.

2. With us, they are usually but here and there a straggling person, or some
few half-witted self-conceited Novices that fall off and disagree from us in
any thing that destroys salvation: But with the Papists, Princes are against
Princes, and Nations against Nations, and which is much more, General Councils
against General Councils, even in the Foundation of their faith. So that let
the General Councils be never so full and learned, and justly called, yet if
they be against the Popes Sovereignty over them, the other party call them but
Conciliabula, false Councils and Conventicles. Of how great moment this
difference is, let the learned Cajetane be a witness, who in his Oration in the
Council at the Laterane, under Leo 10. inveighing against the Councils at Pisa,
Constance and Basil, makes one to be Babel, and the other Jerusalem.

3. As I proved before, the Papists are divided into two several pretended
Catholic Churches by making themselves two Sovereigns: but so are not we: For
we have but one Head Jesus Christ. That they are two Churches (besides what is
said) hear the words of Cajetane in the foresaid Oration (in Bin. p. 552.)
[This Novelty of Pisa, sprung up at Constance, and vanished. At Basil it sprung
up again and is exploded: and if you be men, it will n^w also be repressed as
it was under Eugenius the fourth. For it comes not from heaven, and therefore
will not be lasting. Nor does it embrace the Principality of that One, who is
in the Church triumphant, and preserves the Church militant; and which the
Synod of Pisa ought to embrace if it came from heaven, and not, as it does, to
rely on the Government of a multitude. The Church of the Pisans therefore does
far differ from this Church of Christ. For one is the Church of believers: the
other of Cavillers: One of the household of God; the other of the Errone us: One
(is the Church) of Christian men: the other of such as fear not to tear the
coat of Christ, and divide the mystical members of Christ from his mystical
body.] This was spoken in Council with applause. And can there yet be greater
divisions then these?

4. They have been utterly divided about the very power of choosing their Pope,
in whom they must unite. In one age the People chose him: In another the Clergy
chose him; sometime both together: For a long time the Emperors chose him: At
last only the Cardinals chose him. And sometime a General Council has chosen
him. Our Catholic Church has no such uncertain Head, but one that's the same
yesterday to day and for ever.

5. They have often had two or three Popes at once, and one part of the Church
has followed one, and another the other: yea (as is said for forty years
together, none knew the true Pope) says Cajetane ubi sup. [Of the Schism of
that time there were three so accounted Popes, that none of them might be
esteemed the Successor of Peter either certain, or without ambiguity.] For many
ages one part has been running after one, and the other after the other, or
striving about them. But we are all agreed in our Head without Controversy.

6. They have killed multitudes of persons in their divisions about the choice
of their Pope (as in Damasus choice) And they have had many bloody wars to the
dividing of the Church about their Popes and between Pope and Pope. This was
their Unity. It would make a Christian ashamed and grieved to read of the
lamentable wars and divisions of Christendom, either between or about their
Popes.

7. Their Popes and Christian Emperor, Kings and Princes, have been in yet
longer and more grievous wars.

8. They have set Princes against Princes, and Nations against Nations in wars
about the Causes of the Popes for many ages together: and it is too seldom
otherwise.

9. They have set Kings and their own subjects together in wars, as England and
almost all Christendom has known by sad experience.

10. They have Excommunicated Princes, and encouraged their subjects to expel
them, and to murder them: hence were the inhumane murders of Henry the third,
and Henry the fourth, Kings of France; and the Powder Plot, and may Treasons in
England: This is their Unity.

11. They center and unite the Church in an impotent, insufficient Head, that
is not able to do the Office of a Head, to the hundredth part of the Church,
and therefore cannot possibly preserve unity. But our Head is all-sufficient.

12. They set up not only a Controverted head, which all the Churches never
agreed to, nor ever will do, but also a false usurping Head, which the Churches
dare not and ought not to unite in. Whereas Jesus Christ is beyond controversy
the just and lawful Head of the Church.

13. Your Agreement and Unity is with none but your own sect: and is this so
great a matter to boast off? you divide your selves from most of the Catholic
Church, and cast them off as Heretics, or Schismatics; and then boast of a
Unity among your selves. And so may the Quakers, the Anabaptists, the
Socinians, as well as you: Or if you magnify your Unity from the greatness of
your number that agree, the Greek Church also is numerous: and yet in this we
far exceed you. For the true Catholic is in Union with all the Members of
Christ on earth. We lay our Unity on the Essentials of Christianity, and so are
united with all true Christians in the world: even with many of them that
reproach us: when you laying your Unity on I know not how many doubtful
points, yea, on you know not what your selves, can extend it no further then to
your sect. Which is the more notable and glorious Unity? to be United to the
truly Catholic body, containing all true Christians in the world, or to be at
Unity with a sect, which is the lesser and more corrupted part of the Church?

14. With what face can Papists glory in their Unity, that are the greatest
Dividers of the Church on earth? Who is it that condemns the greatest part of
the Church, and prosecuteth that condemnation with fire and sword, or so much
vehemence, as the Papists do? when they have most audaciously divided
themselves from all others, and arrogated the title of Catholics to
themselves, they call this abominable Schism by the name of Unity. If you say
that the Reformers have divided themselves from all others too: I answer, not
as from Heretics, or no members of the same body with us, as you do: but only
as from unsound mistaken Brethren: And therefore properly we are not divided
from them, but only from their mistakes. We think it not lawful to join with
the dearest Brethren in sinning, or in that worship (by personal local
communion) where we cannot keep our innocence: But yet we hold the unity of the
Spirit with them in the bond of Peace: and are one with them in all the
substance of Christianity, and holy worship. Even where distance of place, or
circumstantiall differences keep us from Communion in the same Assemblies: yet
our several Assemblies have communion in faith, and Love, and the substance of
worship as to the kind, so that our division from other Christians is nothing
to the Papists.

15. But yet when any differ from us in any point Essential to our Religion
(that is, to Christianity,) they are none of us, nor owned by us; and therefore
you cannot say that we are at difference among our selves, because some
Apostates have fallen off from us. You will not allow us to say you have many
sects, because some of you have turned Socinians, or because thousands of yours
have turned to the Reformers, in the days of Luther, Calvin, etc. And why then
should those sects be numbered with us that are not of us, but went out from us?
If men turn Infidels, Seekers, Quakers, Socinians, etc. they are not of us no
more then of you. If you say that we bred them: I answer, no more than you
breed them, when they turn to the same sects from you: Nor no more then you
bred the Lutherans, far better men. They went out from you, and yet you bred
them not: But on the other side, you cherish those as part of your Church,
which differ from you in your fundamentals; so that the Pope dare not unchurch
or disown them (as the French, etc.) but so do not we.

16. Our Unity is in Positives, and theirs is in Negatives: Ours is a Unity in
faith; and theirs is in not believing the contrary: And so dead men, may have a
fuller Unity in the grave then the Papists have.

17. Our Union is Divine, having a Divine Head and Center, and Divine Doctrine
and Law in which we agree. But the Papists is humane, having a carnal Head and
Center, and Humane Decrees and Canons for its matter and Rule.

18. They have not so sure a means of retaining men in their unity as we have:
Let experience be Judge of this: For where one has forsaken our Unity and
Communion, I suppose hundreds, if not thousands, have forsaken theirs, as
France, Belgia, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, Hungary, Transylvania,
England, Scotland, Ireland, etc. can witness: and if themselves might be
believed, the Greek Church, and all, or almost all the Christians else in the
world have gone from their unity. And yet will they glory in the effectualness
of their means of unity? Why then did they not retain all these Nations in
their unity?

19. Moreover, indeed they have very little Religious unity at all among them;
for its force and terror that keeps men in their Church: And who can tell under
such violence how many stick to them in Conscience and willingly? He that will
forsake their Religion in Spain, must be tormented and burnt at a stake, and in
other Countries where they have full power, he must be at least undone. So that
1. Theirs is a unity of bodies more then of minds: 2. And their union is not
procured by the Pope as Pope; but by the temporal sword, which the Pope has
usurped over some countries, and which deluded Princes use by his persuasion in
other Countries. What a juggling deceit then is this, to persuade poor souls,
that the only way to unity is to Center in the Pope of Rome, and that this is
the most effectual means of ending differences! when in the mean they make so
little use of it, and place so little confidence in it themselves, but uphold
their unity by the Magistrates sword? And if this be the way, we have
Magistrates among us as well as they, that can as effectually compel men to
unity, as far as their Judgments tell them it is fit: And besides this force,
it is the riches and preferment of their Clergy, with their immunity from
secular power, and the like, that is the means of their unity. But it is the
light of holy Scripture opened by a faithful Ministry, and countenanced by
Christian Magistracy without tyranny, that is our means of unity.

If the Papal Headship be so effectual a means of unity as they pretend, and
if they are so much of a mind as they say, let them give us leave but to preach
one 12. months in Spain and Italy if they dare: or let them give men leave
without fire and sword to choose their Religion.

20. And yet besides all this, and after all this tyranny, they have more
difference among themselves then we have, or then all the Christians that I
hear of in the world. And to hide the Infamy of their differences, they
tolerate them, and extenuate them. For differences in Discipline, and order of
Worship they allow abundance of sects called Orders, that men and women may
choose which they please. And the voluminous differences of their Schoolmen,
Casuists and Commentators, they say are not in matters of faith. But call them
what you will, they are many of them greater differences then are with us. I
pray read over the Jansenians Mystery of Jesuitism, and take notice of the
differences between the Jesuits and them in Case- Divinity, and judge whether
they be small. And let it not offend your ears if I recite some of their
Differences in that Papists own words, as he cites the Jesuits, and tells you
where to find what he says.

Page 89. Filintius the Jesuit holds, that if a man have purposely wearied
himself with satisfying a whore, that he might be dispensed with from fasting
on a fasting day, he is not obliged to fast, But the Jansenians think otherwise.

Basilius Pontius and Bunny the Jesuits teach, that a man may seek an
opportunity of sinning primo and per se, when the spiritual or temporal
concernment of our selves or our neighbors inclines him thereto, But the
Jansenists think the contrary: Page 91.

Eman. Sa the Jesuit holds, that [a man do what he conceives lawful according
to a probable opinion, though the contrary be the more certain: and for this
the Opinion of one grave Doctor is sufficient.] And Filintius the Jesuit held
[that it is lawful to follow the less probable opinion, though it be the less
certain, and that this is the common opinion of modern authors] Page 95. And
yet the Jansenists are against it.

Layman the Jesuit holds, that [If it be more favorable to them that ask
advice of him, and more desired, it is Prudence to give them such advice as is
held probable by some knowing person, though he himself be convinced that it is
absolutely false.] But the Jansenists are against this. Page 96.

Bunney the Jesuit holds [that when the patient follows a probable opinion,
the confessor is bound to absolve him, though his judgment be contrary to that
of the penitent: and that he sins mortally if he deny him absolution] Myster.
of Jesuit. page 97. But the Jansenists deny this.

Father Reginaldus and Cellot hold, that [the modern Casuists in questions of
Morality are to be preferred before the ancient Fathers, though they were
nearer the Aposiles times] Page 98. But the Jansenists think otherwise.

Pope Gregory the fourteenth declares Murderers unworthy to have Sanctuary in
Churches. But the Jesuits and Jansenists agree not who are the Murderers. The
29 Jesuits in their Praxis page 600. by murderers understand those who have
taken money to kill one treacherously: and that those who kill without
receiving any reward, but do it only to oblige their friends, are not called
murderers.] But the Jansenists think otherwise. (No marvail if you cannot
understand the Scripture without a judge, when you can no better understand
your judge, no not what he means by a murderer.)

Vasquez the Jesuit says [that in this Question, rich men are obliged to give
alms out of their superfluity; though the affirmative be true, yet it will
seldom or never happen, that it is obligatory in point of practice] Page 105.
But the Jansenists think otherwise.

Valentia the Jesuit, Tom. 3. p. 2042. holds, that [If a man give money not as
the price of a Benefice, but as a Motive to resign it, it is not Simony, though
he that resigns do look at the money as his Principal end] and so Tannerus, p.
115. But the Jansenists think otherwise.

Father Gaspar Hurtado says [that an Incumbent may without mortal sin wish the
death of him that has a pension out of his living, and a son his fathers
death; and may rejoice when it happens, so it proceed only from a consideration
of the advantage accrewing to him thereby, and not out of any personal hatred]
page 136. But the Jansenists believe not this.

Layman the Jesuit, and Pet. Hurtado: thinks that a man may lawfully fight a
duel, accepting the challenge to defend his honor or estate, Page 138. But
the Jansenist thinks otherwise.

Sanchez and Navarrus allow a man to murder his adversary secretly, or dispatch
him at unawares to avoid the danger of a duel: p. 140. And Molina thinks you
may kill one that wrongfully informs against us in any Court: and Reginaldus,
that you may kill the false witnesses which the prosecutor brings; And Tannerus
and Emanuel Sa, that you may kill both witnesses and judge which conspire the
death of an innocent person] But so think not the Jansenists.

Henriquez says [one man may kill another who has given him a box on the ear,
though he run away for it, provided he do it not out of hatred or revenge, and
that by that means a gap be open for excessive murder, destructive to the
State. And the reason is, a man may as well do it in pursuance of his
reputation, as his goods; and he that has had a box on the ear is accounted
dishonorable till he has killed his enemy.] And Azorius says, Is it lawful
for a person of quality to kill one that would give him a box on the ear, or a
bang with a stick? some say not -- But others affirm it lawful, and for my
part I think it probable, when it cannot be avoided otherwise: For if it were
not, the reputation of innocent persons were still exposed to the insolency of
the malicious.] page 142, 143, 144. many other are of the same mind, in so much
that Father Lessius says [It is lawful, by the consent of all Casuists, to
kill him that would give a box on the ear, or a blow with a stick, when a man
cannot otherwise avoid it p. 145. Father Boldellus says It is lawful to kill
him that says to you [thou lyest] if a man cannot right himself otherwise.]
And Lessius says [If you endeavor to ruin my reputation by opprobrious
speeches before persons of honor, and that I cannot avoid them otherwise then
by killing you, may I do it? According to modern Authors I may; nay though the
crime you lay to my charge be such as I am really guilty of, it being supposed
to have been so secretly committed, that you cannot discover it by ways of
justice. It Is proved, if when you would take away my reputation by giving me a
box on the ear, it is in my power to prevent it by force of arms, the same
defense is certainly lawful, when you would do me the same injury with your
tongue. Besides, a man may avoid the affront of those whose ill language he
cannot hinder. In a word, honor is more precious then life, but a man may kill
in defense of his life, ergo, he may kill in defense of his honour] page 146.
But the Jansenists are against all this.

Escombar says, that regularly it is lawful to kill a man for the value of a
crown, according to Molina. p. 151. Father Amicus says [It is lawful for a
Churchman, or a Religious man to kill a detractor that threatens to divulge
the scandalous crimes of his community or himself, when there is no other means
left to hinder him from doing it, as if he be ready to scatter his calumnes, if
not suddenly dispatched out of the way] p. 152, 153. And Caramovel in his
Fundamental Theology takes it for certain, and thence concludes, that [a
Priest not only may kill a detractor on certain occasions, but sometimes ought
to do it] And yet the peevish Jansenist believes none of this.

But I must stop: you may read in the said Jansenians Mystery of Jesuitism, a
volumn of such passages of the Jesuits, allowing men to give and receive the
Sacrament when they come that day from Adultery: and allowing a man to eat and
drink as much as he can with his health: and discharging men from a Necessity
of Loving God, unless it be once in their lives, or as others say, upon
Holy Days, or as Hurtado de Mendoza, once a year, or as Conink, once in three
or four years, or as Henriquez, once in five years, or as Anthon. Sirmond, not
at all, so we do not hate him, and do obey his other commands, with abundance
more.

Now Reader I would here leave it to thy consideration, whether all these
differences among the Papists are so small as to be no matters of faith. And I
entreat you to read over the forementioned Book, (the Mystery of Jesuitism)
and then judge whether Papists or the Reformed Catholics are more at unity
among themselves.

Well! but suppose the loving of God, the avoiding murder, bribery, and the
like, be no matter of faith at Rome, yet I have not done with them so. I desire
to know whether the holy Scripture be matter of faith or not? They dare not
deny but it is. Well! and what is the Scripture, but the words ut signa, and
the sense or matter ut res significata? And are the Papists agreed among
themselves about either of these? no: For the words, its well known how some of
the best Learned of them have stood for the pre-eminence of the Hebrew and
Greek Texts: and others, and the most, for the vulgar Latin. And that vulgar
Latin Translation has been altered and altered again by them. And after many
others comes Pope Sixtus the fifth, and makes it so complete, that the Church is
required to use his Edition; yet after him comes Pope Clement the eighth and
mends it in many hundred, if not thousand places, and imposes this upon the
Church; which of these Popes was Infallible? I am sure they much differ in
their Translations.

And for the sense of scripture, though men must swear to take Scripture in the
Churches sense, yet will not any Pope or Council to this day, tell us the sense
of them, either by giving us an infallible Commentary, or by deciding the many
thousand differences that are among their Commentators. Do not all these
Commentators forswear themselves, having sworn (those that lived since the
Council of Trent) to expound Scripture in the sense of the Church, and only
according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers. And why does not the Pope
decide these controversies? seeing it is their happiness to have such a Judge of
Controversies to keep them all of a mind?

But perhaps they will say, that all these Scriptures be not matters of faith.
No! where are we then? what is matter of faith if Scripture be not? And if all
be not, how shall we know which is? But at least, tell us, Is no one of all
those many hundred or thousand Texts which your Commentators differ about any
matter of Faith? If not, then sure you have no Faith. If it be, then surely the
Papists differ among themselves in matters of Faith. It is not a few Texts that
Lyra's excepter and Burgensis differ about, to name no more. And of the
foresaid Editions of the Bible by Pope Sixtus, and Clement, see Dr. James'
Bellum Papale, vel Concordia discors.

CHAP. XVI.
Detect. 7. BY what has been said, you may discern how to deal with them, when
they would industriously confound the Essentials and the Integral parts of our
Faith: for this is another of their juglings.

They cannot endure to hear us distinguish the fundamentals (that is, the
Essentials) of our Religion from the rest: and therefore they call out to us
for a Catalogue of our fundamentals; and would persuade us that whatsoever is
matter of faith, is of Necessity to salvation to be believed, and those are
damnable Heretics that deny them, and therefore we must not make any such
difference. See Knot against Chillingworth. Their design in this is to persuade
people that the world must be wholly of their mind in matters of faith, or else
they cannot be saved. And by this trick they would prove that the Protestants
and many other Churches are all Heretics, and therefore have no place in
General Councils, and are no parts of the Catholic Church. But let us consider
how judiciously they proceed.

1. We must desire the Papists to tell us whether Christianity be any thing or
nothing? If any thing, it has its Essence: and 2. Whether this Essence of
Christianity be Knowable or not? If not, then they cannot know a Christian from
another: and they cannot know the Church from other Societies. If it be
knowable, then its Essence must needs be knowable. 3. And we would be informed
by them, whether all true Christians in the world are of the same stature or
degree of knowledge and explicit belief? If they be, then there is no
difference between Fathers and Babes, Strong and Weak, Priest and People; and
then the Jesuits have no more Knowledge or Faith then the simplest woman of
their Church: but if there be a difference, then 4. We would know whether the
Essence of Christianity be varyed according to these degrees. If so, then there
are as many sorts of Christianity in the world, as there be degrees of Faith;
which they have more wit, I suppose, then to affirm. If not, then the Essence
of Christianity is distinguishable from the Integrity or superadded Degrees,
which is the thing that we contend for. 5. We desire also to know whether the
Apostles did not go on to teach their people more, after they had made them
Christians, in a state of salvation. And whether the Priests, Friars, and
Jesuits will give men up, and teach them nothing more when they have made them
Christians. I know they will say, There Is more to be taught. And if so, then
the Essentials of Christianity are distinguishable from the Integrals or
Degrees. 6. And we would know else how they will understand that in Heb. 5. 10,
11, 12, 14. and 6. 1, 2. [For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye
have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the Oracles
of God, and are become such as have need of milk and not of strong meat. For
every one that uses milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is
a babe. But strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, who by reason
of use have their senses exercised to discern good and evil: therefore leaving
the Principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection, not
laying again the foundation, etc.] Tell us now whether the Apostle do not here
distinguish between babes and strong men; milk and strong meat; the principles
or foundation and perfection? 7. And we would know of them whether all that is
Revealed by God be of absolute Necessity to every man's salvation that do or may
hear it? If so, then no man can be saved that knows not all that God has
revealed; and then no one in the world can be saved: for here we know but in
part. And their own Commentators differ about the word of God, which shows
that they are imperfect in the Knowledge of its sense. And their Pope knows it
not, or else he is shamefully to blame, that will not tell it the world, and
reconcile his Commentators and Disputers. But if all revealed be not of
Absolute Necessity, then we may have leave to distinguish between points
absolutely Necessary, and the rest. 8. And we would know whether all shall be
damned, that know not as much as the most Learned and Wise? if not, then still
we may have leave to distinguish. 9. Further we demand, whether any ignorance
or error that is culpable, will stand with Charity and Salvation? If not, then
who shall be saved? If yea; then we may still distinguish the points of
Absolute Necessity from the rest. 10. We demand also, whether the whole holy
Scripture be the word of God? If so, then whether we ought not to believe it
all as far as we can understand it? And if so, whether it be not all, de fide
matter of Faith? If not, they must tell us, what part of Gods word is to be
believed, and what not. If yea; then certainly men may err de fide in points of
Faith, and yet have Charity, and be saved: as their disagreeing Commentators,
Casuists and Schoolmen do. 11. We would know whether the matters that their
Divines are disagreed in, be Revealed by God, or things unrevealed? If not
revealed, do they not deserve to be kicked out of the world, for troubling the
world so with unrevealed things? If they be Revealed, are they not Revealed to
be believed, and so are de fide? 12. And we would know whether there be not
some things Essential to true Obedience, and some things not Essential? If not,
then no sinner has sincere Obedience, and can be saved: If yea; then why may
not the same be said of faith? 13. Also we would know, when they baptize the
Adult, whether they require any profession of the faith from them or not? If
not, they may as well baptize Infidels or Heathens. If they do, then what is
that profession? Is it a profession of every particular truth that God has
revealed to be believed? No sure: for then none but Doctors must be baptized.
Nor they neither. Or is it a profession of some particular Truths only? If of
some only, why of those more then the rest, if they be not the Essentials
distinguishable from the rest? And do they make men true Christians by
baptizing them, or not? If they do, then sure the Baptismal faith must contain
all that is Essential to Christianity. 14. We desire also to be informed by
them, what is the use of the Churches Creed, and why they have used frequently
to make confession of their faith? Was it not the whole faith Essential to
Christianity which they confessed? If not, then it was not fit to be the badge of
the Church; or of the Orthodox: if yea; then it seems those Creeds had in them
the essentials distinguished from the rest. 15. we would know whether every
thing delivered or defined by any General Council, be of such necessity to
salvation, that all must explicitly believe them all that will be saved? If
so, then whether any Papist can be saved, seeing they understand them not all?
If not, then sure a distinction must be made. 16. And we would know how they
can countenance ignorance so much as they do, if all things revealed be of
equal necessity to salvation. 17. And what mean they to distinguish of
Implicit and Explicit faith? Is it enough to believe as the Church believes,
and not know what in any particular? then it is not de fide, or necessary to
salvation to believe the resurrection of Christ, or of man, or the life to
come. For a man may believe that the Church is in the right, and yet not know
that it holds any of these. Is it enough to believe the formal object of
faith (which with us is Gods veracity) without the material? Or is it enough to
remain Infidels, and only believe that the Church are true Believers? If you
hold to this, you make no act of faith, but one (the believing that the Church,
that is, the Pope or Council are true believers) to be of Necessity to
salvation. But if there be something that is Necessary to be actually (that is
explicitly) believed, then must not that be distinguished from the rest and
made known? 18. Whence is it that you denominate men fideles, believers with
you? Is it from a Positive faith, or for not holding the contrary? If the
latter, then Stones, and Beasts, and Pagans, and their Infants may be
believers. If the former, then that Positive faith from whence all believers
are denominated must be known. 19. Is not that true faith and all that is
essential to Christianity, which does consist with saving grace or (to use your
phrase) with true Charity? If not, then either Infidels and no Christians may
have true Charity, or else true Charity may be in the unjustified; or both: If
yea, (which doubtless you will yield) then sure men of lower knowledge and
faith then Doctors, may have true Charity; and therefore true faith. 20.
Lastly, I appeal to your own confessions. Bellarmine often distinguishes
between the points that all must of Necessity explicitly believe, and the
rest. And Suarez in three parts. Thom. Disp. 43. Sect. 4. faith of the Article
of Christ's descending into Hell [If by an Article of faith we understand a
truth which all the faithful are bound explicitly to know and believe, so I
do not think it necessary to reckon this among the Articles of faith, because
it is not altogether necessary for all men] Here you see that Suarez
distinguishes between Articles of Necessity to all, and those that are not:
and that he excepts even the Descent into Hell from this number of Articles
Necessary to all I might cite many more of your writers; but the thing is well
known.

But perhaps you will say, that though all that is de fide, be not necessary to be
believed explicitly by all, yet implicitly it must. I Ans. 1. that which you
call Implicit believing is no believing that point, but another point: yea a
point that does not so much as infer that: for it follows not [the Church is
infallible, therefore Christ descended into Hell.]

2. And we believe all that is de fide with an Implicit faith as well as you:
But it is an Implicit Divine faith, and not humane: For we are sure that All
that God says is true; and this Divine veracity is the formal object of our
faith. And we believe that all that is in Scripture is true, and that all that
was ever delivered by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost is true.

Object. But all that is de fide is so necessary, that it will not stand with
salvation to believe the contrary, or deny or dis-believe any point of faith.
Answ. 1. That cannot be true, For no man can prove that a point may not be
denied and disputed against by a true Believer as long as he is ignorant that
it is true, and from God: the same ignorance that keeps him from knowing it,
may cause him to deny it, and gainsay it. 2. Do not your own differing
Commentators, Schoolmen and Casuists (on one side at least) dispute
voluminously against some Truths of Divine revelation? If you change a man's
mind from the smallest error by dispute, do you take that to be a change of his
state from death to life? Aenaeas Sylvius thought a General Council was above
the Pope: but when he came to be Pope Pins the second, he thought the Pope
above a General Council; was this a change from death to life? It seems by his
Bull of Retractation, he thought so, but so did not several General Councils:
was the Catholic Church Representative at the Council of Basil, or Constance,
or Pisa in a state of death and damnation for believing the Pope to be subject
to a General Council? or was the Council at Laterane (another Representative
Catholic Church) in a state of death for holding the Contrary? Must either
Pope John the twenty second, or Pope Nicolas be damned because of the
contrariety of their Decrees? If the Council of Toletane the first ordain that
he that has a Concubine instead of a wife, shall not be kept from the
Sacrament, does it prove them all in a state of death? If Bellarmine confess
that the sixth General Council at Constantinople have many errors, does it
follow that the Catholic Church representative was in a damnable state? If the
second Council at Nice maintain the corpercity of Angels, and the first Council
at the Latarane maintain the contrary, does it follow that one of them was in a
state of death? I think not: (though I am sure it proves a General Council
fallible, when approved by the Pope, and therefore Popery a deceit.) Bellarmine
sometime tells us of the change of his own mind.

And the Retractations of Austin (a better man) tell us of the change of his
mind in many things: And yet it follows not that he was in a state of death
and unjustified before.

Object. But all that is de fide is of Necessity to the Salvation of some,
though not of all. Answ. 1. If that be granted, yet you must grant us leave to
distinguish between Points necessary to be believed by all, and points that are
not thus necessary to all. 2. But in what case is it that you mean, that other
points are of Necessity to some? 1. Is it to those some that know them to be of
Divine Revelation? we easily grant you that: But that is not because the Things
themselves are simply necessary to Salvation, but because a Belief of Gods
veracity, and the Truth of all that he Reveals in general, is of necessity:
and he that Believes that God is True (verax) cannot choose but believe all to
be True which he knows God reveals. He that thinks God to be a Liar, in one
word, does not believe his veracity, and so has no Divine faith at all. And
therefore you need not fear lest any one should be guilty of not believing that
which they know is the word of God, but those that take God to be a Liar, and
that is those that take him not to be God, and so are Atheists. But still the
thing of Absolute necessity is but first to believe in General that God is true
in all his word, secondly and to believe the truth of the essential points of
Christianity in particular (embracing the Good propounded in them.) Now its
true that secondarily all known Truths are of necessity to be believed, because
else our General belief of Gods veracity is not sincere. But yet we must say
that antecedently even to that person, these superadded truths were not of
Necessity to his Salvation to be believed, because they were not of such
Necessity to be Known; and if they had not been known, you would say your
selves there had not been such Necessity of Believing them.

But if you go further, and say, that all that were obliged to know them, or
that had opportunity, or the Revelation if the truth, and yet did not, and
thereupon deny them culpably, are in a state of death; I deny that, and shall
prove it false. Its true, that a wilful refusing the Light, because men love
darkness rather then light, is a certain sign of a graceless wretch. But every
culpable ignorance and unbelief is not Damning ignorance or unbelief.

1. Otherwise no man should be saved: For no man is void of culpable ignorance,
and consequently of culpable unbelief. Had we never been wanting in the use of
means, there is no man but might have known more then he does. Is there any one
of you that dare refuse to ask God forgiveness of your ignorance, unbelief, or
the negligence that is the culpable cause of them, or that dare say, you need
no pardon of them? 2. If you plead for venial sin, how can you deny a venial
unbelief upon venial ignorance? But then I pray you learn more wit and piety,
1. then to say that your venial unbelief or sin is no sin, save as Analogically
so called; or 2. then to say it deserves a pardon, or deserves not everlasting
punishment. But if you will call it venial, because being consistent with the
true Love of God and habitual Holiness, and saving faith, the Law of Grace does
pardon it, and not condemn men for it, thus we would agree with you that there
is venial sin; but then you must yield us that there is venial unbelief.

3. And we easily prove all this from the Law of God. It is the nature of the
preceptive part to constitute Duty only, and the violation of that is sin: But
it is the sanction, the promise and threatening that Determines of the Reward
and Penalty: Now it is only the old Law of works that makes the Threatening as
large as the prohibition, condemning man for every sin: but so does not the Law
of Grace. The precept still commands Perfect obedience, and so makes it a
duty; but the promise makes not perfect obedience the condition of Salvation;
but Faith, Repentance and sincere Obedience, though imperfect. The Law of
Nature still makes everlasting Death due to every sin: But it is such a Due as
has a Remedy at hand provided and offered in the Gospel; and is actually
remedyed to all true believers. So that as it is not every sin that will damn
us, though damnation be due to it (because we have a present Remedy;) so it is
not every culpable ignorance or unbelief that will damn us, though it deserve
damnation, because the Gospel does not only not damn us for it, but pardons it,
by acquitting us from the condemnation of the Law. All this may teach you, not
only to mend your abominable doctrine about Mortal and venial sin, but also to
discern the reason why a man may deny some points of faith that are not of the
essence of Christianity, and yet not be damned for it, because the Law of Grace
does not condemn him for it, though he be culpable, because the Law of Grace
may command further then it peremptorily condemns in case of disobedience. It
is the Promise that makes faith the Condition of Life, though it be the Precept
that makes it a duty: Now it saves not as a performed Duty directly, (because
the precept gives not the Reward) but as a performed Condition: And therefore
unbelief condemns not effectually as a mere sin directly, but as such a sin
as is the violation or nonperformance of that condition. But it is not a
belief of every thing that is preceptively de fide, which is made the condition
of life.

CHAP. XVII.
Detect. 8. ANother of their Juglings is, to extol the judgment of the
Catholic Church as that which must be the ground of faith, and the decider of
all Controversies: And to this end they plead against the sufficiency of
Scripture, and bend all the force of their arguings and designs, as if all
their hope lay in this point, and as if it were a granted thing that the day is
theirs, and we are lost, if the Catholic Church be admitted to be the Judge.
Hence it is that they cry out against private faith and opinions, and call men
to the faith of the Church, and persuade the poor people, that the Church is
for them, and we are but branches broken off.

Well, we are content to deal with them at their own weapon, and at that one in
which they put their trust. For our parts we know that the true Catholic
Church (nor any member of it, in sensu Composito) cannot err in any of the
Essentials of Christianity (for then it would cease to be the Church:) But we
have too much reason to Judge that it is not free from error in lesser things.
But yet for all that in the main cause between the Papists and us, we refuse
not their judgment. Nay we turn this Canon against the Canoneers, and easily
prove that the Papists cause is utterly lost, if the Catholic Church be Judge.

But is it the Ancient Church, or the present Church that must decide the
cause? Well! It shall be which you will. For the most Ancient Church in the
Apostles days, we are altogether of its belief, and stand to its decision in
all things; and if you prove we mistake them in any thing, we shall gladly
receive instruction and be reclaimed. To them we appeal for our Essentials and
Integrals. And for some following ages, we will be tried by them in the
articles of our faith, and in the principal controversies we have with the
Papists.

Yea, but this will not serve their turn: It is the present Church that must
judge or none: For say they, if the ancient Church had power, so has the
present: and if the ancient Church had possession of the truth, how shall we
know it but by the present? I answer, 1. We may know it by the Records of those
times far surer then by the reports of men without writing: Controversies or
numerous mysterious points are sorrily carried in the memories, especially of
the most, even of the Teachers. And for the Records, one diligent skillful man
will know more then ten thousand others. One Baronius, Albaspinaeus, Petavius,
among the Papists, and one Usher, Blondell, Salmasius, Gataker, etc. among the
Protestants, knew more of the mind of antiquity, then a whole Country besides,
or perhaps then some General Councils.

2. Well! but if you appeal to the greater number, to them shall you go. You
must be tried by the present Church; Why then you are condemned. Is it the
lesser number, or the greater, or the better that must be judge? You will not
say the leser, as such: If you do, you know where you are. If you say, the
Better part shall be judge: who shall be Judge which is the Better part? we are
ready to prove the Reformed Churches the Better part: and if we do not, we will
give you the day, and lose our cause. But I suppose you will appeal to the
Greater part. Content! Then the world knows you are lost. The Greeks,
Moscovites, Armenians, Abassines, and all other Churches in Asia, Africa and
Europe are far more then the Papists; and your own pens and mouths tell us that
these are against you. Many of them curse you as Heretics or Schismatics; the
rest of them know you not, or refuse your government. They all agree against
your Popes universal Headship or Sovereignty, and so against the very form of
your new Catholic Church: So that the world knows the Judgment of the far
greatest part of Christians on earth to be against you in the main, so that you
see what you get by appealing to the Catholic Church.

But I know you will say, that all these are Schismatics, or Heretics, and
none of the Catholic Church: But they say as much by you, some of them, and
all of them abhor your charge; and how do you prove it? and who shall be Judge
whether they, or you be the Catholic Church? You tell us of your succession,
and of twenty tales that are good, if you may be Judges your selves; but so do
they say as much which is good if they be Judges. When we offer to dispute our
case with you, you ask us Who shall be Judge, and tell us the Catholic Church
must be Judge: But who shall be Judge between you and them which is the
Catholic Church? you will not let us be Judges in our own cause, and why then
should you? Are we Protestants the lesser number as to you? so are you to all
the rest that are against you. And what reason have we to let the lesser number
Judge over the Greater? If still you say, because you are the Better, let that
be first tried; but no reason you should there also be the Judges.

So that the case is plainly come to this, Either the Papists must stand to the
Greater number, and then the controversy is at end: or they must shamefully
say, we will not dispute with you, unless we may be the Judges our selves,
though the fewer. Or else they must lay by their talk of a Judge, and dispute
it equally with us, by producing their evidence, which we are ever ready for.

CHAP. XVIII.
Detect. 9. THE most common and prevalent Deceit of the Papists is, by
ambiguous terms to deceive those that cannot force them to distinguish, and to
make you believe they mean one thing, when they mean another, and to mock you
with cloudy words. I shall here warn you to look to them therefore especially
in three terms, on which much of their controversies lies, that is, the words
Church, Pope, and Council. For there is but few understand what they mean by any
one of these words.

1. When you come to dispute of the Church with them, see that you agree first
under your hands of the Definition of that Church of which you dispute. And
when you call them to Define it, you will find them in a wood, you will little
think how many several things it is that they call [the Church:] For example,
sometime they mean the whole Body, Pastors and People: but more commonly they
mean only the Pastors, which are the far smallest part. And sometime they mean
the Church Real: and sometimes only the Church Representative, as they call it
in a General Council. But whether they mean the Pastors or People, they
exclude all saving the Pope of his subjects, and so by the [Church] mean but a
part or sect. Sometime in the Question about Tradition, some of the French take
the [Church] for the community, (as fathers deliver the doctrine of Christ to
their children, etc.) And sometime they take it in its Political sense, for a
holy society, consisting of a visible Head and members: But then they agree not
of that Head, some setting the Pope highest, and some the Council. But
frequently they take the word [Church] for the supposed Head alone, as in most
questions about Infallibility, Judging of Controversies, expounding Scripture,
keeping of Traditions, defining points of faith, etc. They say, The Church must
do these: but commonly they mean the supposed Head: And one part mean a
General Council: and the Jesuits and Italians, and predominant part do mean
only the Pope: so that when they talk of the whole Catholic Church, and call
you to its Judgment, and boast of its Infallibility (you would little think
it) they mean all this while but one poor sinful man: and such a man as
sometime has been more unlearned then many of your school boys of twelve or
fourteen years of age; and sometime has been a Murderer, Adulterer, and (if
General Councils, or the common vote may be believed) an Heretic, an Infidel,
an Incarnate Devil. This man is their Church, as Gretser, Bellarmine, and the
rest of that strain profess.

So that if you do but force them to define and explain what they mean by the
Church, you will either cause them to open their nakedness, or find them all to
pieces about the very subject of the Dispute.

2. So also when they use the name of [a Pope] in disputation, make them
explain themselves, and tell you (in a Definition) what they mean by [a Pope.]
For, though you would think this term were sufficiently understood, yet you
shall find them utterly at a loss, and all to pieces about it. Let us consider
distinctly of the Efficient, Matter, and Form. 1 As to the efficient cause of
their Pope, there must concur a Divine Institution (which they can no where
show) and a call from man (and Nemo dat quod non habet, what man or men have
power to make a Head to the Catholic Church.) But whether they will call it an
Efficient Cause, or only a Causa sine qua nen, Election and Ordination must go
to make a Pope. Now either they will put these into their Definition, or not.
If not, know of them whether a man without Election and Ordination may be Pope:
If so, what makes him one? If Possession, then he that can conquer Rome, and
sit down in the chair is Pope: If not possession, what then? and why may not
any man say, I am Pope? well: but doubtless they will tell you that Election,
or Ordination, or both, is Necessary. If so, then first for Election, is it
Necessary to the being of a Pope, that some certain persons Elect who have the
Power, or will any Electors serve whosoever? If any will serve, then every
Monastery or every Parish may choose a Pope: If there must be certain
Authorized Electors, see that those be named in the Definition: or at least
declared. And then first know whether these Electors are empowered to that work
by Divine Law, or by Humane: If by Divine, let them show it if they can. In
Scripture they can never find who must choose the Pope. And their Tradition (if
that were a Divine law) has no such precept, as appears by the alterations
and diverse ways. And if it be but by a Humane Ecclesiastical Canon, then it
seems the Papacy is so too: for the Power received can have no higher a cause
then the Power giving or authorizing.

2. When you come to know who these Electors must be, you open their nakedness.
For first if they say, It must be the Cardinals, ask them, where then was the
Pope when there were no Cardinals in the world? And whether that were a Pope or
not that was chosen by the whole Roman Clergy? or whether those were Popes or
not that were chosen by the People? Or those that were chosen by the Emperors?
or those that were chosen by Councills? If they tell you that it must be the
Roman Clergy; Know whether the Cardinals be the whole Roman Clergy, who are
Bishops of other Churches, or whether they are not merely Titular, at least
many of them? And whether the People, the Council, or the Emperors were the
Roman Clergy? If they would persuade you, that either the people, or the
Emperor, or Council did not elect the Pope, but only show whom the Roman
Clergy should elect, interposing exorbitantly some unjust force, with the Due
Election, then all current History cries shame against them, and we will lay
the Dispute on that with them readily, though it were with Baronius himself.
Nothing almost is more evident in the Papal History, then that there have been
at least these five ways of election among them. Let them put it upon this
issue with us when they will.

If they allow of any of these as valid, which ever it be (as they must, or
give up their succession) then 1. We would know by what Law of God the Emperor
of Germany may choose a Head for the Catholic Church, any more then the
Emperor of Habassia, or the King of France or Spain? 2. And we would know when
the Emperor has chosen one, and the Clergy another (if not some others a
third) whether both were not true Popes, if both parties were authorized
Electors? And if yet the People choose one, and the Roman Clergy another, and
the Cardinals alone a third, and the Emperor a fourth, and the Council a
fifth, must all these stand, or which of them, and why? Or if they tell you
that it must be the particular Roman Church; then 1. If the people of that
Church choose one, and the Clergy by major vote another, and the Cardinals a
third, which is the true Pope? 2. And then the succession is gone however: For
they were no Popes that Emperors or Councils chose.

2. If they shall tell you that it is not Election but Consecration that makes
a Pope, yea or that Consceration is of Necessity with Election; then 1. Demand
of them whether it be any one whosoever that may Consecrate, or whether this
high power be confined to certain hands? If any may serve, or any Bishops, then
he that can get three drunken Bishops to consecrate him may be Pope. And then
there may be an hundred Popes at once. But if it be confined to certain hands,
2. Let it be put down in the Definition, or at least declared who those are
that must ordain or consecrate him. 3. And if they say, that It must be only
the Italian Bishops that must consecrate, then 1. Know of them by what Law of
God they have power to consecrate a Head to the universal Church, when all
nations are agreed that quod pertinet ad omnes, ab omnibus tractari debet. 2.
And by what Law they can create or Generate a creature of a more noble species
then themselves, as if a beast should beget a man? Or whether this prove not,
that as a Bishop at first was but Presbyter primae sedis, (like the fore man of
a Jury) and thence sprung an Archbishop, who was Episocopus primae sedis, and
thence a Patriarck, who was Archiepiscopus primae sedis; so in process of time,
when Pride grew riper, the Pope grew to be Patriarcha primae sedis; but not
till long after, the Head or Governor of the universal Church, nor Patriarcha
Patriarcharum; no more then the Archbishops or Bishops were at first Episcopi
Episcoporum.

But if they can show us no law of God empowring these special consecrators,
any more then others, then where is the Papacy that depends on it? There is
nothing in Scripture to empower the Italian Bishops any more then the
Gallicane, Germane, or Asian, to Consecrate a Head for the Catholic Church.

3. But suppose there were, yet we must be resolved whether it be some or all
the Italian Bishops that must do it? If but some, which be they? and how is
their power proved? If all or any, then 1. What shall we do when some of them
consecrate one Pope, and some another, and some a third, which has fallen out:
which of these is the Pope? If Consecration give the Power, then all are Popes.
2. And still the Papal succession is overthrown while many Popes had no
Consecration by Italian Bishops.

Thus you may see what a case the poor Jesuits or Friars will be in, if you put
them but to insert the necessary Electors and Consecrators in their Definition
of a Pope.

2. But that's not the worst, you must require them to put his necessary
Qualification in the Description. For if no Disposition of the Matter be
necessary, but ex quolibet ligno fit mercurius Romanus, then a Jew or other
Infidel may be Pope: which they will deny. And if any Disposition of the
subject be of necessity to the Reception of the form, then cause them to put it
down. And then 1. It is either true Godliness: and then farewell Papacy. 2. Or
it is common honesty and sobriety: and then still farewell Papacy. 3. Or it is
learning and knowledge: and then Alphonsus a Castro, and others of their own
will bear witness that some Popes understood not their Grammar, and one good
man being (says Wernerus) rudis literarum, was fain to get another Compope to
say his offices, (though it happened that they could not agree, and so a third
was chosen, and his choice disliked, and a fourth chosen, till there was six
chosen Popes alive at once.) 4. If age be necessary, then the Children Popes
(one at least) have interrupted the succession. 5. Yea, if the Masculine Gender
be but Necessary, Pope Joan has interrupted the succession, unless between
forty or fifty of their own Historians deceive us. 6. but all this is the
smallest part, the Question is whether faith in Christ be of Necessity to a
Pope? If so, then what will you say to John the twenty third, that denied the
life to come, and to those that have been guilty of Heresy? So that by that
time they have put the necessary Qualification of a Pope into their Definition,
you shall find them hard put to it.

3. But yet the worst is behind. They be not agreed about the very form of the
Papacy: For some say, He is the Head of all the Catholic Church But others
with the General Councils of Constance and Basil say, that he is the Head only
of the singular members, but a subject to the Catholic Church represented in a
Council, which receives its power immediately from Christ, so that you may see
what a case they will be in, if they be but forced to tell you what they mean
by a Pope, and to Define him too.

3. And if they use the name of a General Council, call them to Define what
they mean by a General Council: some of them will say, It must be a true
Representative of the whole Catholic, Church: so that Morally they are all
Consenting to what is there done. But then the doubt remains whether there be
a Necessity of any certain Number of Bishops? If not; it seems the whole Church
may agree that twenty, or ten, or two, or one shall represent them, and be a
general Council. But if this must not hold, then Must All the Bishops of the
world be there, or only some, and how many? Binnius says, Vol. 1. page 313.
that [a General Council is that where all the Bishops of the whole world may
and ought to be present, unless they be lawfully hindered, and in which none but
the Pope of Rome by himself or his Legates, is wont to preside.] And vol. 3.
page 229. It is when all the Church is morally Represented, the Pope
presiding.] But what a loss are we here at? 1. How prove they that only Bishops
should be members of a Council, and not Presbyters?

2. But if that were granted them (without proof and contrary to practice) yet
we are at a far greater loss to know what a Bishop is that must here be a
member? Is he only the Primus Presbyterorum in a presbytery? Or is he the
Ruler of a Presbytery, (they Ruling the people?) Or is he the sole Ruler of
Presbyters and people? And is he to be in every Parish where are diverse
presbyters? or only in every Class^s or lesser Synod? or only in every County,
or Province? Or shall the old Rule stand, that every City must have one? If so,
then are not all our Corporations true Cities? And so by any of these Rules,
there have been few General Councils in the world. And what word of God is
there why London, Worcester, Canterbury should have Bishops; and Shrewsbury,
Ipswich, Plymouth and hundreds such should have none? so that if the very
matter of your Councils be so humane and disordered, what is the Council
composed of such? As most of them use the term Bishop, you would put them as
hard to it to Define a Bishop almost, as to define a Pope.

3. But suppose they help you over this rub, yet by their Definition they null
many General Councils, because the Pope presided not there: even the first
General Council it self at Nice (whatsoever they boldly feign to the contrary.)

4. And by this Rule, either we never had a General Council, or but few: For
instance, At the first Session of the Council of Trent (the last and most
famous Council) there were but four Archbishops, and twenty two Bishops, taking
in the Titular Bishops of Upsal, Armach, and Worcester. And at diverse other
Sessions after, but eight, or nine, or very few more. In the fourth Session
which Decreed to receive Tradition with equal pious affection and reverence as
the holy Scriptures, and which gave us a false Catalogue of the Canonical
Books, there were but the Popes Legates, two Cardinals, nine Archbishops
(titular and all) and forty one, or forty two Bishops (titular and all.) Now we
would fain know whether this was the whole Church morally represented? and
whether these twenty two, or forty one were all the Bishops of the world, or
the hundredth part of them? Yea whether all the Bishops of the African, Asian,
and other Churches could and ought to have been there?

If they say that most of the Bishops of the world are Heretics or
Schismatics, and had nothing to do to be there, we are sure that this is but
the impudent censure of a sect, that unchurcheth most of Christ's Church, for
far less faults then it self is guilty of: But how is this heavy censure proved?

5. Nay to make short of it, its plain by this Definition, that a General
Council is but a name (at least since the days when the Church lay in a narrow
room) and that no such thing is to be expected in the world. For 1. If all
Bishops, or half come thither, what shall their poor flocks do the while? 2.
How many years must they be travailing from America, Ethiopia, and all the
remote parts of the Christian world? 3. So much shipping, and provision, and so
many thousand pound a man is necessary for the Convoy of many, that alas the
poor Bishops be not able to defray the hundredth part of the charge. 4.
Abundance of them are so aged and weak, that they are unfit for the journey. 5.
Their Princes are some of them Infidels, and some at wars, and will never give
them leave to come. 6. They must pass through many Kingdoms of the enemies, or
that are in wars, that will never suffer them to pass. 7. The tediousness, and
hazards of the journey, with change of air is like to be the death of most of
them, and so its but a plot to put an end to the Church. 8. The length of
General Councils is such (some of them being ten years, and some (as that at
Trent) eighteen years) that so many Bishops to be so long absent from home, is
but to give up the Church to Infidelity or Impiety (unless the Bishops be such
things as the Church can spare.) 9. When they come together, they cannot many
of them understand one another, because of the diversity of their languages.
10. And the Number would be so great, that ten or twenty Council-houses or
rooms would not hold them: so that they could not Converse in one Assembly: so
that a true General Council now, is but a name to amuse those that think the
world is no bigger then a man may ride over in a weeks journey.

6. And yet even this Definition of Binnius is ridiculous: For he makes it
enough that all the Bishops of the world may and ought to be there, whether
they be there or not. But then what if laziness or danger deterr them or detain
them? Is that a Council where Bishops ought to be and are not? How many must de
facto be present, any or none? Prove if you can that forty Bishops are a
General Council, because the rest ought to be there. And who shall be judge of
each man's case, whether he could or ought to have been there? will you judge
men before they are heard, or their cause known? Your saying that they ought to
have been there, is no proof.

And yet Binnius has one exception [unless lawfully hindred] Good still! If
all the Bishops in the world be lawfully hindered, it seems it is a General
Council when no body is there: You see now what you put the poor Papists too,
if you put them to define a General Council, or tell you what they mean by that
word.

And therefore I again advise you; let them not befool you with empty or
ambiguous words. And when they are all to pieces among themselves, let them not
make you believe they are united by agreeing in One word, when they are several
things that are meant by that one word.

CHAP. XIX.
Detect. 10. When they go about from Councils or other History to prove the
Sovereignty of the Pope, let them not cheat you by confounding, 1. An humane
Ordinance with a Divine:. 2. And an alterable point of Order with an
unalterable essential part of the Church: 3. Or a mere Primacy in the same
Order or office with a Governing Sovereignty, or a different Order or office.

First therefore we would learn of them, whether the pre-eminence and order of
the five Patriarchal Sees, began not about the first General Council to be
looked after, but was settled some while after: For till there were General
Councils (such as were so called) there was no great occasion of determining
which should have the first, second, or third seat.

2. Or when ever the time was, yet we enquire, whether these other Sees as of
Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, or some of them were not Patriarchal as soon as
Rome? and whether Councils that speak of priority or posteriority, do not in
the same manner, and on the same grounds, and to the same ends give Alexandria,
and Antioch, their places, as they give to Rome the first place? Surely we find
them speaking of them as matters of the same Order and nature, saying, Rome
shall have the first place or seat, Constantinople the second, Alexandria the
third, Antioch the fourth, and Jerusalem the fifth. 4. And therefore we enquire
whether all these have not the same kind of right to their pre-eminence,
whether it be Divine or Humane. And that the very foundation of this
Patriarchall order, yea of Romes Patriarchall Primacy, (which was the
preparative to its universal Sovereignty) was not a mere humane invention,
given on occasion of the Imperial seat at Rome, and not any institution of
Christ to Peter and his Successors, I desire you not to take from my word; but
all that will not be fooled out of all Historical verity by Popish audacity,
let them take it from the express words of the fourth great approved General
Council, viz. of Calcedon, which the poor Jacobites and other Churches of the
East and South are so reproached for rejecting. In Act. 16. Binnii page 134.
these are their words [Definitiones Sanctorum Patrum sequentes ubique and
Regulam, and quae nunc relecta sunt 150. Deo amantissimorum Episcoporum, qui
congregati sunt sub piae memoriae Imperatore majore Theodosio in Regia civitate
Constantinop. Nova Roma, cognoscentes and nos eadem definivimus de privilegiis
ejusdem Sanctissimae Constantinop. Ecclesiae novae Romae. Etenim sedi Senioris
Romae, propter Imperium civitatis illius (N. B.) patres consequenter privilegia
reddiderunt. Et eadem intention permoti 150. Deo amantissimi Episcopi aequa
sanctissimae sedi novae Romae privilegia tribuerunt, rationabiliter judicantes
Imperio and Senatu Urbem ornatam aequis Senioris Regiae Romae privilegiis
frui.] i. e. [We following always the Definitions of the holy fathers, and the
Canon, and knowing those that now have been read of the hundred and fifty
Bishops, most beloved of God, that were Congregated under the Emperor of pious
memory Theodosius the Greater, in the Royal City Constantinople (new Rome,)
have our selves also defined the same things, concerning the Privileges of the
same most holy Church of Constantinople, new Rome. For to the seat of old Rome,
because of the Empire of that City, the Fathers consequently gave the
Privileges. And the hundred and fifty Bishops most beloved of God, being moved
with the same intention, have given equal Privileges to the most holy Seat of
New Rome: reasonably judging, than the City adorned with the Empire and Senate,
shall enjoy equal Privileges with old Regal Rome.]

I do not stand to note that this Council was called by Martian: that his Lay
Officers were called the Judges, or how light the Council made of Rome when
they said [Qui contradicunt Nestoriani sunt: qui contradicunt Romam ambulent]
Bin. p. 98. Nor do I stand so much on it, that they gave Constantinople equal
privileges. But it may confound all the Papal Juglers on earth to find an
approved General Council affirming, 1. That Romes Privileges (even its mere
primacy) were given by the Fathers. 2. And that because it was the Imperial
City. 3. And therefore on the same reason they do the like by Constantinople.
4. And that the General Council of Constant. had gone before them on these
grounds: so that you have the vote of two of the first four great General
Councils, that it was not so from the beginning, nor an Apostolical Tradition,
but the act of the Fathers, because of the Imperial City. If a General Council
can err, Popery is a deceit. If it cannot err, then the very Primacy of order
in the Pope was then but new, and humane, on a Carnal ground, done by man, that
might do the like by others, and therefore undo this again.

But say they, Pope Leo confirmed not this. Answ. 1. Still then the Church
Representative it seems may err, and the Pope only is infallible. 2. Leo and
his Delegates were offended at Anatolius his rising, and the equaling him with
Rome: but they never excepted one word (that ever I found) against the saying,
that it was because of the Empire that Rome by the Fathers had the Primacy
given it.

And the Reason given by themselves Council. Constant. Can. 5. is, [because
Constantinople is new Rome] But Binnius says that Rome receives not the
Canons of this Council neither, but only their condemnation of Macedonius. And
he says [that every Council has just so much strength and authority as the
Apostolic seat bestows on it. For (says he) unless this be admitted, no
reason can be given why some Councils of greater numbers of Bishops were
reprobated; and others of a smaller number confirmed] Bin. Vol. 2. p. 515.

What would you have more Sirs? Do you not see yet what the Popish Catholic
Church is; and what they mean when they mouth it out to you, and ask you
whether your private Judgment be safer or wiser then that of the whole Church,
or of all the Christian world? You see they mean all this while but one man,
whom Gretser and others plainly confess they call the Church. So that indeed it
is General Councils, and all the Christian world or Church that are the
ignorant, fallible, and often erring part; and it is one man, (that sometime is
reputed an incarnate Devil by a General Council too) that is the unerring
Pillar of the Church, and wiser then all they. Do you not see that they make a
mere nothing or mockery of General Councils, any further then they please the
Pope? And can you expect that any thing should please them that is against his
Greatness, or, as Julius the second calls it, [his holding the place of the
great God, the Maker of all things, and all Laws?] What a vile abuse is it then
of the Pope to trouble the world by the meetings and Consultations of General
Councils, when he can sit at Rome and contradict them infallibly, and, Good
man, is fain to save the Catholic Church from the Errors that General Councils
(the Representative Catholic Church) would else lead them into: and therefore
could he not with less ado infallibly make us Laws, Canons, and Scriptures
without them? For sure that which the Pope can do against a General Council, he
can do without them. If he can Infallibly contradict a General Council, and
Infallibly Rule us contrary to their Judgment, he may no doubt Infallibly Rule
us without them. And therefore of late times they have learnt so much wit, that
you may look long enough before you see a General Council. And I think the
Council of Constance were no better Prognosticators then William Lilly, nor no
more effectual Lawgivers then Wat Tyler, when they Prognosticated or Ordained
Decennial Councils: And I will be judged by all the world.

And here also you may see what account the Papists make even of the first
General Councils. Its all one with them to judge others Heretics for
contradicting especially the four first General Councils (compared to the four
Evangelists) as the Scripture it self: and yet (who would have thought it) they
profess themselves to reject the Canons or Decrees of both these, the first of
Constantinople, and that of Calcedon in part.

And, now I think on it, by this privilege I cannot see but the Pope is
privileged from all possibility of being an Heretic personally. But these
things are on the by, I return to the point in hand, which is to prove to you,
that not only the Romish Universal Monarchy and Vice-godhead, but even its
Patriarchal Primacy was no Apostolical Tradition, but an Humane Institution,
founded on this Consideration, that Rome was the Imperial Seat and City.

5. And Humane it must needs be. 1. For we find that Councils did not declare
it as any part of the Law of God, but Ordain it as an act of their own. 2. We
find them adding the Patriarchate of Constantinople, which was a new seat,
neither Patriarch nor Bishop residing there in the Apostles days, or long
after. 3. Yea we find them giving this new Patriarch the second place, and once
making him equal with old Rome, which they would never have presumed to do, if
they had thought that the Patriarchship of Alexandria, Antioch, or Rome had
been of Divine Institution: for what horrible arrogance would that have been,
when the Holy Ghost by the Apostles had made Alexandria second, and Antioch
third, and Rome first, for a Council to set Constantinople before two of them,
and equal with the first?

6. And therefore we have reason to think that if Patriarchs be desirable
creatures, there may more and more new ones now be made, as lawfully as
Constantinople was.

7. And we do not think that a General Council or Pope can make a man of one
Nation to be Patriarch of the Church in another Nation, that perhaps may be in
wars with the Prince of the first Nation: but that each Prince with the Church
under their Power, has more to do in it then either Pope or Council. And if
Portugal and France set up Patriarchs at home, they do as lawfully as the
Patriarch of Constantinople was set up.

8. And therefore we must needs judge, that to disobey the Pope, or withdraw
from his subjection (if he had never forfeited his Patriarchship by the claim
of an Universal Headship) were no greater a sin, then to disobey or withdraw
from the Patriarch of Alexandria, Antioch, or Constantinople: either the
Government by Patriarchs and Archbishops is of Gods ordaining and approving,
or not: if not (as most of the Protestants hold) then it is no sin to reject
any of them. If it be of God, then to reject any of them (though in simple
error) is a sin of disobedience through ignorance, but is far from proving a
man to be no member of the Catholic Church: for sure Patriarchs are far from
being Essential parts of the Catholic Church.

For, 9. We conclude, as in the Papists own Judgment, the Catholic Church may
be without the Patriarch of Constantinople, Alexandria, or Antioch; so may it
therefore without the Pope of Rome.

CHAP. XX.
Detect. 11. THE great endeavor of the Papists is to advance Tradition: The
Council of Trent Ses. 4. has equalled it with the Scriptures, as to the pious
affection and reverence wherewith they receive it. On pretense of this
Tradition they have added abundance of new Articles to the faith, and accuse us
as Heretics for not receiving their Traditions: And this is a principal
difference betwixt us, that we take the Scriptures to be sufficient, to
acquaint us with the will of God, as the Rule of faith and holy living: and
they take it to be but part of the word of God, and that the other part is in
unwritten Tradition, which they equal with this (as before.) For the maintaining
of Tradition it is that they write so much to the dishonor of the holy
Scripture, as you may find in Rushworths Dialogues, and Tho. Whites Defense of
them, and many others; so like to the Arguments and Language of the Seekers and
Infidels, that we can scarcely know whom we hear when they speak to us.

For the discovery of their desperate fraud in this point, and the right
confuting of them: 1. You must distinguish them out of their confusion: 2. You
must grant them all that is true and just, which we shall as stiffly defend as
they: 3. You must reject their errors and confute them: And 4. You may turn
their own principal weapon against them, to the certain destruction of their
cause.

Of all these briefly in course.

1. For the first two I have spoke at large in the Preface to the second part
of the Saints Rest, and in the determination in the first part of my Book
against Infidelity. But briefly to touch some of the most necessary things
here, 1. We must distinguish the Tradition of the Scriptures, or the Scripture
doctrine, from the Tradition of other doctrines, pretended to be the rest of
the word of God. 2. We must distinguish between a certain proved Tradition, and
that which is unproved and uncertain, if not grossly feigned. 3. We must
distinguish between the Tradition of the whole Catholic Church, or the greater
part, and the Tradition of the lesser more corrupted selfish part (even the
Roman part.) 4. We must distinguish between a Tradition of necessary doctrine
or practice, and the Tradition of mutable Orders. 5. And we must distinguish
between Tradition by way of Testimony, or History, or by way of Teaching
Ministry, and Tradition by way of Decisive Judgment, as to the Universal
Church: suffer them not to jumble all these together, if you would not be
cheated in the dark.

2. And then concerning Tradition, we grant all these following Propositions,
(so that it is not all Tradition that we deny.)

1. We grant that the Holy Scriptures come down to us by the certain Tradition
of our fathers and Teachers; and that what the seeing and hearing of the
Apostles was to them that lived with them, that Tradition and belief of certain
Tradition is to us, by reason of our distance from the time and place: So that
though the Scripture bear its own evidence of a Divine author, in the Image and
superscription of God upon it, yet we are beholden to Tradition for the Books
themselves, and for much of our knowledge that these are the true writings of
the Apostles and Prophets, and all, and not depraved, etc.

2. We thankfully acknowledge that the Essentials of the faith, (and more) has
been delivered even from the Apostles in other ways or forms, besides the
Scriptures: as 1. In the Professions of the Churches faith. 2. In the baptismal
Covenant and signs, and whole administration. 3. In the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. 4. In Catechisms or Catechizings. 5. In the prayers and praises of the
Church. 6. In the hearts of all true believers, where God has written all the
Essentials of the Christian says and Law: So that we will not do as the
Papists perversely do: when God delivers us the Christian Religion with two
hands, Scripture (completely) and Verbal Tradition, (in the essentials) they
quarrel with the one hand (Scripture) on pretense of defending the other: so
will not we quarrel with Tradition (the other hand:) but thankfully confess a
Tradition of the same Christianity by unwritten means, which is delivered more
fully in the Scripture: and this Tradition is in some respect subordinate to
Scripture, and in some respect coordinate, as the spirits left hand as it
were, to hold us out the truth.

3. We confess that the Apostles delivered the Gospel by voice as well as by
writing, and that before they wrote it to the Churches.

4. By this preaching we confess there were Christians made, that had the
doctrine of Christ in their hearts, and Churches gathered that had his
ordinances among them, before the Gospel was written.

5. And we confess that the Converted were bound to teach what they had
received to their children, servants and others.

6. And that there was a settled Ministry in many Churches ordained to preach
the Gospel as they had received it from the Apostles before it was written.

7. And that the said ordinances of Baptism, Catechizing, Professions,
Eucharist, Prayer, Praise, etc. were instituted, and in use before the Gospel
was written for the Churches.

8. And that when the Gospel was written, as Tradition brings it to us, so
Ministers are commissioned to deliver both the Books, and the doctrine of this
Book, as the Teachers of the Church, and to preach it to those without, for
their conversion.

9. And that Parents and Masters are bound to teach this doctrine to their
children and servants: yea if a Minister or other person were cast into the
Indies or America without a Bible, he must teach the doctrine, though he
remembered not the words.

10. We grant that to the great benefit of the Church, the writers of all ages
have in subserviency to Scripture delivered down the Sacred Verities, and
Historians the matters of fact.

11. And that the unanimous Consent of all the Churches, manifested in their
constant professions, and practices, is a great confirmation to us.

12. And so is the suffering of the Martyrs for the same truth.

13. And the Declarations of such consent by Councils is also a confirming
Tradition.

14. And the Confessions of Heretics, Jews and other Infidels, are
Providentiall and Historical Traditions, for confirmation.

15. And we profess that if we had any Certain proof of a Tradition from the
Apostles of any thing more then is written in Scripture, we would receive it:
All this we grant them for Tradition.

3. But in these points following we oppose them. 1. We take the holy
Scriptures as the Complete universal Rule or Law of faith and Holy living, and
we know of no Tradition that contains another word of God; Nay we know there
is none such because the Scripture is true, which asserteth its own
sufficiency. Scripture, and unwritten Tradition are but two ways of
acquainting the world with the same Christian doctrine; and not with diverse
parts of that Doctrine, so as that Tradition should add to Scripture: yea
contrarily it is but the substance of greatest verities that are conveyed by
unwritten Tradition: but that and much more is contained in the Scripture,
where the Christian doctrine is complete.

2. The manner of delivery in a form of words, which no man may alter, and in
so much fullness and perspicuity, is much to be preferred before the mere
verbal delivery of the same doctrine. For 1. The Memory of man is not so strong
as to retain as much as the Bible does contain, and preserve it safe from
alterations or Corruptions; Or if one man were of so strong a memory, no man
can imagine that all or most should be so: Or if one Generation had such
wonderful memories, we cannot imagine that all their posterity should have the
like. If there were no statute Books, Records, or Law Books in England, our
Laws would be but sorrily kept, and obeyed and executed.

2. If all the world had such miraculous memories, yet men are apt to be
negligent either in learning or keeeping of holy doctrine; All have not that
zeal that should excite them to such wonderful diligence without which such a
treasure could not be preserved.

3. When matter and so much matter, is committed to bare memory without a form
of unalterable words, new words may make an alteration before men are aware:
The change of one word sometimes does make a whole discourse seem to have
another sense.

4. There are so many carnal men in the world that love not the strictness of
that doctrine which they do profess, and so many heretics that would pervert
the Holy Doctrine, that it would purposely be altered by them if it could be
done; and it might much more easily be done, if it lay all upon men's memories:
For one party would set their memory against the others, and (as it was about
Easter a public matter of fect) tradition would be set against tradition:
especially when the far greater part of the Church turn Heretics, as in the
Arrians days, then Tradition would be most at their keeping and
interpretation; and if we had not then had the unalterable Scriptures, what
might they not have done?

5. A whole Body of Doctrine kept only in Memory, will be soon disjoynted and
dislocate; and if the matter were kept safe, yet the method and manner would be
lost.

6. And there could not be such satisfactory Evidence given to another of the
Integrity or Certainty of it, as when it is preserved in writing. We should all
be diffident that the Laws of England were corrupted, or that Lawyers might
combine to do it at their pleasure, if there were no Law Books or Records, but
all lay in their memories. If they were never so faithful, yet they could not
give us such evidence of it.

I do not think any man of common reason can heartily believe, that all the
holy Truths of God, Historical, Doctrinal, Practical, Prophetical, etc. could
(without a course of miracles, or extraordinary means) have been kept through
all ages, as well without writing, as with it.

7. And if writing be not necessary, why have we so many Fathers, Histories,
and Canons? And why do they fetch their Tradition from these, and ridiculously
call them unwritten verities? Are they unwritten, when they turn us to so many
volumes for them? And if man's writing be necessary for their preservation, me
thinks men should thankfully acknowledge that God has taken the best way in
giving it us in his own unalterable phrase.

3. If they do prove that some matters of fact are made known to us by
Tradition that are not in the Scripture, or that any Church Orders or
Circumstances of worship then used are so made known to us, (which yet we wait
for the proof of) it will not follow that any of these are therefore Divine
Institutions, or universal Laws for the unchangable obligation of the whole
Church. If there be some things Historically related in the Scripture, that
were obligatory but for a season, and ordained occasionally, and ceased when
the occasion ceased (as the Love Feasts, the Kiss of Love, the washing of feet,
the abstaining from things strangled and blood, the anointing the sick, the
Prophesyings one by one, mentioned 1 Cor. 14. 31. miraculous gifts and their
exercise, etc.) then it will not follow, if they could prove that the Apostles
fasted in the Lent, or used the sign of the Cross in Baptism or holy
Ordinances, or confirmed with a Cross in Chrysme, etc. that therefore they
intended these as universal Laws to the Church, though I suppose they will
never prove that they used the things themselves.

4. We will never take the Popes Decision or bare word for a Proof of
Tradition: nor will we receive it from pretended Authority, but from rational
Evidence. It is not their saying, we are the authorized keepers of Tradition,
that shall go with us for proof.

5. And therefore it is not the Testimony of the Papists alone, (who are not
only a lesser part of the Church, but a part that has espoused a corrupt
interest against the rest) that we shall take for certain proof of a Tradition:
but we will prefer the Testimony of the whole Catholic Church before the
Romish Church alone.

6. They that can produce the best Records of Antiquity, or rational proof of
the Antiquity of the thing they plead for, though they be but a few Learned
Antiquaries, may yet be of more regard in the matter of Tradition then millions
of the vulgar, or unlearned men: so that with us, universal Tradition is
preferred before the Tradition of the Romish sect, and Rational proof of
Antiquity is preferred before ignorant surmises. But where both these concur,
both universal consent, and records or other credible evidence of Antiquity, it
is most valid.

And as for the Romish Traditions which they take for the other part of Gods
word: 1. In all Reason they must produce their sufficient proof that they came
from the Apostles, before we can receive them as Apostolic Traditions. And
when they have done that, they must prove that it was delivered by the Apostles
as a perpetual universal doctrine or Law for the whole Church: and when they
have well proved both these, we shall hearken further to them.

2. Either these Traditions have Evidence to prove them Apostolical, or no
Evidence. If none, how can the Pope know them? If they have Evidence, why may
not we know it as well as the Pope? at least, by the helps that his charity
does vouchsafe the world.

3. If there be any Proof of these Traditions, it is either some Ancient
Records or Monuments; and then our Learned Antiquaries may better know them
then a multitude of the unlearned: Or it is the Practice of the Church: And
then 1. How shall we know how long that practice has continued, without
recourse to the writings of the ancients? The reports of the people is in many
cases very uncertain. 2. But if it may be known without the search of Ancient
Records, then we may know it as well as they.

4. If the Pope and Clergy have been the keepers of it, have they in all ages
kept it to themselves or declared it to the Church? (I mean to all in common)
If they have concealed it, 1. Then it seems it belonged not to others. 2. Or
else they were unfaithful and unfit for the office. 3. And then how do
succeeding Popes and Clergy know it? If they divulged it, then others know it
as well as they. We have had abundance of Preachers from among the Papists,
that were once Papists themselves, as Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Calvin,
Beza, Peter Martyr, Bucer, etc. and yet these knew not of your truly
Apostolical Traditions.

5. And it mars your credit with us, because we are able to prove the beginning
of some of your traditions, or a time when they had no being, since the death
of the Apostles.

6. And also that we are able to prove the death and burial of many things that
have gone long under the name of Traditions.

7. And when we find so lame an account from your selves of the true
Apostolical Traditions: You are so confounded between your Ecclesiastical
Decrees and Traditions, and your Apostolical Traditions, that we despair of
learning from you to know one from the other: and of seeing under the hand of
his Holiness and a General Council a Catalogue of the true Apostolical
Traditions. And sure it seems to us scarce fair dealing that in one thousand
and five hundred years time, (if indeed there have been Popes so long) the
Church could never have an enumeration and description of these Traditions,
with the proofs of them. Had you told us which are Apostolic Traditions but as
fully and plainly, as the Scriptures which you accuse of insufficiency and
obscurity, do deliver us their part, you had discharged your pretended trust.

8. And it is in our eyes an abominable impiety, for you to equal your
Traditions with the holy Scripture, till you have enumerated and proved them.
And it makes us the more to suspect your Traditions, when we perceive that they
or their Patrons have such an enmity to the Holy Scriptures, that they cannot
be rightly defended without casting some reproach upon the Scriptures. But this
we do not much wonder at: for it is no new thing with the applauders of
Tradition. We find the eighth General Council at Constantinople, Can. 3.
decreeing, that [the Image of Christ be adored with equal Honor with the Holy
Scripture,] But whether that be an Apostolical Tradition, we doubt.

9. And if General Councils themselves, and that of your own, should be for the
sufficiency of Scripture; what then is become of all your Traditions? Search
your own Binnius, page 299. whether it past not as sound doctrine at the
Council of Basil (in Ragusii Orat.) Sup. 6. [that faith and all things
necessary to salvation, both matters of belief, and matters of practice, are
founded in the literal sense (of Scripture,) and only from that may
argumentation be taken for the proving of those things that are matters of
faith, or necessary to salvation; and not from those passages that are spoken
by allegory, or other spiritual sence] Sup. 7. [The Holy Scripture in the
literal sense soundly and well understood, is the infallible and most
sufficient Rule of faith] Is not here enough against all other Traditional
Articles of faith? A plain man would think so. Yea, but Binnius notes that he
means that explicitly or implicitly it is so. Well! I confess the best of
you are slippery enough: but let us grant this; (for indeed he so explaineth
himself afterward: yet that's nothing for Tradition. He there maintains that
Scripture is the Rule of faith (not part of the Rule) [For (says he) when the
intellect happens to err, as in heretics, its necessary that there be some
Rule, by the deviation or conformity to which the intellect may perceive that
it does or does not err. Else it would be still in doubt and fluctuate -- it
appears that no humane science is the Rule of faith. It remains therefore
that the Holy Scripture is this Rule of faith. This is the Rule, John 20. where
be says, these things are written that you might believe, that Jesus is the
son of God, and believing might have life in his name. And 2 Pet. 2. You have a
more sure word of prophecy to which ye do well that ye attend as to a light,
etc. And Romans 15. Whatsoever things were written, were written for our
learning, etc. -- And its plain that the foresaid authorities are of holy
Scripture; and speak of the holy Scripture, etc. The second part also is plain,
because if the holy Scripture were not a sufficient Rule of faith, it would
follow that the Holy Ghost had insufficiently delivered it, who is the author
of it: which is by no means to be thought of God whose works are all perfect.
Moreover if the Holy Scripture were wanting in any things that are necessary to
salvation, then those things that are wanting might lawfully and deservedly be
superadded from some thing else (aliunde) or if any thing were superfluous, be
diminished. But this is forbidden, Rev. 22. From whence its plain that in
Scripture there is nothing defective, and nothing superfluous, which is
agreeable to its author, the Holy Ghost, to whose Omnipotency it agreeeth that
nothing deminutely; to his Wisdom that nothing superfluously; and to his
Goodness that in a congruous order, he provide for the Necessity of our
salvation, Prove. 30. 5, 6. The word of God is a fiery buckler to them that hope
in him: Add thou not to his words lest be reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar.] How like you all this in a Popish General Council? and in an Oration
against the Sacrament in both kinds.

Well! but perhaps the distinction unsaith all again? No such matter; you shall
hear it truly recited. He proceeds thus [But for the further declaration of
this Rule as to that part, it must be known, that the sufficiency of any
doctrine is necessarily to be understood two ways; one way Explicitly,
another way Implicitly. And this is true in every Doctrine or science, because
no doctrine was ever so sufficiently delivered, that all the Conclusions
contained in its principles, were delivered and expressed explicitly and in
the proper terms: and so it is in our purpose: because there is nothing that
any way or in any manner (N.B.) pertains to faith and salvation, which is not
most sufficiently contained in the holy Scripture explicitly or implicitly.
Hence says Austin [every truth is contained in the Scriptures, latent or
patent, as in other sciences Speculative, or Moral and Civil, the Conclusions
and determinations are contained in their principles, etc. and the deduction is
by way of inference or determination -- ] This is the plain Protestant
Doctrine. There is nothing any way necessary to faith or salvation, but what is
contained in the Scriptures, either expressly, or as the Conclusion in the
premises. Good still! we desire no more. Let holy Reason then discern the
Conclusion in the premises, and let us not be sent for it to the Authority of
Rome; nay sent for some thing else, that is no Conclusion deducible from any
Scripture principles: we grant Tradition or Church practices are very useful
for our better understanding of some Scriptures. But what is this to another
Traditional word of God? Prove your Traditions but by inference from Scripture,
and we will receive them.

Yet let us hear this Orator further clearing his mind [Adding to a Doctrine
may be understood four ways. 1. By way of explication or declaration. 2. By
way of supply. 3. By way of ampliation. 4. By way of destruction, or contrary.
The first way is necessary in every science and doctrine, and specially in Holy
Scripture; not for it self, which is most sufficient, and most clear in it
self, but for us: (This we all yield) The second way is necessary to sciences
diminutely and insufficiently delivered by their authors, for their supplement:
so Aristotle is supplemented by Albertus Magnus, etc. The third way, specially
if it be not excessive, is tolerable to the well being, though it be not
necessary. The fourth way -- assertively is to be rejected as Poison -- Thus
are the authorities to be understood, that forbid to add to, or diminish from
the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 12, 32.

Well! by this time you may see, that when such doctrine as this for Scripture
sufficiency and perfection as the Rule of faith and life, admitting no addition
as necessary but explication, nor any other as tolerable, but moderate
ampliation (which indeed is the same,) I say, when this doctrine past so lately
in a Popish General Council, you may see that the very Doctrine of Traditions
equaled with Scripture, or being another word of God, necessary to faith and
salvation, containing what is wanting in Scripture, is but lately sprung up in
the world. And sure the Traditions themselves be not old then, when the conceit
of them came but lately into the world.

4. Well: I have done the three first parts of this task: but the chief is yet
behind, which is to show 1 How little the Papists get by their Argument from
Tradition. 2. And how ^uch they lose by it: even all their cause.

1. Two things they very much plead Tradition for: the one is their private
doctrines and practices, in which they disagree from other Christians: and here
they lose their labor with the judicious. 1. Because they give us no
sufficient proof that their Tradition is Apostolical. 2. Because the dissent of
other Churches shows that it is not universal: with other Reasons before
mentioned.

2. The other Cause which they plead Tradition for, is the Doctrine of
Christianity it self. And this they do in design to lead men to the Church of
Rome; as if we must be no Christians, unless we are Christians upon the credit
of the Pope, and his Subjects. And here I offer to their Consideration these
two things, to show them the vanity of their arguing.

1. We do not strive against you in producing any Tradition or Testimony of
Antiquity for the Scripture, or for Scripture Doctrine: we make as much
advantage of such just Tradition as you. What do such men as White, Vane,
Cressy, etc. think of, when they argue so eagerly for the advantage of
Tradition to prove the Scripture and Christian faith? Is this any thing against
us? Nothing at all. We accept our Religion from both the hands of Providence
that bring it us; Scripture and Tradition: we abhor the contempt which these
partial Disputers cast upon Scripture; but we are not therefore so partial our
selves as to refuse any collateral or subordinate help for our faith. The more
Testimonies, the better. The best of us have need of all the advantages for our
faith that we can get. When they have extolled the Certainty of Tradition to
the highest, we gladly join with them, and accept of any certain Tradition of
the mind of God. And I advise all that would prove themselves wise defenders of
the faith, to take heed of rejecting Arguments from Providence, or any
necessary Testimony of man, especially concerning matter of fact, or of
rejecting true Church History, because the Papists over value it under the name
of Tradition, left such prove guilty of the like partiality and injuriousness
to the truth as the Papists are. And whereas the Papists imagine, that this
must lead us to their Church for Tradition, I answer that in my next
observation, which is,

2. We go beyond the Papists in arguing for just Tradition of the Christian
faith, and we make far greater advantage of it then they can do. For 1. They
argue but from Authoritative Decision by the Pope, under the name of
Church-Tradition (excepting the French party) whereas we argue from true
History and certain Antiquity, and prove what we say.

Where note 1. That their Tradition is indeed no Tradition: for if it must be
taken upon the credit of a man as supposed Infallible by supernatural (if not
miraculous) endowment, this is not Tradition but Prophecy. And if they prove
the man to be such a man, its all one to the Church whether he say that [This
was the Apostles doctrine, or, This I deliver my self to you from God.] For if
he were so qualified, he had the power and credit of a prophet or Apostle
himself. And therefore they must prove the Pope to be a Prophet, before their
kind of Tradition can get credit: and when they have done that, there is no
need of it: this their honest Dr. Holden was ware of, upon which he has so
handsomely canvassed them.

2. Note also that such as Dr. Holden, Cressy, Vane, White and other of the
French way that plead for Tradition, mean a quite other thing then the Jesuited
Italian Papist means; and while they plead for universal Tradition, they come
nearer to the Protestants, then to their Brethren, if they did not contradict
themselves, when they have done, by making mere Romish Tradition to be
universal.

3. Note also, that when Papists speak of Tradition confusedly, they give us
just reason to call them to Define their Tradition, and tell us what they mean
by it, before we dispute with them upon an ambiguous word; seeing they are so
divided among themselves, that one party understands one thing by it, and
another another thing; which we must not suffer these juglers to jumble
together and confound.

2. Another advantage in which we go beyond the Papists for Tradition, is, that
as we argue not from the mere pretended supernatural Infallibility or Authority
of any, as they do, but from rational Evidence of true Antiquity; so we argue
not from a sect or party as they do, but from the Universal Church: As far as
the whole Church of Christ is of larger extent and greater credit then the
Popish party, so far is our Tradition more Credible then theirs. And that is
especially in three things.

1. The Papists are fewer by far then the rest of the Christians in the world.
And the testimony of many, yea of all, is more then of a part. 2. The Papists
above other parties have espoused an interest that leads them to pretend and
corrupt Tradition, and bend all things to that interest of their own, that they
may Lord it over all the world: But the whole Church can have no such Interest
and Partiality. 3. And the Papists are but one side; and he that will judge
rightly, must hear the other sides speak too. But the Tradition that we make
use of, is from all sides concurring; yea Papists themselves in many points.

Yea our Tradition reaches further then the Universal Church: for we take in
all rational Evidence: even of Jews, Heathens, and Heretics, and Persecutors,
that bear witness to the matters of fact, and what was the doctrine and
practice of the Christians in their times, and what Books they made the ground
of their faith: so that as true Universal impartial
naturally-or-rationally-infallible History or Testimony, differs from a
private, pretended-prophetical assertion, or from the Testimony of one party
only; so does our Tradition excel both the sorts of Popish Tradition, both
that of the Papal, and that of the Council party. And now judge who may better
boast of or extol Tradition, they or we; and to what purpose, Cressy, White,
and such men do bring their discourses of Tradition.

2. But yet we have not so done with them, till Tradition have given them their
mortal stroke. You appeal to Tradition, to Tradition you shall go. But what
Tradition mean you? The Tradition of the Catholic Church? And where is this to
be found and known? but in the profession and practice of the Church, and in
the Records of the Church. Well then! of both these let us enquire.

The first and great Question between you and us, is, Whether the Pope be the
Head and Sovereign Ruler of the whole Catholic. Church: and then whether the
Catholic Church and the Roman are of equal extent? What says Tradition to
this?

1. Let us enquire of the present Church: and there we have the profession and
practice of all the Greek Church; the Syrians, the Moscovites, the Georgians,
and all others of the Greek Religion dispersed throughout the Turks Dominions,
with the Jacobites, Armenians, Egyptians, Abassines, with all other Churches in
Europe, etc. that disclaim the Headship of the Roman Pope; all these do with
one mouth proclaim that the Church of Rome is not, and ought not to be the
Mistress of the world, or of all other Churches, but that the Pope for laying
such a claim is an usurper, if not the AntiChrist. This is the Tradition of the
Greeks; this is the Tradition of the Abassines: the far greatest part of the
Church on earth agree in this. Mark then what is become of the Roman
Sovereignty, by the verdict of Tradition; even from the vote of the greatest
part of the Church. Rome has no right to its pretended Sovereignty. Babylon is
fallen by the judgment of Tradition.

If you have the faces again to say that all these are Heretics or
Schismatics, and therefore have no vote, we answer. If a minor party, and that
so partial and corrupt, seeking Dominion over the rest, may step into the
Tribunal, and pass sentence against the Catholic Church, or the greatest part
of it, blame not others, if on far better grounds they do so by that part. And
for shame do not any more hereafter use any such self-condemning words, as to
ask any Sect, [How dare you condemn the Catholic Church? Do you think all the
Church is forsaken but you, etc?] And let us ask you, as you teach your
followers to ask us, [If we must turn from the Universal Church to any Sect,
why rather to yours then another? why not as well to the Anabaptists, or other
party, as to the Papists?]

But your common saying is, that the Greeks, Protestants, and all the rest were
once of your Church, and departing from it, they can have no Tradition but
yours, for their spring is with you. To which we answer. 1. The vanity of this
your fiction shall by and by be answered by it self. 2. You say so, and they
say otherwise: why should we believe you that are a smaller, partial and
corrupted part? 3. Well then let us go to former ages, seeing it is not the
present Church whose voice you will regard (only by the way, I pray forget not,
1. That you do ill then to call us still to the Judgment of the present
Church, and dare not stand to it. 2. And that you do ill to persuade men that
the greater part of the Church cannot err, if you sentence the greater part as
Schismatics or Revolters.) But how shall we know the way and mind of the ages
past? If by the present age, then the greater part gives us in their sense
against you. If by the Records of those times, we are content to hear the
Testimony of these. And first when we look into the Ancients themselves, we
find them generally against you; and we find in that which is antiquity indeed,
no footsteps of your usurped Sovereignty, but a contrary frame of Government,
and a consent of antiquity against it. 2. When we look into later History we
find, how by the advantage of Romes temporal greatness and the Emperors
residence there your greatness begun, and preparation was made to your
usurpation, and how the translation of the Imperial Seat to Constantinople made
them your Competitors, yea to begin in the claim of an universal Headship; and
we find how it being once made a question, you got it by a murdering Emperor
resolved on your side for his own advantage. We find that it was long, even
till Hildebrands days, before you could get any great possession, for all this
sentence. It would but be tedious here to recite our Historical Evidence: we
refer you to what is done already by Goldastus and Bishop Usher de statu and
success. Ecclesiar. and in his Answer to the Jesuits Challeng, and in his
Discourse of the Ancient Religion of Ireland, etc. specially by Blondel in his
French Treatise of Primacy, and Dr. Field, and many others that have already
given you the testimony of Antiquity. More then you can give a reasonable
answer to, I have produced in my Book called the safe Religion. In plain
English, instead of Apostolical Tradition for your Sovereignty; we find that
eight hundred years after the days of Christ, you had not near so much of the
Catholic Church in your subjection, as you have now: that at four hundred, or
five hundred, if not till six hundred years after Christ you had no known part
of the world that acknowledged your universal Sovereignty; but only the Latin
Western Church submitted to the Pope as their Patriarch, and the Patriarch
primae sedis, the first in order among the Patriarchs: and that before the
days of Constantine and the Nicene Council, he was but a Bishop of the richest
and most numerous Church of Christians: and we see no proof that of an hundred
years after Christ he was any more then the chief Presbyter of a particular
Church.

If all this will not serve, we have National Evidences beyond all exception,
that the Ethiopian Churches of Habassia, the Indians, Persians, etc. were never
your subjects to this day. That England, Scotland, and Ireland here in your
Western Circuits, were not only long from under you, but resisted you,
maintaining the Council of Calcedon against you, and joining with the Eastern
Churches against you, about Easter day, etc. And that the Eastern Churches and
many great Nations, (as Tendue, Nubia, etc.) that now are revolted, were never
your subjects, and some of them had little to do with you.

And yet if all this will not serve, we have your own Confessions. I have
elsewhere mentioned some: Canus Loc. Theol. lib. 6. cap. 7. fol. 201. says
[Not only the Greeks, but almost all the rest of the Bishops of the whole
world, have vehemently fought to destroy the Privilege of the Church of Rome:
and indeed they had on their side, both the Arms of Emperors, and the greater
number of Churches: and yet they could never prevail to abrogate the Power of
the one Pope of Rome] Mark here whether the Catholic Church was then your
subjects, when the greater number of Churches, and most of the Bishops of the
whole world, as well as the Greeks were against you, and vehemently fought
against your pretended privileges.

Rainerius (supposed) contra Waldenses Catal. in Bibliotheca Patrum, Tom. 4.
page 773. says [The Churches of the Armenians, and Ethiopians, and Indians,
and the rest which the Apostles converted, are not under the Church of Rome.]
Read and blush, and call Baronius a parasite. What would you have truer or
plainer? And what Controversy can there be, where so many Nations themselves
are witnesses against you? And you may conjecture at the numbers of those
Churches by what a Legate of the Popes that lived among them, says of one
Corner of them, Jacob. a Vitriaco Histor. Orient. cap. 77. that the Churches in
the Easterly parts of Asia alone exceeded in multitude the Christians both of
the Greek and Latin Churches] Alas, how little a thing then was the Roman
Catholic Church!

If all this were not enough, the Tradition of your own Catholic Church is
ready to destroy the Papacy utterly. For that a General Council is above the
Pope, and may judge him and depose him, and that is de fide, and that its
Heresy to deny it, and that all this is so jure that ne unquam aliquis
peritorum dubitavit, no wise man ever doubted of it, all this is the judgment
of the General Council of Basil, with whom that of Constance does agree; And
whether these Councils were confirmed or not, they confess them lawfully called
and owned, and extraordinary full: and so they were their Catholic Church
Representative; and so the Popes Sovereignty over the Council is gone by I
radition: but that's not the worst. For, if a free General Council should be
called, all the Churches in the world must be equally there represented: And if
they were so, then down went the usurped Head-ship of the Pope: For we are sure
already that most of the Churches in the world are against it: and therefore in
Council they would have the Major vote. And thus by the concession of the Roman
Representative Catholic Church the Pope is gone by Tradition. So that by that
time they have well considered of the matter, me thinks they should be less
zealous for Tradition.

CHAP. XXI.
Detect. 12. ANother of the Roman frauds is this: They persuade men that the
Greeks, the Protestants, and all other Churches, were once under their Papal
sovereignty, and have separated themselves without any just cause: and
therefore we are all schismatics; and thereforefore have no vote in general
Councils, etc. --

A few words may serve to show the vanity of this accusation. 1. Abundance of
the Churches were so strange to you, that they had not any notable communion
with you. 2. The Greek Churches withdrew from your Communion, but not from your
subjection. If any of the Patriarcks or Emperors of Constantinople did for
carnal ends at last submit to you, it was not till lately, nor was it the act
of the Churches, nor owned, nor of long continuance. So that it was your
Communion and not your subjection that they withdrew from.

2. And as for us of the Western parts, we answer you, 1. We that are now
living, our Fathers, or our Grandfathers, were not of your Church: and
therefore we never did withdraw.

2. There were Churches in England before the Roman Power was here owned: And
therefore if it was a sin to change, the first change was the sin, when they
subjected themselves to you; and not the later, in which they returned to their
ancient state.

3. And for the Germans or English or whoever did relinquish you, they have as
good reason for it, as for the relinquishing of any other sin. If they did by
the unhappiness of ill education or delusion, submit to the usurped Sovereignty
of the Pope they had no reason to continue in such an error. Repentance is not
a Vice, when the thing Repented of is a vice. Justify therefore your
usurpation, or else it is in vain to be angry with us for not adhering to the
usurper, and the many corruptions that he brought into the Church.

CHAP. XXII.
Detect. 13. ANother deceit that they manage with great confidence, is this;
say they, If the Church of Rome be the true Church: then yours is not the true
Church, and then you are Shismaticks in separating from it: But the Church of
Rome is the true Church; For you will confess it was once a true Church: when
Paul wrote the Epistle to the Romans: and if it ceased to be a true Church,
tell us when it ceased, if you can: If it ceased to be a true Church, it was
either by heresy, or Schism or Apostasy: but by none of these: therefore, etc.

A man would think that children and women should see the palpable fallacy of
this Argument; and yet I hear of few that the learned Papists make more use of.
But to lay open the shame of it in brief I answer 1. The deceit lies in the
ambiguity of the word [Church.] As to our present purpose, observe that it has
these several significations. 1. It is taken often in Scripture for one
particular Church, associated for personal communon in Gods Worship. And thus
there were many Churches in a Country, as Judea, Galatia, etc. 2. It is taken
by Ecclesiastical writers often for an Association of many of these Churches
for Communion by their Pastors; such as were Diocesan, Provincial, National
Churches; whereof most were then ruled by Assemblies, where a Bishop,
Archbishop, Metropolitan or Patriarck (as they called them) did preside. 3. It
is taken often in Scripture for the Body of Christ, the holy Catholic or
Universal Church containing all true Believers as mystical, or all Professors
of true faith as visible. 4. It is taken by the Papists often for one particular
Church which is the Mistress or Ruler of all other Churches.

And now I come to apply these in answer to the argument. 1. If the Question be
of a true particular Church, we grant you that the Church of Rome was a true
and noble Church, in the days of Paul and long after; and thus Paul owneth it
in his Epistle as a true Church. And to the question when it ceased to be a
true Church: I answer, 1. What matter is it to us whether it be reasoned or not
any more then whether Corinth, Ephesus, Coloss, Thessalonica, or Jerusalem be
true Churches or ceased? In charity we regard them all: but otherwise what is
it to the faith or salvation of the world, whether Rome or any one of these be
yet a true Church, or be ceased? I know not well whether there be any Church at
Coloss or Philippi, or some other places that had then true Churches: And does
it therefore follow that I am not a true believer? what would you say to such a
fellow that should argue thus concerning other Churches, as these men do of
Rome? and say, e. g. [If Philippi, be a true Church, then England are no true
Churches, If it be not, when did it cease to be a true Church?] Would you not
answer him, [What is it to me whether Philippi be a true Church or not? May not
we and they be both true Churches? How prove you that? And whether it be ceased
or not ceased, does no what concern my faith or salvation, further then as my
charity is to be exercised toward them] So say we of Rome: It was a true
particular Church in the Apostles days. And if it be still a true Church what
hinders but we may be so to? But whether it be so or not, is little to me. It
concerns not my faith or Salvation to know whether there be any such place as
Rome on earth, or whether it were consumed long ago. If a man were so simple as
to believe a report that Rome was destroyed by Charles of Bourbon, and never
inhabited, or had a Pope since, he were but such a Heretic as Pope Zachary and
Bishop Boniface made of Virgilius, for holding there be Antipodes (though
further from the South.)

2. And if you take the word [Church] in the second sense, for a Diocesan or
Patriarchiall Church, or Association of Churches; supposing such forms proved
warrantable, the same answer serveeth as to the first.

3. But (to come to the true state of our Controversy) If by [a true Church]
you mean either of the two last, that is, 1. The whole Universal Church: or 2.
A Mistress Church that must Rule all the rest, it was never such a true Church
in Paul's days.

And therefore here we turn this argument of the Papists against themselves. If
the Church of Rome were neither the whole Catholic Church, nor the Mistress of
all other Churches when Paul wrote his Epistle to them, then it is not so now,
nor ought to be so accounted. But the former is proved: 1. That the Church of
Rome was not the whole Catholic Church then, no man that's well in his wits can
doubt, that reads what a Church there was at Jerusalem, what a Church at
Ephesus, and Philadelphia, Smyrna, Thyatira, Laodicea, Corinth, and abundance
more. Prove that all or any of these were parts of the Church of Rome if you
can. 2. Where does Paul once name them either the Catholic Church, or the
Mistress or Ruler of all Churches? or give the least hint of any such thing? or
mention any Pope among them whom the whole world was to take to be their
Sovereign Head? Is it not an incredible thing that Paul (and all the Apostles)
would forget to make any mention of this privilege, or teach them how to use
it, or teach other Churches their duty in obeying the Church of Rome, if indeed
they had been made the Mistress Church? Men that can believe what they list, may
say what they list. But for my part I will never think so hardly of Paul and
all the Apostles, as to accuse them of so great oblivion or negligence. And
therefore I conclude, Rome was neither the Universal Church, nor the Mistress
Church then (not many an age after) and therefore it is not so to be accounted
now. So that you see how easily this silly Argument shows its shame.

But (though it concern not our main question) I shall tell them further, that
the Matter of the Roman Church must be distinguished from its New Political
Form. For the Matter, so many of its members as are true Christians, are part
of the Catholic Church of Christ, though not the whole: And for the form, 1.
There is the form of its several parts, and the form of the whole. The form of
any parts of the Roman Church that are Congregations or particular Churches of
true Christiant, may make those parts true Churches: that is, there may be many
a true Parish Church that yet live under the Papal Yoke. But as to the
Political form of their Roman Catholic Church, as it is a Body Headed by one
claiming an Universal Monarchy, so the form is false and Antichristian, and
therefore the Church as Papal, must be denominated from this form; and can be
no better.

And this is our true answer to the question, whether the Church of Rome be a
true Church? There are I doubt not among them many a thousand true members of
the Catholic Church, and there may be true particular Churches among them,
having true Pastors and Christian people joined for Gods worship (though I
doubt there is but few of them but do fearfully pollute it: and I am confident
that salvation is much more rare and difficult with them, then it is with the
Reformed Catholics; yet that many among them are true Christians and saved, I
am fully persuaded, especially when I have read such writings as Gersons, Guil.
Parisiensis, Ferus, Kempis, etc.) And I think the better of Bellarmine himself
for saying of Kempis de imitatione Christi [Ego certe ab adolescentia and usque
in senectam hoc opusculum saepissime volvi, and revolvi, and semper mihi novum
apparuit, and nunc etiam mirifice cordi meo sapit. Bellarm. de Scripter. Eccl.
page 298.]

But the Pope as a pretended Universal Monarch is a false Head, and
consequently their Papal Church, as such, is a false Antichristian Church, and
no true Church of Jesus Christ.

And (by the way) I conceive you are thus to understand a clause in a late oath
of Abjuration drawn up by the last Parliament to be offered to the Papists,
viz. that [the Church of Rome is not the true Church] that is, 1. Not the whole
Catholic Church, but part of it, as they are Christians. 2. Nor a true Church
at all as Papal, and so formally as the Now Romish Church. But all this is
little to our main Question.

CHAP. XXIII.
Detect. 14. ANother great Endeavor of the Papists is, to edness, unity,
consistency and setledness in Religion: but we are still at uncertainty and to
seek, incoherent, not tied together by any certain bond, but still upon
divisions, and upon change: And they instance thus [A while ago you were
Episcopal, and then Presbyterian, and now you are nothing, but every one goes
his own way: A while ago you worshipped God in one manner, in Baptising,
Marrying, Burying, Common Prayer, the Lords Supper; and now you have all new.
Where is the Church of England now? some of you are for one Government, and
some for another: the Lutherans have superintendents, the Calvinists are
Presbyterians: And what names of reproach do the Episcopal give the
Presbyterians? and the Presbyterians take them to be Antichristian. Some of you
are Arminians; some Calvinists; some say Christ dyed for all, and some say no;
some are for Justification only by Christ's Passive Righteousness, and some also
by his active; with other such differences even in these fundamental points.]

I repeat their words just as I have heard they make use of them with the
people, and now I shall open the deceit of them in particular Answers to each
part.

And 1. For the matter of unity, I have spoken of it before, and dare leave it
to all the world that are judicions, whether the Papists or we are more
unanimons, or more divided. Only to the Instances of division, I shall speak
further now. 1. For the matter of Church Government, we are all agreed in the
substance of it (except a very few straglers;) As concerning the duty of
Penitence, Confession, Restitution, Contrition, and of the excommunicating the
obstinate, and Absolving the penitent, etc. All this we agree is the duty of
the Presbyters; and we agree that these Presbyters may have a President, only
some think that the President is ejusdem ordinis, of the same order, differing
but in degree, and has no power jure divino, but what the Presbyters have, but
only the exercise is restrained as to the Presbyters, by men; but others think
that the President is a Bishop eminently of another order, having not only the
exercise, but the power above the Presbyters. And is this difference so great a
business? And do not these cheaters know, that if for this they would reproach
us, they must do so by themselves? Know they not that among their own Schoolmen
there is the same difference, or in most points the same? And know they not
that if differences in Ceremonies or Modes should unchurch us, or disgrace us,
it would fall as foul on the whole Catholic Church, and that in the very
primitive times? Did they never read of the difference between the Asian and
the Roman Churches, about the celebration of Easter day, and how Polycrates and
the rest did plead Tradition against the Church of Romes Tradition; and how
Irenaeus did reprehend the Bishop of Rome for his uncharitable censure of the
Churches for so small a difference? And how Polycarp and Anicetus Bishop of
Rome could not agree, as building upon contrary Traditions: but yet maintained
Christian peace; as Eusebius out of Irenaeus his Epistle to Victor tells us,
lib. 5. Hist. Eccl. cap. 26. And the English and Irish Churches long after that
adhered to the Asian way; even after the Council of Nice had ended the
controversy on the Roman side. And who knows not how many more controversies
greater then these of ours have been among the Churches of Christ, without
their unchurching or disparagement to Religion.

And for the Doctrinal Controversies mentioned, most of them lie more in words
then in sense, and all of them are far from the foundation, though they be
about Christ, who is the Foundation. If one of your picture-drawers mistake the
complexion of Christ, or if one should say he was not buried in a sheet, these
are errors about Christ that is the foundation, and yet far from the
foundation. Those of us that say Christ dyed for all, and those that say he
dyed not for all, do agree as your Schoolmen do, that he dyed for all, as to
the sufficiency of his death and price: but he dyed not for all as to the
actual efficiency of pardon and salvation: Is not this your doctrine? and is
not this ours? and are not you as much disagreed about it as we? what else
meant the late decision against the Jansenists? and what means the present
persecution of them in France? And yet have you the faces to make this a
reproach of us? And for the righteousness of Christ, we are commonly agreed
that it is both his Obedience and Passion that we are justified and saved by:
though we are not all of a mind about the reason of their several interests;
which difference is so far from unchristening us, that it makes no considerable
odds among our selves, who are censorious enough in cases of difference.

And for different forms of worship, sure these men do wilfully forget what a
number of Offices and Mass books have been among themselves and other Churches?
and what a number of Letanies or Liturgies of several ages and Churches they
have given us in the Bibliotheca Patrum? but more of this anon.

2. And as for the changes and unfixedness which they charge us with, we are
contented that 1. Our principles. 2. And our practices be compared with the
Papists, and then let even modest and judicious enemies be judges which of us
are more fixed, or more mutable.

1. For our Principles: we take only Christ to be the chief Foundation of our
Faith, and his inspired Prophets and Apostles to be the secondary foundation:
whereas the Papists build upon many a most ungodly ignorant man, because he is
the Pope of Rome. And which of these is the firmer foundation?

2. We take nothing for our Rule but the sure word of God contained in the holy
Scriptures: but the Papists take the Decrees of all Popes and Councils for
their Rule: Our Rule they confess to be Divine and infallible: Their Rule we
affirm to be humane and fallible. Which then is like to be more firm? Our Rule
(the sacred Scriptures in the Original languages, as to the words, and the
matter of them, as to the sense) the Papists themselves confess unchangeable;
but whether they will say as much of their own, I will try by two or three
Instances. 1. What an alteration Pope Sixtus, and Pope Clement made in the
Vulgar Latin Bible, which is one part of their Rule, I told you before, and
Dr. James his Bellum Papale will tell you the particulars. 2. The other part is
their Decrees, of which Pope Leo the tenth in Bulla contr. Luth. in Binnius,
page 655. says [the holy Popes our predecessors never erred in their Canons
and Constitutions] And yet hear what Pope Julius the second says in his
General Council at the Laterane with their approbation, Cant. pragmat. sanct.
monitor. Binnius, vol. 4. page 560. [Though the Institutions of sacred Canons,
holy Fathers, and Popes of Rome -- and their Decrees be judged immutable, as
made by Divine Inspiration; yet the Pope of Rome, who, though of unequal
merits, holds the place of the Eternal King, and the Maker of all things, and
all Laws on earth, may abrogate these Decrees when they are abused.]

You see here from the mouth of Infallibility it self (if the Roman faith have
any) of what continuance we may judge their Immutable Decrees to be of, which
are made as by Divine inspiration: they are Immutable till the Pope abrogate
them, who being in Gods place, though of unequal merits (O humble confession!)
is of power to do it.

3. We have a Rule that was perfected by Christ and his Apostles, to which
nothing can be added, and therefore we are at a Certainty for our Religion: for
we have a sure and perfect Rule from Heaven. Nothing may be added to it, or
taken from it. But the Papists do profess that the Determinations of the Pope
or Council may make a point (and so five thousand points, for there is no
certain number) to be de fide articles of faith, and necessary to salvation,
though not in se, yet quoad nos, as to us. (And what it is for a Law to be
obligatory in se, and not quoad nos, is hard to understand.) So that the
Papists never know when their faith is perfect and grown to its full stature.
For ought they know a thousand more Articles yet may be added. And yet these
men of uncertain growing faith, have the face to persuade men that we are
mutable, and they are fixed. You see our several Principles: now to our
Practices.

For our part, 1. We never changed our Head, our Lord, our Faith, or one
Article of our Faith: if malice it self be able to charge us with changing the
smallest Article of our Faith, let them say their worst: we change not our
Rule, the holy Scriptures, nor one clause or sentence of it, but endeavor the
preservation of the same, which at the first we received. In our contests with
the Papists, our great offense is at their mutation from the ancient Rule and
way; we contend but for the faith once delivered to the Saints: the old way
with us is the good way: we abhor a Religion that is new sprung up, or is less
then one thousand five hundred and fifty years standing at least. If we change
in any thing, it is but by repenting of our former changeableness while our
Nation was Popish; having then changed from the Apostolic simplicity, we
change from that sinful change, and return to the ancient way again. And if we
have made any further changes since our first change at the Reformation, it is
but a perfecting the change to Antiquity, and Apostolic simplicity which we
then begun. Rome was not built in a day, and is not pulled down in a day. The
work of Reformation is but one change, though it be not done all at one time.
If we find some spots of Romish dirt upon us, that escaped us at our first
washing, it is no dangerous mutability yet to wash it off. If a man converted
by saving grace be not perfectly rid of all his former sin the first day of his
Conversion, should he be reproached as mutable for striving against it all his
life after, and casting it off by degrees as he is able? If a man did but
recover by degrees from the relics of his disease, they will not therefore
reproach him as mutable? If he sweep the dust or dirt out of his house every
day, they will not say, He is mutable and knows not where to rest. These men
might as well reproach us as mutable, because we rise in the morning and do not
still lie in bed; or because we go to bed at night, and do not stay up still.

But what is it that we are changeable in? we have changed none of the
substance of worship: did we baptize before, and do we not so still? Did we
pray or administer the Lords Supper before, and do we not so still? what is the
change? why, 1. We before used the common Prayer book and now we do not. 2.
Before we used prayers at the buria of the dead, which now are omitted. 3.
Before we used the Cross and Surplice, and kneeled at the Sacrament, which are
now omitted. And what then? therefore we have changed our Religion. Even as a
man changes his clothes by brushing them, or his house by sweeping it, or his
face by washing it. Do these men think us so sottish as to place our Religion
in these Circumstances? God has bid us Pray continually: but he has not told
us whether we shall use a Prayer book or not, but left that to men's necessities
or conveniences to determine of. And does a man change his Religion or Worship
of God, if he either begin or cease to use a Book? If any man had so little wit
or Religion, as to place their Religion in a Prayer book, its no great loss to
them if they have lost their Religion, when the Prayer book is taken from them.
We doubt not but Prayer books are profitable to some, and hindrances to
others: some should use them, and some should not: but whether we use them, or
not use them, is no part of our Religion at all, but a mere Accident, or common
help and appurtenance. God has not told preachers whether they shall use any
Notes for their memory in Preaching: to one it is an hinderance; to another an
help. Does a man change his Religion when he changes a custom of using Notes?
God has not told us what Chapter we shall read, or what Psalm we shall sing,
or what Text we shall Preach on this day or that day. What if one age think it
best that some Pastors give Laws to all the rest, that they shall read no
Chapter, preach on no Text, and sing no Psalm but by their direction: and the
next age think it meeter to leave it to each Minister, as thinking it unfit to
Ordain such Ministers that have not wit enough to choose their Text, or
Chapter, or Psalm according to occasions. Will you say that here is a change of
Religion? These outside Hypocrites tell the world what a thing they take
Religion to be, and in what they place it. What if one man use an hourglass in
preaching, and another use none? What if one read a Chapter with spectacles,
and another without? or if one preach in a Pulpit, and another below: or if one
preach in a white garment, or another in a black: or if one stand at the
Sacrament, and another sit, and another kneel: Are we therefore of several
Religions? or is this any part of the worship it self? Do we not all now either
stand, sit, or kneel at the hearing of a Sermon, as we please? Do we not kneel
or stand at Prayer as we please? Yea do not men commonly in singing Psalms of
Prayer or Praise to God, sit or stand as they please? And what if we do so at
the Sacrament? Is it not all one? Or does standing, kneeling or sitting make
another Religion, or any part of it? And for Marrying, Burying, Baptizing, and
the rest, we have altered no part at all of the worship of God; but order them
in that manner as seems most convenient. What ignorant souls are these, that
think that the using a Prayer book, or praying without book, or the using this
gesture, or that, these words, or those words that are to the same sense, does
make different Religions or Ordinances of worship? These are tricks that none
but the sottishly ignorant will be deluded with, that know not wh^^ Religion or
worship is. They may as well say, If I change my Lecture-day from Thursday to
Friday, that I change my Religion or the worship of God. These are our great
changes.

Well I will you now hear whether the Papists or we be the greatest Changlings?
1. Some just changes they have made themselves, that they know well enough are
as great as ours. It was so common in the ancient Church to Pray only standing
on every Lords day, and not to kneel at all in any part of the worship of that
day, that it was taken for an universal Tradition, and to kneel was taken for a
great sin, and condemned by General Councils many hundred years after Christ;
and yet the Church of Rome, and other Churches as well as we, have cast off
this pretended Tradition, violated this Decree of General Councils, and
forsaken this universal Custom of the Church. And the Papists receive the
Eucharist kneeling, for all this Law and Custom.

In the primitive Church, and in Tertullians days, a Common Feast of the
Church was used with the Lords Supper, and the Sacrament taken then. But now
this Custom is also changed. It was then the Custom to sing extempore in the
Congregation to Gods praise. But now Rome it self has no such Custom. It was
once the Custom to give Infants the Lords Supper: but now Rome it self has
cast off that Custom. Once it was a Canon that Bishops must not read the books
of Gentiles, (Council. Carthag. 4.) which yet Paul made use of, and the Papists
now do too much value. Abundance such changes might be mentioned, greater then
ours, in which we are justified by the Papists themselves.

2. But they have yet other kind of changes then these. They have changed the
very Essence of the Catholic Church (in their esteem;) they have changed the
Officers, the Doctrine, the Discipline, the Worship, and what not, as though
they had been born for change, to turn all upside down.

In the Primitive times, the Church had no universal Monarch but Christ: but
they have set up a new universal Monarch at Rome.

In the primitive times the Catholic Church was the Universality of
Christians: and they have changed it to be only the subjects of the Pope.

In the Primitive times Rome was but a particular Church, as Jerusalem and
other Churches were: but they have changed it, to be the Mistress of all
Churches.

For many hundred years after Christ, the Scripture was taken to be a
sufficient Rule of faith; but they have changed it to be but part of the Rule.

In the ancient Church all sorts were earnestly exhorted to read, or hear, and
study the Scripture in a known tongue: but they have changed this into a
desperate restraint, proclaiming it the cause of all Heresies.

In the ancient Church the Bread and Wine was the Body and Blood of Christ
Representative and Relative: but they have changed it into the real Body and
Blood.

Heretofore there was Bread and Wine remaining after the words of Consecration:
but they have changed so, that there remains neither Bread nor Wine, but the
qualities and quantity, without the substance, and this must be believed,
because they say it, against Scripture and Antiquity, and in despite of sense
it self.

In the ancient Church the Lords Supper was administered in both kinds, bread
and wine to all: but they have lately changed this into one kind only to the
people, denying them one half of the Sacrament.

Of old the Lords Supper was but the Commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, and a Sacrament of our Communion with him and his members: but
now they have changed it into a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the
quick and dead: and in it they adore a piece of Bread as very God, with Divine
worship.

Of old, men were taught to make daily confession of sin, and beg pardon, and
when they had done all, to confess themselves unprofitable servants: but now
they are so changed, that they pretend not only to be perfect without sin, and
to Merit by the Condignity of their works with God, but to supererogate and be
more perfect then innocence could make them, by doing more then their duty.

Of old those things were accounted sins deserving Hell, and needing the blood
of Christ for pardon, which now are changed into venial sins, which properly
are no sins, and deserve no more then temporal punishment.

Of old the Saints had no proper merits to plead for themselves; and now men
have some to spare for the buying of souls out of Purgatory.

Of old the Pastors of the Churches were subject to the Rulers of the
Commonwealth; even every soul, not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake was
obliged to be subject: but now all the Clergy are exempted from secular
Judgment, and yet the secular power is subject to them: for the Pope has
power to depose Princes, and dispossess them of their Dominions, and put others
in their rooms, and dissolve the bonds of Oaths and Covenants, in which the
subjects were obliged to them, and to allow men to murder them by stabbing,
poisoning, etc. If you do not believe me, stay but till I come to it, and I
shall give you yet some further proof.

Would you have any more of the Popish Changes? Why I might fill a volume with
them. Should I but recite all the changes they have made in Doctrines, and all
that they have made in Church Orders, and Discipline, and Religious Orders and
their Discipline, and in Worship, and Ceremonies, I should be over tedious:
their very Liturgy or Mass Book has been changed, and made by changes, such
abundance of additions it has had since the beginning of it. What changes
Sixtus the fifth, and Clement the eighth made in their Bibles, I told you
before: as also what changes they have had in the election of their Popes.

And now I am content that any impartial man be judge whether Papists or the
Reformed Churches are the more mutable and unsettled in their Religion? and
which of them is at the greater certainty, firmness, and immutability?

CHAP. XXIV.
Detect. 15. ANother fraud of the Papists, which they place not the least of
their confidence in, is this: They persuade the people that our Church and
Religion is but new, of the other days invention: and that theirs is the only
old Religion. And therefore they call upon us to give them a Catalogue of the
professors of our Religion in all ages; which they pretend we cannot do: and
ask us where our Church was before Luther?

To this we shall give them once more a brief, but satisfactory answer. I. We
are so fully assured that the oldest Religion is the best, (since the date of
the Gospel) that we are contented that our whole cause do stand or fall by
this trial. Let him be esteemed of the true Religion, that is of the oldest
Religion. This is the main difference between us and the Papists: We are for no
Religion that is not as old as the days of the Apostles: but they are for the
Novelties and Additions of Popes and Councils. Their own Polidore Virgil de
Inven. Rerum, p. 410. lib 8. c. 4. calling us a Sect, does give you a just
description of us [Ita licentia pacta loquendi, etc. i. e. Having once got
leave to speak, that sect did marvailously increase in a short time; which is
called Evangelicall, because they affirm that no Law is to be received which
belongs to salvation, but what is given by Christ or the Apostles.] Mark what
they confess themselves of our Religion: And yet these very men have the face
to charge us with Novelty; as if Christ and his Apostles were not of sufficient
Antiquity for them. Our main quarrel with them is, for adding new inventions in
Religion, and their principal business against us is to defend it, and yet they
call theirs the old Religion, and ours the new.

Our Argument lies thus. That which is most conform to the Doctrine and
Practice of Christ and his Apostles, is the truly Ancient Religion and Church.
But our Religion and Church is most conform to the doctrine and practice of the
Apostles: therefore it is the truly ancient Religion and Church. The Major they
will yield: For no older Religion is desirable, further then as the Law of
Nature and Moral Determinations of God are still in force. I suppose they will
not plead for Judaism. For the Minor, we lay our cause upon it, and are ready
to produce our evidence for the Conformity of our Religion and Churches to the
doctrine and practice of the Apostles.

That Religion which is most conform to the Holy Scriture is most conform to
the doctrine and practice of Christ and his Apostles: But our Religion (and
Churches) is most conform to the holy Scriptures: therefore, etc. They can say
nothing against the Major, but that the Scripture is Insufficient without
Tradition: But for that, 1. We have no Rule of faith but what is by themselves
confessed to be true: They acknowledge Scripture to be the true word of God; So
that the Truth of our Rule is Justified by themselves. 2. Let them show us as
good Evidence that their Additional Articles of faith or Laws of life came from
the Apostles, as we do that the Scriptures came from them, and then we shall
confess that we come short of them: Let them take the Controversies between us
point by point, and bring their proof, and we will bring ours, and let that
Religion carry it that is Apostolical: But we are sure that by this means they
will be proved Novelists. For 1. Their Traditions in matter of faith superadded
to the Scripture, are mere Heretical or Erroneous forgeries, and they can give
us no proof that ever they were Apostolical. 2. The Scripture affirms its
own sufficiency; and therefore excludes their Traditions. 3. I showed you how
in their own General Council at Basil, the Scripture sufficiency was defended.
4. I have showed you in my Book called the Safe Religion, that the ancient
Fathers were for the sufficiency of Scripture. 5. Their Traditions are the
opinions of a dividing sect, contrary to the Traditions or doctrine of the
present Catholic Church: the far greater part of Christians being against
them. 6. We are able to show that the time was for some hundred years after
Christ, when most of their pretended Traditions were unknown or abhorred by the
Christian Church, and no such things were in being among them. 7. And we can
prove that the chief points of Controversy mantained against us, are not only
without Scripture, but against it, and from thence we have full particular
evidence to disprove them. If the Scriptures be true, as they confess them to
be, then no Tradition can be Apostolical or true that is contrary to them: For
example: the Papists Tradition is, that the Clergy is exempt from the
Magistrates judgment: But the holy Scripture says [Let every soul be subject
to the higher power, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The Papists Tradition is for
serving God publicly in an unknown tongue. But the holy Scripture is fully
against it. Their Tradition is against Lay men's reading the Scripture in a
known tongue, without special License from their ordinary: But Scripture and
all antiquity is against them. The like we may say of many other Controversies.

So that these seven ways we know their Traditions to be deceitful; because
they are 1. Unproved. 2. Against the sufficiency of Scripture. 3. Against their
own former confessions. 4. Against the concent of the Fathers. 5. Contrary to
the judgment of most of the Catholic Church. 6. We can prove that once the
Church was without them. 7. And they are many of them contrary to express
Scripture.

And if Scripture will but show which of us is nearest the doctrine and
practice of the Apostles, then the controversy is ended, or in a fair way to
it: For we provoke them to try the cause by Scripture, and they deny it: we
profess it is the Rule and test of our Religion; but they appeal to another
Rule and test. And thus you may see which is the old Religion: which will be
somewhat fullyer cleared in that which follows.

II. And that our Church and Religion has been continued from the days of
Christ till now, we prove thus. 1. From the promise of Christ, which cannot be
broken. Christ has promised in his word, that that Church and Religion which
is most conform to the Scripture, shall continue to the end: But our Church and
Religion is most conform to the Scripture: therefore Christ has promised that
it shall continue to the end.

2. From the event. The Christian Religion and Catholic Church has continued
from the days of Christ till now. But ours is the Christian Religion, and
Catholic Church: therefore ours has continued from the days of Christ till
now. The Major they will grant: the Minor is proved by parts; thus. 1. That
Religion which has all the Essentials of Christianity, and does not deny or
destroy any Essential part of it, is the Christian Religion: but such is ours:
therefore, etc. 2. That Religion, which the Apostles were of, is the Christian
Religion: But ours is the same that the Apostles were of: therefore, etc. 3.
That Religion, which is nearer the Scripture then the Romish Religion, is
certainly the Christian Religion: But so is ours: therefore, etc. 4. They that
believe not only all that in particular that is contained in the Ancient Creeds
of the Church, but also in general all that is besides in the holy Scripture,
are of the Christian Religion: But thus do the Reformed Churches believe, etc.

2. And for our Church; 1. They that are of that one holy Catholic Church,
whereof Christ is the head, and all true Christians are members, are of the
true Church: (For there is but one Catholic Church:) But so are we: therefore,
etc.

2. They that are Sanctified, Justified, have the love of God in them, are
members of the true Catholic Church: But such are all that are sincere
Professors of our Religion: therefore, etc.

But all this will not serve them without a Catalogue, and telling them where
our Church was before Luther: To this we further answer; we have no peculiar
Catholic Church of our own; for there is but one, and that is our Church:
Wherever the Christian Church was, there was our Church. And wherever any
Christians were congregate for Gods worship, there were Churches of the same
sort, as our particular Churches. And wherever Christianity was, there our
Religion was: For we know no Religion but Christianity. And would you have us
give you a Catalogue of all the Christians in the world, since Christ? Or would
you have us as vain as H. T. in his Manual, that names you some Popes, and
about twenty professors of their faith in each age, as if twenty or thirty men
were the Catholic Church: Or as if those men were proved to be Papists by his
naming them? This is easy, but silly disputing.

In a word, Our Religion is Christianity. 1. Christianity has certain
Essentials, without which no man can be a Christian; and it has moreover many
precious truths, and duties necessary necessitate praecepti, and also
necessitate medii, to the better being of a Christian. Our being as Christians
is in the former; and our strength and increase and better-being is much in the
latter. From the former, Religion and the Church is denominated. Moreover, 2.
Our implicit and actual explicit Belief (as the Papists call them) must be
distinguished; or, our General and our particular Belief. 3. And also the
Positives of our Belief must be distinguished from the employed Negatives; and
the express Articles themselves, from their employed Consectaries.

And now premising these three distinctions, I shall tell you where our Church
has been in all Ages since the birth of Christ.

1. In the days of Christ and his Apostles our Church was where they and all
Christians were: And our Religion was with them in all its parts, both
Essential and perfective. That is, we now Believe 1. All to be true that was
delivered by the Apostles as from God, with a General faith, 2. We believe all
the Essentials and as much more as we can understand, with a Particular faith.
3. But we cannot say that with such a particular faith we believe all that the
Apostles believed or delivered; for then we must say that we have the same
degree of understanding as they; and that we understand every word of the
Scriptures.

2. In the days of the A postles themselves, the Consectaries, and implied
Verities, and Rejections of all Heresies were not particularly and expressly
delivered either in Scripture or Tradition (as the Papists will confess.)

3. In the next ages after the Apostles, our Church was the one Catholic
Church, containing all true Christians, Headed by Jesus Christ: and every such
Christian (too many to number) was a member of it. And for our Religion, the
Essential parts of it were contained both in the Holy Scriptures, and in the
Public Professions, Ordinances, and Practices of the Church in those ages,
(which you call Traditions:) and the rest of it, even all the doctrines of
faith and universal Laws of God, which are its perfective parts, they were
fully contained in the holy Scriptures. And some of our Rejections and
Consectaries, were then gathered and owned by the Church, as Heresies
occasioned the expressing of them: and the rest were all employed in the
Apostolical Scripture doctrine which they preserved.

4. By degrees many errors crept into the Church: yet so, that 1. Neither the
Catholic Church, nor one true Christian (in sensu composito at least) did
reject any essential part of Christianity. 2. And all parts of the Church were
not alike corrupted with error, but some more, and some less. 3. And still the
whole Church held the holy Scripture it self, and so had a perfect General or
Implicit belief; even while by evil consequences they oppugned many parts of
their own profession.

5. When in process of time by claiming the universal Sovereignty, Rome had
introduced a new pretended Catholic Church, (so far as their opinion took) by
superadding a New Head and form, there was then a two fold Church in the West;
the Christian as Christian headed by Christ; and the Papal as Papal Headed by
the Pope; yet so as they called it but one Church; and by this usurped Monarchy
as under Christ endeavored to make but one of them, by making both the Heads
Essential, when before one only was tolerable. And if the Matter in any part
may be the same, and the same Man be a Christian and a Papist, and so the same
Assemblies: yet still the forms are various: and as Christians and part of the
Catholic Church, they are one thing: and as Papists, and members of the
separating sect, they are another thing. Till this time there is no doubt of
our Churches Visibility.

6. In this time of the Romish Usurpation, our Church was visible in three
degrees, in three several sorts of persons. 1. It was visible in the lowest
degree among the Papists themselves, not as Papists, but as Christians. For
they never did to this day deny the Scriptures, nor the Ancient Creeds, nor
Baptism, the Lords Supper, nor any of the substance of our Positive Articles of
Religion. They added a New Religion and Church of their own, but still
professed to hold all the old in consistency with it.

Wherever the truth of holy Scriptures and the ancient Creeds of the Church
were professed, there was our Religion before Luther: But even among the
Papists the holy Scriptures and the said Creeds were (visibly) professed:
therefore among them was our Religion.

And note here that Popery it self was not ripe for a corruption of the
Christian faith professed, till Luthers opposition heightened them. For the
Scripture was frequently before, by Papists held to be a most sufficient Rule
of faith, (as I showed before from the Council of Basil:) and consequently,
Tradition was only pleaded as conservatory and expository of the Scripture; but
now the Council of Trent has in a sort equalled them. And this they were
lately driven to, when they found that out of Scripture they were unable to
confute or suppress the truth.

2. At the same time of the Churches oppression by the Papacy, our Religion was
visible (and so our Church:) in a more illustrious sort, among the Christians
of the most of the world, Greeks, Ethiopians, and the rest, that never were
subject to the usurpation of Rome, but only (many of them) took him for the
Patriarch primae sedis, but not Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae, or the
Governor of the Universal Church. So that here was a visibility of our Church
doubly more eminent then among the Romanists: 1. In that it was the far
greatest part of the Catholic Church that thus held our Religion, to whom the
Papists were then but few. 2. In that they did not only hold the same Positive
Articles of faith with us, but also among their Rejections, did Reject the
chief of the Popish errors as we do. Besides many particular points named in my
Safe Religion, they Rejected with us, the Popes Catholic Monarchy, the
pretended Infallibility of the Pope or his Councils: the new form of the Papal
Catholic Church, as Headed by him, with other such points; which are the very
fundamental controversies between us and the Papists. So that (besides that
the Papists themselves profess our Religion) the major part of the Catholic
Church did profess it, with the Rejection of the Papacy and Papal Church; and
so you may as easily see where our Religion was before Luther, as where the
Catholic Church, or most of Christians were before Luther.

3. And beside both these, our Religion was professed with a yet greater
Rejection of Romish corruptions, by thousands, and many thousands that lived in
the Western Church it self, and under the Popes nose, and opposed him in many
of his ill endeavors against the Church and truth, together with them that
gave him the hearing, and were glad to be quiet, and gave way to his tyranny,
but never consented to it.

Concerning these we have abundant evidence, though abundance more we might
have had, if the power and subtilty of the Papal faction had not had the
handling of them. 1. We have abundance of Histories that tell us of the bloody
wars and contentions that the Emperors both of East and West have had with the
Pope to hinder his tyranny; and that they were forced by his power to submit to
him, contrary to their former free professions. 2. And we have abundance of
Treatises then written against him, both for the Emperors and Princes, and
against his doctrine and tyranny: some store of them Goldastus has gathered:
And intimations of more you have in their own expurgatory Indices. 3. And we
have the histories and professions of the Albigenses, Waldenses, Bohemians and
others that were very numerous, and if Raynerius say true, they affirmed (about
the year one thousand one hundred) that they had coutinued since the Apostles,
and no other Original of them is proved. 4. Particular evidence unanswerable
is given in by Bishop Usher de Succes. and statu Eccl. and Answer to the
Jesuits, and the Ancient Religion of Ireland, and in Dr. Field, and Morneyes
Mystery of Iniquity, and of the Church, and Illyricus, and many others. 5.
Even General Popish Councils have contended and born witness against the Popes
superiority over a Council. 6. And in that and other points whole Countries
of their own are not yet brought over to the Pope. 7. They have still among
themselves Dominicans, Jansenists, etc. that are reproached by the Jesuits as
siding with Calvin in many Controversies, as Catharinus and many more in
others. Most points of ours which we oppose to Popery, being maintained by some
or other of them. 8. But the fullest evidence is the certain history or
knowledge of of the case of the common people and Clergy among them, who are
partly ignorant of the main matters in Controversies between us (as we see by
experience of multitudes for one, to this day) and are generally kept under the
fear of fire, and sword, and torments; so that the truth of the Case is this:
the Roman Bishops were aspiring by degrees to be Archbishops, and so to be
Patriarchs, and so to have the first seat and vote, and to be called the Chief
Bishops or Patriarchs, and at last they made another thing of their office, and
claimed (about six hundred years or more after Christ) to be universal Monarchs
or Governors of all the Church: But though this claim was soon laid, it was
comparatively but few, even in the West, that made it any Article of their
faith, but multitudes sided with the Princes that would have kept the Pope
lower, and the most of the People meddled not with the matter, but yielded to
necessity, and gave place to violence, except such as the Albigenses,
Bohemians, Wicklefists and the rest that more openly opposed. So that no man
could judge of the multitude clearly, which side they were on, being forced by
fire and sword, and having not the freedom to profess their minds.

So that in sum, our Religion was at first with the Apostles, and the
Apostolic Church: and for diverse hundred years after, it was with the
universal Christian Church: And since Romes usurpation, it was even with the
Romanists though abused, and with the greater part of the Catholic Church that
renounced Popery then, and so do now; and also with the opposers of the Pope in
the West under his own nose. You see now what Succession we plead, and where
our Church and Religion still was.

If any deny that we are of the same Church and Religion with the Greeks,
Abassines, and most of the Christian world, (yea all that is truly Christian) I
easily prove it. 1. They that are Christians joined to Christ the Head, are all
of the same Church and Religion (for none else are Christians or united to
Christ, but the Church which is his Body) But the sincere Greeks, Abassines,
etc. and we are Christians united to Christ the Head: therefore we are all of
one and the same Church and Religion.

2. They that believe the same holy Scripture, and differ in no essential part
of the Christian faith, are of the same Church and Religion: but so do both we
and all true Christians: therefore we are all of one Church and Religion.

3. They that are truly regenerate, and Justified, hating all known sin,
longing to be perfect, Loving God above all, and seeking first his Kingdom and
Righteousness, and accounting all things but as dung in comparison of Christ,
these are all of the true Catholic Church, and the true Christian Religion:
but such are all that are sincere, both of the Greeks, Abassines, etc. and the
Reformed Churches; as we prove, 1. To others by our Profession and Practice, by
which only they are capable of judging of us. 2. To ourselves infallibly
against all the Enemies of our salvation in Hell or Earth, by the knowledge and
acquaintance with our own hearts, and the experience of the work of God upon
them. All the Jesuits in the world cannot persuade me that I love not God, and
hate not sin, and prefer not the Love of Christ before all the world, when I
feel and know that I do; till they can prove that they know my heart better
then I do.

4. If Christ Consent to it, and we Consent to it, then we are all (that are
sincere in their profession) of the true Catholic Church and Religion (for if
he consent and we consent, who is there that is able to break the match?) But
Christ consents, and we consent: as we prove by parts. 1. His consent is
expressed in his Gospel, that whoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life; and whoever will, may drink of the water of life freely.
2. And our consent we openly professed at Baptism, and have frequently
renewed, and our own souls are acquainted with the sincerity of it, whatever
any that know not our hearts may say against it.

5. All that are truly Baptized, and own their Baptismal Covenant, are visible
members of the true Catholic Church: (For it is the very nature and use of
Baptism to enter us into that Church:) But Greeks, Abassines, Georgians,
Armenians, etc. and Protestants, are all truly Baptized, and own their
Baptismal Covenant: therefore we are all of the true Catholic Church.

What is ordinarily said against this succession of our Church, I have answered
in my safe Religion. I now add an answer to what another, viz H. Turbervile in
his Manual says against us in the present point. The easiness of his
Arguments, and the open vanity of his exceptions, will give me leave to be the
shorter in confuting them.

His first Argument (page 43.) is this. [The true Church of God has had a
continued Succession from Christ -- But the Protestant Church, and so of all
other Sectaries, has not a continued Succession from Christ to this time:
therefore, etc.] Answ. 1. I pray thee Reader be an impartial Judge what this
man or any Papist ever said with sense and reason, to prove that the Eastern
and Southern Churches have no true Succession. Let them talk what they please
of their Schism, the world knows they have had as good a Succession as Rome.
Are they not now of the same Church and Religion as ever they have been? All
the change that many of them have made, has been but in the entertaining of
some fopperies, common to Rome and them. And if any of these (which you call
Sectaries) can prove their Succession, it destroys your Argument and Cause. Me
thinks you should not ask them, where their Church was before Luther?

2. But how does this Disputer prove his Minor, that we have no Succession?
Only by a stark falsehood: forsooth [by the Concession of the most Learned
Adversaries, who freely and unanimously Confess, that before Luther made his
separation from the Church of Rome for nine hundred or one thousand years
together, the whole world was Catholic, and in obedience to the Pope of Rome.

Answ. O horrid boldness! that a man that pleads for the sanctity of his
Church, dare thus speak so notorious an untruth in the face of the world! At
this rate of Disputing, the man might have saved the labor of writing his
Book, and have as honestly at once have persuaded his Disciples, that his
Adversaries unanimously consess that the Papists cause is best. What if the
fifteen cited by him had said so, when I can bring him one thousand five
hundred of another mind, and cite him fifteen for one of another mind, is that
the unanimous confession of his Adversaries? But unless his Adversaries were
quite beside themselves, there is not one of them could say as he feigneth them
to say. For does not the world know, that the Eastern and Southern Churches,
far exceeding the Romanists in number, did deny obedience to the Pope of Rome?
Would this persuade his poor Disciples that we all confess, that there are, or
were no Christians in the world but Protestants and Papists? His first cited
Confession is Calvin's [that all the Western Churches have defended Popery] A
fair proof! Does this Disputer believe in good sadness, that the Western
Churches are all the world, or a sixth part of the world? But this is the
Popish arguing. What Calvin speaks of the Western Churches, that is, the
prevailing power in each Nation of them, he interprets of all the world. So he
deals with Dr. White, who expressly in the words before those which he cites,
affirms the visibility of the Churches of Greece, Ethiope, Armenia, and Rome;
but only says, that at all times there has not been visible distinct
companies free from all corruption: which one would think every penitent man
should grant that knows the corruption of his own heart and life. It would be
tedious to stand to show his odious abuse of the rest: when they that say most
of the word [world] but as it is used, Luke 2. 1. so much of his first argument.

His second is this. Without a continued number of Bishops, Priests, Laics,
succeeding one another in the profession of the same faith from Christ and his
Apostles to this time, a continued succession cannot be had: But Protestants
have no continued number, etc.

Answ. And how proves he the Minor? No how at all; but puts us to disprove it;
and withal gives us certain Laws, which we will obey when they grow up to the
honor of being reasonable. His first Law is, that [We must name none but only
such as held explicitly the thirty nine Articles, all granting and denying the
same points that the late Protestants of England granted or denied -- for if
they differ from them in any one material point, they cannot be esteemed
Protestants] Answ. A learned Law! And what call you [a material point?] You may
yet make what you list of it. If they differ in any point Essential to
Christianity, we grant your imposition to be necessary. But there is not the
least Chronologicall, or Geographicall, or other truth in Scripture, but is a
Material Point, though not Essential. Must you needs know which these
Essentials are? In a word: Those which the Apostles and the ancient Church
pre-required the knowledge and profession of, unto Baptism. And because all
your fond exceptions are grounded on this one point, I shall crave your
patience, while I briefly, but sufficiently prove that Men that err, and that
in points material, may yet be of the same Church and Religion.

Argum. 1. If men that err in points material (that is, precious truths of God,
which they ought to have believed.) may yet be true Christians and hold all the
Essentials of Christianity: then may they be of the same true Church and
Religion: But the former is true: therefore so is the later. The Antecedent is
proved, in that all truths which may be called Material, are not of the
essence of Christianity.

Argum. 2. The Apostle Thomas erred in a Material point (which is now an
essential) when he would not believe Christ's Resurrection: and yet was a
member of the true Church: therefore, etc.

Argum. 3. The Papists err in material points, and yet think themselves of the
same true Church: therefore they must confess that differing in Material points
may be the case of members of the same true Church. For proof of the Minor, I
demand: Are none of the points Material that have been so hotly agitated
between the Jesuits, and Dominicans and Jansenists? the Papal party, and the
Council party? The Thomists, Scotists, Ockamists, etc. At least review the
Jesuit Casuists cited by the Jansenists Mystery of Jesuitism; and tell us
whether it be no whit Material Whether a man may kill another for a Crown? or
may kill both Judge and witnesses to avoid an unjust sentence? Or whether a man
should go with good meanings into a Whorehouse to persuade them to penitence,
that has found by experience that when he comes there he is naught with them
himself? Or whether a man may lawfully lie and calumniate to put by a calumny?
Or speak falsely with mental reservations? Or forbear loving God many years
together, if not all his life? Are these points no whit Material? You know that
one part of you (with a Pope and General Council) are for deposing Heretical
Kings, and murdering and stabbing them, and others of you disavow it: Is this
no whit material? And yet you are all of one Church and Religion. A hundred
more of your differences I could name.

Argum. 4. From instances of the Fathers that have erred in Material points,
and yet are taken to be of the same Church and Religion. How many Churches
differed about Easter day? what abundance of errors are in your Clementines,
and other such writers owned by you? Justin Martyr was a Millenarie: Numbered
diverse Infidels with Christians; thought that Angels lived by meat, and
generated with Devils, etc. Athenagoras thought that second Marriages were
comely Adultery and that the Angels fell by the love of women, and begot Giants
of them, etc. Irenaeus has the like: Theophilus Antioch. worse: Tertullian and
Orrigen you will confess had yet worse, Clem. Alexand. was for the salvation of
Infidels and Heathens: against swearing and many such, besides those before
mentioned. Greg. Thaumaturgus has diverse, if the confession and other works be
his that are ascribed to him. Cyprian, Firmilian, and the whole Council at
Carthage were for rebaptizing those baptized by heretics; Against all Wars and
Oaths Lactantius (with many more) was a Millenary, and has too many great
errors. I have no delight to rake into their faults; but if it be necessary I
shall quickly prove many and great errors by forty more of them at the least.
And yet all these or most, are confessed by you to be of one Church and
Religion.

Argum. 5. From your own Confessions. Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Beat. SS cap. 6.
faith that he sees not how the sentence of Justin, Irenaeus, etc. can be
defended from error. Of Tertullian he says, There Is no trust to be given to
him: lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 8. Eusebius he says was addicted to the
Heretics. Cyprian he says did seem to sin mortally: de Romans Pont. lib. 4.
cap, 7. Augustine is accused by many Jesuits for going too far from Pelagius.
Hierom is often plucked by you. And so are many more of the Fathers. And yet you
confess some of them at least were of the true Church and Religion.

Argum. 6. If there be no perfect concord to be expected till we come to the
place of perfect knowledge and happiness, then it is not perfect concord, that
is necessary to prove us of the same Church or Religion. But the Antecedent is
alas too far past doubt. Therefore, etc.

Argum. 7. If the godly and learned Doctors of the Church (and all men) have
some (alas how many) culpable errors in matters of Religion (yea of faith, if
you call that de fide, which we are obliged to believe) then those that have
such errors may be of the same Church and Religion: But the Antecedent is so
true and evident that I think none but a blind proud Pharisee will deny himself
to beg of God daily to pardon and heal his culpable errors. So much to prove
that men of errors and differing minds (if not about the essence of the Church)
may be of the same Church.

2. But why is it that they must all needs explicitly hold the thirty nine
Articles? 1. I pray you tell us, whether all your own Church do explicitly
hold and believe all your Articles? that is, all that Popes and General
Councils have defined or declared. Dare you say that one of five hundred, of
five thousand, does explicitly believe all this? And why then is it necessary
in our case that all must explicitly believe all those Articles? 2. Yea with
us it is far more unnecessary. For we take not those Articles for the Rule of
our faith, but only the holy Scripture: And therefore you may as well tell us
that no man is of our Religion, that did not write or speak all the same words
that Jewel, Reignolds, Perkins, or such other have written in their whole
works. 3. Its easy to prove for all that, that the sense and substance of
those Articles have been owned by the Churches in all ages.

3. But what if we grant your conclusion, that [else they cannot be esteemed
Protestants] what of that? As if none but Protestants were of the same Church
and Religion with us. Sure you think we make a sect of our selves like you, and
exclude all others from the Church and Salvation as you do! The word
[Protestant] is not the first denomination of our Religion from its essence;
for so we call our selves [Christians] only; But it is a title that
accidentally accrewed to our Religion, from our Protesting against your
innovations and corruptions; and our Rejecting the errors contrary to our
Religion which you had introduced. Now those that were not involved in your
errors as our forefathers were, but lived at a further distance from you, might
have no occasion to make such a Protestation; and yet be of the same Church and
Religion as we are.

Now to your particular Laws. 1. Says H. T. [Let him not name the Waldenses:
for they held the Real presence, that the Apostles were Lay men, that all
Magistrates fall from their dignity by any mortal sin, that it is not lawful to
swear, etc. and Waldo lived but in one thousand one hundred and sixty.

Answ. 1. We have better assurance of the faith of the Waldenses in their own
published Confessions, then from the mouth of their Adversaries. 2. The
Lutherans hold the real presence, and yet are of the same Religion and Church
with us. 3. The Apostles were Laymen in the Jews account and sense, as not
being Priests or Levites, but not in Christians account that believed their
mission: and thus thought the Waldenses. 4. They thought that Magistrates and
Ministers do by Mortal sin forfeit all the right and title to their office,
from which themselves may have comfort and justification in judgment: But they
never thought that they were not to be obeyed by others, or that their actions
were not valid for the Churches good. 5. Many of the ancientest Fathers thought
it unlawful to swear at all, that yet are cited by you as of your Church. But
the Waldenses are slandered in these points. 6. Though Waldo was but about one
thousand one hundred and sixty, yet the same Religion and Church under other
names, and before those names were fastened on them, was much elder, as
Raynerius may satisfy you. So that for all this, the Waldenses and we are of
one Church and Religion.

He adds [Let him not name the Hussites, for they held Mass, Transubstantiation
and seven Sacraments, that the universal Church consisted only of the
predestinate, etc.] Answ. O what a sort of men have we to deal with? The
Council of Constance burnt John Huss to ashes for saying that there remained
the substance of Bread and Wine after Consecration and that Transubstantiation
was a new word to deceive men with] as Binnius himself expresses among their
accusations of him: And among the articles for discovery of the Hussites, one
was Whether they take it to be a mortal sin to reject the Sacraments of
Confirmation, extreme unction and marriage.] And yet now Huss is burnt for it,
the poor lay-Papists are persuaded by their deceivers, that the Hussites were
for Transubstantiation and seven Sacraments. Why then did a General Council
accuse or receive accusation and witness against him for the contrary? 2. That
the universal Church as invisible, and as taken in the first signification,
contains none but the truly sanctified (and so predestinate) we believe as
well as Huss: though in the second Analogical signification, the Church as
visible, contains all the Professors of faith and Holiness, whether sincere
or not. 3. And that they were condemned by the Council of Constance, and Huss
and Hierom burnt after they had a safe conduct, does show that the faith of
Papists is perfidiousness, (for why should the people be more just then a
General Council?) but it shows not that we and they are not of the same Church
or Religion: you condemned and burnt those of our Religion too: therefore you
thought at least that we are near kin.

But H. T. proceeds with his precepts [Let him not name the Albigenses: for
they held all marriages to be unlawful, and all things begotten ex coitu to be
unclean: They held two Gods etc.] Answ. These are not only such falsehoods by
which you uphold your cause, but the more inexcusable and shameless, by how
much the more frequently and fully detected long ago, and yet continued in.
Perrin, Viguerius and many others might have prevented your error: especially
Bishop Usher de Succes. Eccles. cap. 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. who has given you
enough out of your own writers to have satisfied you; and showed you, that it
was from the Arrians and Manichees, inhabiting those Countries among them,
that the heavy charges of Bernard, Eckbertus Schonaugiensis and others were
occasioned. And see by him there cited what the same Bernard says against your
Church of Rome, and then judge which he spoak hardlier of.

As for the Catharists next added, they were not the Puritan Waldenses as you
speak, but part of the Manichees: and if such as they are described, we are
content to lose their names, and are not ambitious to be reputed their
Successors.

He adds [Let him not name the Wicklifians: for they held; that all things came
to pass by fatal necessity; That Princes and Magistrates fell from their
dignity and power by mortal sin.] Answ. We know by many of Wicklifs own books
printed and manuscript what his judgment was, what ever your Council at
Constance accuse him of. It was a Divine Necessity opposed to uncertainty, and
to the determination of an unruled will, that he mentions. And do not your
Jesuits lay as heavy a charge on the Dominicans sometimes? and with as great
cause may many of your Schoolmen be disclaimed for this as Wicklife, if you
will understand him, and them. Wicklife was known to obey and teach obedience
to Magistrates. But is it not a fine world, when Wicklife must not be of our
Church because he is supposed to deny the power of Magistrates in mortal sin?
and yet the Pope and his Council determine that Princes or Lords that will not
root out such as the Pope calls Heretics must be cast our, and their Country
given to others. It seems you take Wicklife to be some kin to your selves. But
we doubt not but he was of the Catholic Church and Religion, and therefore of
the same with us.

H. T. adds [Let him not name the Grecians: for they rejected the Communion of
Protestants. Censur. Eccl. Orient. They were at least seven hundred or eight
hundred year in Communion with the Church of Rome. -- they were united to the
Church of Rome again in the Council of Florence: They held Transubstantiation,
seven Sacraments, unbloody Sacrifice, Prayer to Saints, and for the dead.]

Answ. If one Patriark, or twenty men reject our Communion, what is that to the
Millions of Greek Christians that never rejected it? And what is that to all
Patriarcks before and after that rejected it not? Did Cyril reject our
Communion, that has published a Protestant confession, and was so maligned,
and treacherously dealt with to the death, and falsely accused to the Turks by
the Jesuits, for his constancy? 2. Do you think the world knows not by what
inducements you drew a few poor men at Florence to subscribe to a certain union
with you? and what death the Patriark dyed? and how the Greeks resented his
fact? and what a return they made to your Church? I pray persuade your selves
that they and we and all are Papists. 3. If the Greeks did disclaim Communion
with us, they are nevertheless of the same Church and Religion with us, for all
that. Paul and Barnabas were both Christians when they parted in dissension. If
one neighbor in anger call another Traitor unjustly, and say he will have no
Society with him, they may be both the Kings subjects and members of one Common
wealth for all that. 4. As to the Greeks opinions, and the Papists false
accusations of them, I have spoken already against pretended. Veridicus in my
Safe Religion. It is not you nor all the Jesuits on earth that can prove the
Greeks and us to be so distant, as not to be of the same Catholic Religion and
Church.

You add [Let him not name the Egyptians: for they held Transubstantiation and
unbloody Sacrifice, as is manifest by their Liturgies; but denied the
procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, and held but one will in Christ.
Godignus de reb. Abas. lib. 1. cap. 28.] Answ. 1. Godignus talks not of the
Egyptians but the Abassines. This learned man it seems, is so homebred, and
confined to the Roman Church, that he little regards the rest of the
Christian world; or else he would have known a difference between the Egyptians
and Abassines: He is likely to know well the true Catholic Church that while.
2. You cannot prove that they hold Transubstantion. Nor shall your bare naming
their Liturgy make us believe it. The Egyptian Liturgy you tell us not where to
find, nor I suppose do you know your selves. An Ethiopick Liturgy your
compilers of the Bibliotheca Patrum have given us, Tom. 6. But 1. It has no
mention of Transubstantiation in it, that I can find, but only a Hoc est
Corpus, etc. which we say in our Administration as well as they. 2. And I find
that Liturgy so contrary to the reports of your own writers concerning the
practice of the Ethiopians, (as about the Elevation, Confirmation, etc.) that I
must needs conclude, that either the Liturgy or much of it is forged, or that
the generality of your own Relators of their practice are grossly deceived, and
do deceive, (which is not likely, because they are many, and write at several
times, and it is against themselves.) 3. And as for the procession of the Holy
Ghost, and the denial of two wills in Christ, some of your own writers profess,
that the former in the Greeks, and the later in many others, is found to be but
a verbal difference, the same words not signifying the same thing in their
esteem as in ours. 4. However, if they would but become the subjects of the
Pope, they might be of your Church for all this: and therefore seeing they are
the subjects of Christ, we shall take both Ethiopians and Copties to be of the
same Catholic Church with us, for all these and many other of their errors.

Lastly says H. T. [Let him not cite the Armenians: for they hold but one
nature in Christ, and that his flesh was changed into his Divinity, and were
condemned by the Council of Calcedon.]

Answ. The Armenians are a considerable part of the Catholic Church. Binnius
in the life of Eugenius the third says, their Catholic (so call they their
chief Bishop) has infinite, that is, above a thousand Bishops under him. Oath.
Frisingensis has the like.

1. Though they held but one nature in Christ, it was not by permixtion or
confusion of the natures, as Eutiches imagined, but Conjunction or Coalition:
Nicephor. Hist. Eccles. lib. 18. cap. 53. And diverse of your own writers say
the difference is found to be but in words. And even all this they now deny, as
you may see in their own Confession published not eighty years ago, Artic. 26,
27, 28, 29, 30. etc. 2. That they change the humane nature of Christ into the
Divinity, is your slander, and therefore no good argument. 3. That they were
condemned by (the five Acts, or in any Act of) the Council of Calcedon, is
another untruth: sure you go much upon trust, that dare venture to stuff your
book with such falsehoods. But the best is, your simple Papists know not but all
is true: they must believe you, and cannot disprove you. The Armenians then and
we are of one Catholic Church and Religion, notwithstanding all your forgeries
and vain exceptions. I know that one or two petty Councils chid them for not
mixing water with wine in the Eucharist; and more then that, the Canons of the
General Council called Quinisexti do condemn the same error as theirs, and also
their deputing the Sons of Priests successively to the Priesthood, and not
shaving their hair: and their eating eggs and cheese on Saturdayes and Sundays
in Lent. But 1. We fear not to say that we are of the same Church with men that
err more then not shaving, or then eating eggs and cheese comes to, or any of
this. 2 And remember that this is one of your Reprobate Councils. 3. And one
that the third time (when two General Councils before had done it) did Canon.
36. give aequalia privilegia, equal privileges to the Seat of Constantinople
as Rome had. So that I think you will have no mind of this General Council. And
if any other have judged them Eutichians, though I renounce that opinion, yet I
must tell you, that my Charity covers far greater errors in the Papists, or
else I could not take them for Christians. If the Question had ever been
started in a Council, whether man's soul and body are two Natures or but one,
its ten to one but it would have made another heresy, and yet perhaps the real
difference have been no more then it is now there is no Controversy about it.
But H. T. adds [Protestants pretense to the Fathers of the first five hundred
years, is very idle; because were it true, as it is most false, that those
Fathers were Protestants, yet could not that suffice to prove them is continued
Succession of one thousand six hundred years.]

Answ. 1. It suffices us if those Fathers were Christians, as we are, though
having no usurper of an universal Monarchy to Protest against, they were not to
be called Protestants. 2. It is an idle pretense indeed, to go about to prove a
Succession of one thousand six hundred years, by the bare instance of five
hundred years: but your idle head has forged more idle pretenses then this, by
way of calumniation. But yet we may prove the Antiquity of our Religion from
those Fathers, and the Novelty of yours, and a Succession for those five
hundred years: and for the rest, if the whole Christian world had been big
enough for you to see, you might have discerned our Evidence of a further
Succession.

He adds [2. Because those of the sixth age must needs know what was the
Religion and Tenets of them that lived in the fifth age, by whom they were
instructed, and with whom they daily conversed better then our Protestants can
now do; who have Protested on their salvation, that it was the very same with
theirs, received from them by word of mouth etc.]

Answ. 1. Any thing will serve for the simple that will believe you. But I pray
you tell us whether it were all or some of the sixth age that made this solemn
Protestation that you mention. If all or most, or the ten thousandth man, tell
us where we may find that Protestation. If a few, they were not the sixth age.
2. If Pope Boniface alone was not the sixth age, tell us where that age did
Protest on their salvation, that the Bishop of Rome was taken by their Fore
fathers for the universal Monarch and Head of the Church (beyond his bare
Primacy of order) 3. What age has protested on their salvation, that the Roman
prohibition of reading Scriptures, or of receiving the Eucharist in both kinds,
or other points anon to be mentioned, were the Religion of their Forefathers,
and so from age to age? 4. I pray you tell us where to find this Protestation
of the tenth age, which Genebrard, Bellarmine, and others of your own so
complain of, as having not learned men, nor any Council, but Apostatical Popes
and an ignorant wicked Clergy, that suspected a man of Heresy if he understood
Greek or Hebrew, and of Magic or Conjuring, if he meddled with Mathematics? 5.
It is legible in the writings of the sixth Age, that they did fetch the
doctrine of the fifth age from their writings, and not only from word of mouth.
What else mean the preservation of those writings and those numerous citations
out of them? Nay more; they would not trust their memories in a General Council
for the Canons of the Church: no nor for the Canons of the next preceding
Council, no nor for the Common Creed; but had all read and repeated out of the
writing before the Council when there was occasion. And let Conscience be free
to speak truth for a few sentences, and tell us in good sadness, whether you
believe that the Oral Tradition of all the Church did preserve the Knowledge of
Augustines, Epiphanius, Chrysostomes, etc. doctrine, so much as their writings
do? Is the doctrine of Aquinas, Scotus, Gabriel, etc. yea the Council of Trent
preserved now more certainly in men's memories, then in writing? If so, they
have better memories then mine that keep them, and they have better hap then I
that light of such keepers. For I can scarce tell how to deliver my mind so, in
any difficult point, but one or other is misunderstanding and misreporting it;
and by leaving out or changing a word, perhaps make it another matter: so that
I am forced to refer them to my writings: and yet there by neglect they
misinterpret me, till I open the book it self to them.

6. Either the Fathers of the fifth age are intelligible in their writings, or
not. If they be, then we may understand them I hope with industry. If they be
not, then 1. Much less were their transient speeches intelligible. 2. And then
the writings of the sixth age be not intelligible, nor of any other: and so we
cannot understand the Council of Trent (as the Papists do not that controvert
its sense voluminously,) nor can we know the Churches judgment.

7. By your leave, the Roman Corrupters take on them so much Power to make new
Laws and new Articles of Faith quoad nos, by definitions, and to dispense with
former Laws, that unless they are all Knights of the Post, they can never swear
that they had all that they have from their Forefathers.

8. Well! but all this is the least part of my answer. But I grant you that the
sixth age understood and retained the doctrine of the fifth age, and have
delivered it to us. But that there were no Heretics or corrupters, you will
not say your selves. Well then! the far greatest part of the Catholic Church
did not only receive from the fifth age the same Christian Religion, but also
kept themselves from the grossest corruptions of the Pope and his flatterers,
that were then but a small part: And thus we stick to the Catholic Church
succeeding to this day, and you to an usurper that then was newly set on the
Throne of universal Sovereignty. So that your chief Argument treads Popery in
the dirt: because the greater part of the Catholic Church not only in the
fifth and sixth age, but in the seventh, eighth, nineth, tenth, thirteenth,
fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth ages, have been aliens or enemies to the
Roman universal Monarchy: therefore if one age of the Church knew the mind of
the former age, better then the Pope did, we may be sure that the Pope is an
usurper.

The third Argument of H. T. is, that the Fathers of the first five hundred
years taught their tenets: therefore its impossible they should be for the
Protestants. Answ. 1. Protestants are Christians, taking the Holy Scriptures
for the Rule of their faith. If the Fathers were Christians, they were for the
Protestants, but its certain they were Christians. If you could prove that they
were for some of your mistakes, that would not prove them against the
Protestants in the doctrine of Christianity, and the holy Scriptures; and so
that we are not their Successors in Christianity, and of the same Church, which
was it that you should have proved, but forgot the question. And of this we
shall speak to you more anon.

Well! by this time I have sufficiently showed the succession of our Church:
and continuation of our Religion from the Apostles, and where it was before
Luther, and given you the Catholic Church instead of a dozen or twenty names
in each age, which it seems will satisfy a Papist; but yet we have not done
with them, but require this following Justice at their hands.

Seeing the Papists do so importunately call to us for Catalogues and proof of
our succession, Reason and Justice requires that they first give us a
Catalogue of Papists in all ages, and prove the succession of their Roman
Catholic Church: which they can never do while they are men.

And here I must take notice of the delusory ridiculous Catalogue wherewith H.
T. begins his Manual. His Argument runs thus [That is the only true Church of
God, which has had a continued succession from Christ and his Apostles, to
this day, (very true:) But the Church now in Communion with the Sea of Rome and
no other, has had a continued succession from Christ and his Apostles to this
time: therefore, etc. -- ] For the proof of the Minor he gives us a Catalogue.
And here note the misery of poor souls that depend on these men, that are
deluded with such stuff, that one would think they should be ashamed the world
should see from them.

1. What if his Catalogue were true and proved, would it prove the Exclusion,
that [no other Church:] had a succession? Does it prove that Constantinople, or
Alexandria had no such succession, because the Romanists had it? where is there
ever a word here under this Argument to prove that exclusive part of his Minor?

2. And note how he puts that for the Question that is not the Question between
us. A fair beginning! The Question is not about Churches in Communion with you,
but about Churches in subjection to you: But this is but a pious fraud, to save
men by decieving them. The Ancient Church of Rome had the Church of Jerusalem,
Corinth, Philippi, Ephesus, and many a hundred Churches in Communion with her,
that never were in subjection to her.

3. And if the Papists can but prove themselves true Christians, I will quickly
prove that the Protestants are in Communion with them still, as Christians, by
the same Head (Christ) the same spirit, baptism, faith, love, hope, etc. though
not as Papists, by subjection to the same usurper.

4. Our question is of the Universal Church: And this man names us twenty or
thirty men in an age that he says were professors of their Religion: And does
he believe in good sadness that twenty or thirty men are either the universal
Church, or a sufficient proof that it was of their mind?

5. But principally, did this man think that all, or any besides their subjects
had their wits so far to seek, as to believe that the persons named in his
Catalogue were Papists, without any proof in the world, but merely because they
are listed here by H. T? Or might he not to as good purpose have saved his
labor, and said nothing of them?

6 But what need we go any further? we will begin with him at lis first
Century, and so to the second, and if he can prove that Jesus Christ, or the
Virgin Mary, or John Baptist, or the Apostles, or any one of the rest that he
has named, were Papists, (much more all of them) I am resolved presently to
turn Papist. But unless the man intended to provoke his reader to an unreverent
laughter about this abuse of holy things, one would think he should not have
named John Baptist, that was dead not only before Rome had a Church, but also
before the time that Bellarmine and his Brethren pretend that Peter received
his Commission, to be the universal Head. And did not this writer know that
Protestants can give him the same names as for them? and if printing them be
proof, their proof is as good: If it be not, what proof shall we have? Our
proof is the Holy Scriptures, written by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost in
those times. Thence we prove that the first Church held the same belief as we
have: yea, though it be not incumbent on us, we will thence prove that the
Catholic Church was not then Papists. Why else do we still appeal to
Scriptures, and they refuse to stand to the trial of it any otherwise then as
expounded by the Pope, but that we are confident, and they diffident of them*
We know the Apostles faith from the Apostles; but the Papists will not know it
but from the present Church of Rome. They tell you the Apostles were for them:
but how know we that? Why by the testimony of the next age: and where is that
testimony? Why the third age received it; and how is that proved? Why because
the fourth age was of their mind; And how prove you that? Why in the upshot,
because the present age is of their mind: Why but most Christians of the
present age, are against them: yea, but they are none of the Church: It is only
the present Church of Rome. Well! but the present Church of Rome represented in
a General Council may err. I, but the Pope cannot in Cathedra and in approving
a Council. So that the sum is this: If the Pope himself may be judge, the
Apostles were Papists: But if the Apostles may be heard themselves, they were
none.

I make no doubt (though Bellarmine deny it,) but other Churches can prove as
good a succession as the Roman, as to Bishops; And poor Bellarmine after all
is fain to give up this Mark as insufficient to prove a true Church. Lib. ^. de
Eccles. cap. 8. Dico secundo, Argumentum a successione legittna adferri a nobis
praecipue ad probandum non esse Ecclesiam ibi non est haec successio, quod
quidem evidens est: ex quo tamen n^ colligitur necessario, ibi esse Ecclesiam
ubi est successio. By his own confession then, succession will not prove the
Romanists a true Church.

But as to a succession of Religion, and a continuation of the Catholic
Church, for my part, I am so far from declining it, in argumentation, that I
here solemnly profess to all the Papists that shall read these words, that, AS
SOON AS I SHALL SEE ANY CERTAIN PROOF, BY CATALOGUE OR ANY OTHER WAY, THAT THE
CATHOLIC CHURCH, HAS SUCCESSIVELY FROM AGE TO AGE BEEN PAPISTS, I WILL TURN
PAPIST WITHOUT DELAY: AND I CHALLENGE THEM TO GIVE US SUCH PROOF IF THEY CAN.

Nay if they will prove that in the first age alone, or the second, or third
alone, the Catholic Church were Papists, I am am resolved to turn Papist: Nay
I am most confident they cannot prove that in any one age to this day, the
Catholic Church were Papists.

And as to H. Ts. Catalogue, I return him further answer, that no one named by
him in the first age had any one of their errors: And no one named by him to
the year four hundred, (I may add, to the year six hundred, if his false
catalogue be truly corrected) was a Papist; so well has he proved the Popish
Succession.

But for the plainer opening of this, I shall add the discussion of another of
their deceits.

CHAP. XXV.
Detect. 16. ANother notable fraud of the Papists, is, to confound all their
own errors and corruptions together, and then to instance in some of those
errors that are common to them with some others, and to omit the Essential
parts of Popery: And so they would make the world believe, that if they prove
the Antiquity of any points in difference between them and us, they do thereby
prove the antiquity of Popery (and so of the succession) And so they would make
our Religion also Essentially to consist in every inferior difference between
us.

Suffer them not therefore thus to juggle in the dark, but distinguish between
the Essentials of Popery, or the main difference between them and us, and the
other errors, which are not proper to them alone.

Thus Bellarmine opens his juggling lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 9. where he pleads
Antiquity of Doctrine as a Note of the true Church: And (says he) Jam duobus
modis, etc. Two ways we may by this Mark prove our Church. 1. By showing the
sentences of the Ancients, by which we confirm all our tenets, and refute our
adversaries. But this way (says he) is most prolix, and obnoxious to many
calumnies and objections. (Mark Papists, and take heed of appealing to
Antiquity.) The other way (says he) is shorter and surer, by showing first
from the confession of the adversaries, that our tenants are the doctrine of
all the ancients, etc.] And indeed if the weakness or rashness of any
Protestants be the Papists strength, its time for us to be more prudent: but if
it be the Papists unhappiness that cannot understand the ancients in the
ancients, but only from the Pope or the Protestants, the Fathers are fallen into
the hands of Babies as well as the Scriptures; and the Protestants have too
little wit if they will join with the Pope in an abusive interpreting the
Fathers for the Papists. And thus Bellarmine proceeds to cite Calvin, and the
Centurists, as giving them the Fathers. But wherein? Forsooth in the point of
Free Will, Limbus, Concupiscence, Lent, Lay baptism in necessity, etc. And
therefore by our Confessions Antiquity is for the Papists. And this is their
shortest and surest way. (The more fools we then.) Is not here great diffidence
in the Fathers, when they have more confidence in our sayings then their
writings?

But this juggling will not serve the turn. Take up the Essentials of Popery,
and prove a Catholic succession of them, and you shall win the day. In
Explication of my former professions, I here again solemnly promise and
protest, that [WHEN EVER I SEE A VALID PROOF OF A CATHOLIC SUCCESSION OF THESE
FOLLOWING POINTS, I WILL PRESENTLY TURN PAPIST: OR OF ANY ONE OF THEM, I WILL
TAKE UP THAT ONE.] And I provoke the Papists that boast of Tradition,
Succession and Antiquity, to do this if they are able.

1. Let them prove a Catholic Succession, or continuation of this point, that
The Pope of Rome is appointed by Christ to be the universal Monarch,
Sovereign, Governor, Head of the Catholic Church, and the Vicar of Christ on
earth, and holding the place of God himself, whom all must obey.

2. And that the true and only Catholic Church is a Society thus headed and
Governed by the Pope, and that no man is a true member of the Catholic Church,
that is not the subject of the Pope as universal Monarch: Nor can any other be
saved, as being without the Church.

3. And that the Church of Rome is by Gods appointment the Mistress of all other
Churches.

4. And that the Pope of Rome is Infallible.

5. That we cannot believe the Scriptures to be the word of God, or the
Christian doctrine to be true, but upon the Authoritative Tradition of the
Roman Church, and upon the knowledge or belief of their Infallibility: that is,
we must believe in the Pope as Infallible, before we can believe in Christ (who
is pretended to give him that infallibility.)

6. That no Scripture is by any man to be interpreted but according to the
sense of the Pope or Roman Church, and the unanimous consent of the Fathers.

7. That a General Council approved by the Pope cannot err; but a General
Council not approved by the Pope may err.

8. That nothing is to us an Article of faith till it be declared by the Pope
or a General Council; (though it was long before declared by Christ or his
Apostles as plain as they can speak.)

9. That a General Council has no more validity then the Pope gives it.

10. That no Pastor has a valid Ordination, unless it be derived from the Pope.

11. That there are Articles of faith of Necessity to our Salvation, which are
not contained in the Holy Scriptures, nor can be proved by them.

12. That such Traditions are to be received with equal pious affection and
reverence as the holy Scriptures.

13. That Images have equal honor with the Holy Gospel.

14. That the Clergy of the Catholic Church ought to swear obedience to the
Pope as Christ's Vicar.

15. That the Pope should be a temporal Prince.

16. That the Pope and his Clergy ought to be exempted from the Government of
Princes, and Princes ought not to judge and punish the Clergy, till the Pope
deliver them to their power, having degraded them.

17. That the Pope may dispossess Princes of their Dominions, and give them to
others, if those Princes be such as he judges heretics, or will not
exterminate Heretics.

18. That in such cases the Pope may discharge all the subjects from their
allegiance and fidelity.

19. That the Pope in his own Territories, and Princes in theirs, must burn or
otherwise put to death, all that deny Transubstantiation, the Popes
Sovereignty, or such doctrines as are before expressed, when the Pope has
sentenced them.

20. That the people should ordinarily be forbidden to read the Scripture in a
known tongue; except some few that have a license from the ordinary.

21. That public Prayers, Praises and other public worship of God, should be
performed constantly in a language not understood by the People; or only in
Latin, Greek or Hebrew.

22. That the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, is Transubtantiate into the very
body and blood of Christ; so that it is no more true Bread or Wine, though our
eyes, taste, and feeling tell us that it is.

23. That the consecrated host is to be worshipped with Divine worship, and
called our Lord God.

24. That the Pope may oblige the people to receive the Eucharist only in one
kind, and forbid them the Cup.

25. That the sins called venial by the Papists, are properly no sins, and
deserve no more but temporal punishment.

26. That we may be perfect in this life by this double perfection. 1. To have
no sin, but to keep all Gods Law perfectly. 2. To supererogate, by doing more
then is our Duty.

27. That our works properly merit salvation of God, by way of Commutative
Justice, or by the Condignity of the works as proportioned to the Reward.

28. That Priests should generally be fordidden Marriage.

29. That there is a fire called Purgatory, where souls are tormented, and
where sin is pardoned, in another world.

30. That in Baptism there is an implicit vow of obedience to the Pope of Rome.

31. That God is ordinarily to be worshipped by the Oblation of a true proper
propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the dead, where the Priest only shall
eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, while the Congregation look on and
partake not.

32. That the Canon of Scripture is the same that is declared by the Council of
Trent.

I will pass by abundance more to avoid tediousness; And I will not stay to
enquire which of these are proper to the Papists. But I am resolved so to
receive many of them as they can prove a Catholic succession of; that is, that
they were in all ages the Doctrine of the Universal Church: And I crave the
charity of such a proof from some Papist or other, if they have any charity in
them; and that they will no longer keep universal Tradition in their purses.

And I would desire H. T. to revise his Catalogue, and instead of twenty or
thirty dead and silent names, that signify no more then Blanks or Ciphers, he
would prove that both those persons and the Catholic Church did in every age
hold these thirty two forementioned doctrines. And when has done, then let him
boast of his Catalogue. Till they will perform this task, let them never more
for shame call to us for Catalogues or proof of succession. But if they are so
unkind that they will not give us any proof of such a Catholic succession of
Popery, we shall be ready to supererogate, and give them full proof of the
Negative, [That there has been no such succession of these thirty two points,]
as soon as we can perceive that they will ingeniously entertain it: though
indeed it has been often done already.

But certainly it belongs to them that superinduce more Articles of Faith, to
prove the continuation of their own Articles through all ages; of which anon.

Well! but one of these Articles at least (the Popes Sovereignty) H. T. will
prove successively, if you will be credulous enough. In the first age he proves
it from Peter's words, Act. 15. 7, 8, 9, 10. God chose Peter to convert
Cornelius and his company: therefore the Pope is the Universal Monarch. Are
you not all convinced by this admirable argument? But he forgot that
Bellarmine, Ragusius (in Council. Basil.) and others of them say, that no
Article can be proved from Scripture, but from the proper literal sense. To
say somewhat more, he unseasonably talks of the Council of Sardis and Calcedon,
an. 400. and 451. lest the first age have but a blank page.

In the second age he has nothing but the names of a few that never dreamt of
Popery, and a Canon (which you must believe was the Apostles) that Priests must
communicate. Of which we are well content.

In the third Age he names fifteen Bishops of Rome, of whom the last was
deposed for offering incense to Saturn, Jupiter, etc. But not a syllable to
prove that one of these Bishops was the universal Monarch: Much less that the
Catholic Church was for such Monarchy. But to excuse the matter, he tells you,
that the second and third Age produced no Councils (the greater deceivers then
are the Papists that have found us Councils then) and so you have no Catholic
succession proved. Yea, but he says, they have successions of Popes, Martyrs
and Confessors, which is sufficient for their purposes. See the strength of
Popery! Any thing is sufficient for your purposes, it seems. Rome had Bishops,
therefore they were the Universal Rulers of the Church: A strong consequence!
Rome had Martyrs and Confessors: therefore it was the Mistress of all Churches.
Who can resist these arguments? But why did you not prove that your Confessors
and Martyrs suffered for attesting the Popes Sovereignty! If they suffered but
for Christianity, that will prove them but Christians, and not Papists. Thus
you see to the confusion of the Papists, that they have nothing to show for the
succession or antiquity of Popery for the three first Ages. Yea worse then
nothing: For here he comes in with some of the Decretals forsooth of some of
their Bishops. Decretals unknown, till a while ago in the world, brought out by
Isidore Mercator: but with so little cunning as left them naked to the shame of
the world; the falsehood of them being out of themselves fully proved, by
Blondell, Reignolds, and many more, and confessed by some of themselves. Here
you see the first foundation of Papal succession; even a bundle of fictions,
lately fetched from whence they please to cheat the ignorant part of the world.

But in the fourth and fifth ages H. T. does make us amends for his want of
proof from the three first. But suppose he do, what is that to a succession,
while the three first ages are strangers to Popery? Well! but lets hear what he
has at last. His first proof (after a few silent names) is from the Council of
Nice; And what says that? why 1. It defined that the Son of God is
consubstantiall to his Father, and true God And what is that to Popery? 2 But it
defined the Popes Sovereignty: But how prove you that? Why it is in the thirty
ninth Arab. Canon. O what Consciences have those men that dare thus abuse and
cheat the ignorant! As if the Canons of the first General Council had never
been known to the world, till the other day that Alphonsus Pisanus a Jesuit
publishes them out of Pope Julius and I know not what Arabic book. These men
that can make both Councils and Canons at their pleasure above a thousand years
after the supposed time of their existence, do never need to want authority.
And indeed this is a cheaper way of Canon-making in a corner, then to trouble
all the Bishops in the world with a great deal of cost and travail to make
them. But if this be the foundation, the building is answerable. Their Bishop
Zosimus had not been acquainted with these new Articles of an old Council, when
he put his trick upon the sixth Council of Carthage, where for the advancement
of his power (though not to an universal Monarchy, yet to a preparative
degree) he lays his claim from the Council of Nice, as saying [Placuit ut si
Episcopus accusatus fuerit, etc.] which was that If an ejected Bishop appeal to
Rome, the Bishop of Rome appoint some of the next province to judge; or if yet
he destre his cause to be heard, the Bishop of Rome shall appoint a Presbyter
his Legate, etc.] In this Council were 217. Bishops, Aurelius being president,
and Augustine being one. They told the Pope that they would yield to him till
the true copies of the Council of Nice were searched; for those that they had
seen had none of them those words in, that Zosimus alleged. Hereupon they send
abroad to the Churches of the East, to Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch,
etc. for the ancient Canons. From hence they received several copies, which all
agreed; but none of them had either Zosimus forgery in; nor the forged clause
which Bellarmine must have in; much less the eighty Canons of Pisanus the
Jesuit, or this one which H. T. does found his succession on, but only the
twenty Canons there mentioned, which have not a word for the Popes Sovereignty.

And here note 1. That Zosimus knew not then of Pisanus Canons, or else he
would have alleged them; nor yet of Bellarmines new part of a Canon for the
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome. 2. That Zosimus himself had not the faith, the
wit or the memory, to plead either Scripture, Apostolical Institution, or
Tradition, for his privilege, but only a false Canon of the Council of Nice:
as looking no higher it seems for his authority. 3. How early the Roman Bishops
begun both to aspire, and make use of forgeries to accomplish it. 4. That there
was no such Apostolic or Church Tradition for this Roman power, as our Masters
of Tradition now plead for; which all the Catholic Church must know. For the
whole Council, with all the Churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch,
etc. that is, in a manner all save Rome were ignorant of that which Zosimus
would have had them believe, and Bellarmine and H. T. would have us to believe.
5. Note also how little the Church then believed the Popes infallibility. 6.
Yea Note, how upon the reception of the several Copies of the Nicene Canons,
they modestly convicted Zosimus of falsehood: And how the Council resolved
against his usurpation. See in the African Councils, the Epistle of Cyril and
Alexandria, and Atticus of Constantinople: and the Epistles of the Council to
Boniface and Celestine. In their Epistle to Boniface before they had received
their answers from other Churches about the Nicene Canons, they tell him that
they believed they should not suffer that Arrogance [non sumus istum typhum
passuri] But to Celestine they conclude more plainly, though modestly
[Presbyterorum quoque and sequentium, etc. i. e. [Let your holiness, as
beseems you, repel the wicked refuges of Presbyters and the Clergy that
follow them; because this is not derogate, or taken from the African Church by
any Definition of the Fathers; and the Nicene Decrees most plainly committed
both the inferior Clergy, and Bishops themselves to the Metropolitans. For
they did most prudently, and most justly provide, that all businesses (N. B.
all) should be ended in the very places where they begun; and the Grace of the
holy Ghost will not (or should not) be wanting to each province: which equity
should by the Priests of Christ be prudently observed, and most constantly
maintained: Especially, because it is granted to every one to appeal to the
Councils of their own Province, or to a Universal Council, if he be offended
with the judgment of the Cognitors. Unless there should be any one that can
think that our God can inspire a justice of trial into any one man (N. B.) and
deny it to innumerable Priests that are congregated in Council. Or how can
that judgment that's past beyond sea be valid, to which the necessary persons
of the witness could not be brought, either because of the infirmities of sex,
or of age, many other impediments intervening. For that any (i. e. Legates)
should be sent as from the side of your holiness, we find not constituted by
any Synod of the Fathers. Because that which you sent us by our fellow Bishop
Faustinus as done by the Nicene Council in the truer Councils, received as the
Nicene, (sent from holy Cyril our fellow Bishop of the Church of Alexandria,
and from venerable Atticus the Bishop of Constantinople, out of the Authentic
(Records,) which also heretofore were sent by us to Boniface your predecessor,
Bishop of venerable memory, by Innocent a Presbyter, and Marcellus Subdeacon,
by whom they were from them to us directed,) in which we could find no such
matter. And do not ye send your Clergy executors to potent men; do not ye yield
to it; lest we seem to bring the smoaky Arrogance of the world (or secular
arrogance) into the Church of Christ, which prefers the light of simplicity
and day of humility for them that desire to see God. For of our brother
Faustinus, we are secure, that the safe brotherly charity in your holinesses
honesty and moderation, can suffer him to stay no longer in Africa.]

Well said Aurelius! Well said Augustine! Well said all you African Fathers!
Had others stuck as close to it as you, the Papacy had been kept from the
Universal Monarchy.

Note here 1. That this Council looked no higher for the power of the Pope and
other Metropolitans, then to the Council of Nice, and thought it a good
argument, that the Pope had no such power, because no Council had so subjected
the African Church: And therefore they never dreamt that Christ or the Apostles
had given it him. 2. Note that they evince the Nullity of his pretended power
out of the Nicene Council. 3. Note that they took him not to be above a
Council, having power to dispense with its Canons. 4. Note that by the Nicene
Council, not some, but all business must be ended where they begin, and this
Council so interpreted them: and therefore there is no appeals to the Pope. 5.
And that he that says otherwise unjustly charge the Holy Ghost to be wanting
to the Church. 6. That this order is to be held fast. 7. That they took it for
a sufficient reason against appeals to Rome, because all might appeal to a
provincial or general Council. 8. Note that they thought it a thing not to be
imagined by a man, that God should give his Spirit to any one man, even to the
Pope, to enable him to try and judge, and deny it to a Council, General or
Provincial. This seemed to them a thing that none should imagine, so that they
little dreamt of the Roman infallibility or power of Judging all the world. 9.
Note also that they thought the Pope to be incapable of this universal
judgment, were it but by distance, and the natural impediments of age, sex,
and many the like that must needs hinder the necessary witnesses from such a
voyage or journey. So that they give an Argument from Natural necessity against
the Popes pretended Sovereignty and judgment. 10. Note also that they plainly
make such judgments to be invalid for want of necessary witness and means of
prosecution. 11. And whereas the Pope might object that he could prevent all
this by his Legates, they flatly reject that too, and say they find no such
thing Constituted by any Synod: so that they both rejected the Popes trying and
judging by Legates in other Metropositans jurisdiction; and they took it for a
sufficient ground to do so, that there was no Council had so constituted;
little dreaming of a Scripture constitution, or Apostolical Tradition. And if
the Pope may neither judge them by himself nor his Legates, he may sit still.
12. Next they convince the Roman Bishop of sending them a false Canon of the
Nicene Council. 13. And they show us here what way the Pope then took to get
and keep his Power: even by sending to the secular commanders of the Provinces,
(in whom they had special interest by their residence at Rome,) to execute
their wills by force. 14. And note how the Council plainly accuses them for
this, of introducing secular Arrogance into Christ's Church, that better loves
simplicity and humility and light. 15. And note how plainly they require the
Bishop of Rome to do so no more. 16. And how plainly they tell him that
Faustinus his stay any longer in Africa will not stand with that honesty and
moderation of the Bishop of Rome which is necessary to the safety of brotherly
charity.

I give you but the plain passages of the Council as they lie before you, and
scrue no forced consequences from them. And now let Binnius and his brethren go
make women and children believe that it was not Appeals to Rome, but a trouble
some manner of trial that the Council was against. And let H. T. tell men that
take him for infallible, of a Nicene Canon for the Popes Supremacy and
Monarchy. And let him persuade idiots and dotards that the Catholic Church in
the fourth and fifth ages was for the universal Government of the Pope. And so
I proceed to his next proof.

Says H. T. [The first Constantinop. Council decreed the Bishop of
Constantinople to be chief next the Bishop of Rome.]

Answ. 1. You see then that Primacy was but the Institution of Councils, for
order sake. 2. You see then that it was grounded on a secular reason; for so
says the Canon [because it is new Rome.] 3. You see then that the Popes
Primacy was but honorary, and gave him no universal Government. For the primacy
here granted to Constantinople, gave them no Government over Alexandria,
Antioch, etc. 4. Yea expressly the second Canon limits all Bishops without
exception to their own Diocese. And so does the third Canon, expressly affirming
[that according to the Nicene Council in every province, the provincial Council
ought to administer and govern all things.] See now what a proof here is of
Catholic succession of the Roman Monarchy! Nay how clearly still it is
disproved to that time.

The next proof of H. T. is from the third Act of the first Council of Ephesus,
that Peter yet lives and exercises judgment in his Successors] Answ. He turns
us to look a needle in a bottle of hay. That Council is a large volume,
containing six Tomes in Binnius, and not divided into Acts. But I suppose at
last I have found the place, Tom. 2. c. 15. where the words [that Peter was the
Head of the Apostles] though nothing to their purpose, are neither spoken nor
approved by the Council, but only by Philip a Presbyter, Celestines Legate. And
the Council, though specially moved by his concurrence to extol Celestine to
the highest, yet 1. Never spoke a word of his Governing power or Sovereignty,
but only his concent: And when they mention the Roman Church, it is only their
concent which they predicate. 2. And they extol Cyril equally with Celestine
[Novo Paulo Celestine (they forgot Peter) Novo Paulo Cyrillo: -- Unu^
Celestinus, Unus Cyrillus,] etc.

The next witness brought is the Council of Calcedon, as caling Leo Universal
Archbishop and Patriarch of old Rome, and sentence is pronounced against
Dioscorus in the names of Leo and Saint Peter.] Answ. 1. This is but one of
your common frauds. It was not the Council that called him universal
Archbishop, but two Deacons in the superscription of their Libels, viz.
Thedodorus and Ischirion. And were they the Catholic Church? 2. By [Universal
Archbishop] its plain that they meant no more then the chief in dignity and
order of all Archbishops; and not the Governor of all. 3. I have showed you
before that this very Council in its Canons not only give the Bishop of
Constantinople equal privileges with the Bishop of Rome, but expressly say that
Rome received this primacy of order a patribus, from a Council, because it was
Seeds Imperii, the seat of the Emperor. I thought I had given you enough of
this Council before. Sure I am when Bellarmine comes to this Canon, he has
nothing to say for his cause, but plainly to charge this famous fourth General
Council with lying or falsehood, and to say, that the Pope approved not this
Canon. But approved or not approved, if this was the Catholic Church
representative, sure I am that their testimony is valid to prove that there was
then no Catholic reception of the Roman Monarchy as of God, but contrarily a
mere primacy of Dignity and Honor given it newly by men.

In the sixth age he had not one Council to pretend it seems for the Roman
Sovereignty, for he cites none, but about other matters (of which anon.)

In the seventh age (which he calls the sixth) though then the Sovereignty was
claimed by Boniface, he cites no Council for it niether.

In the eighth age (from the year seven hundred) he cites the second Council of
Nice, as approving an Epistle of Pope Adrian, wherein he says that the Roman
Church is the Head of all Churches.] Answ. 1. But whether Adrian himself by the
Head meant the chief in Dignity, or the Governor of all, is a great doubt. 2.
But whatever he meant, the Synods approving his Epistle for Images, is no proof
that they approved every word in it. 3. Yea Tharasius seems to imply the
contrary, calling him only, Veteris Romae primas and testatorum principum
successor; as if his Sea had the Privilege only of being the Primate of Rome,
and not the Ruler of the world. 4. But if this Council did (as it did not)
openly own the Papal Sovereignty, it had been no great honor to him: For as in
their decrees for Images they contradicted two Councils at Constantinople; and
that at Frankford contradicts them; so might they as well contradict the
Church in this: Even as they defined Angels to be corporeal, which the Council
of Laterane afterward contradicted. But the plain truth is, it was the scope of
Adrians Epistle as for Images, which they expressed themselves to approve. And
that their Image Worship it self has no Catholic succession, me thinks they
should easily grant, considering not only, 1. That there is nothing in the
first ages for them. 2. And that Epiphanius and many before him speak expressly
against it. 3. But specially that there have been more General Councils of
those ages against them then for them, and that before this of Nice decreed for
them, the representative Catholic Church (except still the Pope be the
Catholic Church) did condemn them.

I suppose by this time you will think it needless for me to follow H. T. any
further in his Catalogue. I am content that any impartial sober person judge,
whether here be a satisfactory proof of a Catholic succession of the Papal
Sovereignty, when through so many ages, they bring not a word for any
succession at all; much less that it was owned by the Catholic Church: and
least of all that all the rest of Popery was so owned.

Object. But at least some other points of Popery are proved by H. T. to have
such a succession. Answ. Peruse his proofs and freely judge. Two of the thirty
two Articles which I mentioned before he speaks to: The one is that Bishops,
Priests and Deacons should abstain from their Wives, or be degraded.] But 1.
The Council which he cites for this, is but a Provincial Council in Spain in
the fifth Age: and what is this to Catholic succession? 2. The Evidences for the
Antiquity of Priests marriages are so clear and numerous, that I will not thank
any of them to confess their doctrine a Novelty. 1 Cor. 9. 5. Have we not power
to lead about a Sister, a Wife as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren
of the Lord and Cephas? I hope they will not deny that Peter had a Wife? 1 Timothy
3. 2, 4. A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one Wife -- One that rules
well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity. ver.
12. Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children, and
their own houses well, Tit. 1. 7. If any be blameless, the husband of one Wife,
having faithful children, -- The Ancient Canons called the Apostles, say, Can.
6. Let not a Bishop or Presbyter put away his own Wife on pretense of Religion.
And if he reject her, let him be excommunicated: but if he persevere, let him
be deposed.] Let Bellarmine persuade those that will believe him, that this
Canon speaks but of denying them maintenance: Canons as well as Scripture are
unintelligible to these men. The Canons at Trull. of the fifth and sixth
Council, do expressly expound this Apostolic Canon as I do here: and they
profess it was the Apostles concession then to the Bishops to marry: and they
themselves forbid any to separate Priests from their Wives, and professedly
oppose the Roman Church in it, Can. 12, 13. For this Bellarmine, lib. 2. cap.
27. de Pontif. Romans reproacheth them, and that's his answer. Forsooth, the Pope
approved not these Canons: 1. Let Adrians words be read, and then judge. 2.
What if he did not? Our enquiry is of Catholic Tradition and succession, and
not of the Popes opinion. But its easy to bring much more for this.

Another point that H. T. proves, is, The same Canon of Scripture which they
own: And for this he brings one Provincial Council, Carth. 3. as in the sixth
Age. An excellent proof of Catholic succession through all Ages. But have we
not better proof of the contrary? Let him that would be satisfied peruse these
records and judge. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. cap. 9. vel. 10. and there
Joseph. li. 1. cont. Apion. Constitut. Apostol. (whosoever was the author) lib.
2. cap. 57. Canon. Apostult. Dionys. Eccl. Hier. cap. 3. Melet. in Eusebius. Eccl.
Histor. lib. 5. cap. 24. Origin in Niceph. hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 16. Orig.
Philocal. cap. 3. Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. cap. 25. Tertul. cont. Marcion. Carm. lib.
4. cap. 7. Athanas. Tom. 2. Epist. 39. Et in Synops. Sacr. scrip. Hilar.
Pictav. Explanat. in Psalmos. Cyril. (vel. Johan.) Hierosol. Catech. 4. Council.
Laodic. Can 59. Epiphan. haeres. 8. and 76. and de Mensur. and ponderib. Greg.
Nazianz. Carmin. de veris and genuinis libris SS. Amphiloch. in Balsam. page
1082. Hieronym. in Prolog. in lib. Reg. and Prol. in lib. Solom. Et Epist. ad
Laetam. and passim. Ruffinus in Symbolum. But what need I cite any more, when
Dr. Cousin has done it in a volume purposely? where this allegation also of the
third Conc. Carthag. is answered.

AND now having showed you that Papists cannot prove any Catholic Succession,
or Continuation, or Tradition of their Religion, let us consider of their silly
shift, by instancing in some by-points common to them with others. Of which I
shall say the less because I have spoke to it already in my Safe Religion.

And before I mention any particulars, remember that I have proved before that
ignorance or difference about many points not essential to Christianity, may
consist with our being of one Religion and Catholic Church, and therefore such
differences are nothing to the point of succession of the Catholic Church or
Religion. This is plain to any reasonable man. And that the Papists may see
that for their parts they have nothing to say against it, I shall add to what
is said, that they tolerate or plead for the toleration of greater differences
among themselves, which yet they affirm to consist with the unity of faith. I
will now give you but an instance or two.

The Jesuits maintain, that if a man do but believe in their Pope and Church as
infallible, he may (not only as some say, be ignorant of some Article of the
Creed it self, and yet be a true Catholic, yea and be saved, but also) believe
a false Article as from God and the Church: The former is commonly taught not
only by such as Suarez, that say the Article of Christ's Descent into Hell is
not to all of Necessity to Salvation, but by many others in the Doctrine of
Implicit faith. The later clause you may see among others in Franc. Albertinus
the Jesuit, Corollar. page 250. where his objectors put this case [Suppose
twenty Bishops preach to a country man a false Article, as if it were spoken
by God and the Church: that proposal of the twenty Bishops is so sufficient,
that the Country man prudently forms an evident practical judgment, and
morally certain, to believe with a speculative assent the Article proposed by
the twenty Bishops, for the Authority of God as the formal reason. Three
absurdities seem hence to follow. 1. That the Country man should be obliged
under mortal sin, to believe the twenty Bishops, and so the precept of faith
should bind to believe a falsehood. 2. The Country man should be in Gods Grace
without faith. In Grace, because he commits no mortal sin, yea he obeys the
command of believing: Yet without faith, because he believes a falsehood
opposite to faith, and so loses faith. 3. God should concur to deceive -- To
the first Albertinus answers that its no Absurdity that the command of faith
do oblige to believe a falsehood, it being not per se, but per accidens. To the
second he says, that the Country man does not lose his grace or faith,
because the falsehood believed is not formally opposite to the true faith (but
materially) -- Here you see that a man may hold an Article opposite to the
faith materially, and yet not only be a true Christian in grace and faith, but
also in so doing obey by accident the command of believing, so be it he believe
in their Church. And if that be so, with what face can these men say, that our
Church or Religion is new, or not the same with the Greeks, etc. when we have
the same formal Object of faith, and differ in no Essential Material point? See
here their lubricity and partiality.

One Instance more: The second Council of Nice that decreed for Image Worship,
does yet expressly decree that Latria, Divine worship is to be given only to
God; Thomas Aquinas sum. 3. q. 25. art. 3. and 4. purposely maintains that
Latria, Divine Worship is to be given to the Image of Christ, and to the Cross
that he dyed on; and to the sign of that Cross. Here is an Article of their
faith expressly contradicted: And yet Aquinas is a member of their Church; And
if any say, he is no member, its proved past doubt, for the Pope has Canonized
him for a Saint: So that now it is a part of their Religion to take him for a
true believer: And Albertinus has (as he thinks) proved, that though in many
other matters of fact the Pope be fallible, yet in the Canonizing of Saints he
is infallible, because of some promise of Gods special assistance (if one knew
where to find it.) Abundance of such Instances might be brought that prove,
that the Papists own men as true believers, that deny or contradict Articles of
their faith. But what need we more, then that France and thousands elsewhere are
yet members of their Church, that deny the Laterane and Florentine definition
for the Popes Supremacy above a General Council? and when most Papists hold
that Angels are incorporeal, contrary to the definition of the said second
Council of Nice. And therefore by their own law, nay much more, we may well say
that those were of our Religion that differed from us in nothing that is indeed
or our esteem Essential to the faith. Now to a few particulars.

1. The Papists tell us that [Fulk confesses that Hierom, Austin, Ambrose,
etc. held the invocation of Saints] H. T. p. 49. Answ. 1. If any hold that they
should desire the departed Saints to pray for them, as they do the living, we
have reason enough to take it for their error, but its no proof that they are
not of the same Church and Religion with us: As long as they give no part of
that adoration or honor to Saints which is proper to God the Father, Son, or
Holy Ghost, it is not inconsistent with true Faith and Christianity.

2. But yet we must tell you that the Primitive Church was unacquainted with
the Romish prayer to Saints. Till the end of the fourth Century they are not
able to prove that ever three men (if any one) were for any prayer to the Dead
at all, except such a conditional speech in an Oration as Greg. Nazianzen has
[If holy souls have any care or feeling of such things as these, receive this
Oration] Orat. 11. I entreat the Reader that needs information of the way of
Antiquity in this point, to read Bishop Ushers Answer to the Jesuit on this
point, page 418, etc. Where he says that [for nine parts of the first four
hundred years, he dare be bold to say that the Jesuit is not able to produce
so much as one true testimony out of any Father whereby it may appear that any
account at all was made of it] Where he cites the full express words of the
Fathers of those first ages against praying to Saints, as Origin in Jus. Hom.
16. And in Romans lib. 2. cap. 2. And Contr. Celsum lib. 8. page 432, 433, 406,
411, 412. and lib. 5. page 239. Tertullian Apol. cap. 30. Tertullian and
Cyprian of Prayer: Athanasius Orat. 4. Cont. Arrium page 259, 260. Eccles.
Smyrn. apud Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. etc. I am loath to recite what is there already
given you. 3. And when Prayer to the dead did come in, how exceedingly it
differed from the Romish Prayers to the dead, I pray you read there in the same
Author. 4. And also of those Adorations and Devotions offered by the Papists to
the Virgin Mary, I desire you to read in the same Author, and Place, enough to
make a Christian tremble, and which for my part I am not able to excuse from
horrid Blasphemy or Idolatry, though I am willing to put the best
interpretation on their words that reason will allow.

5. The Reason why in the old Testament men were not wont to pray to Saints,
Bellarmine says was, because then they did not enter into heaven nor see God.
Bellar. de sanct. Beat. li. 2. cap. 19. So Suarez in the third part, Tom. 2.
disp. 42. Sect. 1. But abundance of the chief Doctors of the Church for diverse
Ages were of opinion that the Saints are not admitted into Heaven to the clear
sight of God before the day of Judgment (as most of the Eastern Churches do to
this day) therefore they could not be for the Popish Prayer to Saints.

And here again observe, that men may be of the same faith and Church with us,
that differ and err in as great a matter as this. The Council of Florence has
now defined it, that departed souls are admitted into Heaven to the clear sight
of God: And yet Stapleton and Francis. Pegna. a Castro, Medina, Sotus, affirm
that Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Origin, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Austin, Lactantius, Victorinus, Prudentius, Theodoret, Aretas,
Oecumenius, Theophilact, Euthymius, yea and Bernard, have delivered the
contrary sentence. See Staplet. Defens. Eccles. author. cont. Whitak. lib. 1.
cap. 2. with Fran. Pegna in part. 2. Director. Inquisitor. com. 21.

Now as all these must needs be against the Popish Invocation of Saints, so
they were against that which is now determined to be de fide; Whence I gather
(on the by) 1. That the Romish faith increases, and is not the same as
heretofore. 2. That they had not this Article by Tradition from any of these
Fathers, or from the Apostles by them (unless from the Scriptures.) 3. That men
that err in such points as are now defined by Councils to be de fide, are yet
accounted by Papists to be of their Church and faith: And therefore they may be
of ours, notwithstanding such errors as this in hand. 4. And note also by this
taste, whether the Papists be not a perjured generation, that swear not to
expound Scripture but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.

6. The Council of Laodicea condemned them as Idolaters that prayed to Angels,
Can. 35. (which Caranza, Crab, and other Papists have turned into Angulos;
whose falsification you may see fully detected by the said Bishop Usher, ibid.
page 470. 471, 472. Read there also the full Testimonies of Greg. Nissen,
Athanasius, Epiphanius, etc. against praying to Saints and Angels, and the
detection of Bellarmines fraud, that pretends the Fathers to speak of the
Gentiles Idolatry when they mention the Virgin Mary and the Saints, and say
expressly they were not to be adored.

But for all this, H. T. Manual. page 291, etc. has Fathers for this Adoration
of Angels and Saints. And who are they? The first is Dionysius: to which I
answer, 1. There is never a such a word in the place cited in Dionysius, in the
Book that I have at hand, printed Lugdun. 1572. 2. We are for praying the
Saints to pray for us too, that is, those on earth: And the words cited by him,
mention not the Saints in heaven. 3. That Dionysius is not Dionysius but a
spurious Apochryphal Book: Not once known and mentioned in the world till
Gregory the greats days, (six hundred years after Christ) as Bellarmine
himself says Lib. de Scriptor. Eccles. de Dionys. And lib. 2. de Monach. cap.
5.

The second is Clem. Apostol. Constit. 5. Answ. 1. The words speak only of
honoring the Martyrs, which is our unquestioned duty; but not of Praying to
them. 2. Its an Apochryphal forgery, and neither the Apostles nor Clements Work
which he cites (but any thing will serve these men:) Let him believe
Bellarmine de scriptor. Eccles. page 38, 39. where he proves it, and says
that [in the Latin Church, these Constitutions are of almost no account, and
the Greeks themselves Canon. 2. Trul. reject them as depraved by Heretics, and
that the receiving of them is it that misleadeth the Aethiopians.] See more
against them in Cooks Censura, page 17, 18, 19. and Rivets Crit. Sac. and
Dalaeus in Pseudepigrap.

The third Testimony of H. T. is from Justins second Apol. Answ. It is not
Praying to Angels that Justin seems to intend, but giving them due honor,
which we allow of. His intent is to stop the mouths of Heathens that called the
Christians impious for renouncing their Gods: To whom he replyeth, that we yet
honor the true God, and his Angels, etc. --

His Testimony for the third age is only Origin (and yet none of Origin) First
in his Lament. Answ. 1. Origin there mentions the Saints, but not the dead
Saints. It may be all the Saints in the Church on earth whose prayers he
desires. 2. If this satisfy you not, at least be satisfied with this, that
you cite a forgery that is none of Origens works. Not only Erasmus says that
[This Lamentation was neither written by Origin, nor translated by Hierom, but
is the fiction of some unlearned man, that by this trick devised to defame
Origin:) But Baronius Annal. Tit. 2. ad an. 253. p. 477. witnesses that Pope
Gelasius numbers it with the Apocryphals.

But H. T. has a second testimony from Origin. in Cantic. Hom. 3. Answ. 1.
That speaks of the Saints prayer for us, but not of our prayers to them one
word, which is the thing in question. 2. But Erasmus and others have showed
that neither is this any of Origens works. Sixtus Senensis says, that some old
Books put Hieroms name to it: And Lombard and Aquinas cite passages out of it
as Ambroses.

You see now what Testimonies H. T. has produced for the first three Ages,
even till above four hundred years after Christ. And yet no doubt but this is
current proof with the poor deluded Papists that read his Book.

2. The next exception to be considered is, Praying for the Dead: which they
say the ancient Church was for.

Answ. 1. We are for the Commemoration of the holy lives and sufferings of the
Saints: and the first sort of the ancients prayers for them began here, as the
occasion. 2. We are for thankful acknowledgement of Gods Mercies to the
departed Saints, and to the Church by them. And the first prayers for them were
such as these. 3. Bishop Usher has copiously proved that they were Saints,
supposed to be in Heaven or Paradise, and not in Purgatory, that were then
prayed for: and therefore that it was not the Popish praying for tormented
souls that was then practiced: And therefore their prayers then were besides
Commemorations and Thanksgivings, the petitioning of all those following
Mercies for them which are not to be received till the resurrection: Bellarmine
himself proving that though we were certain that the blessed souls shall have a
raised glorified body, and be justified in the last Judgment, yet may it be
prayed for, because it is yet future. Now we are far from being of another
Church or Religion then those that hold such an opinion as this. Says Usher
page 224. when he had cited many testimonies [In these and other prayers of the
like kind, we may descry evident footsteps of the primary intention of the
Church in her supplications for the dead: which was that the whole man (not the
soul separated only) might receive public remission of sins, and a solemn
acquittal in the judgment of that great day; and so obtain both a full escape
from all the Consequences of sin (the last enemy being now destroyed, and death
swallowed up in victory) and a perfect consummation of bliss and happiness: all
which are comprised in that short prayer of S. Paul for Onesiphorus (though
made for him while he was alive) [The Lord grant unto him that he may find
mercy of the Lord in that day] Yea, diverse prayers for the dead of that kind
are still retained in the Roman offices; of which the great Spanish Doctor John
Medina thus writes; Although I have read many prayers for the faithful
deceased, which are contained in the Roman Missal, yet have I read in none of
them that the Church does petition, that they may more quickly be freed from
pains: but I have read that in some of them petition is made, that they may be
freed from everlasting pains.] Again there be other prayers (says Medina)
wherein petition is made, that God would raise the souls of the dead in their
bodies unto bliss at the day of judgment.]

You see then, that our Question is not whether the dead may be prayed for: but
what prayers may be made for them. And therefore to find that about three
hundred years after Christ (more or less) men begun to pray for the dead, is no
proof that they were not of our Church or Religion; or that therefore we want
succession. It was not a praying to be sooner out of Purgatory that then was
used, as Papists do, but a Praying for the mercies promised at the
Resurrection: And thus we think it lawful to pray for the dead; were it not
for the accidental evil that might follow with them that will misunderstand and
abuse it.

And its further to be noted, that as Pegna, Stapleton and others confess, the
Fathers, Greek and Latin, before mentioned, did believe that men had not their
perfect Joys till the Resurrection; and therefore they had the far stronger
motive to pray for the dead. And if Protestants had not been partly of this
mind (save only that we put not the soul into hidden receptacles, nor anywhere
but with Christ) Bellarmine had not found so much occasion of that unworthy
calumny against Calvin for the words cited by him in his Instit. as if he
denied the beatifical vision, if not the immortality of the soul: Even because
he took not our bliss to be perfect till the Resurrection, but somewhat short
of what we shall then be. Now seeing the Fathers were so commonly of that mind,
and the Greeks and Aethiopians are still of that mind, and Bellarmine says
Luther and Calvin are of that mind, you may see that neither in that nor the
point of praying for the dead as used by the ancients, is our distance so great
as to weaken the proof of our succession, or make us to be of two Churches or
Religions.

And here you may see the differences between the Prayers for the dead which
are used by the Papists, and by the Eastern Churches to this day. And yet if
upon private unsound opinions any should go somewhat further in this point, it
follows not that such error changes the faith. I desire the Reader that
would have a fuller sight of the face of Antiquity in this point, to read
Bishop Usher of it in the forementioned Answer to the Jesuit.

3. Another point that they much challenge us about, is, The Veneration or
Adoration of Images, Relics, and the Cross, to which I may join,
peregrinations to places esteemed by them to be of eminent holiness. Concerning
Peregrinations, you may see by a plain Epistle of Gregory Nyssen (in the end of
his printed works, but in the midst of a M. S. in Paris Library) written
purposely against going on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, what is to be thought of
this. He advises even the retired Monasticks even in those Countries that
were near Judaea, to forbear such Pilgrimages as dangerous and unnecessary, and
not at all commanded in the Scripture. The Papists did as long as they could
persuade the world that this Epistle was none of Gregory's, and when they were
made ashamed of that, they would expound it as prohibiting Pilgrimages to none
but the Monasticks: And sure if it should be forbidden them, then much more
should others be forbidden, that have not the leisure, and pretend not to the
devotions which these pretend to. Read but the Epistle it self without either
Molinaeus his notes on our side, or Gretsers frivilous answers, and judge as
thou see cause.

As for Images, we allow the Historical use of them, and the setting them up in
Churches the Lutherans allow, and we dislike it only as dangerous and a
needless snare, but take not our selves to be of another Church or Religion
from those that are otherwise minded: No nor from those that Reverence them as
they respect the persons whom they signify. But its one thing to use Images,
and another thing to use them Popishly, which is to make them mediate objects
of Divine worship, yea to worship the very Image it self, and the Cross and the
sign of the Cross with the same worship as we do him that is signified by them:
So that we confidently affirm, 1. That the Primitive Church did make no use of
Images at all in the worship of God; no nor endure them in the place of
Worship. 2. That when they were first brought in, the Popish use of them was
still renounced and detested. Clemens Alexandrinus Protreptic. ad Gent. says
that [We are plainly forbidden to use that deceitful Art] (of painting or
image-making) -- And [We have no sensible Image made of any sensible matter,
but such an Image as is to be conceived with the understanding] Origin against
Celsus lib. 7. page 373, 384, 386. 387. is large and plain against this use of
Images, as the Protestants are. And the Eliber. Council. C. 36. says [Placuit
picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur, aut adoratur in
parietibus depingatur. It seems good to us, that Pictures ought not to be in
the Church, lest that which is worshipped or adored should be painted on Walls]
Some Papists would sain find a sense for this (anon contrary to the words: But
Melch Canus plainly says, that the Council did not only imprudently but
impiously make this law to take away Images, Loc. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 4. conc.
4. I shall cite no more, but entreat the Reader that is willing to be informed
how much Antiquity was against the Papists in the points of Images, to peruse
only Dallaeus de Imaginibus, and Usher in his Answer to the Jesuit and Sermon
to the Parliament: And I provoke the Papists to confute what is in them
alleged if they can.

H. T. has no better shift to salve their credit (Manual page 319, 320.) then
to set their own Schoolmen and General Council together by the ears. The second
Council of Nice (that did most for Images) did openly renounce the adoring them
with Divine honor, and Tharasius solemnly professed, Duntaxat in unum verum
Deum latriam and fidem se refer and reponere [They did refer and repose faith
and divine worship in the true God alone] But Aquinas sum. 3. q. 25. a. 3. and
4. maintains (as I before observed) that the Image of Christ, and the Cross
and the sign of the Cross are to be worshipped with Divine worship.] And what
says H. Turbervile to this? Why [This is a mere school opinion and not of
faith with us: Urge not therefore what some particular Divines say, but hearken
to the Doctrine of Gods Church. -- ] Very good! Is not this so gross a kind of
juggling, that would never down if devout ignorance and implicit faith had not
prepared the stomachs of the people? 1. You see here that to contradict the
Determination of a General Council, is not of faith with them. But it is not
against your faith? Do you give leave to mere school opinions to contradict
General Councils? See here what is become of the Popish faith? If the
Determinations of Councils be not Articles of faith with you, then you have no
faith, but give up your cause: And if they be, then Aquinas and his followers
are Heretics. 2. And then see what is become of the Popes Infallibility in
Canonizing Saints, that have sainted Thomas Aquinas that proves a Heretic by
your Law: so that your cause is gone which way ever you turn you. 3. And then
see what it is to pray to Saints, when some of them are made Heretics by your
own Laws. 4. And then also see, at what Unity the Church of Rome is among
themselves, when it is the very common doctrine of their learned Schoolmen,
which contradicts a General Council: Are you not well agreed that while? 5.
And lastly note what a Holy Church you have, when the common sort of your most
learned Divines are thus made Heretics: See Bishop Ushers allegations of Th.
Arundels Provincial Council at Oxford, 1408, ex Guil. Linewood lib 5. And Jac.
Naclantus in Romans cap. 1. fol. 42. says [We must not only confess, that the
faithful in the Church do worship before the Image, as some cautelously speak,
but that they adore the Image, without any scruple: yea and that they worship
it with the same worship as the Prototype: so that if it be worshipped with
Divine worship, the Image must have Divine worship -- ] And Cabrera in 3. part.
Thom. qu. 25. art. 3. disp. 2. number. 15. there cited by Usher, says that it is
of faith that Images are to be worshipped in Churches and without: and we must
give them signs of servitude and submission, by embracing, lights, offering
incense, uncovering the head, etc. 2. That Images are truly and properly to be
adored, with an intention to adore themselves, and not only the samplars
represented in them. This Conclusion is against Durandus and his followers,
whose opinion by the Moderns is judged dangerous, rash, and savouring of
Heresy: and M. Medina reports that M. Victoria reputed it heretical: but our
conclusion is the common one of Divines. If Images be improperly only adored,
then they are not to be adored simply and absolutely; which is manifest
Heresy. And if Images were to be worshipped only by way of Remembrance,
because they make us remember the samplars, which we thus adore as if they were
present, it would follow that all creatures are to be adored with the same
adoration as God -- which is absurd. 3. The Opinion of Saint Thomas, that the
Image must be worshipped with the same act of adoration, as the samplar which
it represents, is most true, most pious, and very consonant to the decrees of
faith] Thus Cabrera, who adds that this is the doctrine of Thomas and all his
Disciples and almost all the old Schoolmen, and particularly of Cajetan,
Capreolus, Paludanus, Ferrariensis, Antoninus, Soto, Alexand. Ales. Albertus
Magnus, Bonaventura, Richardus de media villa, Dionysius Carthusianus, Major,
Marsilius, Thom. Waldensis, Turrecremata, Clichtovaeus, Turrian, Vasquez, etc.
And Azorius says [It is the constant opinion of Divines,] Institut. Moral tom.
1. lib. 9. cap. 6. Yea in the Roman Pontifical published by the Authority of
Clement the eighth, it is expressed, that [The Legates Cross shall have the
right hand, because Divine worship is due to it See here whether the Pope
himself be not an Heretic, and the Pontifical contain not heresy, and the
whole rabble of the Schoolmen heretics, by contradicting the determination of
the General Council at Nice 2. which H. T. cites, and the doctrine which he
says is the doctrine of Gods Church, such is the faith and unity of the
Papists.

But they will say still that though all these worship the very Cross and
Images themselves, and that with Divine worship, yet there be some of a better
mind, that do but worship God by the Image, such as H. T. etc. Answ. And do you
think that rational Pagans did not know as well as you that their Images were
not Gods themselves, and so worshipped them not as Gods, but as the
representers and instruments of some Diety? Lactantius Instit. lib. 2. cap. 2.
brings them in saying thus [Non ipsa, etc. We fear not them, but those whom
they represent, and to whose names they are consecrated [And Arnobius thus
[Deos per simulachra veneramur: It is the Gods that we worship by Images] And
Augustine thus reports the Pagans sayings [in Psalm. 96. Non ego lapidem, etc.
I do not worship that stone, nor that Image, which is without sense] And in
Psalm. Psalm. 113. cono. 2. [Nec simulachrum, nec daemonium colo, etc. 1 worship
neither the Image, nor a Spirit in it; but by the bodily likeness I behold the
sign of that which I ought to worship.] Yea that many of them renounced the
worshipping of Devils, appears by Augustines report of their words, in Psalm.
96. [Non colimus mala daemonia, etc. We worship not evil spirits: It is those
that you call Angels, that we worship, who are the powers of the great God, and
the Ministers of the great God] To whom Austin answers [Would you would worship
them (that is, honor them aright,) then you would easily learn of them not to
worship them] And doubtless few could be so silly as to think there were as
many Jupiters or Apollos as there were Images of them in the world. So that you
see here that some of the Pagans as to Image Worship disclaimed that which the
Papists ascribe to them, viz. Divine worship.

Oh but says H. T. tell us not of particular Doctors, but of the Doctrine of
Gods Church. Answ. What not of Saint Thomas? What! not of the Army of School
Divines before mentioned? What! not of the [Communis sententia Theologorum:]
the common judgment of Divines? for so they call it; What? not of that which
is de fide, or consonant to it, and whose contrary is heresy, or savours of
Heresies? (as they say of Durandus opinion) what! not of Pope Clement the
eighth and the Roman Pontifical? (page 672.) wonderful! are all these no body
in your Church? O admirable harmony that is in your united Church!

But you can agree to leave out the second commandment lest the very words
should deter the people from Image worship; and to make an irrational division
of the tenth to blind their eyes. And yet you cry up the Testimony of the
Fathers, when you are fain to hide one of the ten commandments, so that
thousands of your poor seduced followers, know not that there is such a thing.
No wonder if you cast away Gregory Nyssen's Epistle against Pilgrimages; and
Epiphanius his words (in the end of his Epistle to Johan. Herosol.) against
Images; and if Vasquez (in 3 Thom. disp. 105. c. 3.) contrary to the plain
words do fain that it was the Image of a profane or common man that Epiphanius
pulled down; and Al. Cope (Dial. 5. c. 21.) say, that the epistle is counterfeit
and not Epiphanius's: and if Bellarmine (de Imag. c. 9.) and Baronius (ad an.
392.) say that this part of the Epistle is forged: and if Alphons. a Castro.
(cont. Haeres. de Imag.) reproach Epiphanius for it as an Iconoclast: so well
are you agreed also in the confutation of the Fathers Testimonies, that any way
will serve your turn, though each man have his several way. Fair fall Vasquez
that plainly confesses, that indeed the Scripture does forbid not only the
worship of an Image for God, but also the worshipping of the true God in an
Image: but says that this commandment is now repealed, and therefore under the
Gospel we may do otherwise. (Vasq. li. 2. de Adorat. Disp. 4. c. 3. Sect. 74.
75. etc. 4. Sect. 84.

But of this point I shall say no more now but this. 1. Many Christian Churches
do reject Images from their Churches and worship as well as Protestants. 2.
More reject statues that reject not pictures. 3. Many that keep them, worship
not them, nor God in them, or by them, as by a mediate object. 4. General
Councils have been against Images, that want nothing but the pleasure of the
Pope to make them of as good authority as the Council that was for them. 5.
That Council that was for them (Nice 2.) condemns the Schoolmen and Pope
Clement himself as Heretics, for worshipping them, or the Cross with Divine
worship. 6. I again urge any Papist to answer Dallaeus book rationally that
can. 7. To spare me the labor of saying more of the judgment of the ancient
Catholic Church against the Popish use of Images, I desire the Reader to
peruse what Cassander an honest Papist has written to that end, Consultat. de
Imag. et simulac. who begins thus [Ad Imagines vero sanctorum quod attinet,
certum est, initio praedicati Evangelii aliquanto tempore inter Christianos,
praesertim in ecclesiis, imaginum usum non fuisse, ut ex Clemente and Arnobio
patet: Tandem picturas in ecclesiam admissas ut rerum gestarum historiam
exprimentes etc. -- ] And he produces abundance from antiquity against the
present Popish use of them.

4. Another point in which the Papists pretend to better Countenance from
Antiquity then we, is the point of the Corporal presence with
Transubstantiation: But of this there is so much said by multitudes of our
Divines, that I shall now say no more, but desire the studious to Read at least
Bishop Ushers Answ. to the Jesuit of it, and Edmundus Abertinus de
Eucharistia: a Treatise so full of evidence from Scripture, Reason, and the
judgment of the Fathers, that I boldly challenge all the Papists in the world
to give a tolerable answer to it, that is a better then that is given.

When we have thus showed them the stream of Antiquity to have been against
them, they pass us by, and thrust into the ignorant peoples hands, a few musty
scraps of abused words, which are answered and cleared over and over: Thus do
H. T. D. Baily, and others.

5. In the point of Satisfaction and Purgatory, besides what Sadeel, Chamier
and others have said, Usher and the foresaid Dallaeus in a full Treatise have
showed the Papists nakedness from Antiquity, so that modesty should forbid them
to pretend the Fathers for them any more, if any modesty be left.

6. About their Fasts (though that be no essential of Religion) both the time,
manner etc. is so fully spoak to by the said Dallaeus in another just volume de
Jejuniis, that Popery in this also is openly condemned by the Fathers in the
view of the impartial considerate world.

The point of Free will, and most of the rest in which they imagine that we
dissent from Antiquity or the Eastern Churches, I have spoak to already in my
first Book against Popery. I had thought to have gone through the rest
particularly, at least the rest mentioned by H. T. and D. Baily; but finding
them so frequently and fully handled already, I will forbear such labor in
vain.

CHAP. XXVI.
Detect. 17.

ANother of the Papists Deceits, and one of the Principal that they support
their cause with, is, A false interpretation and application of all the sayings
of the Fathers, which they can but force to a show of countenancing their
supremacy. That you may find out their juggling in this, I shall show you some
of of their Footsteps more particularly.

1. Any claim that their own ambitious Bishops have made to a further power
then was due to them, they use as an Argument for their universal sovereignty:
when as we deny not but that there was too much pride and Ambition in their
Prelates (which is all that this will prove;) even in some that otherwise might
be good men. We deny not but that Zosimus would fain have extorted a confession
of his usurped power, and a submission to it from Aurelius, Augustine, and the
rest of the Africane Council. But yet he could not do it. We confess that Leo
the first, and Gregory the first, and others, were very busy for the extending
of their power: And that the Roman Bishops were long endeavoring to have put
the halter on the Africanes heads, yea and long about the French before they
got them under. And shall these partial ambitious men be the witnesses? And
because they would have had more power, does it follow that it was their due?

2. Again, if they find that any distressed Churches or Bishops have but sent
to Rome for help, they presently gather thence that they took the Pope to be
Christ's Vicar General. As when Chrysostom sent to Innocent, and Basil and the
rest in the East did send so often for help into the West, when as the reasons
were but such as these; 1. Because Rome during the Emperors residence there,
was the place where life or death was last pronounced on every man's cause by
the secular power: and therefore the Bishop of Rome had the greater opportunity
to befriend other Churches. 2. And afterward Rome had a great secular influence
on the Empire. 3. And because in the divisions of the East about Arrianisme,
they thought the countenance of the Orthodox in the West might have done
somewhat to turn the scales. 4. Because the Bishop of Rome being taken for the
Patriarch of the first place, his voice might do much against an adversary.

I will delay you now which no more instances, then those of Basils time from
the East. Eusebius, Meletius, Basil, and the rest of the Orthodox, being both
pestered with the Arrians, and all to pieces also among themselves, do send for
help to the West. (Basil. Epist. 69.) But to whom? and for what? Not to the
Bishop of Rome only, nor by name, but equally to the Bishops of Italy and
France, without any mention of the Roman power. And it was not that the Pope
might decide all by his sovereign power, which certainly was so near a way to
their relief, that no wise man can imagine them so mad as to forget it, if it
had been a thing then known and approved of. But only they desire that some may
be sent to help them to be the stronger party in a Synod, or at least some one
to comfort them, and put some countenance on their cause. And Epist. 70. Basil
writes himself (in the name of the rest:) but to whom [To the Bishops of
France and Italy.] and France before Italy, without taking notice of an
universal Head of the Church at Rome. And what does he so importune them for?
not that the Pope would decide the controversy: but that they would acquaint
the Emperor with their state (because the West had an Orthodox Emperor, and
the East an Arrian) or send some to them to see how it stood with them: so that
it was but either help from the Emperor, or countenance from the number of
Bishops (because they were over voted quite at home) that they desired. So
Epist. 74. Basil again writes, [to the Bishops of the West;] (and so no more to
the Roman Bishop then the rest,) and he gives these as his Reasons [For,
(says he) what we here speak is suspected, as if we spoke through private
contention. -- But for you, the further you are remote from them by habitation,
so much credit you have with the people, whereto is added that the grace of God
helps you to relieve the oppressed: And if Many of you unanimously decree the
same things, it is manifest that the multitude, will produce a certain
reception of your opinion.] Wonderful! if there were then a Vicar General of
Christ at Rome, that it never came into their mind to crave his decision or
help, as such?

O but say the Papists, that was because they had to do only with the Arrians,
that cared for no authority that was against them. Answ. 1. But would these
Arrians have so much regarded the votes of the French and Italian Bishops, yea
or a few men sent from them, and yet not regard the Head of the Church? The
Arrians sure had heard of this Headship, if any had. And would not the Orthodox
desire so much as a word from Rome for this advantage? 2. But it is false that
they were only the Arrians that they called for help against. They expressly
say, that it was also because they were divided among themselves, (by personal
quarrels.) How importunately does Gregory Nyssen afterward call for help from
others, and tells Flavianus in his Epist. to him, of their misery as if all
were lost? And the only sad instance was, that Helladius (counted a good
Bishop) had proudly neglected him, and made him stand at his door (when he went
to visit him) a great while before he was let in; and then did not bid him sit
down; and then did not speak to him first but two or three strange angry words.
This was the great business. But to proceed with Basil. Epist. 77. he falls to
chiding the Western Bishops, for not sending to them, nor regarding them and
their communion: and to touch their pride, he adds, [We have one Lord, one
faith, one hope: Whether you think your selves the Head of the universal
Church: the head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you; or if you place
your selves in the order of other Church Members, you cannot say to us, we need
you not.] And would you here believe that the Papists have the faces to cite
this passage of Basil, for their Headship, because here is the word Head! When
as its plain, 1. That Basil by the Head means but the chiefest part, and not
the sovereign power. 2. That he speaks to all the Bishops of the West, and not
only to the Roman Bishop. 3. That he does it as a smart reproof of their
arrogance, and not in any approbation at all. But any thing will serve them.
More from Basil I shall have occasion to mention anon.

3. Nore also, that when the Papists find but any Heresy condemned by the
Bishop of Rome, they cite this as a testimony of their Sovereignty: As if other
Patriarch and Bishops condemned them not as well as they; Or as if we knew no
that the Church desired the most general vote against Heretics, and therefore
would be loath to leave so great a Bishop out.

4. And when they find the Pope excommunicating foreign Bishops, they cry up
this as a Testimony of his Headship: As if we did not know, 1. That to refuse
Communion with another Church or Bishop is no act of Jurisdiction over them. 2.
That other Bishops have made bold also to excommunicate the Pope: I Will now but
recite those words of Nicephorus lib. 17. cap. 26. which you use to glory in
(as many do in their own shame) [Vigilius (says he) proceeded to that
insolency, that he excommunicated Mennas for four months. And Mennas did the
same by him: But Justinian being moved to anger with such things, sent some to
lay hold on him. But Vigilius being afraid of himself, fled to the Altar of
Sergius the Martyr, and laid hold on the Sacred Pipes, would not be drawn away
till he had pulled them down -- ] But by the Mediation of the Empress Theodora,
the Pope was pardoned, and Menna and he absolved one another. A fair proof of
the Vicarship! 3. And so it was, that Pope Honorius was condemned for an
Heretic by two or three General Councils.

5. Also when they meet with any big words of their own Popes (as I command
this or that) they take it for a proof of the Vicarship: As if big words did
prove Authority. Or as if we knew not how lowlily and poorly they spoke to
those that were above them. As Gregory the first for instance, was high enough
toward those that he thought he could master. but what low submissive language
does he use to secular Governors that were capable of overtopping him? And what
flattering language did his successors use to the most base murderers and
usurpers of the Empire?

6. Another Roman deceit is this; When they find any mention of the exercise of
the (now thriving) Roman Power, over their own Diocese or Patriarchal circuit,
they would hence prove his universal Power over all. And by that Rule the
Patriarch of Alexandria or Constantinople may prove as much.

7. Also when they meet with the passages that speak of the elevation of their
Pope to be their first Patriarch, in the Roman Empire, or any Power that by the
Emperors was given him, they cunningly confound the Empire with the world, and
especally if they find it called by the name of the world; and they would
persuade you that all other Christians and Churches on earth, did ascribe as
much to the Bishop of Rome, as the Roman Empire did. Its true that he was in
the Empire acknowledged to be first in order of dignity, because of Rome the
seat of his Episcopacy; especially when General Councils began to trouble
themselves and the world about such matters of precedence. And its well known
from the language of their writers, as well as from the words of Luke 2. 1.
that they usually called the Empire all the world: And from such passages would
the Papists prove the Primacy at least of the Pope over all the world. But put
these Juglers to it, to prove if they can, that beyond the Rivers Meroes and
Euphrates, and beyond the bounds of the Roman Empire, the Pope did either
exercise Dominion, or was once so much as regarded by them, any more then any
other Bishop, except there were any adjacent Island or Country that had their
dependence upon the Empire. I hope they will not deny that the Church extended
much beyond the Empire. (Though our History of that part of it be much
defective.) And let them prove if they can, that ever any of those Churches had
any regard to the Roman Bishop, any more then to another man. Let them tell you
where either the Empire of the Abassines or any other out of the line of the
Imperial power, was any whit like-subject to the Pope.

8. But their chief fraud is about names and words. When they meet with any
high complemental title given to the Bishop of Rome, they presently conclude
that it signifies his Sovereignty. Let us instance in some particulars, and
show the vanity of their conclusions from them.

1. Sometimes the Roman Bishops are called [Summi Pontifices,] the chief Popes:
and hence some gather their Supremacy. But I suppose you will believe Baronius
(their chief flatterer) in such a case as this. And he tells you in Martyrolog.
Roman. April. 9. that [Fuit olim vetus ille usus in Ecclesia, ut Episcopi
omnes, non tantum Pontifices, sed and summi Pontifices dicerentur -- i. e. It
was the ancient custom of the Church to call all Bishops not only Pontifices
Popes, but chief Popes] And then citing such a passage of Hierom Epist. 99. he
adds [Those that understand not this ancient custom of speech, refer these
words to the Popedom of the Church of Rome.)

2. As for the names Papa, Pope, Dominus, Pater Sauctissimus, beatissimus, dei
amantissimus, etc. its needless to tell you that these were commonly given to
other Bishops.

3. And what if they could find that Rome were called the mother of all
Churches? I have formerly showed you, where Basil says of the Church of
Caesarea, that it is as the mother of all Churches in a manner. And Jerusalem
has often that Title.

4. Sometime they find where Rome is called Caput Ecclesiarum, and then they
think they have won the cause. When if you will consult the words, you shall
find that it is no more then that Priority of Dignity which (not Christ, but)
the Emperors and Councils gave them, that is intended in the word. Its called
the Head, that is, the chief Seat in Dignity, without any meaning that the Pope
is the universal Monarch of the world.

5. But what if they find the Pope called the Archbishop of the Catholic
Church, or the Universal Bishop? then they think they have the day. I answer,
indeed three flattering Monks at the Council of Calcedon, do so superscribe
their libels; but they plainly mean no more then the Bishop that in order of
dignity is above the rest; And many particular Churches are often called
Catholic Churches. There Is difference between [A Catholic Church] and [The
Catholic Church.] And the Bishop of Constantinople had that Title, even by a
Council at Constant. an. 518. before the Bishop of Rome had it publicly, or
durst own it: It was settled on the Patriarch of Constantinople to be called the
Ecumenical or Universal Patriarch. Who knows not that Emperors gave such
Titles at their pleasure? Justinian would sometime give the Primacy to Rome,
and at another time to Constantinople, saying [Constantinopolitana Ecclesia
omnium aliarum est caput: The Church of Constantinople is the Head of all other
Churches.] An. Dom. 530. C. de Episcopis. l. 1. lege 24. And its known that
this Justinian that sometime calls Rome the Head, did yet when the fifth
General Council had condemned Vigilius Pope of Rome, permit Theodora his
Empress to cause him to be fetched to Constantinople, and dragged about the
street in a halter, and then banished, till they had forced him to subscribe
and submit to the Council: even as they had deposed Pope Silverius his
predecessor. And Baronius himself mentions a Vaticane Monument which as it
calls Agapetus Episcoporum princeps on one side, so does it call Menna [the
Apostolic Universal Bishop:] Which Baronius says, does mean no more then that
he was Universal over his own Provinces: aad if that be so, any Bishop may be
called Universal. And do not these men know what Council of Carthage decreed
that the Bishop primae sedis should be called neither Summus Sacerdos, nor
Princeps Sacerdotum, vel aliquid hujusmodi, tantum Episcopus primae sedis: i.
e. Not the chief Priest, or the chief of Priests but the Bishop of the first
seat] And how long will they shut their eyes against the testimony of two of
their own Popes, Pelagius and Gregory the first that condemned the name of
Universal Bishop?

Sometime they find the Church of Rome called Apostolic; and so were others as
well as that, as is commonly known.

And sometime the Pope is called the Pillar of the Church; And what of that? so
are many others as well as he; as all the Apostles were as well as Peter? The
Church is built on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. That the
Pastors of the Church were ordinarily called the Pillars and props of it, as by
Nicephorus Gildas, Theodoret, Basil, Tertullian, Dionysius, Hierom, Augustine,
etc. you may see proved in Gatakers Cinnus page 395, 396.

And lastly, when the Papists read their Popes called the Successors of Peter,
they take this as a proof of their Sovereignty. Whereas 1. Peter himself had no
such Sovereignty. 2. They succeed him not in his Apostleship. 3. They are
called Paul's Successors as well as Peter's. 4. Others are called Peter's
Successors too as well as they, by the Fathers. 5. And other Bishops ordinarily
are called the Apostles Successors, and other Churches called Apostolic
Churches.

I shall only set before them the words of one man at this time, (Hesychii
Hierosol. apud Photium Cod. 269.) and desire them to tell me whether ever more
were said of the Pope, yea or of Peter, then he says of Andrew, calling him
[Chori Apostolici primogenitus, primitus defixa Ecclesiae columna, Petri
Petrus, fundamenti fundamentum; principii principium vel primitiae, qui vocavit
antequam vocaretur, adduxit priusquam adduceretur] i. e. [The first begotten of
the Apostolic Chore, the first fixed Pillar of the Church; the Peter of Peter,
or the Rock of Peter, the Foundation of the Foundation; the Principal of the
Principal, who called before he was called, and brought (others) to (Christ)
before he was brought to him (by any others.)

And the same Hesychius says of James apud Photium Cod. 275. [(...), etc. i.
e. With what Praises may I set forth the servant and Brother of Christ, the
chief Emperor (or Commander or Captain) of the New Jerusalem; the Prince or
chief of Priests, the President or Principal of the Apostles, the Crown or
Leader among the Heads, the principal Lamp among the Lights; the principal
planet among the Stars; Peter speaks to the people; but James gives the Law
(or sets down the Law)] Can they show us now where more then this is said of
Peter himself? Much less of the Pope?

CHAP. XXVII.
Detect. 18. ANother of the Principal Deceits of the Papists, is, the forging
and corrupting of Councils and Fathers, and the citation of such forgeries. Be
careful therefore how you receive their Allegations, till you have searched
and know the Books to be genuine, and the particular words to be there, and
uncorrupted.

They have by their greatness obtained the opportunity of possessing so many
Libraries, that they might the easilyer play this abominable game. But God in
mercy has kept so many monuments of Antiquity out of their hands, partly in
the Eastern, and partly in the Reformed Churches, as suffice to discover
abundance of their wicked forgeries and falsifications.

Of their forging Canons, yea feigning Councils that never were, (as Council.
Sinuessan. Council. Romans sub Silvestr. See Bishop Ushers Answer to the Jes. page
12, 13. As also of their forging Constantines Donation, and Isidore mercators
forging of a fardell of Decretals; and of their falsifying and corrupting in
the Doctrine of the Sacrament, the works of Ambrose, of Chrysostom. (or the
Author operis Imperfecti,) of Fulbertus Bishop of Chartres; of Rabanus of
Mentz, of Bertram, or Ratrannus, etc. Read I pray you the words detecting their
horrible impious cheats.

But their Indices expurgatorii will acquaint you with much more. And yet their
secreter expurgations are worst of all.

What words of Peter's Primacy, and others for their advantage, they have added
to Cyprian de unitate Ecclesiae, see in Jer. Stephens his Edition of it, where
much more additions to Cyprians works are detected out of many Oxford
Manuscripts.

Andreas Schottus the Jesuit publishing Basils works at Antwerp Lat. A. D.
1616. with Jesuitical fidelity, left out the Epistle, in which is this passage
following, which should not be lost: speaking of the Western Bishops he says
[verily the manners of Proud men do use to grow more insolent, if they be
honored. And if God be merciful to us, what other addition have we need of?
But if Gods anger on us remain, what help can the pride of the West bring us?
when they neither know the Truth, nor can endure to speak it; but being
prepossessed with false suspicions, they do the same things now, which they did
in the case of Marcellus, contentiously disputing against those that taught the
truth, but for Heresy, confirming it by their authority. Indeed I was willing
(not as representing the public person of the East) to write to their Leader
(Damasus) but nothing about Church matters, but that I might intimate that they
neither knew the truth of the things that are done with us, nor did admit the
way by which they might learn them. And in general, that they should not insult
over the calamitous and afflicted, nor think that Pride did make for their
dignity, when that one sin alone is enough to make us hateful to God] so far
Basil in that Epistle left out by the Jesuit; in which you may see the Roman
power in those days, in the consciences of Basil and such other Fathers in the
East.

And (by the way) how Tertullian reverenced them, you may see lib. de pudicit.
page 742. where he calls Zepherinus, as we say, all to naught: And the Asian
Bishops condemning of Victor, with Irenaeus his reproof of him; Cyprians and
Firmilians condemning Stephen: Marcellinus his condemnation by all: Liberius
his being so often Anathematized by Hilary Pictav. the resistance of Zosimus and
Boniface by the Africans, etc. show plainly in what esteem the now-infallible
universal Head was then among the Fathers, and in all the Churches. But when
the Papists come to the mention of such passages, what juglings do they use?
sometime they silence them: sometime they pass them over in a few words that
are buried in a heap of other matters: sometime they bring in some forgeries to
obscure them. But commonly they make a nose of wax of Councils and Fathers, as
well as of Scripture, and put any ridiculous sense upon them that shall serve
their turns, though perhaps six men among them may have five or six Expositions.

An Epistle of Ciril of Jerusalem to Austin is forged by one, that their
Molanus calls A barbarous impostor (Histor. Imag. l. 3. c. 36.) about the
miracles of Hierom; where Purgatory and other errors are befriended. When as
Ciril himself dyed thirty years before Hierome. And yet Binsfield, Suarez and
other of the most learned Papists stick not to make use of this forgery for all
that.

But it would be tedious to recite their particular forgeries. The studious
Reader may find many of them discovered up and down by Bishop Usher and other
of our Writers. And for his fuller help, I advise him to read Dr. Reignolds de
Libris Apocryph. and Dr. Th. James his corruptions of the Fathers, and
Scultetus his medulla patrum: yea of the Papists themselves, read Sixtus
Senensis his Bibliothec. and Bellaerm. de Scriptorib. Eccles. and Possevines
Apparatus, and Erasmus censures on the Fathers which he dealt with: But
especially let him not be without Cooks censura Patrum, and Blondell on the
Decretals; to which also add Rivets Critica Sacra, and Dallaeus de
Pseudepigraphis.

Of their abominable Legends I shall say nothing, but that the wiser sort of
themselves are ashamed of them. And if any Ancients have abused the Church by
shameless forgeries, the Papists make use of such as confidently as if they
were the word of God. For instance, Let any man but read over the Books of
Basil Bishop of Seleucia (if it be his indeed) of the life and Miracles of
Thecla, and try his faith upon it, whether he be able to believe that Thecla
stood so long at the window to hear Paul while all those daily applications and
orations were made to her? that Demas and Hermogenes were there to stir up the
people against Paul as a deceiver, under the cloak of being his companions;
that any of those Orations recited are true, when the Author like a professed
fabler uses to say [I suppose thus or thus they said:] that her Mother
Theoclaea, and her lover Thamiris were on the sudden so cruel as to burn her,
while they are said so much to burn in Love to her; that when Thecla had formed
her body like a Cross, and cast her self into the flaming pile, the flames in
reverence of the Cross, became as a Chamber to her, covering her like a vault
from the peoples sight, and not approaching her; and that the earth making a
grievous noise, the showrs and hail destroyed the people, and Thecla went her
way without observance, finding Paul and Onesiphorus hid in a Sepulcher at
prayer for her: that Paul permitted her to cut her hair, and change her habit,
and become his fellow travailer; that Alexander the Governor was so inflamed
with her beauty at Antioch, even before she came in full sight of the people in
the City Gate, that he could not forbear, but presently must leap upon her like
a mad dog; that she tore his Cloak, and threw off his Crown, and so saved her
Virginity; that for this she was cast and tied to wild beasts, and the Lions
couched to her, and one Lyoness fought for her, and killed the rest that
assaulted her; that yet they turned more upon her: that she leaped into the
Fish pond among the devouring Sea Calvs; and that fire from Heaven came down
into the Water, and there made her a chamber, and saved her from those
Sea-beasts; that Falconilla's soul appeared to her Mother Tryphaena to beg
Thecla's prayers that she might be admitted into heaven, telling her how much
Thecla was admired in Heaven. (She knew who was admired in Heaven before she
could be let in:) that at Thecla's prayers she was admitted into heaven; (but
tells us not where she was before:) that when Thecla was again tied to wild
bulls, and fire set to their posteriors to enrage them, the fire killed them,
and burnt the bonds, and she was unhurt. That Thecla again puts on man's
clothes, and seeks Paul; (whether she wore breeches I find not;) that Paul
hereupon pronounces her an Apostle (a predecessor of Pope Joan) and ordains
her to go and preach the Gospel: and appoints her to one Pagan City (as if
either women were Apostles, or ordained to be preachers of the Gospel, that by
Paul were forbidden to speak in the Church: or Apostles were confined to a
City:) that she fixed at Seleucia, and there converted and baptized many, and
at last (after many miracles) did not die, but entered alive into the earth,
which opened it self for her in the place where the holy Table stood; that
after her death she wrought those one and thirty miracles that fill a second
Book, and many more; appearing to this Basil, and encouraging him when he was
weary, to go on in the writing of her praises, and plucking him by the ear, and
so curing his headache, which else would have prevented his Oration in her
praise the next day, with abundance more that are more strange then this.

I have instanced but in this one case of Thecla, because it would be endless
to tell you of all the rest of their fictions (were I acquainted with them all)
Nor do I mention this as one of their Legends, no nor as a piece of
Metaphrastes, but as the works of St. Basil (not Basil the great) an ancient
Father. Now either this is Basils work, or it is not. If it be not, then you
see what trust is to be given to the Papists Antiquities, and supposed Fathers:
For this is one of them, and this story vindicated by Petrus Pantinus, yea by
no less a man then the Great Baronius, the Master of Antiquities, who Annal.
Tom. 1. ad. An. D. 47. brings a whole Army of Fathers to attest the Acts of
Thecla, and approves of this of Basils, and the like of Metaphrastes. Two
Testimonies trouble him shrewdly. One is no later then Tertullian, who (de
Baptis. cap. 18.) says thus [But if any women read the pretended writings of
Paul, and defend the example of Thecla, for women's Liberty to teach and
baptize, let them know that a Presbyter in Asia, that framed that writing,
putting Paul's name instead of his own, was cast out of his place, being
convicted of it, and confessing that he did it in love to Paul.]

The other is Hieroms testimony de Script. Eccless. who citing the forecited
words, says [The travails therefore of Paul and Thecla, and the whole fable of
the baptized Lion, we reckon among Apocryphal writings: For how can it be that
the inseparable companion of the Apostle (Luke) was ignorant of this only among
all his matters?]

But yet Baronius thinks that these are not the same Books that Tertullian and
Hierom speak against: and why so? Because 1. Here is no mention of Theclaes
Preaching and Baptizing, nor of the Lion baptized. 2. Because so many Fathers
attest the story. But the first is a visible falsehood, contrary to the express
words of the story, which feign Paul to have sent her to preach as a true
Apostle, and mention her baptizing the people of Seleucia. And for the baptized
Lion, perhaps Hierom spoke de baptismate sanguinis: and meant the Lion that
dyed in the defense of Thecla: And in that place Thecla is brought as calling
Death a Baptism: However that word which might easily be mistaken, is no great
disproof that this is the same story. And for the Fathers Testimony, as we
believe that a famous Martyr called Thecla there was, from whence the occasion
of the story rose, so it does but show how unfit the Fathers are to be the
Authors of our Faith, or to be esteemed infallible, that so easily believe and
recite the forged stories of an Asiatick Presbyter, even when Tertullian had
before revealed the deceit.

But if really this Book was written by Basil of Seleucia, and was not
spurious, then we yet further see, that they that rest upon the Holy Scriptures
alone for the matters of their faith, do take a surer wiser way, then they that
build all on the credit of such credulous imprudent fabulous Fathers as this
author was.

By this little taste you may see how their Records and Testimonies from
Antiquity are to be trusted: Even as Zosimus report of the Nicene Canon to the
African Council was, who proved it a forgery, and so rejected it, when the
writings are only in their keeping, and their interest calls them to deprave
them, they are little to be trusted; who dare venture to corrupt those that are
in the hands of the Christian world.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Detect. 19. ANother of the Popish devices is, when they have laid their own
cause upon so many forgeries, and uphold it by so many false reports, to make
the people believe that it is we that are the liars, and that we are not to be
believed in any thing that we say of them: and that we misreport the Fathers,
belie the Roman Catholics, and therefore no man should read our Books, or
discourse with us, so as to afford us any credence. So that indeed they get as
much by mere persuading the people that we are Liars, as by any way that I
know. We cannot tell them what is in their own Writers, but the ignorant people
are commonly taught to say, we slander them. Though we cite the book, and page,
and line, and tell them that they were printed at Rome, or Colen, or Antwerp,
or Paris, by men of their own Profession, yet they believe us not, for they are
instructed to hold us for liars, that we may be incapable of doing them good.
If we cite any of the Fathers, they tell us that we misalledge them, or have
corrupted them, or they say no such thing. If we show them the books published
by their own Doctors, and licensed by their Superiors, and printed by Papists,
yet they will not believe us. And so they are taught the easiest way in the
world to repel the truth, and confute those that would do them good. It is no
more but say, you lie, and all is done.

In such a case as this, what is there to be done? Ignorance and Incredulity
thus purposely conjoined, are the wall of brass that is opposed to our
endeavors. To what purpose should we speak to them that will not hear? In such
a case I know but one of these two ways. 1. To endeavor to revive the
stupefied humanity and Reason of these men: and ask them, Is Religion the work
of a man or of a beast? Of a wise man, or of a mad man? Is it a Reasonable or
an Unreasonable course? If it be Reasonable, why then will you go without
Reason upon other men's bare words? But if you are so little men as to venture
your souls without Reason, me thinks you should not venture against it? Would
you rest on the bare word of one of these men, if it went against Reason? If
so, then you renounce your manhood. But suppose you will be so unreasonable,
yet I hope you have your five senses still? What if a Priest shall tell you
that the Crow is white, and the snow is black, or that you see not when you
know you see, will you believe him? If you will believe them before your eyes,
and taste, and feeling, then I have done with you; who can dispute with stocks
and stones, or men so far forsaken of God, as to renounce all their senses? But
if you will not believe a Priest against your eyes, and other senses, then why
do you believe him that Bread is not Bread, and Wine is not Wine, when the
eyes, and smell, and taste of all men say it is? And if your senses tell you
that your Priests deceive you in one thing, me thinks you should not be so
confident of them in other things, as to believe and hearken to none but them.

2. If this will not serve, try whether you can procure their Priests to
discuss those points before the incredulous people, that so they may hear both
sides speak together. Get a conference between them, and some experienced
judicious Divine. But this will hardly be obtained. For if it be to dispute
with one that is able, they will presently pretend a danger of persecution: and no
promise of security will satisfy them. But if it be a weak unexperienced man
that challenges them, then they will venture, and take the advantage.

If nothing else can be done, it is the best way to offer them some small Book
against Popery to read. If they are so captivated that they will neither Hear
nor Read, and their Leaders will not be drawn to a Dispute, I know not what to
do but leave them, and let them take what they get by their unreasonable
obstinacy: They are unworthy of truth that set no more by it.

CHAP. XXIX.
Detect. 20. A Another of their deceits is by pretended Miracles. If they do but
hear of a Wench that has the strangulatus uteri, or furor uterinus, or such
hysterical Passions in any violent degree, they presently go to cast the Devil
out of her, that so they may make deluded people think that they have wrought a
Miracle. And usually the Country people, and perhaps the diseased woman her
self, may be so much unacquainted with the disease, as verily to believe the
Priests, that they have a Devil indeed: and so turn Papists when the cure is
wrought, as thinking it was done by the finger of God. The nature of this
disease is to cause such strange symptoms, that most ignorant people that see
them, do think that the persons are either bewitched, or have a Devil. At this
very time while I am writing this, I am put to dissuade a man from accusing one
of his neighbors of witchcraft, because his daughter has this disease, and
cries out of her. Lest the Papists get further advantage by this ignorance of
the people, I shall acquaint them briefly with some of the symptoms of this
disease. It usually seizes upon young women between the Age of seventeen and
thirty two years: And most commonly on those that are of a sound complexion,
somewhat sanguine, or at least, fleshly and strong, and but seldom on the
weaker sort (in this manner.) When it is but a mere strangulation, women
commonly know it, by the rising to their throat, and sweling, and the like: But
when it comes to the disease we mention, it causes them to fall by fits into
sudden trances, and swoons: in which at first usually they seem stupid as dead,
if it be in a colder body, but after they grow to violent motions, and
strivings, and ragings, so that its as much as two can do to hold them. And
when the fit is over, they are well again. Sometime there will be motions like
convulsive in the head, the hands, and the fingers distinctly: so that you
shall see one hand violently moved to some part of the body, so that it will be
hard to remove it. Sometime one finger set double, and then another, and after
that another, so that it will be hard till the fit is over to set them strait.
Usually the body tossed up and down with raging madness. And some of them will
continue a year, or two, or seven in this case, daily falling in such fits as
one would think should destroy or weaken them presently, and yet after the
fits, be almost as well as ever, and their strength does not much decay. If
they hear any mention of a Witch, they will likely take a conceit that they are
bewitched; and then in their fits they will cry out upon the Witch, and if they
see her, they will fall into a fit. If they get but a conceit that they are
Possessed with a Devil, (by hearing the mention of others that were possessed)
they will by the power of corrupted fancy, play the parts of the possessed, and
rage, and rore, and swear, and speak as in the person of the Devil, and take on
them to prophecy, or tell of secrets. All this I have known: and I have eased
some of them by medicine in a few moments, and cured them (at that time) in a
few days: So that I could easily have made the common people believe that I
had cast out a Devil, if I had but had the design and conscience of a Papist. A
while ago a neighbor Minister told me of a neighbor that was handled thus. I
told him what disease it was, and advised him to persuade her to a judicious
Physician. But the next I hear of her was that neglecting the Physician, she
was cured by some Papist Priest, and thereupon was turned Papist. And no doubt
but among themselves it is reported for a Miracle.

The same course they take also in some distractions and other diseases. And
sometime persons are trained up by them to dissemble and counterfeit a lunatic
or possessed state.

And here because H. T. in his Manual, page 85, 86. does plead their Miracles, I
shall revive the memory of one of the great Miracles that was done among their
Proselites in the Parish of Wolverhampton: though I have mentioned it
heretofore. I have the Book by me (Printed at London by F. K. for Will. Barret,
1622.) and have spoke with many persons that knew the Actor himself, being yet
alive: so that I suppose that no Papist about Wolverhampton will deny it, what
ever they do elsewhere.

At Bilson in the Parish of Wolverhampton in Staffordshire there was a Boy
named William Perry, Son of Tho. Perry, who seemed to be bewitched or possessed
with a Devil: (about thirteen years old, but of special wit above his age.) In
his fits he seemed to be deaf, and blind, writhing his mouth aside, continually
groaning and panting, and when he was pricked, pinched, whipped, he seemed not
to feel. He seemed to take no food that would digest, but with it cast up rags,
thread, straw, pins, etc. his belly almost as flat as his back, his throat
swelled and hard, his tongue stiff and rolled up toward the roof of his mouth,
so that he seemed always dumb, save that once in a fortnight or three weeks he
would speak a few words. It was thought he was bewitched by one Joan Cocks,
because 1. He would discern when that woman was brought into the room, though
it were secretly done, as was tried before the Grand Jury at Stafford. 2. He
would not endure the repeating of the first verse of John, [In the beginning
was the word, etc.] but other texts he would endure. When the Parents had been
a while wearyed with him, and the Country flockt in to see him, a Priest of
the Romish Religion was invited to cure him. The Priest exorcised, him praying
in Latin over him, hanging a stone about his neck, washing him with Holy
water, Witch water, and anointing him with Holy Oil, etc. which seemed to ease
him, and make him speak, and sometime cure him for the time. They Hallowed all
his meat and drink: He would not so much as eat Raisins, or smell to flowers,
unless they were blessed by the Priest: He told them that while the Puritans
stood by him he saw the Devil assault him in the shape of a black bird. The
Priest requires the chief fiend to show himself: then the boy puts out his
tongue swelled: The Priest commands him to show the People by the sheet before
him, how he would use those that dyed out of the Roman Catholic Church.
Whereupon he pulls, and bites, and tosseth the sheet, till the people cry out
and weep. Then he commands the Devil to tell him, how he did use Luthen,
Calvin and John Fox: and he plays the same part more fiercely then before.
Then the Priest commands him to show what power he had of a good Catholic that
dyed out of mortal sin: and then he thrust down his arms, and hanged down his
head, and trembled. The Boy promises when his fit is over, that the will live
and die a Catholic, persuading his parents and friends, etc. On this manner
three Priests one after another followed the cure, still succeeding, but yet
not curing him, that they might draw the Country to a longer observance of
them, (and preached to them in the house) and that the Miracle might be the more
famous. For forsooth there were many Devils in him, they said, to be cast out.
And it stopped the cure, because the Mother would not promise them to turn Papist
if they cured him. But in the mean time the supposed Witch is brought to trial
at Stafford Assizes, 1620. before Judge Warburton and Judge Davies: But in the
end the Judges desired Bishop Morton then present to take care of the Boy: who
took him home to his Castle at Eccleshall, and after certain weeks time (the
Bishop being abroad) the said Bishop comes to the Boy, and tells him that he
understood that he could not endure the first verse of John, and says he, the
Devil understands Greek as well as English, being a Scholar of almost six
thousand years standing, and therefore he knows when I recite that verse in
Greek: And so calling for a Greek Testament, he read the 12. verse; and the Boy
thinking it had been the first, fell into his fit: And when that fit was over,
the Bishop read the first verse, and then the Boy had no fit, thinking it had
been some other verse. And thus they proved him a deceiver, and the Boy was
much confounded, but pretended more distraction; and then that he might get
away, he complained of extreme sickness, and made water in the Urinal, as black
as ink, groaning when he made it: But the third day after, they espied him
mixing ink with his Urine, and nimbly conveying away the Inkhorn. And when they
came in upon him, and found him in the conveyance, he broke out into tears, and
was suddenly cured, and confessed all, how he had been taught his art, and how
he did all, and confessed that his intent was to be cured by a Priest, and to
turn Papist (and whether they have caught him again or no, I know not; for I
hear he is a Quaker in Bristol, or at least a reviler of the Ministry) The
Bishop took his examination at large, October. 8. and 13. 1620. If any doubt of
the story, they may be satisfied yet by the Boy himself, or by the Reverend
Bishop yet alive, or by any of the neighbors in Bilson that were at age there
but thirty seven years ago.

But before the Bishop had discovered the knavery, one of the Conjuring Priests
writes the Narrative of the business (which is printed with the rest) and is
Entitled [A Faithful Relation of the proceedings of the Catholic Gentlemen
with the Boy of Bilson, showing, etc.] And they begin with [Not to us O Lord,
but to thy Name give the Glory!] And so they proceed to make their report of
it, for deluding the people, as a Miracle. And the writing was by a Papist
Gentleman examined, attested upon Oath to be received from one Mr. Wheeler,
etc. But when they heard of the Discovery, they were ashamed of their faithful
Relation. At last, the Bishop brought the Boy at the next summers Assizes, July
26. 1621. to ask pardon openly of God, and the woman accused by him, and of the
Country cheated by him, and there was an end of that Popish Miracle. Abundance
more such I could give you out of certain records; but I recited this for the
sake of H. T. and the Papists of Wolverhampton.

And for your Miracles; I beseech you, if you regard not us, yet open your ears
to a Jesuit that speaks the Truth. Joseph Acosta (de temporib. noviss. lib. 3.
c. 3.) [To all the Miracles of Antichrist, though he do great ones, the Church
shall boldly oppose the Belief of the Scriptures: and by the inexpugnable
Testimony of this Truth, shall by most clear light dispell all his juglings as
Clouds. -- Signs are given to Infidels, Scriptures to Believers; and therefore
the Primitive Church abounded with Miracles, when Infidels were to be called:
But the last, when the Faithful are already Called, shall rest more on the
Scripture, then on Miracles. Yea I will boldly say, that all Miracles are vain
and empty, unless they be approved by the Scripture; that is, have a doctrine
conform to the Scripture. But the Scripture it self is of it self a most firm
Argument of Truth.]

And the same Acosta confesses in his Indian History, that they do no Miracles
in the Indies (where the boast is.) And if they did, it would confirm
Christianity, but not Popery.

Yea if Miracles be so much to be looked at, why will you not give us leave to
observe them? The same Miracles that you boast of, do testify against you, if
they be true. To instance now but in one. Prosper makes mention of a Miracle
(which Thyraeus de Daemoniac. page 76. and many more of yours recite,) that was
done by the Sacramental Wine: A person possessed by the Devil was cured, (after
many other means used in vain) by the Drinking of the Wine in the Eucharist.
And does not this Miracle justify us that give the people the Wine, and
condemn you, that refuse to give it them? Many other Miracles I could recite,
that the Fathers say were done by the Sacrament in both kinds received, which
condemn you that forbid it.

CHAP. XXX.
Detect. 21. ANother of the Papists ways of deceiving is, by impudent Lies and
Slanders against their Adversaries; which they vent with such confidence, that
the seduced people easily believe them. They that are taught to believe their
Priests against their own seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting and smelling, must
needs believe the vilest Lies that they are pleased to utter, in cases where
the miserable people are unable to disprove them. I will give you but a few of
that multitude of Instances that might be given.

1. In a Manuscript of the Papists which I lately received from a Neighbor of
Sturbridge, as sent from Wolverhampton, there are these words, with which they
conclude [Luther having richly supped, and made his friends merry with his
facete conceits, died the same night. This is testified by Cochleus in vita
Lutheri. And John Calvin, a branded sodomite, consumed with lice and worms,
died blaspheming and calling upon the Devil. This is registered by
Schlusselburge and Bolseck; these were the Ends of the Parents of the
Protestant and Presbyterian pretended Reformed Religions.

And as if their own tongue must sentence them to Hell, in the very words
before they say [All Liars, their part shall be in the pool burning with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death] And so make Application of it to the
Protestants, as being Liars; and when they have done, conclude with the two
forecited impudent Lies of Luther and Calvin. The like words of Calvin has the
late Marquess of Worcester (or Dr. Baily for him) in his Papers to King
Charles; the whole writing being stuffed with such impudent Lies, that one
would wonder that humane nature should be capable of such wickedness, and that
the silly people should swallow down such heaps of falsehood. And it is not
these two alone, but multitudes of Papists that have written these Lies of
Luther and Calvin. Thyraeus the Jesuit in his Book de Daemoniacis, part. 1.
cap. 8. page 21. tells us this story: that the same day that Luther dyed, there
was at Gheola a Town in Brabant many persons possessed of Devils, that waited
on their Saint Dymna for Deliverance, and were all that day delivered: but the
next day they were all possessed again; whereupon the Exorcist or some body
asked the Devils where they had been the day before; and they answered, that
they were commanded by their Prince to be at the Funeral of their fellow
Labourer Luther. And for proof of this, Luthers own servant that was with him
at his death, looking out at the window, did more then once, to his great
terror, see a company of ugly spirits leaping and dancing about without: and
also that the Crows followed the Corpse all the way with a great noise.]

O wonderful patience and mercy of God, that suffers such abominable Liars to
live, and does not cause some sudden vengeance to befall them! Reader, I will
tell thee now the case of these two servants of Christ that are thus reviled
(even as their Master was before them, that was said to do Miracles by the
power of the Devil.)

As for Luther, he was often taken with a great pain in his breast, about the
mouth of the stomach, and thought his Death when it came would be sudden; which
made him say, Feri Domine, feri clementer, quia ipse paratus sum: strike Lord,
strike mercifully, for I am ready] Having preached his last Sermon at
Wittenberge, Jan. 17. he took his journey the 23. to Count Mansfields Country,
whither he was called. When he came thither, he was grown so weak, that they
almost despaired of his life; yet by the use of somentations he had so much
ease, as that he preached sometime, and did other work from Jan. 29. to Febr.
17. The last day of his life, though he was weak, yet he sat at the table with
them, and at Supper his discourse was upon the Question, Whether we shall know
one another in Heaven? which he affirmed and proved, in that Adam knew Eve as
soon as he saw her, that she was flesh of his flesh: and therefore much more
shall we know one another in Heaven, etc. After Supper, he withdrew himself as
he used, for private prayer; but the pain of his breast increased on him. When
he had taken a medicine, he lay down on a Couch and slept sweetly two hours,
and then went to his Chamber, saying to those about him [Pray God to preserve
the Doctrine of the Gospel to us; for the Pope and Council of Trent have
strange Contrivances.] When he was laid down and had slept a while he awakened,
and found by the increase of his pain, that he was near his End, and spoke to
God as follows in their hearing [O my heavenly Father, the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the God of all Consolation, I thank thee that thou have
revealed to me thy Son Jesus Christ, in whom I have believed, whom I have
professed, whom I have loved, whom I have Celebrated (or Honored) whom the
Pope of Rome and the rest of the rabble of the ungodly do persecute and
reproach: I beseech thee O my Lord Jesus Christ receive my soul. O my heavenly
Father, though I am taken from this life, and though my body must now be laid
down, yet I know certainly that I shall abide with thee for ever, and that none
can take me out of thy hands.] Then he said [So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life] Then he repeated part of the 68. Psalm: and when he
had drunk a medicine that was given him, he said [I go hence: I now return my
spirit unto God] presently adding [Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit,
thou have Redeemed me O God of Truth] And so he dyed as if he were setting
himself to sleep, without any sign of further pain: but when they saw him
dying, Dr. Jonas and Caelius cried to him [Reverend Father; do you die constant
through Christ in his doctrine which you have hitherto preached?] And he
answered [Yea] and never spoke more. When he was dead (at Islebe) Count
Mansfield would have kept his body, but the Duke of Saxony would not suffer
him, but caused it to be brought back to Wittenberge, and there with great
solemnity interred.]

This is the true report in brief of Luthers Death, delivered to the world by
those that stood by him, and were eye witnesses. And yet these impudent Lying
Papists have persuaded their followers that the Devils were seen dancing about
him, that when he should be buried there was a horrible thunder, and the body
was taken away out of the Coffin by the Devil, and a stink of Brimstone left
behind, with more such stuff as this, which they have printed, and which one
would think the Father of Lies should be ashamed of.

And for Calvin, not only those before mentioned, but also Bolsecus, Surius,
Prateolus, Demochares, Lindanus, Sanctesius, Cahierus, and others publish to
the world, not only that he was an Epicure, but a Sodomite, and was burnt on
the shoulder for Sodomie with a hot iron at Noviodunum where he was born. Yea
Lessius the Jesuit impudently calls Christ to witness, that shall judge all
men according to their works, that he does not devise these things of his own
brain, but from good authors, and forty years current fame. And his Authors are
these Papists, Bolsecus, Brigerus, Stapleton, Campian, Duraeus, Surius, and
Reginaldus. Has Hell any greater calumnies then these to fill the mouths or
writings of men withal?

Reader, I shall show thee what credit these men are of by this instance. As
for the time when they say he was stigmatized for Sodomie, it was when he was a
Papist, and therefore if it had been true, it had been a greater dishonor to
them then to us. But its a mere forgery of the Devil and a Friar. Hierom
Bolseck a Friar, seemed to turn Protestant, and coming to Geneva, he began to
preach the Pelagian doctrine there, and openly contend against the Pastors in
the Congregation; and being confounded by Calvin, the Magistrates imprisoned
him, and banished him for sedition. Then he betakes himself to the neighbor
Towns, to play the same game there: but the Magistrates of Bern also banish
them out of their Country. Whereupon he turned Papist again, and when Calvin
was dead, he wrote all these abominable lies of him, and all the rest (with
Schlusselburgius the Lutheran, an enemy of Calvin's) do take up the report from
this one Lying heretical Papist: and so it becomes a current fame with them, as
if it were as true as the Gospel: Whereupon our writers call to them, provoke
them, challenge them to search the Records at Noviodunum, where they say the
thing was done, and prove that ever there was such a thing, or else bear the
open shame of Liars. But they can bring no proof, but call on us to disprove
it: When the City are Papists, and haters of Calvin. But after all this, as God
would have it, the Papist Dean of that City, called Jacobus le Vasseur,
publishes at Paris, 1633. the Annals of their Cathedral Church, and therein
pouring out his hatred against Calvin, and saying what he can against him, does
yet out of their records clear him of all these accusations, and lets the world
know that there was never any such thing, and that they had no crime at all
against him, but that he turned from the Papists; and that the Major or chief
Governor of the City went away with Calvin, when he was forced to fly from his
native Country. He recites all the passages of Calvin's life there, but
professes that they had no more against him. Thus God confounded the Lying
Papists by one of themselves, and the Records of that City, where they said the
thing was done. And yet they believe one another, and carry on the Lie to this
day.

Mr. Rob. Amstrowther, Chaplain to the King of Englands Ambassadors with the
Emperor, being at Vienna, heard the Jesuits and other repeating confidently
this slander of Calvin; Whereupon he opened to them this Evidence against it;
and satisfied them of the flashood, so that they told him, they never knew so
much before, and promised him they would never mention it more.

If any would see the very words of their own Records, and Doctor Vasseur, he
may read them in Rivets Sum. Contr. against Baily, and again in his Jesuita
Vapulans, Cap. 2.

And as for the life of Calvin after he forsook the Papists, if you will but
believe that the City of Geneva, and all the Ministers and others that were
about him, in his life and at his death, did know better then Bolseck, a
fugitive Apostate Papist that was his enemy, and then far off, you may see at
large in Melchior Adamus, and Beza, the description of such a shining burning
light as Rome has not to boast of. He was a man of admirable wit, judgment,
industry, and piety. When he had forsaken his own Country for the Gospel sake,
and taken up in Geneva, and planted the Gospel there, with Farellus and
Viretus, at last the ungodly part getting the Head, the Ministers were
banished. And so he settled in in another City. The four Bailiffs of Geneva that
banished the Ministers, within two years were ruined by the judgments of God.
One of them accused of sedition, seeking to escape through a window fell, and
was broken to death. Another was put to death for murder. The other two being
accused of Mal-administration, fled and were condemned. Calvin is sent for and
entreated to return to Geneva: which by importunity, and Bucers persuasion, he
yields to. There was he continually molested by the ungodly, and loved by the
good. The Malignants whom he would restrain by Discipline from Whoredom,
drunkenness, and other wickedness, were still plotting or raging against him,
and called their Dogs by his name. But shame was still the end of their
attempts. His revenge was to tell them [I see I should have but sorry wages if
I served man: but its well for me that I serve him that always performs his
promises to his servants] As for his work, he preached every day in the week
each second week, and besides that, he read three days a week a Divinity
Lecture. And every Thursday he guided the Presbytery; and every Friday at a
meeting he held an Expository conference and Lecture: so that the whole came to
almost twelve Sermons a week. Besides this, he wrote Epistles to most Countries
of Christendom (in Europe) to Princes, Divines and others; And he wrote all
those great volumes of most Learned judicious Controversies, Commentaries, and
other Treatises, which one would have thought might have been work enough for a
man that had lived an hundred years, if he had done no other. And many
Heretics he confuted, and some convinced and reduced. He set up among the
Ministers a course of teaching every Family from house to house, of which he
found incredible fruit; For all this his labor he endured the affronts,
contradictions, and reproaches of the rabble, yea and sometime has been beaten
by them: because he would not administer the Sacrament to ungodly men, that
were rulers in the place, he was at first banished, and after threatened, and
continually molested by them, and railing fellows set to preach and write
against him. And whether he were an Epicure, you may soon judge: He always
used a very spare diet: and for ten years before his death did did never taste
one bit, but at supper, as his constant course so that every day was with him a
better fast then the Papists use to make on their fasting days. By this
extreme labor, speaking, and fasting, and watching (for he dictated his
writings as he lay in bed much,) he overthrew his body, and falling first into
a Tertian, and then into a Quartan, after that he fell into a Consumption, with
the gout and stone, and spitting of blood, and the disease in the Hemorrhoid
veins, which at last ulcerated by over much fasting, speaking, and use of
Aloes; besides the headache which was the companion of his life. In these
sickness he would never forbear his labor, but when he he was persuaded to it,
he told them, that he could not bear an idle life. And when he was near to
death was still at work, asking those that entreated him to forbear, Whether
they would have God find him idle? Under all these pains of Gout, Stone,
Colic, Headache, Hemorrhoids, Consumption, etc. those that were about him
testified to the world that they never heard him speak a word unbeseeming a
patient Christian. The worst was that often repeated word [How long, Lord! how
long!] as being weary of a miserable world. Witnesses he had enough; for he
could scarce have rest, for people crowding to him to visit him. On Mar. 23. he
went among the Ministers to their Meeting, and took his farewell of them there.
The next day he was wearyed by it: but the twenty seventh day he was carried to
the Court to the Senate of the City, where he made a speech to them, and took
his farewell of them, with many tears on both sides. April. 2. he was carried
to Church, and staid the Sermon, and received the Sacrement. Afterward the
Senate of the City came to him, and he made an heavenly Exhortation to them. On
April 25. he dictated his Will, which I would his slanderers would read. His
Library it self, and all his goods being prized, came scarce to three hundred
Crowns. May 11. he wrote his farewell to Farellus. May 19. all the Ministers
came to him, with whom he sat, and did eat, and cheerfully take his leave of
them. On the twenty seventh of May his voice seemed to be stronger, and so
continued till his last breath that day, which was with such quietness as men
compose themselves to sleep. The next night and day the City Magistrates,
Ministers, Scholars, people and strangers, were taken up in weeping and
lamentation. Every one crowded to see the Corpse, among whom the Queen of
Englands Ambassador to France was one. He was buried according to this desire
in the common Churchyard, without any Monument or Pomp: and has left behind
him such a Name, as in despite of all the Devils in Hell, and all the Papists
on earth, shall be precious till the coming of Christ; and such writings has
he left as are the comfort of the Disciples of Truth, and the shame of the
reproaching Adversaries.

Reader, this is that Calvin that is so hated by the bad, and loved and
honored by the good: whom these Papists have called an Epicure and Sodomite,
and said that he died blaspheming, and calling upon the Devil, and was eaten
with lice and worms. Is not God exceeding patient, that will suffer such
wretches to live on the Earth? What man could they have named since Augustine,
yea since the Apostles days, that was more unfit for such a slander then
Calvin? Yet because one man Bolseck that was banished and turned Papist, and
lived then I know not in what Country, has written these things against him,
the rest of them, even as much as the late Marquess of Worcester, take them up
as confidently, as if the infallible Chair had uttered them.

But yet if thou think this Enemy Bolseck is more to be believed then those
that lived with Calvin, and the City of Geneva, that had continual access to
him, I will give thee such a Testimony as shall shame the Papists, that have a
spark of modesty. Hear then what other Papists themselves say that knew better
what they said, or made more Conscience of their words.

Florimundus Raimundus a Papist of Bordeaux (or the Jesuit Richeome that wrote
in his name) writing for the Pope and against Calvin, has these words of him.
[Under a dry and lean body he had a sharp and lively wit, ready in answering;
bold in attempting; a great faster; even from his youth, whether for his health
to overcome the headache, or for his studies -- There is scarce a man found
that ever matched Calvin in Labors: for the space of twenty three years, in
which he remained in the Episcopacy of Geneva, he preached every day once, and
twice on the Lords day of times. And every week he read public Lectures of
Divinity (besides) and every Friday he was at the conference of the Pastors:
The rest of his time he spent either in writing Books, or answering letters.]

Reader, is this Testimony from a Papist like the rest? But yet thou shall have
more. Papirius Massonius a Learned Papist, and Scholar to Baldiom one of
Calvin's Enemies, wrote Calvin's life; and he says of him, [No day almost passed
in which he did not preach to the Citizens. Thrice every eight days as long as
he lived, he professed (or publicly taught) Divinity (in the Schools;) being
Laborious, and always writing or doing something. -- Of a weak body, but worn
by watchings, reading, writing, meditations, diseases, businesses, preachings.
He took very little sleep; and therefore much of his works he dictated in bed
to his servant that wrote them from his mouth. He did eat but once a day: and
confessed that he found not a more present or surer Remedy for his weakness of
stomach and headache. His clothing was of small price, to cover him rather
than adorn him. -- At Worms and Ratisbone he exercised the strength of an
excellent wit with so great applause of the Germane Divines, that by the
judgment of Melanchthon and his Associates; by a peculiar privilege he was
called The Divine. He wrote as much and as well as any man of the contrary
parties, whether you respect number, acuteness, language, sharpness, emphasis,
or subtilty: not a man of all his Adversaries, whether Catholics, Anabaptists,
Lutheranes, Arrians, or the forsakers of his Party, that wrote against him, did
seem to match him in gravity of writing, and weight of words and sharpness, in
answering his principles. He almost terrified Pighius himself discoursing of
free will, and Sadaletus.] These are the words of a Learned Papist.

But this is not all. Abundance of Papists tell us of a story how Calvin hired
one in Geneva to take on him dead, that he might have the honor of raising him
from the dead. This the Jesuit Thyraeus de Daemoniacis writes, and many
others, and it goes among them for a current truth; and all from the report of
Bolseck. But, as God would have it, Pap. Massonius confuteth this also, and
says, that his Master Baldwinus knew nothing of it, who lived at Geneva, and
after turned Papist, and Calvin's enemy: and other reasons he gives to disprove
this and the other slanders that were raised of Calvin, saying, that they were
but scriptores plebii, maledicendi studio, etc. vulgar Writers, that study or
love to reproach or speak evil, that vend these things. And so much shall serve
against the Papists Lies against Luther and Calvin.

If you would see more of that heap of Lies confuted, which the Marquess of
Worcester gave in to King Charles, read Mr. Chr. Cartwrights Reply to them,
where part of them (and but part) are detected.

And as they have done by these, so by others also. When Beza was eighty years
of age, a false report came to the Papists that he was dead. Whereupon Claudins
Puteanus with his Jesuitical Companions wrote a Book, that at his death he
turned Papist and renounced his Religion: so that the old man (that lived seven
years longer) was fain himself to write against them, to prove that he was not
dead, nor turned Papist: These be the means by which men are reconciled to the
Church of Rome.

They have printed also a story that Calvin's own Son being bitten by a mad dog,
was sent by his Father to one of their Saints Images for Cure, when no other
means would serve; and being cured, he turned Papist: when as the world knew
that Calvin never had a Son. Also they tell us of a saying of Luthers, that
[This Cause was not begun in the Name of God, nor will it be ended in the Name
of God] This Luther spoke of Eckius and the other Papists, as himself
professes in his Answer to Eurferus, Tom. 1. fol. 404. And these shameless
Liars confidently publish that he spoke this of himself, as the Marquess of
Worcester to King Charles did.

Another saying of his they as impudently abuse, viz. [If the wife will not,
let the Maid come,] persuading the world, that Luther would have a man lie with
his Maid, if his Wife refuse: whereas he only labors to prove, that Desertion
is a sufficient cause of divorce: and that if the Wife refuse, she should be
warned again and again before others and the Judges, and in Case of utter
refusal and desertion, Vasthe may be rejected, and Hester the Maid taken to
Wife: which many a Papist is ready to justify.

Yea they annex that Luther would have men Contain but five days; when as he
vehemently detesteth it, and urges the contrary, telling them that God no
doubt will enable them to be Continent, if they will use his Means, Tom. 5.
sermon. de Matrimon. They forgot that the 5. supposititious Epist. of their
Clement pleading for the Community of all things, adds [In omnibus autem sunt
sine dubio and Conjuges] [Among these All no doubt but Wives and Husbands are
contained.]

Of the horrid Lies of Genebrard, Possevine, and other Papists against Peter
Martyr, Beza, Calvin and others, see Dr. Reynolds ad Anglica. Seminar. ante
lib. de Idololatria Romans Eccl.. 5. page 20, 21, 22, 23.

When the fall of their house at Black-fryars had killed their Priests, and
such abundance of the people that were hearing him in the midst of the Sermon,
they printed a Book to persuade the people beyond sea, that it was a company of
the Heretics or Puritans that were killed at the hearing of one of their
preachers: Dr. Gouge tells you when and where it was printed, and many read it.

When the Gunpowder Plot was in hand, they had contrived presently to give it
all abroad that the Puritans did it: Read Mr. Samuel Clark of it in his Mirror
of Gods Judgments, Fol. and you shall find this fully detected.

When Fisher the Jesuit had held his conference with Dr. Featley, and Dr.
White, there being present two Earls, one of them (the Earl of Warwick) having
business shortly after beyond sea, fell unknown into Dr. Westons company at
Saint Omers, who presently tells it him for news, how Fisher had confounded the
Protestant Doctors, and that two Earls and so many people were turned by it to
the Church of Rome; not knowing that he that heard him was one of the two
Earls, and that there were not so many people there, and how they were
confirmed against Popery by that Dispute. And when the Earl of Warwick brought
home this jest, Dr. Weston hearing what sport was made with it in England,
writ a simple excuse for his Lying, which I have at hand, but find it had been
better for him to have said nothing.

Should I recite but half the forgeries of this nature, by which the Priests
and Jesuits cheat the poor people, I must be voluminous.

But alas, their very worship of God is much of it composed of Lies, and is not
that like to be acceptable worship? How their Offices and Legends are stuff
with fictions, Canus and many of their own confess. And Cassander says that so
few of the relics in all Germany would be found true ones if examined, that
its better quite take off the people from the veneration of them. Instancing in
one of old that was worshipped as a Saint, and upon enquiry was found to be the
bones of a Thief.

Agobardus Bishop of Lions (says Usher) complained about eight hundred years
ago, that the Antiphonary used in his Church had many ridiculous and
fantastical things in it: and that therefore he corrected much of it, cutting
off what seemed superfluous, or light, or lying, or blasphemous. Agobard. ad
Cant. Lugd. de Correct. Antiphon. page 396. And not long since Lindanus made
the like complaint, that [Not only Apochryphal matters out of the Gospel of
Nicodemus and other toys are thrust in, but even the secret prayers, (yea,
alas for shame and grief, the very Canon varying, and redundant) are defiled
with most filthy faults.]

Reader, I will trouble thee no more with stirring in this puddle; but only
warn thee, as thou love thy soul, trust it not on the bare reports of such
Liars, but try before thou trust, and give not up thy sense and Reason to men
that make so little, or so ill a use of their own. If thou refuse this Council;
say not but thou wast warned.

CHAP. XXXI.
Detect. 22. ANother of their Deceits is by quarrelling with our Translations
of the Bible, and making the people believe that we have so corrupted it, that
it is none of the word of God, and so they openly scorn it, and deride it.

As to this point, though Learned men can soon confute them by vindicating the
Text as in the Original Languages, and then vindicating our Translation; yet
the common disputant need not put them and himself to so much trouble. If
really they will but let the Law of God contained in the Holy Scripture be the
Rule by which our difference shall be tried and decided, we will cut short the
rest of the controversy, and take it wholly together, and we will stand to the
Vulgar Latin, which is it that themselves applaud. We are content that this be
the Rule between us. Yea rather then they shall shift off the unlearned by
these tricks, we will admit of their own Translation, which the Rhemists have
(with little friendship to our cause) composed. Only we must entreat them that
their Commentaries and conceits be not taken into the Text as part of the Word
of God. So that this quarrel is quickly at an end. The Scripture is so full
against them, that no Translation that makes it not another thing, can make it
to be on their side.

CHAP. XXXII.
Detect. 23. ANother of the Designs of the Papists is, to bring all the
faithful Pastors of the Churches into contempt, or suspicion at least with the
People, that so they may draw them to refuse our helps, and the Papists may
deal with them alone, whom they know they are easily able to overreach. Though
our people have not that absolute Dependence upon their Teachers as theirs
have, yet an ordinate Dependence is Necessary to them, or else God would never
have appointed Teachers and Pastors for his Church. The Papists dare not trust
their followers so much as to read a Bible in their vulgar tongue. Much less to
Read our writings against their errors and impieties: No nor their Priests and
Friars ordinarily to read them: No nor commonly to read the writings of their
own Party: No not those, nor the strongest of those that are written against
us: for fear lest the objection should prove too hard for the answer; or lest
they should understand the truth of our doctrine in some measure. Sr. Edw:
Sands in his Europae Specul. professes how hard he found it, to meet with the
Works of Bellarmine himself in any Booksellers shop in Venice or other parts
of Italy. But our people have all leave to keep and read the Papists writings:
We dare venture them upon the light upon equal terms: But yet we know them to
be insufficient, for the most part, to defend even plain and necessary truths
against the Cavils of adversaries that overmatch them in learning and other
abilities. Now lest we should but afford them our assistance, the Papists
principal design is to bring them into false conceits of the Ministers, and
make us odious to them; that they may neglect our help, and the easilyer
hearken to other Teachers. And if they can but prevail in this design, the day
is their own, and the souls of our unhappy people are like to be undone.

And the more is it to be feared, lest at last they should this way prevail,
both because of the sin that lies on our selves in too reserved and negligent
a doing of our work; and because of the great obstinacy and unprofitableness of
the people, that hate the light, and unthankfully despise it, or will not obey
it, and work by it while they may.

The designs of the Papists against the Ministry are these 1. They principally
endeavor to delade the Rulers of the Land and set them against them, of which
more anon.

2. They are very busy to procure an overthrow of their established
maintenance: To which end they animate all sects to rail against Tithes.

3. They labor by seoffs and nicknames to make them odious. As they were the
Authors or chief fomenters of the old scorn under the name of Puritans, so are
they of many more of late. If in Court, or Parliament, City or Country; you
hear men set themselves of purpose to scorn or vilify the Ministry, its very
probable that they are either secret Papists, or their deluded serviters. If
they speak of men that regard the Ministry, and be not hardened as they to a
despising of Christ in his servants, they call such [Priest ridden] and the
Pastors they scornfully call [Iack-Presbyters, Drivines,] and many other scoffs
are at hand, to serve the ends of the Devil and the Pope, by alienating the
Affections of the people from their Teachers, that so they may devour them at
pleasure.

4. Another of their ways of reproach is, by telling the people what odious
divisions are among us, and how many minds we are of, and how often we change,
and such like reproaches, by their mouthing it they can make something of;
while they never tell them how much more changeable they have been, and what
divisions are among themselves, incomparably beyond all ours. Nor do they ever
tell them how far we are united, and how small the differences among us are,
and such as must be expected while we all know but in part.

5. Another reproach that the Papists cast on the Ministry, is Greediness,
Covetousness, and being hirelings. And therefore they put these into the mouths
of Quakers and other Sectaries. And what is their ground? Forsooth because we
take Tithes, or other set maintenance. Because we have food and raiment, and
our daily bread. I have said enough of the Cause it self in my several writings
against the Quakers. If any doubt whether the Papists be their Teachers, or of
the same mind, besides many greater Evidences, the Manuscript from
Wolverhampton before mentioned may be full satisfaction. This tells men that
[for filthy lucre sake we scratch itching ears with doctrines of liberty] and
thus it learnedly versifieth.

With Pleasing words they scratch all ears that itch.
That Mammon (whom they serve) may make them rich.
For they are Merconaries, that will be hired
To preach what doctrines are by men desired.
Answ. I must profess unfeignedly that the experience of such horrid wickedness
of men, is a great help to my faith against all temptations that ever would
provoke me to doubt whether there be a Hell; When I see and hear that
unreasonable villainy, that I should scarce have believed humane nature could
have been capable of, if God or such experience had not told it me. But when I
see Abominations before my eyes as incredible or horrid as Hell it self almost,
it silenceth temptations to such unbelief.

Reader, I will give thee a brief comparison between the Papists Priests and
the Ministers of Christ, that thou may see whether these men be fit to rail
at us as Mercenaries, and such as are the servants of Mammon.

Its a well known case that the Ministers of this Land, and of all the Reformed
Churches commonly do many of them want necessaries, and some want food and
raiment, and the rest of them for the most part have little more: Or if one of
an hundred have two hundred pounds a year, its ten to one but taxes and other
payments brings it so low, that he has no superfluities. And some that have
not Wives or Children, do give all that they can gather to the poor; and some
upon my knowledge give more to charitable uses, then they receive for the work
of their Ministry, living on their own means. And they have themselves been the
means of taking down the Lordly Prelacy and Riches of the Clergy: and though
they would not have had the Lands devoted to the Church to have been alienated,
yet they would have had it so distributed as might but have reached to have made
the maintenance of Ministers to be an hundred pounds a year. This was the
height of their Covetousness and Ambition, as you call it.

And now will you take a view of the Popish Clergy, for Greatness, Riches, and
Numerousness. 1. For Greatness, the Pope who is their chief Priest, pretends
to the Government of all the Christian world. Emperors and Kings have kissed his
feet, and held him the stirrup. One Emperor was forced to wait bare foot at
his Gates a long time in patience, till he pleased to open them. Another being
forced to prostrate himself to him, the Pope set his foot upon his neck,
profanely abusing the words of the Psalm. 91. 13. He shall tread on the Lion and
Adder, etc. Diverse Princes has he deposed: He has claimed a Supremacy in
Temporals and Spirituals, and his more moderate flatterers subject Princes to
him in ordine ad spiritualia. General Councils approved by him, decree that he
shall Excommunicate and depose Princes, that will not extirpate those that he
calls Heretics, and shall commit the Government to others, or give their
Countries to the first that can seize on them; and absolve all their V^ssals
from their Allegiance, (in despite of Oaths and Gods Commands.) He is a
Temporal Prince himself, having large Dominions. He has so numerous a Clergy
in the Countries of all Popish Princes, as makes him great and formidable to
them. His Cardinal Priests are equal to Princes, and greater then many Princes
are. 2. And for their Riches and Numbers, to say no more of their Pope and
Cardinals, they have such multitudes of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Abbots,
Priors, Friars, Jesuits, and such others, as take up a great part of the Land
where they live. I will at this time give you but one Instance, and desire you
to compare it with our Ministers and their maintenance: and that is of the
Popish Clergy in France.

Their own writers tells us as follows. Bodin (a Judge in France) says, (as
Heylin Geograph. page 148. recites it) That the Revenues of the Clergy there
are twelve millions, and three hundred thousand livres, which is one million
and two hundred thousand pounds of our English money per annum; and that they
possess seven parts of twelve of the whole revenue of the Kingdom, which is
above half. But we will take up with the lower reckoning of the Book called
Comment. de stat. and says Heylin, this tells us that the Clergy have near a
fourth part of the very Lands of all the Kingdom, besides the Offerings,
Churchings, Bur^als, Diriges, and such like Casualties, which amount to as much
as their Rents, (So that there is another fourth part, which comes to half the
Kingdom) upon which Sr. Edwin Sands computes their revenue at six millions
yearly: And for the number, that one Kingdom has thirteen Archbishops, an
hundred and four Bishops, a thousand four hundred and fifty Abbeys, five
hundred and forty Archpriories: twelve thousand three hundred and twenty
Priories, five hundred sixty seven Nunneries: seven hundred Convents of Friars:
two hundred fifty nine Commanderies of Malta; besides all the Colleges of the
Jesuits. And the Parish Priests are an hundred thirty thousand of all sorts.
And whereas the Kingdom is supposed to have about fifteen millions of people;
the Clergy and their Ministers are judged to be three millions of them.

Judge now like men of reason and impartiality, whether the tongues of these
men be fit to call us Mercenaries, or Hirelings, or such as preach for filthy
lucre. Or whether ever greater impudence was manifested by the vilest Son of
Adam, then for such men that Lord it over Emperors, Kings and Princes, and
devour the wealth of the Christian world, to call poor Ministers of Christ,
Covetous, or Hirelings, that are content with food and raiment, and a mean
education of their children, and that have done so much to take down the
Lordliness and Riches of the Clergy. Judge of this dealing; and if you had
rather have the Popish Priesthood, with the numberless swarm of Friars and
several orders, you may take them, and say, you had your choice.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Detect. 24. ANother of their designs, Conjunct with the last mentioned is, to
persuade the world that they only have a true Ministry or Priesthood, and an
Apostolical Episcopacy, and true Ordination: and that we and all other Churches
have no true Ministers, but mere Lay men under the name of Ministers, because
we have no just Ordination. And how prove they all this? Why, they say, that
they have a Pope that is a true Successor of Saint Peter, but we have no
Succession from the Apostles, and therefore no just Ordination, because no man
can give that Power which he has not. And we are Schismatics separated from
the Church, and therefore our Ordinations are invalid: And some of our Churches
have no Bishops, and therefore say they, we have no true Ministry there, nor
are they true Churches. These are their Reasons.

In answer to which I shall first refer the Reader to my Second s^eet for the
Ministry in Justification of their Call; Where these Reasons are confuted, and
our calling vindicated: and I shall forbear here to repeat the same things
again: Also I refer you for a fuller Answer to the London Ministers Jus Divinum
Ministerii, and to Mr. Tho. Balls Book for the Ministry; and Mr. Masons Book in
vindication of the Ministry of those Reformed Churches that have not Prelates,
and to Voetius Desper. Cause.

2. Though we need not fetch our Ordination from Rome, yet, as to them, we may
truly say, that if they have any true Ordination and Ministry, then so have we:
For our first Reformers were Ordained by their Bishops, which is enough to stop
their mouths. If they say that our Schism has cut off our power of Ordination,
I answer ad hominem, that (though it is they that are indeed the Notorious
Schismatics, yet) if we were what they falsely say we are, it would not null
our Ordination, Confirmation, or such other acts. And this is the Judgment of
their own writers. I shall at this time only cite the words of one of them, and
of many in that one: and that is Thom. a Jesis de Conversione Gentium, lib. 6.
cap. 9. Where he affirms it to be one of the Certainties agreed on [that
Schismatics lose not, nor can lose any spiritual power consisting in the
spiritual Caracter of Baptism, or Confirmation of Orders: For this is
indelible, as Dr. Thomas teaches here, Art. 3. and Turrecremata confirms,
lib. 4. sum. part. 1. c. 7. and Silvester verb. Schismatici: and it appears
by Pope Urbans Can. Ordinationes, 9. q. 1. Who judges those to be truly
ordained, that were ordained by Schismatic Bishops: And from Austin lib. 6.
de Bapt. Cont. Donatist. cap. 5. where he says that [A Separatist may deliver
the Sacrament as well as have it.] He next adds that yet such are deprived of
the faculty of Lawful using the Power which they have, so that it will be
their sin to use it, though it be not a nullity if they do use it: and that
thus those are to be understood that speak against the Ordination,
Confirmation, etc. of Schismatics; viz. that it is unlawful, because their
power is suspended by the Church, but not a Nullity, because they have the
Power, page 316. He puts the Question [Whether Schismatical Presbyters and
Bishops do want the Power of Order, or only want Jurisdiction?] And he
answers out of D. Thom. 22. q. 39. art. 3. that [they want Jurisdiction, and
cannot Absolve, Excommunicate, or grant indulgences, and so they cannot elect
and give Benefices, and make Laws -- But yet they have the holy Power of
Orders; and therefore a schismatic Bishop does truly make and consecrate the
Eucharist, truly Confirm, truly Ordain; and when he Electeth and promoteth any
to Ecclesiastical Orders, they truly receive the Character of Order, but not
the Use, because they are suspended, if knowingly they are ordained by a
Schismatical Bishop.] He next asks, [Whether this punishment depriving them
of Jurisdiction, take place with all Schismaticks] And answers that [some say
that before the Council of Constance this punishment belonged to all notorious
Schismatics, but not to the unknown ones: but since that Council, it takes
place only on those that are expressly and by name denounced, or manifest
strikers of the Clergy] Others say otherwise: But he himself answers, that [If
a schismatic be toleraeted, and by the common error of the people be taken for
lawful, there is no doubt but all his acts of Jurisdiction are valid, which we
shall affirm also of Heretics: But if a Presbyter or Bishop be a manifest
Schismatic, then some say that those acts that require Jurisdiction are
invalid; but others say that they are all valid in case the Schismatic be not
by name excommunicated, or a manifest striker of the Clergy] Thus far Thom. a
Jesu opening the judgment of the Papists Doctors themselves in the point.

And by the way, our new superprelatical Brethren that degrade others that want
their Ordination, yea or commands, and nullify their Acts, should learn not to
go beyond the Papists themselves, if they will go with them.

And observe, that it is but their own Canons, that is, their own wills, that
the Papists here plead when the Council of Constance has so altered the
business.

2. Though this that is said is enough as to the Papists, yet I add for fuller
satisfaction, that their succession is interrupted; and therefore they are most
unfit to be our Judges in this. They have had so long schisms in which no man
knew who was the right Pope, nor knows to this day; and so long removes and
vacancies, and such interpositions of various ways of choosing their Pope, and
interruptions by Heretical Popes, condemned by General Councils; besides
Murderers, Adulterers, Symonists, and such as their own Writers (as Genebrard)
expressly say, Were not Apostolical, but Apostatical; yea Popes that by General
Councils have been judged or charged with infidelity it self (as I have
formerly proved,) that there is nothing more certain then that their succession
has been interrupted.

3. They cannot be certain but its every age interrupted, and that there is no
true Pope or Bishops among them, because the intention of the Ordainer or
Consecrator is with them of necessity to the thing: and no man can be certain
of the Intention of the Ordainers. And therefore Bellarmine is fain to take up
with this, that though we cannot be sure that he is a true Pope, Bishop, or
Presbyter that is ordained, yet we are bound to obey him. But where then is the
Certainty of succession?

4. What succession of Episcopal Consecration was there in the Church of
Alexandria, when Hierom (Epist. ad Evagrium) tells us that [At Alexandria from
Mark the Evangelist even till Heraclus and Dionysius their Bishops, the
Presbyters did always name one man that Bishop whom they chose from among
themselves, and placed in a higher degree. Even as if an Army make an Emperor,
or the Deacons choose one of themselves, whom they know to be industrious, and
call him the chief Deacon.] Thus Hierom shows that Bishops were then made by
mere Presbyters. And in the same Epistle he proves from Scripture, that
Presbyters and Bishops were then all one. And if so, there were no Prelatical
Ordinations then at all. And your Medina accusing Hierom of error in this,
says, that Ambrose, Austin, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Oecumenius, Theophilact, were in the same heresy, as Bellarmine himself
reports him. So that Presbyters now may either ordain, or make themselves
Bishops as those of Alexandria did, to do it. And as Hierom there says, [All
are the successors of the Apostles,] and our Bishops or Presbyters are such, as
much, at least, as yours: yet Apostles as Apostles have no Successors at all,
as Bellarmine well teaches, lib. 4. de Pontif. cap. 25. saying, [Bishops do
not properly succeed the Apostles, because the Apostles were not ordinary, but
extraordinary, and as it were, delegate Pastors, who have no Successors.
Bishops have no part of the true Apostolic Authority. Apostles could preach in
the whole world, and found Churches, but so cannot Bishops. The Apostles could
write Canonical Books, but so cannot Bishops. Apostles had the gifts of tongues
and miracles, but so have not Bishops. The Apostles had Jurisdiction over the
whole Church, but so have not Bishops. And there is no Succession, but to a
Predecessor: but Apostles and Bishops were in the Church both at once, as
appears by Timothy, Titus, Evodius, and many more. If therefore Bishops
succeed Apostles, to what Apostle did Titus succeed? and whom did Timothy
succeed? To conclude, Bishops succed Apostles, but in the same manner as
Presbyters succeed the seventy two Disciples -- But its manifest that
Presbyters do not properly succeed the seventy two Disciples, but only by
similitude. For those seventy two Disciples were not Presbyters, nor did they
receive any Order of Jurisdiction from Christ. Philip, Stephen and others that
were of the seventy two had never been after Ordained Deacons, if they had been
Presbyters before] Thus Bellarmine.

See now what is become of the Popish Apostolical Successors among their
Bishops? And the scope of all this is to prove, that all Bishops receive their
Power from the Pope; and so their succession is confined to him alone: and
therefore as often as there have been interruptions in the Papal Succession, so
often the Succession of all their Church was interrupted.

But if Bishops succeed not Apostles, and have not any of the Apostolic Power,
who then does the Bishop of Rome succeed? Why, Bellarmine has a shift for
this: but how sorry an one it is, you shall bear, cap. 25. he says that [The
Pope of Rome properly succeeds Peter, not as an Apostle, but as an Ordinary
Pastor of the whole Church.] Let us then have no more talk of the Apostolic
seat, or at least no more Arguing from that name. You see then that Peter was
not the Universal Vicar as an Apostle, nor does the Pope so succeed him. And do
you think this does not give away the Vicarship? Which way hereafter will they
prove it?

But an Objection falls in Bellarmines way, that [If this be so, then none of
the Bishops of Africa, Asia, etc. were true Bishops, that were not made by the
Pope: To which he answers (as well as he can) that its enough that the Pope do
Consecrate them Mediately, by making Patriarchs and Archbishops to do it: and
so Peter did Constitute the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, who thus
receiving authority from the Pope, did Rule almost all Asia and Africk] But 1.
That [almost] marreth the whole Cause. For where now is the universal Headship?
2. Did Bellarmine think in good sadness that Alexandria and Antioch were made
at first the seats of Patriarchs, having as large Jurisdiction as afterward
they attained? 3. How will he prove that Peter made these two Patriarchates,
and that not as an Apostle, but as an Ordinary Vicar General? 4. Who made the
Patriarchate of Constantinople, and gave them that vast Jurisdiction? Did Peter
many hundred years after his death? Or did the Pope of Rome, that tooth and
nail resisted, and still sought to diminish his Power? Or rather did not the
General Councils do it by the Emperors Commands, the Pope excepting and
repining at it. 5. Who made the Patriarch of Jerusalem? and who made James
Bishop of Jerusalem? did Peter? And who made Timothy and Titus Bishops? did
Peter or Paul? And who gave Paul that Power? not Peter certainly. Reader, do
not these men jest with holy things? Or is it like that they believe themselves?

6. Bellarmine confesses that the Potestas Ordinis, and interioris
jurisdictionis are both as immediately from God to every Bishop as to the Pope,
cap. 22. And why then should it be denied of the power of exterior
Jurisdiction? 1. Is one part of the Essence of the Office given by the Pope,
and the rest without him? 2. And what if it be proved that exterior and
interior Jurisdiction of a Pastor is all one? Though the matter of obedience be
exterior, yet the Jurisdiction is exercised only on the soul directly, in one
case as well as another; it being the mind on which the obiglation lies, and
the Pastoral Rule is powerful and effectual: and further then you procure
consent, you are despised: For its the Magistrates work to use violence:
Bishops as Bishops can but persuade and deal by words with the inner man.

And thus you see what is become of the Papists Succession.

5. Most of the Ministers in England, till within these few years were ordained
by Bishops If that were of Necessity, they have it.

6. He that is ordained according to the Apostles directions, or prescript in
Scripture, has the true Apostolical Ordination; but so are we Ordained;
therefore, -- The Apostles never Confined Ordination to Prelates, much less to
those Prelates that depend on the Pope of Rome: The Bishops to whom the
Apostles committed this Power, are the same that are called Presbyters by them,
and they were the Overseers or Pastors but of one single Church, and not of
many Churches. And such are those that Ordain among us now. Gregor. Nazianzen.
Orat. 18. says thus [I would there were no Presidency, nor Prerogative of
Place, and Tyrannical Privileges; that so we might be known only by virtue,
(or mere desert:) But now this Right side, and Left side, and Middle, and Lower
Degree, and Presidency, and Concomitancy, have begot us many Contritions to no
purpose, and have driven many into the Ditch, and have led them away to the
region of the Goats.]

What Hierom says, both in his Epistle to Evagrius, and on Tit. cap. 2. is
commonly known. The many plain Testimonies of Anselmn are commonly Cited, as
plain as Hieroms Alphons. a Castro advers. Haeres. lib. 6. in nom. Episcop. had
more ingenuity then to join with them that would wrest Hieroms words to a sense
so contrary to their most plain importance. Tertullian cap. 17. de Bapt.
thought Laymen in Necessity might Baptize, (and so does the Church of Rome
now.) Why then may not Presbyters in such a case at least Ordain? when, as he
there says, [Quod ex aequo accipitur, ex aequo dari potest] And ibid. he
says, that it is but propter Ecclesiae honorem, that Bishops Rule in such
matters, and that peace may be kept, and Schism avoided. But that probati
quique seniores did exercise Discipline in the Assembly, he testifies in
Apologet.

Mr. Prin has cited you abundance of Fathers that were for the parity of the
Ministry, or against Prelacy jure Divino.

Isidore Pelusiat. lib. 3. Epist. 223. ad Hieracem Episcopatum fugientem says
[And when I have showed what difference there is between the ancient Ministry,
and the present Tyranny, why do you not Crown and Praise the Lovers of
equality?]

If you would see more of the Ancients making Presbyters to be Bishops, and
Consenting with Hierom, read Sedulius on Tit. 1. Anselm. Cantuar in Enarrat. in
Phil. 1. 1. Beda on Act. 20. Alcuinus de Divinis officiis, c. 35, 36. and on
John lib. 5. Col 547. etc. and Epist. 108. And that Presbyters may Ordain
Presbyters, see Anselmn on 1 Timothy 4. 14. And Institut. in Council. Colon. de
sacr. Ordin. fol. 196. see also what is said by our Mart. Bucer script. Anglic.
page 254, 255, 259, 291. and sequ. and Pet. Martyr. Loc. Commu. Clas. 4. Loc.
1. sect. 23 page 849. And Wickliffes Arguments in Waldensis Passim. And your
own Cassander Consult. Artic. 14. says [It is agreed among all, that of old in
the Apostles days, there was no difference between Bishops and Presbyters, but
afterward for Orders sake, and the avoiding of Schism, the Bishop was set
before the Presbyters.] And Ockam determines, that by Christ's Institution all
Priests of what degree soever are of equal Authority, Power and Jurisdiction.]

Reynold Peacock, Bishop of Chichester wrote a Book de Ministrorum aequalitate,
which your party caused to be burnt.

And Richardus Armachanus, lib. 9. cap. 5. ad Quest. Armen. says [There is not
found in the Evangelical or Apostolical Scriptures any difference between
Bishops and simple Priests, called Presbyters; whence it follows, that there is
one Power in all, and equal from their Order.] and cap. 7. answering the
Question, Whether any Priest may Consecrate Churches, etc. he says [Priests
may do it as well as Bishops, seeing a Bishop has no more in such matters then
any simple Priest: though the Church for reverence to them appoint that those
only do it, whom we call Bishops -- It seems therefore that the restriction of
the Priests Power was not in the Primitive Church, according to the Scripture.]

I refer you to three Books of Mr. Prins, viz. his Catalogue; his Antipathy of
Lordly Prelates, etc. and his unbishoping of Timothy and Titus; where you have
the Judgments of many writers of these matters. And also to what I have said
in my Second Disputation of the Episcopal Controversies, of purpose on this
point.

7. The chief error of the Papists in this cause is expressed in their reason,
[No man can give the Power that he has not:] wherein they intimate, that it is
Man that gives the Ministerial Power: whereas it is the gift of Christ alone:
Man does but design the person that shall receive it, and then Christ gives it
by his Law to the person so designed: and then man does in vest him and
solemnize his introduction. As a woman may choose her an husband, but it is not
she that gives him the Power over her, but God who determines of that Power
by his Law, affixing it to the person chosen by her, and her action is but a
condition fine qua non, or cause of the capacity of the matter to receive the
form. And so is it here. When do but obey God in a right choice and designation
of the person, his Law does presently give him the Power, which for orders sake
he must be in a solemn manner invested with. But matters of Order may possibly
vary; and though they are to be observed as far as may be, yet they always
give place to the Ends and substance of the work, for the ordering whereof they
are appoineed.

8. Temporal power is as truly and necessarily of God, as Ecclesiastical, and
it was at first given immediately by him, and he chose the person: And yet
there is no Necessity that Kings must prove an uninterrupted Succession. God
uses means now in designing the persons that shall be Governors of the Nations
of the earth: But not always the same means: nor has he tied himself to a
successive Anointing or Election: else few Kings on earth would hold their
Scepters. And no man (from any diversity in the cases) is able to prove that a
man may not as truly be a lawful Church-governor, as a lawful Governor of the
Commonwealth, without an uninterrupted succession of Ministerial Collation.

9. If Bellarmine be forced to maintain that with them it is enough that a
Pastor have the place, and seem lawful to the people, and that they are bound
to obey him, though it should prove otherwise. Then we may as well stand on the
same terms as they.

10. In a word, our Ordination being according to the Law of Christ, and the
Popes so contrary to it, we are ready at any time, more fully to compare them,
and demonstrate to any impartial man, that Christ does much more disown their
Ordination then ours, and that we enter in Gods appointed way. Mr. Eliot in New
England may better Ordain a Pastor over the Indians converted by him, then
leave them without, or send to Rome, or England for a Bishop, or for Orders.
But again I must refer you of this subject to the Books before mentioned, and
the Sheet which I have written, lest I be overtedious.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Detect. 25. ANother of their Deceits is, In pretending the Holiness of their
Churches, and Ministry, and the unholiness of ours. This being matter of fact,
a willing and impartial mind may the easier be satisfied in it. They prove
their Holiness, 1. By the Canonized Saints among them. 2. By the devotion of
their Religious Orders, and their strictness of living. 3. By their unmarried
Clergy. 4. By their sanctifying Sacraments and Ceremonies: In all which they
say that we are wanting, and so far wanting, that being out of the Church,
there is no true Holiness among us.

When in the Preface of my Book against Popery, called The Safe Religion, I had
truly spoken my experience, that I had never the happiness to be acquainted
with any Papist of a serious spiritual temper, and holy life, but only some of
a Ceremonious formal kind of Religion, and but with very few that lived not in
some gross sin, I was passionately censured by some of the Papists, as one that
condemned all for some. When as 1. I only spoke of my own acquaintance. 2. And
I added withal, that yet I was confident that God had his servants among them,
though I had not the happiness to know them. 3. And is it not a ridiculous
business, that these same men should be so passionate with me, for speaking but
the truth, concerning the ungodliness of some of them, when at the same time
they make it an Article of their faith, and an essential point of Popery, That
no one Protestant has charity, or can be saved; yea, that no Christian in the
world is sanctified really, and can be saved, but a Papist. O the partiality of
these men! 4. Yea when they necessitate us to mention their ungodliness, by
calling us to it, and laying the stress of all our cause upon the point: yea
laying the very Christian faith it self upon the Holiness of their Church. For
we must not know that Scripture is Gods word, or that Christianity is the true
Religion, till we first know that the Church of Rome is the true Church, that
we may receive it on their credit: And we must know that they are the true
Church by being the only Holy people in the world. I must profess that if my
faith lay on this foundation, I know so much of the falsehood of it, that I must
needs turn infidel: and I can no more believe this, then I can believe that
the snow is not white.

They confess (I thank them for nothing) that their common people are bad; but
yet say they, [there is some good ones among us, Inter haereticos autem nullus
est bonus: but among the heretics not one is good] So says [Thom. a Jesu de
convers. omn Gent. page 531. And says H. Turbervile Manual p. 84. [But I never
yet heard of any Protestant Saints in the world.] O wonderful perverseness of
the hearts of Sectaries! O wonderful Patience of God! Did not this man's heart
tremble or smite him to write so horrid, so impudent a reproach against so many
precious Saints of God? Durst he thus attempt to rob the Lord of the fruit of
his blood? and to vilify his Jewels? and as Rabshakah, to reproach the Israel
of God? to attempt to pluck them out of Christ's hand that are given him by his
Father; and to shut them out of heaven, that are redeemed and made heirs by so
dear a Price; and to spit in their faces whom Christ has washed with his
blood? Did he not fear that dreadful threatening of Christ, Mat 18. 6. [but who
so shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea.] Though I see so much impiety among the Papists, I dare not
say, I dare not think that God has not some Holy ones among them. Its
dangerous condemning those that Christ will Justify; and making his members to
be the members of the Devil, and abusing so grossly the apple of his eye. If I
see a man live wickedly, I dare say that he is of a wicked life; but I dare not
say that All are so, unless it be among men, whose principles I am sure are
inconsistent with godliness, and I know that they hold those principles
practically or prevalently. And therefore I must say again, that I have been
acquainted with some Papists, learned and unlearned. The unlearned few of them
knew what. Christianity was, nor whether Christ were God or Man, Male or
Female, nor whether ever he was the King, Prophet or Priest of the Church, nor
for what end he dyed, nor what faith, or repentance is; but were infidels under
the name of Papists, or Catholics. The learned and unlearned live in some
gross sin or other, either all or near all that I have been acquainted with.
The better sort would ordinarily swear, [by their Lady, and by the Mass.] and
sometime greater oaths. The rest were some fornicators or adulterers, some
drunkards or revellers, and gamesters, or such like: And never had I the
happiness to be acquainted with one that would speak experimentally and
savourily of the work of Grace upon his soul, of the life of faith, of
communion with God, and of the life to come; but their Religion lay in being
the Popes subjects, and in fasting on Fridayes and in Lent from some sorts of
meat, and in saying over so many Ave Mary's, Pater Nosters, or the like; and in
observing days, and hours, and Cereremonies. Yet I again say, I fully believe
that there be better among them, though I am not acquainted with them.

But if these men that [never heard of a Protestant Saint] and that conclude
[there is no one saved but a Papist,] and build their salvation on this as an
Article of their faith, had known but those that I have known, and yet know,
they would either have been of another mind, or have been left unexcusable in a
malicious reproaching of the Saints of the most high. I bless the Lord that I
can truly say, that I know many and many, that (as far as the heart of another
can be known, by words and a holy life) do live in much communion with God;
whose souls are daily longing after him; and some of them that have vacancy
from worldly necessities, spending much of their lives upon their knees, having
had many a special extraordinary return to their importunate requests: whose
delight is in the Law of the Lord, in which they meditate day and night (which
is locked up among the Papists.) Whose hearts smite them for vain words or
thoughs, or the loss of a few minutes of time; that live in exemplary humility,
meekness and self-denial, bearing wrongs patiently, and doing good to as many
as they can, as the servants of all; contemning the Riches and Honors of the
world, mortifying the flesh, and some of them longing to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, in whom the world never knew either once drunkenness, fornication,
or one rash oath, or any other gross sin, that I could ever hear of. And is it
certain that all these shall be damned, because they believe not in the Pope?
Nay is it not certain by Promise that all such shall be saved?

I must again profess, that when the Papists lay their faith and cause on this,
that their Church is Holy, and ours and all other are every man unholy, its
almost all one to me as if they said that no men but Papists have souls in
their bodies, and laid their faith on this; and as soon I think should I
believe them, if this were their belief. Its a good preservative against
Popery, when a man cannot turn Papist without putting out his eyes, and
renouncing his wit, and reason, and common experience, as well as his charity;
yea without denying of what he knows by his own soul!

But let us come to their Evidences. 1. They say, We have no Canonized Saints.
I answer 1. All the Apostles and Saints of the first ages were of our Religion,
and many of them have been beholden to the Pope for Canonizing them.

2. We have no usurper among us that pretends Infallibly to know the hearts
of others, nor to number Gods Saints. But with us, the Holy Ghost makes
Saints, and their lives declare it; and those that converse with them discern
it, so far as to be highly confident, and men discern it in themselves, so far
as to be Infallibly (though not perfectly) certain.

3. It seems the Pope takes Saints to be rare with them, that they must be
named and written with red Letters in an Almanac: And H. T. Man. page 84. is
fain to send us for proof to their Chronicles and Martyrologies; and he names
four Saints that they have had, viz. Saint Austin the Monk, Saint Bennet, Saint
Dominick, and Saint Francis. Now we all know that none but Saints are saved,
and that without holiness none can see God, Heb. 12. 14. So that it seems if
sanctity be so rare among the Papists, salvation must be rare

But as for us, we make it our care to admit none but Saints to our Church
Communion: though we preach to others to prepare them for it: For we believe
that the Church is a Holy Society, and find Paul calling the whole Churches
that he writes to, by the title of [Saints,] and we believe it is [the
Communion of Saints] that is there to be held. And if we had no more Saints in
one County at once, yea in some one Parish at once, then would fill up the
Popes Calendar, so as to have one for every day in the year, we should betake
our selves to bitter lamentation.

Whereas the Church of Rome takes in all sorts of the unclean, and is so impure
and polluted a society, that its a wonder how they should have the face to
boast of their holiness to men that live among them and know them. Thousands of
their members are stark Infidels, as not knowing the Essentials of the
Christian Faith. Its known here in Ireland, that abundance of them know not who
Christ was, but that he was a better man than Saint Patrick: Bishop Usher saw
it and lamented it, that they perished as Heathens for want of knowing
Christianity it self, while they went under the name of Catholics: and
therefore he would have persuaded the Popish Priests to have Consented that
they should be all taught a Catechism of the common principles that we are
agreed in; but he could not procure it: when Dr. Jo. White asked one of them in
Lancashire, who Jesus Christ was? she answered, that [sure it was some good
thing, or else it should not have been put into the Creed.]

And how much swearing, whoredom, drunkenness, and other wickedness is in their
Church, is known not only by the complaints of their own writers, but by the
too common experience of Travailers. We have known Papists that have turned
from them by the experience of one journey to Rome, and seeing what is there.
And for Church censures by which any of these should be purged out, they are
laid by, and reserved for other uses, even as thunderbolts for the Popes
Adversaries, and the servants of Christ whom they take for Heretics; and for
Princes whom the Pope would have deposed and murdered. These things are not
mere words, but the lives of many Kings and Princes have been the sacrifice of
the Roman Holiness.

And what need you any further proof that their Church is as the common
wilderness, and not as the Garden of Christ, and is a Cage of all unclean
birds, then that they actually keep them all in their Communion. It made my
heart rise at their hypocrisy and filthiness, to read one sentence in one of
the most learned, and sober, and honest of all their Bishops that have written,
and that is Albaspinaeus Observat. 1. page 1. says he [Siquis unquam hoc
seculo, (quod nescio an acciderit) Communione fuit privatus, sola fuit
Eucharistiae perceptione: in reliquis suae vitae partibus, quam ante
Excommunicationem habuit, eandem cum caeteris fidelibus consuetudinem, and usum
retinuit.] That is [If ever any one man in this age was put from the Communion
(which I know not whether such a thing has come to pass,) it was only from the
receiving the Eucharist; in the other parts of his Life, be retained the same
familiarity and converse with other believers, which he had before his
Excommunication.]

Here you see from a credible Bishop that lived in the thickest of their Clergy
in France, that he knew not that any one person in the age that he lived in,
was ever kept from the Lords Supper; but if he were, yet that was all: he was
still a member of their Church, and familiar with the rest. Let the Christian
world then observe by their practice, what an abominable hypocritical contest
they make, for to prove the Power of Church Government to be only in their
Pope, and the Prelates to whom he gives it; and when they have done, do make
no more use of the Power which they so pretend to, as not to exercise the
Censures of the Church upon one offender there in an age. How were that man
worthy to be thought of, or to be used, that would set all the world on fire by
contending, that no Schoolmaster or Physician should be suffered in the whole
world, but himself and such as he gives power to: and when he has done, will
not by himself or his subjects and dependants teach or heal one person in an
age? were such an one meet to live on the earth? Or should we judge that man in
his wits that would believe him? O what a stye is the Roman Society! what
dunghills are in their Assemblies? and yet must not the Shovel or the Beesom be
used once in an Age? what! no weed pulled up? no super fluous branch cut off?
Is this the use of all the Canons of their Church concerning Excommunication,
and abstention? Must the Christian world be at such a vast expense, to maintain
so rich and numerous a Clergy for this? And must we cast out our Pastors to
receive such as these? when we should be ashamed, if we had not exercised more
of the cleansing power of the Keys in one Parish Church, then Albaspinaeus
knew of among the Papists in a whole age.

But perhaps there is little of this filth among them to be cast out: He that
reads their own writers, or lives among them, and sees their lives, will
hardly think so. He that had but seen the Murders of their Popes for the
obtaining of the Popedom, or how Pope Stephen raged against the Carcass of Pope
Formosus, drawing it out of the grave, and changing its Pontifical habit to a
secular, and cutting off his fingers; or he that had seen Pope Christopher
casting the Corpse of Pope Leo the fifth into the River Tiber; or Pope Sergius
keeping the said Christopher bound in prison; or Pope Boniface the seventh
putting out his Cardinals eyes; would scarce believe that the Holy Seat of
Peter were indeed Holy: (all which Platina and others of their own writers give
us notice of.) He that reads Baronius himself telling us (To. 10. an. 897. n.
6.) how Pope Stephen the seventh defiled St. Peter's seat with unheard of
sacrilege, not to be named; and (sect. 4. ib.) and how the Princes of Tuscia
were brought into Peter's Chair and Christ's Throne, being monstrous men, of most
filthy lives, and desperate manners, and every way most filthy.] He that shall
read the same flattering Cardinal, saying, (Can. 900. sect. 1.) [that ugly
monsters were thrust into the Papacy, that it was dawbed with dung, infected
with stinks, defiled with filthiness, and collowed by these with a perpeutal
infamy] And (an. 912. sect. 8.) [that at Rome, the most powerful and the most
sordid whores did Rule; at whose will the seats were changed, Bishops were
made, and, which is horrid to be heard, and not to be spoken, their
sweet-hearts false Popes were thrust into Peter's seat.] And [that for an
hundred and fifty years the Popes were wholly fallen from the virtue of their
Predecessors; being disorderly, and Apostatical, rather then Apostolical, not
entering by the door, but by the back-door] says a passionate Papist,
Genebrard, Chron. l. 4. an. 901. I say he that shall read these impartially,
will scarce think the Head of their Church has been Holy, which is an
Essential part of it, (nor that their succession is uninterrupted.)

But if besides these you would read but Nic. Clemangis, Alvarus Pelagius de
planctu Ecclesiae (lib. 2. art. 2. fol. 104.) and many such like; or their
Poets Mantuan, Pantes, etc. or Petrarch, Mirandula, etc. you would think the
Holiness of Rome-should be the poorest proof in the world of their being the
only Church.

Their Espensaeus and others recite that Distich,

Vivere qui cupitis sancte, discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
Platina says (in vita Marcellini) [Our vices are so increased, that they have
scarce left us any place for mercy with God. How great is the Covetousness of
the Priests! especially of those that rule all! how great lust! how great
ambition and pomp! how great ignorance of themselves, and of the Christian
doctrine! how little Religion, and that rather counterfeit, then true! how
corrupt manners! even such as in the prophanest secular men were to be
detested! its not worth the speaking: when they sin so openly and so publicly,
as if they sought Praise by it.

Their Claudius Espensaeus on Tit. page 75. says [Where is there under the Sun
a greater liberty, clamor, impunity of all evil; that I say not infamy and
impudency (then at Rome:) verily it is such as no man can believe but he that
has seen it, and no man can deny it that has seen it] This was written since
the Council of Trent.

And in the Council of Trent, their Cornelius Muss, a Bishop there, and the
wonder of his age among the Papists, says that [there was no monsters of
filthiness, or sink, or plague of uncleanness, with which both people and
Priest was not defiled: In the very Sanctuary of God, there was no shame, no
modesty, no hope or regard of good living: but unbridled and untamed lust,
singular audaciousness, incredible wickedness.] And after more of the like he
adds, [Would they had not fallen from Religion to superstition, from faith to
infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, yea as men that had no souls, from God
to Epicurus or Pythagoras, saying in an impious heart, and an impudent mouth,
there is no God. And yet now of a long time, there has been no Pastor that
would require, (or seek them again) I say there was none to seek them, because
they all sought their own things, but not one the things of Jesus Christ] The
same Bishop Cornelius Muss after the Council writes thus (To. 2. Sermon 2. Dom.
V. Quadr.) [The Roman Name is hateful with all Nations; and see I pray you how
little esteem the Church it self is of, because of the scandals that are heard,
seen and felt. I speak not now of enemies that call it Babylon, Hell, the
Whore, and say it is the sink of all Errors: But I speak of friends, that
groan and daily sigh within themselves, saying, O holy City, how art thou thus
profaned! O glorious City! that art thus become vile; thus contemned, and
neglected.] These and many more such Testimonies of their own writers, Rivet
and many of ours have often set before them.

Guicciardine their Historian says, that [Those are called Good Popes, whose
Goodness is not worse then other men's wickedness.]

And if you think that now the matter is much mended, read but Claud.
Espensaeus in Tit. 1. page 75. complaining that the promises made by the Pope
of Reformation, at the Council of Trent were all broken, and nothing done but
deceit and shows. And of Pope Sixtus the fifth Bellarmine gave out his
judgment, that he thought when he dyed, he went to the Devil, saying, [Qui
sine paenitentia vivit, and sine paenitentia moritur, proculdubio ad infernum
descendit] [He that lives without Repentance, and dies without Repentance,
undoubtedly goes to Hell.] And says Watson of him (in Quodl. b. page 56, 57.)
Bellarmine said to an English Doctor [Conceptis verbis, quantum capio, quantum
sapio, quantum intelligo, Dominus noster Papa descendit ad infernum] [As far as
I can reach, as far as I have any wisdom, as far as I understand, in plain
terms, our Lord the Pope is gone to Hell.] But which way he went thither, all
the world knows not, but Barthol. Morisot. in the Life of Henry the Great of
France, cap. 17. says [That when the Spaniards perceived his contrivances to
forsake their party, lest he should join with the enemy, they caused him to be
strangled in the night by a Franciscan, or one in a Monks habit; and the next
day gave out that a Domestic Devil had strangled him, and to make good the
report, a Book was written of his life, and printed, where all the wickedness
of Pope Alexander the sixth is charged on him.]

And how the Popes are still chosen by impious Juglings and combinations Rivet
tells you out of your own champion, Cardinal Perron, his Legationes and
Negotiat. And of the saying of Cardinal Ossatus ad D. Ville roy Epist. 87.
concerning Pope Clement the eighth, esteemed one of the very best of them, who
persuaded the King of France to join with the Spaniard in the Invasion of
England; and when the Cardinal answered that the King of France was under an
Oath of Peace with the Queen of England, the Pope (their best Pope) replied,
that [the Oath was made to an Heretic; but he was bound by another Oath to God
and the Pope] and added that [that Kings and other Sovereign Princes tolerate
themselves in all things that make for their commodity: and its now come to
pass that it is not imputed to them, nor taken to be their fault;] and he
alleged the saying of Francisc. Mariae Duke of Urbine, that a Nobleman, or
Great man that is not the Sovereign, is blamed and counted infamous of all men,
if he keep not his faith; but supreme Princes may make Covenants, and break
them again without any danger to their credit, and may lie, betray, and commit
such like practices.]

These are your best Popes! Poor men! that can forgive other men's sins, and
pardon them the pains of Purgatory, and cannot save their own souls from Hell!
Are they not like to Govern the Universal Church well, that can no better
Govern themselves, or that one City where they dwell? And are not these men
worthy to be consulted as infallible Oracles, by those that dwell at the
Antipodes, though it cost them their lives to sail or travail to them? Can he
be a Christian or be saved that believes not in one of these men? Or can any
man receive the Christian faith or Scriptures, till he first know these good
men to be Christ's infallible Vicars?

And how many thousand Whores are licensed at Rome, how sumptuously they live,
what revenues come to the Pope by them? many of your own mention. And though
some of you write for it, and your Pope still maintains it, yet Mariana one
of your Jesuits (though he was for King-killing) condemns this, lib. de
Spectaculis, cap. 16. And your Claud. Espensaeus lib. 3. de Continentia. cap.
4. sets it out with a witness, lamenting Rome, as if it were turned all into
one Whore-house; and be* wailing it, that the Jews should so far shame you,
that no one of their children may play the harlots, unless they first turn
(Popish) Christians and be baptized, and then they have their liberty.

Of the gain that comes to the Pope and Prelates by the Simoniacall Market of
benefices, save me the labor of reciting, and read but Nicol. Clemangis
Archidiaconus Baiosensis Tractde Annatibus non solvendis, and Alvarus Pelagius
de Planctu Eccles. lib. 2. Art. 15. and l. 1. art. 67. and Claud. Espensaeus in
Tit. 1. page 68. and Cardinel. Cusanum de Concord. Cathol. lib. 2. cap. 40. and
Marc. Ant. de Dom. Spalatensem. de Repub. Eccless. lib. 9. c. 9. and Budaeum
li. 5. de Ass; and Duarenum I. C. de sacris Eccles. Minist. lib. 5. c. 8. and
passim, Rivet will direct you to many more.

Yea that the odious sin of Sodomie was common, or too frequent with many of
the Clergy, and Popes themselves (gluttony, drunkenness and whoredom being the
common smaller sins) see the same Rivet manifesting at large out of the express
complaints of Maphaeus, Alvarus Pelagius, and many more of their own writers.
Hoffmeister cited by Grotius Discussio Apol. Rivet. p. 72. [At cum Ep scopi
quidam ignorant, quid Sacramenti vox significet; cum ipsos pudent sacramenta
per seipsos confer, cum omnia apud ipsos sint venalia, cum Ecclesiam
defraudent suis sacramentalibus quae vocant, quae potest Sacramentis apud
simplici ores reverentia? Jam quod ad Parachos and Ecclesiastas quod attinet,
vix centesimus quisque de sacramentis ullam facit mentionem in suis ad plebem
concionibus; hic ex ignorantia, ille ex negligentia. -- Gravissime peccatum est
ab Episcopis nostris, dum numerantur potius ordinandi, quam examinantur: and
quantum quis nummorum tantum and favoris habet apud quosdam. Quae hic premo
prudens lector intelligit. Nolim enim hic refer quales Episcopos, Decanos,
Canonicos, Pastores, etc. Nobis subinde intrudat potius quam ordinet Romana
Curia, Regum item and Principum aulae: qui omnes juxta jocum cujusdam, familiam
suam satiant (si modo tales bestiae satiari possent) muneribus sacris -- Ab
equorum stabulis, e culina rapiuntur ad Sacerdotia, qui, quid Sacerdos sit, ne
persomnium quidem cogitarunt, homines qui professione sunt indigni.]

Papirius Massonius that wrote the Deeds of the Popes for their honor, and
sought his Reward from Sixtus Quintus, says (De Episcop. urb. lib. 6. in
Gregor. 13.) [No man does now a days look for Holiness in Popes: those are
judged the best, that are a little good, or less naught then other Mortals use
to be.]

Pope Pius the second was one of the best that your Papal seat a long time had;
and yet in his Epistle to his Father (Epist. 15.) that was angry with him for
fornication, he says, [Ais dolerete -- i. e. You say you are sorry for my
crime, that I begot a son in sin (or bastardy) I know not what opinion you have
of me. Certainly you that are flesh your selves did not beget a son that is
made of stone or iron. You know what a Cock you were your self. And for my part
I am not gelded, nor one of them that are frigid (or impotent) Nor am I an
hypocrite, that I should desire rather to seem good, then to be good. I
ingenuously confess my error, for am not holyer then David, nor wiser then
Solomon. Its an ancient and usual sin; I know not who is without it. (A holy
Church you are that while) This plague is spread far and near, if it be a
plague to make use of our naturals, though I see it not, seeing Nature, which
does nothing amiss, has bred this Appetite in all living creatures, that
mankind should be continued.] This was he that was the glory of your Papacy,
that knew none without this beastly sin.

And Orichovius tells Pope Julius the third, that Pope Paul the second his
predecessor had a Daughter in the eyes of all men.

And of this Pope Julius the third, Onuphrius himself says, that [Being a
Cardinal he followed voluptuousness as by stealth, but being made Pope, and
having what he would have, he cast away all care, and gave up himself to his
mirth and disposition] Of whom Thuanus says (Hist. lib. 6.) that he was very
infamous as a Cardinal, but after past his life in greater infamy.]

And Alvarus Pelagius, (lib. 2. art. 73. fol. 241, etc.) lamenting Whoredom as
a common sin, but specially of the Clergy, tells us that the cause is, because
[Commonly the Religious of that age were Gluttons or belly Gods, Arrogant,
Proud, incomparably beyond secular men, conversing with women, etc. And drink
more wine in their Religious state then before, and are commonly carnal. And
that the Monks had their female Devotaries, with whom, by the Prelates license
they conversed. And being sent to preach, they go to play the whoremongers: And
that there was scarce any one of the Holy Nuns without her carnal male
Devotary, by which they broke their first faith with Christ, etc.] This was
your Holy Church.

And li. 2. art. 28. he says [That most of the Clergy mix themselves with
gluttony, drunkenness and whoredom, which is their common vice, and most of
them give themselves to the unnatural vice (Sodomie) -- Thus continually, yea
and publicly do they offend against that holy chastity which they promised to
the Lord; besides those evils not to be named which in secret they commit,
which Papers will not receive, nor pen can write.] Abundance more he has of
the same subject, and their putting their choicest youth into houses of
Sodomie. This book of Alvarus Pelagius Bellarmine calls Liber insignis (de
Scriptor. Ecclesiast.)

Math. Paris (in Henr. 3. p. 819.) tells us of Cardinal Hugo's farewell speech
to the people of Lons when he departed with the Popes Court [Friends, (says
he) since we came to this City we have brought you great commodity and alms.
When we came hither we found three or four whore houses, but now at our
departure we leave but one: but that one reaches from the East Gate to the
West Gate.] O Holy Pope! and Holy Church!

But Costerus the Jesuit easily answers all that I have said, Enchirid. cap.
2. de Eccles. that [The Church loses not the name [Holy] as long as there is
but one that's truly Holy.] Answ Is this your sanctity? I deny your conclusion.
For 1. If the Head be unholy, an essential part is unholy; and therefore the
Church cannot be Holy. 2. One person is not the Matter of the Church, as one
drop of Wine cast into the sea does not make it a sea of Wine; and one Italian
in England makes not England Italian: nor one Learned man make England Learned.

And let the Papists observe, that it is from the very words of their own that
I have spoken of them what is here recited, and not from their adversaries. And
therefore I shall be so far from believing the Gospel upon the Account that
their Church is Holy that recommendeth it, or from believing them to be the
only Church of Christ, because of their Holiness, that I must bless God that I
live in a sweeter air and cleaner Society, and should be loath to come out of
the Garden into the Channel or sink to be made clean or sweet, but say, that
the travaller learned more wit, that left us this Resolution,

Roma vale; vidi; satis est vidisse; revertar
Cum leno aut meretrix, scurra cinadus ero.
2 THE second Proof which they bring of the Holiness of their Church, is, the
strict life of their Friars, as Carthusians, Franciscans, and others. Answ.
Having been so long already on this point, I will be but short on this branch.
In a word, 1. I have no mind to deny the Graces of the spirit in any that have
them. Though travelers tell me lamentable stories of your Friars, and Guil. de
Amore, and his companions said much more, and many other Popish Writers paint
them out in an odious garb, yet I do not doubt but God has his servants among
them.

2. But I must tell you that this also shows the Pollution of your Church in
comparison of our Churches; that Holiness and Religion are such rarities, and
next to Miracles among you, that it must be cloistred up, or confined to
certain orders that are properly called Religious, as if the People had no
Religiousness or Holiness. When our care and Hope is to make all our Parish
Churches far more Religious and Holy then your Monasteries or Convents: Yea
were not this Church much more Religious and Holy where I live, I think I
should have small comfort in it.

3. THeir third Proof of the Holiness of their Churches, is their unmarried
Clergy. Answ. 1. I will not stir too long in this puddle, or else I could tell
you out of your own writers of the odious fruits of your unmarried Clergy. Only
(because the essential parts of your Church are they that neerliest concern
your cause) I will ask you in brief, whether it was not Pope John the eleventh
that had Theodora for his whore? whether it was no Pope Sergius the third that
begot Pope John the twelfth of Marosia? whether John the twelfth, alias the
thirteenth (says Luitprandus, and others of your own) did not ravish maids and
wives at the Apostolic doors, and at last was killed in the Act of Adultery?
whether it were not Pope Innocent of whom a Papist wrote this distich?

Octo Nocens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas.
Hunc merito potuit dicere Roma patrem.
And whose Son was Aloisus, made Prince of Parma by Pope Paul the third? And
for your Arch bishops, Bishops, Priests, etc. I shall now add but the words of
your Dominicus Soto de Instit. and Jure qu. 6. art. 1. cited by Rivet, [We do
not deny (says he) that in the Clergy, such as keep Concubines, and are
Adulterers, are frequent.]

2. We have many that live unmarryed, as well as you, but not on your terms.

3. We know that Paul directed Timothy and Titus to ordain him a Bishop that
was the Husband of one Wife, and ruled well his house, having his children in
subjection; and that the Church a long time held to this doctrine, and that
Greg. Nyssen was a married Bishop. But if you are wiser then the Spirit of God,
or can change his Laws, or can prove the Holy Ghost so mutable, as to give one
Law by Paul and other Apostles, and another by the Pope, we will believe you,
and forsake the Scripture, when you can so far bewitch us, and charm us to it.

We believe that a single life is of very great Convenience to a Pastor, when
it can be held: and that Christ's Rule must be observed [Every man cannot
receive this saying, but he that can, let him receive it] And whether Ministers
be Married or not Married (as many now living in the next Parishes to me are
not, no more then my self) it is a strange thing with us to hear of one in many
Counties that was ever once guilty of fornication in his life: and if any one
be but once guilty in the Ministry, he is cast out, though he should be never
so penitent, as any man that reads the Act for ejecting scandalous Ministers
and Schoolmasters may see. As also you may there see, that if he were but once
drunk, if he swear, curse, or be guilty of other scandalous sins, he is cast
out without any more ado. And none are so earnest for the through execution of
this Law as the Ministers. If a Minister do but go into an Alehouse, except to
visit the sick, or on weighty business, it is a scandalous thing among us: we
do not teach as the Jesuits cited by the Jansenist Montaltus, that a man may
lawfully go into a Whorehouse to exhort them from Whoredom, though he has
found by experience, that when he comes among them he is overcome, and plays
the Whoremonger with them.

Lest the vices of your Clergy should be laid open and punished, you exempt
them from the secular power, and will not have a Magistrate so much as question
them for whoredom, drunkenness, or the like crimes. It is one of Pope Nicolas
Decrees (as Caranza page 395. recites them) that [No Lay man must judge a
Priest, nor examine any thing of his life. And no secular Prince ought to judge
the facts of any Bishops or Priests whatsoever] And indeed that is the way to
be wicked quietly, and sin without noise and infamy. But for our parts, we do
not only subject our selves and all our actions to the trial of Princes and the
lowest Justice of Peace, as far as the Law gives him power, but we call out to
Rulers daily to look more strictly to the Ministry, and suffer not one that is
ungodly or scandalous in the Church. And if one such be known, our Godly people
will all set against him, and will not rest till they cast him out (in times
when there is opportunity for it) and get a better in his stead. The whole
Country knows the Truth of this.

If you say, as the Quakers do, that yet the most among us are ungodly; I
answer, that Those among us that are known ungodly and scandalous are not owned
by us, nor are members of our Church, or admitted to the Lords Supper, in those
Congregations that exercise Church Discipline; but they are only as
Catechuments, whom we preach to and instruct, if not cast out.

Your eighth General Council at Constantinople, Can. 14. decreed, that
[Ministers must not fall down to Princes, nor eat at their Tables, nor debase
themselves to them; but Emperors must take them as Equals] But we are so far
from establishing Pride and Arrogancy by a Law, that though we hate servile
flattery and man-pleasing, yet we think it our duty to be the servants of all,
and to condescend to men of low estate, and much more to honor our Superiors,
and God in them.

The same Council decreed, Canon. 21. that [None must compose any Accusations
against the Pope] No marvail then if all Popes go for Innocents. But we are
liable to the accusations of any.

And because you charge our Churches with Unholiness, and that with such an
height of Impudency, as I am certain the Devil himself does not believe you,
that provokes you to it; even that there is not One Good among us, nor one that
has Charity, nor can be saved (unless by turning Papist,) I shall therefore go
a little higher, and tell you that I doubt not but the Churches in England
where I live, are purer far than those were in the days of Augustine, Hierom,
etc. yea and that the Pastors of our Churches are less scandalous then they
were then; what if I should compare many of them even to St. Augustine, St.
Hierom, and such others, both in Doctrine and Holiness of Life? should I do so,
I know you would account it arrogance: but yet I will presume to make some
comparison, and leave you to Judge impartially if you can.

As for the Heavenliness of their writings, let but some of ours be compared
with them, and you will see at least that they spoke by the same spirit: and
for their Commentaries on Scripture, did we miss it as often as Ambrose, Hierom
and many more, we should bring our selves very low in the esteem of the Church:
Even your Cajetane does more boldly censure the Fathers Commentaries then this
comes to.

And as to our lives, the Lord knows that I have no pleasure in opening any of
the faults of his Saints, nor shall I mention any but what are confessed by
themselves in Printed Books, and mentioned by others; and to boast of our own
Purity I take to be a detestable thing, and contrary to that sense of sin that
is in every Saint of God. But yet if the Lords Churches and servants are
slandered and reproached as they were by the Heathens of old, the vindicating
them is a duty which we owe to Christ.

Those Ministers that I Converse with are partly Married, and partly unmarryed.
The Married live soberly, in Conjugal Chastity, as burning and shining lights
before the people, in exemplary Holiness of Life. The unmarryed also give up
themselves to the Lord, and to his service: and I verily think that of many
such that converse with me, there is not one that ever defiled themselves by
incontinency, and I am confident would be ready to take the most solemn Oath of
it, if any Papist call them to it. And for the people of our Communion, through
the mercy of God such sins are so rare, that if one in a Church be guilty once,
we all lament it, and bring them to penitence, or disown them.

And were the Churches better in the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or following
Ages? I doubt not. And I judge by these discoveries. 1. By the sad Histories of
the Crimes of those times.

2. By the lamentable complaints of the Godly Fathers, of the Bishops, and
people of their times. What doleful complaints do Basil, Gregory Nazianz. and
Greg. Nyssen, and Chrysostom, Austin, etc. make? (it were too long to recite
their words.) What complaints made Gildas of the British Church? What a
doleful description have we of the Christian Pastors and People in his days,
from Salvian, through his whole Book de Gubernat.?

3. I judge also by the Canons, and by the Fathers directions concerning
Offenders. For example; Gregory Mag. says of drunkards [Quod cum venia suo
ingenio sunt relinquendi, ne deteriores fiant, si a tali consuetudine
evellantur.] And was this the Roman Sanctity even then? And was this St.
Gregory's Sanctity? that Drunkards must be let alone with pardon, lest if they
be forced from their custom, they be made worse! Then fairfall the Ministers
of England: If such advice were but given by one of us, it would seem enough to
cast us out of our Ministry. We dare not let one drunkard alone in our
Church Communion, where Church Discipline is set up.

So Augustine says [that Drunkenness is a mortal sin, Si sit assidua, if it be
daily or usual. And that they must be dealt with gently and by fair words, and
not roughly and sharply.] If one of us should make so light of Drunkenness,
what should we be thought? I cite these two from Aquinas 22. q. 150. art. 1. 4.
ad 4m and art. 2. 1.

Many Canons determine that [Priests that will not part with their Concubines,
shall be suspended from officiating, till they let them go.] Whereas with us, a
man deserves to be ejected, that should have a Concubine but one night in his
life.

Gratian Distinct. 34. cites c. 17. of a Toletane Council, saying, that he
that has not a Wife, but a Concubine in her stead, shall not be put from the
Communion. His Corrector recites the whole Canon thus [If any Believer have a
wife and a Concubine, let him not Communicate. But he that has no Wife, and
has a Concubine instead of a Wife, may not be put from the Communion: only let
him be content with one woman, either Wife or Concubine, which he will. He that
lives otherwise, let him be cast off, till he give over, and return to
penitence.]

In an English Council at Berghamsted an. 697. the seventh Canon is this [If a
Priest leave his Adultery, and do not naughtily defer Baptism, nor is given to
drunkenness, let him keep his Ministry, and the privilege of his habit]
Spelman, page 195. King Alured in the Preface to his Laws tells us, that except
Treason and Desertion of their Lords, the Councils of the Clergy did lay but
some pecuniary mulct on other sins, Spelm. page 362.

All this shows that the Church then was much more corrupt then ours now in
England.

Yea the best of the Fathers had such blots, that I may well make their
Confessions another discovery, that our Churches are as pure and holy as
theirs. I will name but few of the chief, because I would not rake into their
faults needlessly, who are pardoned, glorified Saints in Heaven. St. Augustine
whilst he leaned to the Maniches had a bastard, and confesses himself guilty
of fornication. St. Hierom that was so vehement for Virginity, and lived a
Monastic life, does yet confess that he was not a Virgin. St. Bernard that
lived so Contemplative a life, in his Sermon. de beata virgin post sermon. 5. de
Assumpt. confesses, se carere virginitate, that he lacked his virginity. And
though Bellarmine (de scriptor. Ecccles. page 224.) do from that only reason
question whether it be Bernards, yet it is in the second Tome among his
undoubted writings, and this reason is a poor disproof.

Now if one of our ordinary Ministers should be but guilty of such a sin,
though but once, and that before Conversion, no doubt but it would lie heavye
on their Consciences; and I am sure it would leave such a blot on their names,
that were never likely to be worn off while they live.

When we tell the Papists of their Licensing Whore-houses at Rome, Bononia,
etc. they commonly fly to the words of Austin, lib. de Ordine, saying [Aufer
Meretrices de rebus humanis, and turbaveris omnia libidinibus, i. e. Take away
Whores from among men, and you will disturb all things with lusts.] Though this
was written when Austin was but a young convert, and it seems that he after
changed his mind, yet this shows that our times are far from the abominations
of those; and our Pastors are far more strict then Austin then was.

4. As for the Holiness of their Church by Ceremonies, as Holy Water, Holy Oil,
Relics, Altars, and an hundred such things, I think it not worth the speaking
of: all things are sanctified to us by the word and prayer. We devote our
selves and all that we have to God, and then to the Pure all things are Pure.
We neglect no Ordinance of God that we can know of and enjoy. He is a spirit,
and seeks such as will worship him in spirit and truth. This is the Holiness
that we look after. But for numbering of Beads, and Ave Mary's, and going
pilgrimages, and such inventions of arrogant men, we place no Holiness in them,
as knowing that God desires not a Mimical or Histrionical worship; and that
none knows what will please him so well as himself.

CHAP. XXXV.
Detect. 26. ANother of their Deceits is, by calling us to tell them when every
one of their Errors did first begin, and what Pope did bring them in; or else
they will not believe but they are from the Apostles.

To this Bishop Usher and abundance of our writers have answered them at large.
I shall therefore speak but these few, but satisfactory words.

1. It belongs to you to prove the continuance of your Opinions or Practices,
more then to us to prove the Beginning. 2. It suffices that we prove that
there was a time when your errors were not in the Church, and that we can do
from the Scriptures and the Fathers, and often have done. 3. You know your selves
of abundance of changes which you know not who did first introduce. Who first
administered the Lords Supper in one kind only? dare you say that this was from
the beginning? Who first laid by the standing on the Lords day, and used
kneeling? (forbidden Can. 20. Council. Nicen. 1. and in other General Councils.)
Alvarus Pelagius de planct. Eccles. li. 2. art. 2 fol. 104. says [The Church
bewaileth the sins of the people, but specially of the Clergy as greater then
the sin of Sodom: For we see that faith and Justice have forsaken the earth.
The Holy Scripture and sacred Canons are accounted as fables -- He Is now a man
of no knowledge that inventeth not Novelties.] You see that then Novelties were
brought in. The same Vincentius Lirinensis complains of: And not only
complains of, but gives Direction what to do in case that [Novella aliqua
contagio, non jam portiunculam tantum, sed totam Pariter Ecclesiam commaculare
conetur? If any novell contagion shall endeavor to stain not only a part of
the Church, but the whole Church alike?] And then his advise is to appeal from
Novelty to Antiquity, and not to the Pope or the present Church. And withal he
adds that This Direction is but for [new heresies at their first rising,
before they falsify the rules of ancient faith (that is, before they corrupt
ancient Writers, or can pretend to Antiquity) and before by the large spreading
of the venom, they endeavor to corrupt the volumes of our ancestors. But
dilated and inveterate Heresies are not to be set upon this way, because by the
long tract of time, they have had a long occasion of stealing Truth: and
therefore we must convince such ancient heresies and schisms by no means but by
the only Authority of the Scripture, if there be need, or avoid them -- ]
Lirinens. cap. 4 etc.

Were there not abundance of Novelties introduced, when Augustine ad Januarium
said that [They load our Religion with servile burdens, which God in mercy
would have to be free, with a very few and most manifest Sacraments of
Celebration, so that the condition of the Jews was more tolerable, that were
subject to Legal Sacraments, and not to the presumptions of men] These words
of Austin your own Joh. Gerson reciting (de vita spirit. animae. lect. 2. par.
3.) adds of his own [Si tuo tempore, etc. If in thy days thou did thus
mourn. Oh wise Augustine, what would thou have said in our time: where
according to the variety, and motion of heads, there is incredible variety and
dissonant multiplicity of such servile burdens, and as thou call them, of
humane presumptions. Among which, as so many snares of souls, and entangling
nets, there is scarce any man that walks secure, and is not taken (or caught.)]

How think you now in the Judgment of Augustine and Gerson; whether there have
any Novelties been brought into the Church; and whether all your Presumptions
and burdens, and (as Gerson calls them) halters for souls, have come from the
Apostles, or are your own? When all is thus overcome with Novelty, do you make
any question whether any thing be new?

It seems that Bernard thought that humane Traditions were too much befriended,
when he thus describes the Assemblies that he approves, Epist. 91. [Such a
Council (do I delight in) in which the Traditions of men are not obstinately
defended, or superstitiously observed; but they do diligently and humbly
enquire, what is the good, and well pleasing, and perfect will of God.]

And it seems to me that General Councils by error introduced Novelties, when
Later Councils were fain to undo what the former had done: For so does blessed
Augustine profess they did, saying, De Baptis. cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 6.
[And Councils themselves that are gathered through several Regions or
Provinces, do without any scruple yield to the authority of more plenary
Councils that are gathered out of the whole Christian world; and those same
plenary Councils do often yield (or give place) the former to the later, when
by some experiment of matters, that which was shut is opened, and that which
lay hid is known] Sure here are alterations made even by General Councils that
correct one another.

And what should hinder the Introduction of Novelty when General Councils do so
often err? Nay if such Councils be Morally and Interpretatively the whole
Church, as the Papists say, then the whole Church does err in the reception of
some Novelty, before they declare it by their decrees. If you say, that General
Councils cannot err, nor introduce such Novelties, your Champion Bellarmine and
many of your own, will give you the Lie: says he De Council. lib. 2. cap. 11.
[Neque potest, etc. It cannot be answered that those Councils erred because
they were not lawful (that is the Arrian and other Heretical General Councils,
at that at Sirmium, Millanie, Ariminum, Ephesus, several at Constantinople
dissallowed by the Papists) For to most of them there was nothing wanting but
the Popes assent. Yea the second at Ephesus was altogether like that at Basil:
For both were called by the Pope; in both of them the Popes Legate was present
at the beginning: from both of them the Popes Legate shortly after went away:
in both of them the Pope was excommunicated; and yet that the Council of
Ephesus erred, the adversaries will not deny.] Hence he concludes that [the
chief Power Ecclesiastical is not in the Church, nor in the Council, the Pope
being removed formaliter vel suppletive.]

And what should hinder, when there is but one man's vote against it, even the
Popes, but that Novelty and error may enter at any time; and when that one man
is often so wicked and Heretical as he is. For General Councils are but a mere
name and mockery. The packing of them shows it: the Paucity and nonUniversality
of them shows it. The Management of their affairs shows it. They do nothing
since the Papal reign, but what the Pope will (excepting the condemned
Councils) They have no Being till he Will; nor make any Decrees but what he
Will: Nor are their Decrees of any further power, then he is pleased to give
them. So that his Will is the sense of the General Council or universal Church.
I need not turn you for this to Sleidan, or Uergerius Bishop of Trent, that
tell us the Holy Ghost came to that Council in a Cloak-bag from Rome: nor to
Espensaeus in Tit. 1. page 42. seeing Bellarmine speaks it out, De Council. lib.
2. cap. 11. saying, [We must know that the Pope is wont to send Legates
instructed concerning the judgment of the Apostolic seat, with this
Condition, that if the Council do consent to the Judgment of the Apostolic
seat, it shall be formed into a Decree; If not, the forming of the decree shall
be deferred till the Pope of Rome, being advised with, shall return his answer]
And says Bellarmine de Council. lib. 2. cap. 11. [In the Council of Basil, Ses.
2. it was decreed by common consent, together with the Popes Legate, that a
Council is above the Pope; which certainly is now judged erroneous] And the
Council of Lateran and Florence decreed the contrary. And Pighius says,
Hierarch. Eccles. l. 6. that [the Councils of Constance and Basil went about by
a new trick, and pernicious example to destroy the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
and instead of it to bring in the Domination of a promiscuous confused popular
multitude, that is to raise again Babylon it self, subjecting to themselves, or
to the community of the Church, (which they falsely pretended that they
Represent) the very Head and Prince of the whole Church; and him that is the
Vicar of Christ himself in this his Kingdom, and this against Order and Nature,
against the clearest light of Gospel verity, against all Authority of
Antiquity, and against the undoubted Faith and Judgment of the Orthodox Church
it self.]

Mark Papists: General Councils with the Popes Nuncio may bring in Novelties in
faith, against the clearest light of the Gospel, and the full Consent of
Antiquity; and yet these Councils affirmed their opinions to be de fide, and
the contrary to be Heretical and Damnable, and contrary to all Antiquity. You
see then that Novelties are among you in matters of faith. And the French to
this day are guilty of those Novelties, and also charge their Adversaries with
Innovation.

Nay what will you say, if General Councils themselves are but Novelties,
though they are the foundation of the faith of one half of the Papists (as the
Pope is of the other) I say not so, but judge whether your Champion Pighius say
so, Hierarch. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 1. fol. 230. where he says that [Concilia
universalia non habent Divinam, and c. General Councils have not a Divine or
Supernatural Original, but merely an humane Original, and are the Invention of
Constantine a Prince, profitable indeed sometimes to find out in Controversy,
which is the Orthodox and Catholic truth, though to this they are not
necessary; seeing its a readyer way to advise with the Apostolic seat] How now
Sirs? Is your Representative Church the foundation of your faith, a Novelty of
Constantines invention; and yet are you in the old way, and must we be put to
prove you to be Novelists?

Do you think those Popes did go the Old way, of whom Alvarus Pelagius speaks
(de planctu Eccles. art. 15. lib. 2.) that [they succeeded in authority, but
not in Sanctity, intruding themselves, procuring, bargaining, etc. building
Towers and Palaces in Babylon, that is, in Rome according to Hierom] Some foul
innovation sure they were guilty of that so re-edified Babylon. So that this is
my first proof that you are Novelists; from the General Accusations of others,
and Confessions of your own.

2. Another proof that changes may be, and yet the time and Authors be unknown,
is from the instance of other Churches that have been corrupted or subverted by
Innovations, and yet the time and authors are unknown. You accuse the Churches
in Habassia of many errors your selves; and you are not able to tell us when
they came in, or who introduced them. The same may be said of the Georgians,
Armenians, Egyptians, yea and of the Greeks and Russians. Can you tell us when,
and by whom each error was introduced that corrupted the Churches mentioned in
the Scripture? as Corinth, Philippi, Coloss, Thessalonica, Ephesus, Laodicaea,
and the rest: you know you can give us no better an account of this, then we
can of the Authors of your Corruptions, nor so good.

You know that among the Primitive Fathers, whose writings are come to our
hands, many errors had the Major vote, as that of the Corporeity of Angels,
(which your second General Council at Nice owned) and their Copulation with
women before the flood, the Millenary conceit, and many more which you confess
to be errors. Tell us when any of these came in, if you can (unless you will
believe that Papias received the last from John, and then its no error.) Who
did first bring the Asian Churches to celebrate Easter at a season differing
from yours? Who first brought the Britains to it? Nay we know not certainly
who first Converted many Nations on earth, nor when they first received their
Christianity: and how then should we know when they first received each error?

And we find that good men did bring in Novelties; and what was by them
introduced as indifferent, would easily by custom grow to seem Necessary: and
what they received as a doubtful opinion, would easily grow to be esteemed a
point of Faith. The Presbyters and whole Clergy of Neocaesarea were offended
with Basil for his Innovations, viz. for bringing in a new Psalmodie, or way of
singing to God; and for his new order of Monasticks: and they told him that
none of this was so in Gregory's days; and what answers Basil? He denies
not the Novelty of his Psalmodie, but retorts again on them, that their Letany
also was new, and not known in the time of Gregory (Thaumaturgus) yea, says
he, How know you that these things were not in the days of Gregory? For you
have kept nothing unchanged to this day of all that he was used to] you see
what chopping and changing was then in the Church among all sorts, when such an
alteration was made in less then forty years. Yet Basil would not have unity to
be laid on any of these things, but adds, [But we pardon all these things,
though God will examine all things: only let the principal things be safe]
Basil Epist. 63. Isidore Pelusiota lib. 1. Epist. 90. says, that [the Apostles
of the Lord studying to restrain and suppress unmeet loquacity, and showing
themselves Masters of modesty and gravity to us, did by wise Council permit
women to sing in the Churches. But as all Gods documents are turned into the
contrary, so this is turned to dissoluteness, and the occasion of sin. For they
are not affected with deep compunction in singing Divine Hymns; but abusing the
sweetness of the singing, to the irritating and provoking of lust, they take it
for no better then stage play songs:] therefore he advises that they be
suffered to sing no more.

Here you see 1. That changes had happened about many Divine things. 2. That he
advises himself the introducing of this novelty, that women be forbidden
singing in the Church, because of the abuse, though he confess it a wise
Apostolic Order. So that for Novelty by good men to creep into Gods worship,
is not strange.

3. Moreover the Nature of the thing may tell all the world, that neither you
nor we can be accountable of the beginning of every error that creeps into
the Church: For 1. The distance of time is great. 2. Historians are not so
exact: and what they tell us not, neither you, nor we can know. 3. Much History
is perished. 4. Much is corrupted by your wicked forgeries, as has been often
proved to you. 5. Mixtures of Fables have hindered the credit of much of it. 6.
Nations are not individual persons, but consist of millions of individuals: And
as it is not a whole Nation that is converted to the faith at once, so neither
is it whole Nations that are perverted to Heresy at once, but one receives it
first, and then more and more, till it overspread the whole. Paul says that
such doctrine eats like a Gangrene; and that is by degrees, beginning on one
part, and proceeding to the rest. 7. As I said before, that which is at first
received but as an Opinion and an Indifferent thing, must have time to grow
into a Custom; and that Custom makes it a Law, and makes Opinions grow up to
be Articles of Faith, and Ceremonies grow to be Necessary things. You know that
this is the common way of propagating opinions in the world.

4. I have in another Book showed you out of many of your own writers the rise
of diverse of your vanities. And Usher has told the Jesuit more: and so he
has told you of your thriving to your present height, in his Book de success.
and statu Eccles. And so has Mornay in his Mystery of Iniquity, and Rivet in
the Defense of him against Cofferellus; and Pet. Molinaeus has purposely
written a Book de Novitate Papismi, and Antiquitate very Christianismi, showing
the Newness of Popery in the several parts of it. To these therefore I remit
you for Answer to this Objection.

5. Can you tell us your selves, when many of your doctrines or practices
sprung up? When took you up your Sabbaths fast, for which you have been
condemned by a Council? You know that when the twentieth Canon of the Nicene
Council was made, and when the Canons at Trull. were made, it was the Practice
of the Church through the known world, to pray and perform other worship
standing, and to avoid kneeling on the Lords Day. Tell us when this Canon and
Tradition was first violated by you, and by whom? It was once the custom of
your Church to give Infants the Eucharist; who first broke it off? It was once
your practice to Communicate in both kinds: who first denied the Cup to the
Laity? At first it was only a doubtful Opinion, that Saints are to be Prayed
to, and the dead prayed for, which came into men's minds about the third or
fourth Century? But who first made them Articles of faith? Augustine began to
doubt, whether there were not some kind of Purgatory: But who first made this
also a point of faith? Who was it that first added the Books of the Maccabees
and many others to the Canon of Scripture, contrary to the Council of
Laodicaea, and all the rest of the concent of Antiquity, which Dr. Reignolds,
Dr. Cousin and others have produced? Who was it that first taught and practiced
the putting an Oath to all the Clergy of the Christian Church within your power
to be true to the Pope, and to obey him as the Vicar of Christ? Who first
taught men to swear, that they would not interpret Scripture, but according to
the unanimous Consent of the Fathers? Who was the first that brought in the
doctrine or name of Transubstantiation? and who first made it an Article of
faith? Who first made it a point of faith to believe that there are just seven
Sacraments, neither fewer nor more? Did any before the Council of Trent swear
men, to receive and profess without doubting, all things delivered by the
Canons and Ecumenical Councils, when at the same time they cast off themselves
the Canons of many General Councils, and so are generally and knowingly
perjured? (as e. g. the twentieth Canon of Nice forementioned) These and
abundance more you know to be Novelties with you, if wilfulness or gross
ignorance bear not rule with you; and without great impudence you cannot deny
it. Tell us now when these first came up, and satisfy your selves.

One that was afterward your Pope (Aeneas Sylvins, Epist. 288. says, that
before the Council of Nice, there was little respect had to the Church of Rome:
You see here the time mentioned, when your foundation was not laid.

Your Learned Cardinal Nicol. Cusanus, lib. de Concord. Cathol. c. 13. etc.
tells you how much your Pope has gotten of late: and plainly tells you, that
the Papacy is but of Positive right, and that Priests are equal, and that it
is subjectional consent that gives the Pope and Bishops their Majority, and
that the distinction of Diocesses, and that a Bishop be over Presbyters, are of
Positive right, and that Christ gave no more to Peter than the rest; and that
if the Congregate Church should choose the Bishop of Trent for their President
and Head, he should be more properly Peter's Successor then the Bishop of Rome]
Tell us now when the contrary doctrine first arose?

Gregory de valentia (de leg. usu Euchar. cap. 10. tells you that the Receiving
the Sacrament in one kind, began not by the decree of any Bishop, but by the
very use of the Churches, and the consent of believers: and tells you, that it
is unknown when that Custom first begun, or got head, but that it was General
in the Latin Church, not long before the late Council of Constance. And may
you not see in this, how other points came in?

If Pope Zosimus had but had his will, and the Fathers of the Carthage Council
had not diligently discovered, shamed, and resisted his forgery, the world had
received a new Nicene Canon, and we should never have known the Original of it.

Its a considerable Instance that Usher brings, of using the Church service in
a known tongue. The Latin tongue was the Vulgar tongue, when the Liturgy and
Scripture was first written in it (at Rome and far and near it was understood
by all.) The service was not changed, as to the language: but the language it
self changed; and so Scripture and Liturgy came to be in an unknown tongue; And
when did the Latin tongue cease to be understood by all? Tell us what year, or
by whom the change was made? says Erasmus (Decl. ad censur. Paris. tit. 12..
41.) [The Vulgar tongue was not taken from the people, but the people departed
from it.

5. We are certain that your errors were not in the times of the Apostles, nor
long after, and therefore we are sure that they are Innovations. And if I find
a man in a Dropsy, or a Consumption, I would not tell him that he is well, and
ought not to seek remedy, unless he can tell when he began to be ill, and what
caused it.

You take us to be Heretical: and yet you cannot tell us when our errors did
first arise. Will you tell us of Luther? You know the Albigenses whom you
murdered by hundreds and thousands, were long before him? Do you know when they
begun? Your Reinerius says that some said, they were from Silvesters days,
and some said since the Apostles; but no other beginning do you know.

6. But to conclude, what need we any more, then to find you owning the very
doctrine and practice of Innovation? When you maintain that you can make us new
Articles of faith, and new worship, and new discipline, and that the Pope can
dispense with the Scriptures, and such like, what reason have we to believe
that your Church abhors Novelty? If you deny any of this, I prove it.

Pope Leo the tenth among other of Luthers opinions, reckons and opposes
this as Heretical [It is certain that it is not in the hand of the Church or
Pope, to make Articles of faith] (in Bulla cont. Luth.)

The Council of Constance that took the supremacy justly from the Pope, did
unjustly take the Cup from the Laity in the Eucharist, [Licet in primitiva
Ecclesia hujusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie, i.
e. Though in the primitive Church this Sacrament was received by Believers
under both kinds.]

The Council of Trent say, Sess. 21. cap. 1, 2. that [this power was always in
the Church: that in dispensing the Sacraments, saving the substance of them, it
might ordain or change things, as it should judge most expedient to the profit
of the receiver.]

Vasquez To. 2. Disp. 216. N. 60. says [Though we should grant that this was a
precept of the Apostles, nevertheless the Church and Pope might on just causes
abrogate it: For the Power of the Apostles was no greater then the power of the
Church and Pope in bringing in Precepts.]

These I cited in another Treatise against Popery, page 365. Where also I added
that of Pope Innocent [Secundum plenitudinem potestatis, etc. By the fullness of
our power, we can dispense with the Law above Law] And the Gloss that often says
[The Pope dispenses against the Apostle; against the Old Testament. The Pope
dispenses with the Gospel interpreting it] And Gregor. de valent. saying
(Tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 8.) [Certainly some things in later times are more rightly
constituted in the Church then they were in the beginning] And of Cardinal
Peron's saying, lib. 2. Obs. 3. cap. 3. page 674. against King James, of the
Authority of the Church to alter matters contained in the Srripture: and his
instance [of the form of Sacraments being alterable; and the Lords command
[Drink ye all of it] mutable and dispensable. And Tolets [Its certain that all
things instituted by the Apostles were not of Divine right.] Andradius (Defens.
Council. Trid. lib. 2. page 236. [Hence it is plain that they do not err that
say the Popes of Rome may sometime dispense with Laws made by Paul and the four
first Councils -- ] And Bzovius [The Roman Church using Apostolical power, does
according to the Condition of times, change all things for the better] And yet
will you not give us leave to take you for changers and Novelists?

But let us add to these witnesses, some more of your worthies, August.
Triumph. de Ancon. q. 5. art. 1. says [To make a new Creed, belongs only to
the Pope, because he is the Head of the Christian faith, by whose authority all
things belonging to faith are confirmed and strengthened -- ] Et Art. 2. [As he
may make a new Creed, so he may multiply new Articles upon Articles] And (in
Praefat. sum. ad Johan. 22.) he says that [the Popes power is Infinite,
because the Lord is great, and his strength great, and of his greatness there
is no end] And q. 36. ad. 6. he says that [the Pope gives the Motion of
Direction, and the sense of Knowledge into all the members of the Church; For
in him we live and move and have our being -- And the Will of God, and
consequently the Popes Will, who is his Vicar, is the first and chief cause of
all motions corporal and spiritual.] And then no doubt may change without
blame.

Abbas Panormitan, in cap. C. Christus de haeret. n. 2. says, [The Pope can
bring in a new Article of faith] And Petr. de Anchoran. in idic. [The Pope can
make new Articles of faith, that is, such as now ought to be believed, when
before they ought not to be believed.]

Turrecremat. sum. de Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 203. says that [the Pope is the
Measure, and Rule, and Science of things to be believed.] And August. de Ancona
shows us that the Judgment of God is not higher then the Popes, but the same,
and that therefore no man may appeal from the Pope to God] (qu. 6. art. 1.) And
therefore be not offended, if we suppose you to have changes.

A Confutation of a Popish Manuscript on this point.
Just as I was writing this, I received another Popish M. S. sent from
Wolverhampton to Sturbridge, to which I shall return an answer before I go to
the next point.

Pap. M. S. An Argument for the Church.
IT will not be denied but that the Church of Rome was once a most pure,
excellent, flourishing and Mother Church; and her faith renowned in the whole
world, Romans 1. 8. and 6. and 16. Whites Def. p. 555. King James speech to the
Parliament. Whitaker in his Answer to Dr. Sanders. Fulk. cap. 21. These. 7.
Reynolds in his fifth Conclusion.

This Church could not cease to be such, but she must fall either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism.

Apostasy is not only a renouncing of the faith of Christ; but of the name and
Title of Christianity. No man will say that the Church of Rome had such a fall,
or fell so.

Heresy is an adhesion or fast cleaving to some private or singular Opinion,
or error in faith, contrary to the generally approved doctrine of the Church.

If the Church of Rome did ever adhere to any singular or new opinion,
disagreeable to the common received doctrine of the Christian world, I pray you
satisfy me in these particulars.

1. By what General Council was she ever condemned? 2. Which of the Fathers
ever writ against her? 3. By what Authority was she otherwise reproved?
For it seems to be a thing very incongruous, that so great a Church should be
condemned by every private person, who has a mind to condemn her.

Schism is a departure or division from the unity of the Church, whereby the
bond and Communion held with some former Church is broken and dissolved.

If ever the Church of Rome divided her self from any body of faithful
Christians, or broke Communion, or went forth from the Society of any Elder
Church, I pray you satisfy me in these particulars.

1. Whose company did she leave? 2. From what body went she forth? 3. Where was
the true Church she forsook?
For it appears not a little strange, that a Church should be accounted
Schismatical, when there cannot be assigned any other Church different from her
(which from age to age since Christ's time has continued visible) from whence
she departed.]

Thus far the Papists Manuscript.

An Answer to the foregoing Argument.
IF the Author of this Argument thinks as he speaks, its a case to be lamented
with tears of blood, that the Church of Christ should be abused, and the souls
of men deluded by men of so great ignorance. But if he know that he does but
juggle and deceive, its as lamentable that any matter of Salvation should fall
into such hands.

1. This Argument I have before answered, Detect. 13. The word Church here is
ambiguous, and either signifies, 1. A particular Church, which is an
Association of Christians for personal Communion in Gods worship. 2. Or diverse
such Associations or Churches Associated for Communion by their officers or
delegates, for unity sake. 3. Or else it may signify some one Mistress Church
that is the Ruler of all the rest in the world. 4. Or else it may signify the
Universal (Catholic) Church it self, which contains all the particular
Churches in the world.

The Papist should not have played either the blind man or the Jugler by
confounding these, and never telling us which he means. 1. For the first, we
grant him that Rome was once an excellent flourishing Church: And so was
Ephesus, Jerusalem, Philippi, Colosse and many more.

2. As to the second sense it is humane, or from Church custom, so to take the
word Church, for Scripture, that I find does not so use it: But for the thing,
we are indifferent: Though it cannot be proved that in Scripture times Rome had
any more then a particular Church; yet its all one as to our cause.

3. As to the third and fourth senses, we deny, as confidently as we do that
the Sun is darkness, that ever in Scipture times Rome was either a Mother to
all Churches, or the Ruler and Mistress of all, or yet the Universal Church it
self. Prove this, and I will turn Papist.

But there is not a word for it in the Texts cited, but an intimation of much
against it. Paul calls Rome a Church, and commends its faith. True, but
does he not so by the Thessalonians, Colossians, Ephesians, Philippians, etc.
and John by the Philadelphians, Pergamus, Thyatira and others, as well? And
will not this prove that Rome was but such a particular Church as one of them?

The citation of Protestants are done it seems by one that never read them, nor
would have others read them; which makes him turn us to whole books to search
for them, if we have nothing else to do, and to miscited places. But we know
that all our Divines confess that Rome was once a true and famous particular
Church, but never the Universal Church, nor the Ruler of the world, or of all
other Churches, in Paul's days. Would you durst lay your cause on this, and put
it to the trial? Why else did never Paul make one word of mention of this Power
and honor, nor send other Churches to her to be Governed?

And now I pray consider to what purpose is the rest of your reasoning? What is
it to me, whether Rome be turned either Apostate, Heretical, or Schismatical,
any more then whether Jerusalem, Ephesus, Philippi, or any other Church be so
fallen? If you are not fallen I am glad of it; if you are I am sorry for it; and so
I have done with you (unless I knew how to recover you.) Would you not laugh
even at the Church of Jerusalem that was truly the Mother Church of the world,
if they should thus reason [We are not fallen away: therefore we must Rule over
all the world, and no man is a Christian that does not obey us?] This is the
sport you make in the cheating of souls.

Well; but let us follow you, though our cause be not concerned in it. 1. I
answer, that we accuse you not of renouncing the name of Christ. 2. We must
needs fear, that according to to your own definition of Heresy, you are guilty
of many Heresies.

And to your Questions, I answer. 1. I pray you tell us what General Councils
did ever condemn one half of the Heresies mentioned by Epiphanius, Augustine or
Philastrius? Was there ever a greater rabble of Heresies then before ever a
General Council was known? and were they dead and buried before the first
General Council was born? 2. Did you not smile when you wrote these delusory
Questions? How can a General Council condemn you, or any great part of the
Church: for instance the Greeks, etc. If you be not there its not a General
Council? And will you be there to condemn your selves? you have more wit and
less grace then so. And I pray, what General Council did ever condemn the
Greeks, for those many errors charged on them? If the Greeks themselves were
not there, it was not a General Council; so considerable a part are they of the
Church. And what General Council has condemned the Abassines, Egyptians, etc.

3. Do you think General Councils are so stark mad or horridly impious, as to
condemn so many Kingdoms with one condemnation, for Heresy? Why, they know
that men must be heard, before they be condemned, and a Kingdom consists of
many millions of souls. And it is not enough to know every man's faith, if we
know the faith of the King, or Pope, or Archbishop, or Bishops: And how long
shall they be examining each person in many Kingdoms?

4. But yet I can say more of your Church then of others. He that kills the
Head, kills the Man: Your Usurping Head is an Essential part of your New-formed
Church: But your Head has been condemned by Councils; therefore your Church in
its essential part has been condemned by Councils. Do you not know that all
the world (as well as the feigned Council Sinuessan.) condemned your Pope
Marcellinus for Offering to Idols? Know you not that two or three General
Councils condemned Pope Honorius as a Monothelite? Yes: no doubt you know it.
Know you not that the second General Council of Ephesus condemned and
excommunicated your Pope? And that the Council of Basil called by him did the
like? If you do not, see Bellarmines parallel of them de Conciliis lib. 2. cap.
11. Do I need to tell you what the Council of Constance did? Or for what John
22. alias 23. and John 13. and other Popes were deposed by Councils?

2. And for Fathers, do I need to tell you how many condemned Marcellinus,
Liberius, Honorius and others? How often Hilary Pictav. (in fragmentis in recit.
Epist. Liberii) does cry out Anathema tibi Liberi, prevaricator: presuming to
curse and excommunicate your Pope. Need I tell you what Tertullian says
against Zephernius: Yea what Alphonsus a Castro and diverse of your own say
against Liberius, Honorius, Anastasius, Celestine; and tell us that many Popes
have been Heretics? At least give us leave to believe Pope Adrian the sixth
himself. Read Dom. Bannes in 2m 2a q. 1. art. 10. Where he proves at large
against Pighius, that a Pope may be an Heretic, and laughs at Pighius that now
after two hundred years would prove them false witnesses, which write that Pope
Honorius was condemned for an Heretic by three Popes, viz. Agatho, Leo the
second, and Adrian the second.

3. But perhaps you will say, that though your Popes have been condemned by
Councils, yet so have not your maintained doctrines. Answ. Yes, that they have
too. Did not the Councils at Constantinople condemn the Doctrine of the second
Nicene Council for Image Worship, and the Council at Frankford do the like? And
those two at Constantinople were as much General as your Council of Trent was,
and much more.

And yet that same Council at Nice did condemn the doctrine of St. Thom.
Aquinas, and your Doctors commonly of worshipping the Image of Christ, and
Cross, and sign of the Cross with Latria, divine worship.

And did not your General Councils at Laterane and Florence declare that the
Pope is above a Council, and that they cannot depose him? etc. And yet your
General Councils at Constance and Basil determine the contrary as an Article of
Faith, and expressly affirm the former to be Heresy. See then your own
doctrine, even in a fundamental point condemned by General Councils of your own
(which side soever you take, the Popes, or the Councils.)

And did not the sixth Council of Carthage, of which St. Augustine was a
principal member, not only detect Pope Zosimus forged Canon of Nice, but also
openly and prevalently resist and reject your Usurpation, and refuse your
Legates and Appeals to you? If you would cloak this, believe your own Pope
Boniface, Epist. ad Eulalium, saying [Aurelius sometime Bishop of Carthage,
with his Colleagues, did begin, by the Devils instigation to wax proud against
the Church of Rome in the times of our Predecessors, Boniface and Celestine.]

And if you have learnt to except against this Epistle, see your Bishop
Lindanus justifying it, Panopl. l. cap. 89 Or at least believe your Champion
Harding against Jewels Challenge, art. 4. sect. 19. [After the whole African
Church had persevered in schism the space of twenty years, and had removed
themselves from the obedience of the Apostolic seat, being seduced by Aurelius
Bishop of Carthage.] Again note, that Austin was one of them.

But you will say, that this was not a General Council: Answ. True; for when part
rises against part, it cannot be the whole that is on either side.

Moreover do you not know that the Greeks have condemned you often? And truly
their Councils have been much more General then yours at Trent was, where about
forty Bishops altered the Canon of Scripture, and made Tradition equal with it.
I think verily this one County would have afforded a far better Council of a
greater number.

But I Will once more name one General Council that has condemned your very
foundation; and that is the fourth General Council at Calcedon before
mentioned, Act. 15. Can. 28. and Act. 16. where you may find, 1. That the
ancient Privileges of the Roman Throne were given them by the Fathers (in
Council) 2. That the Reason was, because Rome was the Imperial City. 3. They
give Equal Privileges to the seat of Constantinople, because it was now become
New Rome. 4. That the Roman Legates would not be present at this act. 5. But
the next day when they did appear, and pretended that this act was forced, the
Bishops all cried [No man was compelled: Its a just decree; we all say thus; we
all approve it: Let that stand that is decreed; its all right.]

6. Here specially note that this General Council thought they needed not the
Popes Approbation for the validity of their Decrees, when they pass them, and
take them for valid, even contrary to the will of the Pope. Speak you that bear
the least reverence to a General Council. Did this Council think that their
Decrees were invalid, if the Pope approve them not? You see, if you be not
wilfully blind, they did not. And who is now to be believed? Bellarmine and his
party, and the present prevalent party of the Papists, that say, Councils not
approved by the Pope are invalid or without authority; or the Council of
Calcedon that thought otherwise?

7. Note that the Popes Legates called this [An humbling, and depressing, and
wronging of the Papacy, and therefore entered their dissent: see Bellarmines
Confession lib. 2. de Pontif. cap. 17. Binnius notes on this Council. Baronius
an. 451.

8. Note also that the shifts of Bellarm. Binnius, Baronius, Becanus, Gretser,
etc. are apparently false, that say this Canon was surreptitiously brought into
the Council: for Aetius, Act. 16. openly professed the contrary, and all the
Bishops professed their consent to the last.

9. Note also that this is one of the four Great Councils which the Papists
themselves compare to the four Gospels; and in it were six hundred and thirty
Fathers.

10. Note also that this great Council is against them, and on the Protestant
side in the very foundation of all our differences, Whether the Roman
Privileges be jure divino or humano? And though it be but the Privileges, and
not the now claimed Vicarship that was in Question, yet the Conclusion is the
stronger against them, because the lesser was denied.

But their last shift is, that this Clause or Canon was not approved, and so is
Null. 1. Mark then you that wrote this Manuscript, that we have General
Councils against you; but we want the Popes Approbation. And in good sadness
was that the meaning of your Question [What Council, that is, what Pope
condemned our Church?] Can it be expected that this one man should condemn
himself? or can you be no Heretic till then?

2. But let it be so this once. Did not your Pope approve of this Council, when
Gregory the first did liken it with the other three to the four Gospels? and
said of this [Tota devotione Complector: integerrima approbatione custodio] I
embrace it with my whole devotion; I keep it with most entire approbation]
Greg. 1. Regist. l. 1. Epist. 24. cited in the Decrees, Did. 15. c. 2. I think
this is expressly a full Approbation, not without excepting any part only, but
excluding all such exceptions. And the like Approbation of Gelasius in the
Roman Council is cited there also in the Decrees, ibid. page 33.

I did also before instance the sixth General Council against you, approved by
Pope Adrian in his Epistle to Tharasius in the second Nicene Council.

And indeed it is no hard matter to prove you condemned by your own Popes also.
If you could but understand the plainest words in a matter that is against your
opinions and wills, there needed no talk to persuade you that Pope Gregory the
first condemned the Title of Universal Bishop or Patriarch, professing
earnestly that he was the forerunner of Antichrist that would usurp it. But the
plain truth is, as sad experience teaches us, no words of Fathers, Popes or
Councils, much less of Scripture, are intelligible to you, when your wills are
against the matter. But we may truly say of you, that lay all on the will of
the Pope, as Austins Observator, your Lodovicus Vives freely speaks (in
schol. in August. lib. 20. de Civit. Dei, cap. 26.) [Those are taken by them
for Edicts and Councils, which make for them (or are on their side;) the rest
they no more regard then a meeting of women in a workhouse or a washing place.]
Do you understand this language of one of your own (but too honest to have much
company.)

Well; but you have a third Question [By what Authority was she otherwise
reproved?] Answ. By the Authority of that Precept, Levit. 19. 17. and many the
like. By the same Authority that Paul reproved Peter, Gal. 2. and withstood him
to the face: by such Authority as any man may seek to quench a fire in his
neighbors house, or pull a man out of the water that is drowning: or as any
one Pastor may reprove another when he sins. By the same Authority as
Irenaeus rebuked Victor, and the Asian Bishops withstood him, and as Cyprian
and the Council of Carthage reproved Stephen; and the rest aforecited did what
they did. By as good Authority as the Church of Rome condemns the Greek
Church, does the Greek Church and many another condemn the Church of Rome.

3. The next case is about the Roman schism. To your Questions, I answer, 1. To
Question whether Papists be Schismatics, is to question whether Ethiopians be
black. Do you not at this day divide from all the Christian world, save your
selves? Do you not unchurch most of the Christians on earth (O dreadful
presumption! when Christ is so tender of his interest and his servants, and is
bound as it were, by so many promises to save them and not forsake them.) You
ask, what Church you left? and when was it? and whose company? Senseless
Questions. By a Church if you mean the Universal Church, there is but One in
all: and therefore One Universal Church cannot forsake another: but when part
of it forsakes the other part, and arrogateth the title of the whole to
themselves, do you doubt whether this be Schism? If you mean a particular
Church: How can Spain, Italy, France, and many more Kingdoms go out of a
particular Church, that contain so many hundred particular Churches in them? No
more then London can go out of Paul's Church. The Catholic is but One
containing all true Christians on earth: and you have been guilty of a most
horrid Schism, as ever the Church knew. For 1. You have set up a Church in the
Church: An Universal Church in the Universal Church: A new form destructive to
the old. Your Pope as Christ-representative is now an Essential part of it, and
no man is a member of it, that is not a member of the Popes body, and subject
to him. So that even the Antipdes and the poor Abassians that know not whether
the Pope be fish or flesh, or never heard of such a name or thing, must all be
unchristened, unchurched and damned, if you be Judges. Yea and Bellarmine tells
us (which indeed your Church Constitution does infer) that all that are duly
baptized, are interpretatively or implicitly baptized into the Pope.

2. And as you have devised a New Catholic Church: so you hereby cast off and
disown all the Christians of the world that be not of your party: determining
it as de fide, that none of them can be saved; who yet had rather venture on
your Curse and Censure, then into your Heresy and Schism.

3. And hereby you fix your selves in this Schism, and put us (that unfeignedly
long for peace) out of all Hope of ever having Peace with you: because you will
hearken to it on no terms, but that all men become subjects to your usurping
Representative-Christ, which we dare as soon leap into the fire as do. Do you
know now where the Church or Body was that you forsook? It was all over the
world where ever there were any Christians.

Were it not a great Schism, think you, if a few Anabaptists should say, We are
the whole Church, and all others are Heretics or Schismatics? Or was it not a
great Schism of the Donatists to arrogate that title to themselves, and
unchurch so many others? And what Church did they forsake? Augustine tells them
over and over what the Catholic Church was that they withdrew from? even all
true Christians dispersed over the earth: Or that Church which begun at
Jerusalem, and thence diffused it self through the world. But he never blames
them for separating from the Universal Roman Head or Vicar: but from the Church
of Rome, as a conspicuous combination of particular Churches. Optatus and he do
blame them for withdrawing, as also from other Churches.

What if John of Constantinople in prosecution of his title of Universal
Patriarch, had concluded as you, that none in the world are Christ's members but
his members, nor of the Church, but his subjects, had not this been a notorious
schism? Tell us then what Church he had forsaken, and answer your self.

But your last Caution in a parenthesis, does condemn your selves. What I Must
that Church that is true be visible from Christ's time? then as Constantinople,
nor most other were never true Churches (which is false) so Rome it self was
never a true Church (which is false also) Did you think that there was a Church
at Rome in Christ's time? Sure you are not so ignorant. By this Rule there
should be no true Church, but that at Jerusalem, and those in Judaea.

But suppose you had said [since the Apostles time] This also had excluded most
Churches on earth. But if you mean the Universal Church, we grant you easily,
that it has been visible ever since Christ's time: but not always in one place
or Country. Is not the greater part of Christians in the world, whom you
schismatically unchurch, a visible company? Doubtless you know they are. Yea
the Abassines and many Churches that being out of the Roman Empire, did never
so much as submit to your Primacy of Order, nor had you ever any thing to do
with them (more then to own them as Christians) yet now are condemned by your
Arrogance, because they will not begin in the end of the world, to enter into a
new Church, which they nor their Forefathers had ever any dependence on. It
was a shrewd answer of an old woman, that the Emperor of Habassia's Mother gave
to Gonzalus Rodericus the Jesuit, pressing her to be subject to the Pope as
the Vicar of Christ, or else she could not be subject to Christ [Neque ego,
inquit illa, neque mei sancto Petro obedientiam negamus: in eadem nunc sumus
fide, in quae fuimus ab initio: ea si recta non erat, cur per tot aetates ac
secula nemo repertus est, qui nos errrantes commonerent] i. e. We are in the
same Belief as we were from the beginning: If it were not right, why did no man
in so many ages warn us of our error till now?] Mark here a double Argument
coucht against the Pope, One from Tradition, even Apostolical Tradition, (for
Godignus himself says, that no man doubts but Ethiopia received the faith from
the beginning, even from the the Eunuch and St. Matthew.) The other is, that
sure that Pope that cannot in so many ages look after his flock, no not so much
as to send one man to tell them that they erred till about one thousand five
hundred years after Christ, was never intended by Christ to be the Universal
Governor of the world. What! will Christ set any on an Impossible work? Or
make it so necessary to people to obey one that they never so much as hear
from? But what said the Jesuit to the old woman! Why he told her [Non potuisse
Romanum Pontificem, qui totius Christi Ecclesiae pastor est, praeteritis retro
annis, Doctores in Abassiam mittere, eo quod Mahumetani omnia circumdarent, nec
ullum ad ipsos additum relinquerant. Nunc vero aperta jam Maritima ad
Aethiopiam via, id praestare quod nequivit prius] that is, [The Pope of Rome
who is the Pastor of the whole Church of Christ, was not able in the years past
to send Doctors into Habassia, because the Mahomitans compassed all, and left
not any passage to them. But now the seas are open, he can do that which he
could not before] Liter. Gonzal. Roder. in Godign. de Reb. Abass. lib. 2. cap.
18. page 324. A fair answer. As if Christ had set either the Pope, or the
Abassines an impossible task: and appointed a Governor that for so many
hundred years could not govern: or the people must be so many hundred years no
Christians, though they believed in Christ, till the Pope could send to them?
And how should these and all such Countries send Bishops to a General Council?

As your own Canus Loc. Theol. says of the Jesuits; so say I of your New
Church [Vocati estis ad secietatem Jesu Christi, quae sine dubio societas cum
Christi Ecclesia sit, qui titulum sibi illum arrogant, hi videant, an
Haereticorum more penes se Ecclesiam existere mentiantur. i. e. You are called
to the society of Jesus Christ, which society being undoubtedly the Church of
Christ, let them see to it, that arrogate this title to themselves, whether
they do not imitate heretics by a Lying affirmation that the Church is only
with them. lib. 4. c. 2. fol. (mihi) 116.

But we do not hence conclude that all that have lived and dyed in your
profession, have been no members of the Church, because that your Church is
guilty of Heresy, and notoriously of Schism. For we know that millions that
live among you consent not to your usurpations; Nay do not so much as
understand your errors thereabout. And some hold them but Notionally as
uneffectual Opinions: And every one is not a Heretic that holds a point that
is judged Heretical, and which is Heresy in another that holds it in another
sort. And there are errors called Heresies by most, which are not destructive
to the Essentials of Christianity, but only to some Integral part. And there is
a schism that does not unchurch men, as well as a schism that does (of which
this is no place to treat.) But ad hominem, me thinks your own writers put you
hard to it, who conclude (as Bellarmine and many more do, though Alphonsus a
Castro and others be against it) that Heretics and Schismatics are no members
of the Church. And Melch. Canus (Loc. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 2. fol. 117.) says
that [that Heretics are no parts of the Church, is the common conclusion of
all Divines, not only of those that have written of late, but of them also that
by their Antiquity are esteemed the most Noble; This is attested by Cyprian,
Augustine, Gregory, the two Councils of Lateran and Florence: Rightly therefore
did Pope Nicolas define that the Church is a collection of Catholics.] If this
be true, it is an Article of faith: And then Alphonsus a Cast. and all of his
mind are Heretics and lost men. And I pray you note what a case you are in.
Two Approved General Councils have determined that a Heretic is no member of
the Church: But multitudes of your own writers, and Pope Adrian, and many more
of your Popes have judged that a Pope may be a Heretic: and consequently no
member of the Church. And consequently judge what is become of your Church, when
an Essential part of it is no part of the Church.

Your common shift (which Canus ibid. and others fly to) is, that He must be a
judged Heretic before he is dismembered. But 1. Sure that is but for
manifestation to men; for before God he is the same, if men never judge him. 2.
Where the case is notorious, the offender is ipso jure cut off. 3. Then it is
in the Popes Power to let whole millions of Heretics to be still parts of the
Church. And so the world shall be Christians or no Christians as he please: and
why may he not let Turks and Infidels on the same grounds be parts of the
Church? For he may forbear to judge them, if that will serve. 4. Then all the
Christians in the world that the Pope has not yet judged and cast out, are
members of the Church: And then millions and millions are of the Church that
never were subjects of the Pope. If you say, It is enough that there is a
General condemnation of all that are guilty as they are: I answer, then it is
enough to cut off a Pope, that there was a General condemnation against such as
he.

5. But if all this satisfy you not, yet I told you before, that two or three
Councils and three Popes did all judge Pope Honorius guilty of Heresy (and
consequently both Popes and General Councils have judged that a Pope may be an
Heretic) therefore you have been judged Heretical in your Head, which is an
essential part of your Church.

And thus I have showed you what is the schism of the Church of Rome, which
being but a part, has attempted to cut off all the rest, and so has made a
new pretended Catholic Church: As a part of the Old Church which consists of
all Christians united in Christ, we confess all those of you, still to be a
part, that destroy not this Christianity: But as you are new gathered to a
Christ-Representative, or Vicar General, we deny you to be any Church of
Christ. If you be Church members or saved, it must be as Christians; but never
as Papists. For a Papist may be a Christian, but not as a Papist.

And if yet you cannot see the Church that you separate from, open your eyes
and look into much of Europe, and all over Asia almost where are any
Christians: look into Armenia, Palestine, Egypt, Ethiopia, and many other
Countries, and you shall find that you are but a smaller part of the Church. If
you will not believe what I have before proved of this, hear what your own say.
Anton. Marinarins in the Council of Trent complains [that the Church is shut
up in the Corners of Europe, and yet Domestic enemies arise, that waste this
portion shut up in a corner.]

Sonnius Bishop of Antwerp (in Demonstrat. Relig. Christian. lib. 2. Tract. 5.
c. 3.) says [I pray you what room has the Catholic Church now in the
habitable world? scarce three elnes long in comparison of that vastness which
the Satanical Church does possess.]

If yet you boast that you have the same seat that formerly you had; I answer,
so have the Bishops of Constantinople, Alexandria, and others whom you condemn:
And we say as Gregory Nazianz. Orat. de land. Athanasii [It is a succession of
Godliness that is properly to be esteemed a succession: For he that professes
the same doctrine of faith, is also partaker of the same throne; But he that
embraces the contrary belief, ought to be judged an adversary, though he be in
the throne. This indeed has the name of succession; but the other has the
Thing it self, and the Truth] And he next adds such words as utterly break
your succession in pieces: saying [For he that breaks in by force (as
abundance of Popes did) is not to be esteemed a successor; but rather he that
suffers force: nor he that breaks the Laws: but he that is chosen in manner
agreeable to the Laws: nor he that holds contrary tenets; but he that is
endued with the same faith: Unless any man will call him a Successor, as we say
a sickness succeeds health; or darkness succeeds light, and a strom
succeeds a calm, (or madness or distraction) succeeds prudence] Thus Nazianz.
page 377.

We conclude therefore with one of your own (Lyra Glos. in Math. 16.) [Because
many Princes and chief Priests (or Popes) and other inferiors, have been found
to Apostatize, the Church consists in those persons in whom is the true
knowledge and confession of Faith and Verity] And so much to this empty
Manuscript.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Detect. 27. ANother of their Deceits is this: To charge us with introducing
New Articles of faith or points of Religion, because we contradict the New
Articles which they introduce; and then they require us to prove our doctrines
which are but the Negatives of theirs.

We receive no Doctrines of faith or worship but what was delivered by the
Apostles to the Church: These men bring in abundance of New ones, and say
without proof, that they received them from the Apostles. And because we refuse
to receive their Novelties, they call our Rejections of them [the Doctrines of
our Religion;] and feign us to be the Innovators. And by this device, it is in
the Power of any Heretic to force the Church to take up such as these men call
New points of faith. If a Papist shall say, that besides the Lords Prayer
Christ gave his Disciples another Form, or two, or three, or many; or that he
gave them ten New Commandments not mentioned in the Bible, or that he often
descended after his Ascension and conversed with them, or that there are many
more worlds of men besides this earth; or that Christ instituted twenty
Sacraments, how should we deal with these men, but hy denying their fictions as
sinful Novelty, and rejecting them as corrupt additions to the Faith? And were
this any Novelty in us? And should they bid us prove in the express words of
Scripture or antiquity, our Negative Propositions, [that Christ gave but one
form of prayer, that he did not often descend, that he gave no more Decalogues,
Sacraments, etc.] Is it not a sufficient proof of any of these, that they are
not written: and that no Tradition of them from the Apostles is proved; and
that they that hold the Affirmative, and introduce the Novelty, must prove, and
not we? Our Articles of faith are the same, and not increased, nor any new ones
added: But the Papists come in with a new faith as large as all the Novelties
in the Decretals and the Councils, and these innovations of theirs we reject
Now our Rejections do not increase the Articles of our faith, no more then my
beating a dog out of my house, or keeping out an enemy, or sweeping out the
filth, does enlarge my house, or increase my family They do not take all the
Anathema and Rejections in their own Councils, to be Canons or Articles of
faith.

For example, The Pope has made it an Article of faith, that no Scripture is
to be interpreted but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers. This
wereject, and make it no Article of our faith, but an erroneous Novelty. Do we
hereby make a new Article? because we reject a new one of theirs, (yea a part
of the Oath of their Church made by Pope Pius after the Council of Trent) 1. If
this be an Article, prove it if you can. 2. If it be a Truth, and no Novelty, I
pray you tell us which be Fathers, and which not? and help us to know certainly
when we have all, or the unanimous Consent. And then tell us whether every man
is not forsworn with you that interprets any text of Scripture before he have
read all the Fathers. or any text which six of them never expounded; or any
text which they do not unanimously agree on? And yet (though it be not our
necessary task) we can easily prove to you, that this is a New Article of your
devising. 1. Because else no man must expound any Scripture at all before these
Fathers were born. For how could the Church before them have their unanimous
consent? And 2. Because that otherwise these Fathers themselves wanted an
Article of faith, unless it was an Article to them, that they must expound no
Scripture but by their own Consent. 3. Because these Fathers do few of them
expound all, or half, or the twentieth part of the Scripture. 4. Because they
took liberty to disagree among themselves, and therefore do not unanimously
consent in abundance of particular texts. 5. Because they tell us that they are
fallible, and bid us not take it on their trust. 6. Because the Apostles have
left us no such rule or precept, but much to the contrary. 7. Your own Doctors
(for all their Oath) do commonly charge the Fathers with error and
misexpounding Scripture, as I showed before, Canus and many others charge
Cajetan (a Cardinal and pillar in your Church) with making it his practice to
differ from the Fathers, and choosing expositions purposely for the Novelty;
pro more suo, as his custom: And when he has highly extolled Cajetan: (Loc.
Theol. lib. 7. page 223.) he adds, that [yet his doctrine was defiled with a
Leprosy of errors, by an affection and lust of Curiosity, or confidence on his
wit, expounding Scripture as he list, happily indeed for the most part, but in
some few places more acutely then happily, because he regarded not ancient
Tradition, and was not verst in the reading of the Fathers; and would not learn
from them the Mysteries of the sealed book] And in another place he blames him,
that he always followed the Hebrew and Greek text: And many other Papists by him
and others are blamed for the same faults: Andradius, and more of the later
plead for it. And yet these men are counted members of your Church, that go
against an Article of your new faith and Oath.

So Transubstantiation is one of your New Articles in that Oath. Do we make a
New one now if we reject it? Or need we be put to prove the Negative? And yet
we can easily do it: And Edm. Albertinus (among many others) has done it
unanswerably.

Another of your Articles is, that [it belongs to your Holy Mother the Church
to judge of the true sense of Scripture] And you mean the Roman Church; and
that they must judge of it for all the Christian world. Prove this to be the
Ancient doctrine if you can. If we reject this Novelty, are we Innovators? or
need we prove the Negative? And yet we can do it, and have often done it at
large. Did Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Nyssen, Augustine, Hierom,
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and the rest of the Fathers, send to Rome for the
sense of the Scriptures which they expound, or did they procure the Popes
Approbation before any of them published their Commentaries? You know sure that
they did not.

The like may be said of all the rest of your New Articles, and Practices: We
stand our ground. Some of your Novelties we reject as trifles, some as smaller
errors, and some as greater: but still we keep to our ancient faith, of which
the Scripture is a full and sufficient Rule (as Vincentius Lirinens. ubi supra)
though we are glad of all helps to understand it, we say with Tertullian de
carne Christi, cap. 6. Nihil de eo constat, quia Scriptura non exhibet. -- Non
probant, quia non Scriptum est -- His qui insuper argumentantur nos resistemus.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Detect. 28. ANother of their Deceits is this: They make advantage of our
charitable Judgment of them, and of their uncharitable judgment of us and all
other Christians, to affright and entice people to their sect. They say that we
cannor be saved, nor any that are not of the Roman Church: But we say that a
Papist may be saved: They say that we want abundance of the Articles of faith
that are of necessity to salvation: We say that the Papists hold all that is
necessary to salvation: Luther says that the Kernel of true faith is yet in
the Church of Rome; therefore say they, Let Protestants take the shell. And
hence they make the simple people believe, that even according to our own
Confessions, their Church and way is safer then ours.

I have answered this formerly in my [Safe Religion,] but yet shall here once
more show you the nakedness of this Deceit.

1. The Papists denying the faith and salvation of all other Christians, does
no whit invalidate our faith, nor shake our salvation. Our Religion does not
cease to be true, when ever a peevish adversary will deny it, or accuse it. Men
are in never the more danger of damnation, because a Papist or any other
partial Sectary will tell them that they shall be damned. We believe not that
the Pope has so far the Power of the Keys of Heaven, as that he can keep out
whom he please. We have a promise of salvation from Christ, and then we can
bear the threatening of a Pope. When Bellarmine judges Pope Sixtus damned
himself, its strange that he should have a power before to dispose of Heaven
for others, and shut out whom he pleased, that must be shut out himself. The
Novatians, Donatists, Anabaptists, or any such Sect, that held the substance of
the Christian faith, might have pleaded this Argument as well as the Papists:
for they also have the courage to pass the sentence of damnation upon others,
if that will serve turn: and we have the Charity to say, that some of them may
be saved.

2. If by the Papists own confession, Charity be the life of all the graces or
holy qualities of the soul, and that which above all others proves a man to be
Justified, and in a state of salvation, then judge by this Argument of their
own, whether our charitableness, or their uncharitableness be the better sign:
and whether it be safer to join with the charitable or the uncharitable? yea
with them that are so notoriously uncharitable, as to condemn the far greatest
part of the Church of Christ, merely because they are not Papists.

3. When we say that a Papist may be saved, it is with all these limitations.
1. We say that a Papist as a Christian may be saved, but not as a Papist. As a
man that has the Plague may Live; but not by the Plague. 2. We say that Popery
is a great enemy and hinderance to men's salvation; and therefore that those
among them that are saved, must be saved from Popery, and not by it. 3. We say,
that therefore salvation is a rarer thing among the Papists, then among the
Reformed Catholics: where it is most difficult, it is like to be most rare:
many more of the Orthodox are like to be saved then of the Papists. 4. And we
say, that where Popery prevails against Christianity, and so much mastereth
the heart and life, that the Christian doctrine is not Practically received,
there is no salvation to be had for such without Conversion. Thus is it that we
say a Papist may be saved. And for my part, I will not be the more uncharitable
to them, for fear of giving them advantage. I know Hunnius has written a Book
to prove them no Christians, and Perkins has written another to prove, that a
Papist cannot go beyond a Reprobate: and I must needs say so too, of all those
in whom Popery is predominant practically, and overcomes Christianity. But yet
I doubt not, but God has thousands among them that shall be saved: partly of
the common people that are forced to forbear contradicting the Priests; and
that understand not, or receive not all the mysteries of their deceit: and
partly among the Friars and Jesuits, where some of them take in the venom but
speculatively: or not predominantly and practically give themselves to
Mortification and an holy Life: though I have known none such, yet when I read
the writings of Gerson, Kempis, Thaulerus, Ferus, Barbanson, Benedictus Anglus,
the Life of Mounsieur de Renty, and such others (though I see in some much of
error, and mere affectation, yet) I am easily persuaded to believe, that they
had the spirit of God, and that there are many more such among them. But I
should be sorry if Holiness were not much more common among us, and freer from
the mixtures of error and affectation.

4. And for our saying that they have the Kernel, and so much as is necessary
to salvation, it is true; but it is the same Kernel that we hold: and we have
it undefiled and unpoysoned, and the Papists mix it with the venom of their
Errors. He that has all things in his meat and drink that I have in mine, may
yet make it worse then mine, if he will put dung or poison in it. When you have
all things necessary in a precious Antidote or other Medicine, you may soon
mar all, by putting in more then all, as the Papists do.

The plain truth is, the Papists and Reformed Catholics are both Christians,
and Christianity is enough to save them that mar it not, but keep it
practically and predominantly: even as a man that takes poison, and he that
takes none, are both of them men: and he that takes the poison may be said to
have all the same parts and members as the other; and yet not be so likely to
live, as he that lets it alone: And I cannot say but many that take it may
recover: and if you ask me Which be they? I say, All those that timely cast it
up again, or else whose strength of Nature prevails against it, and keeps
it from mastering the Heart or vital Powers, shall be recovered and live: but
those in whom the poison prevails and is predominant, shall die. So all those
Papists that so receive the Errors of Popery, as either to cast them up again;
or that they are not predominant to the subduing of the power of Christian
Faith and Holiness, (by keeping them from being sincere, and practical, and
predominant) these shall be saved, but not the rest.

Now if upon these grounds, any man shall think that Popery is the safer way,
because we say, that they have all that is necessary to salvation (objectively
in their Creed) and that a Papist may be saved; upon the same terms that man
may be persuaded that it is safest taking poison, because that he has all the
parts of a man that takes it, and possibly nature may prevail, and he may live.
But yet I shall choose to let it alone.

5. The same Papists that say, that a Protestant cannot be saved, do yet
maintain that an Infidel may be saved, or one that believes not the very
Articles of the Christian faith. You will think this strange. But I will a
little insist on the proof of it, to these uses. 1. That you may see, that
their censures proceed from mere design or partiality. 2. That you may see,
that they make believing in the Pope to be more necessary then believing in
Christ, or in the Holy Ghost. 3. That you may see, how holy their Church is
that admits of Infidels. 4. That you may see, on how fair grounds they deny,
that we may be one Catholic Church with the Fathers, Greeks, Egyptians,
Abassines, Armenians, Waldensis, etc. because of some differences; when yet
they themselves can be one Church with Infidels, or such as deny the Articles
of the Creed, or at least believe them not. 5. And that you may see, how well
their Religion hangs together, and also how well they are agreed among
themselves, even about the essentials of Christianity it self, whether they be
of Necessity to salvation or not.

I before cited the words of Albertinus the Jesuit. I shall now give you many
more, and more fully, which Frans. a Sancta Clara has gathered to my hands in
his Deus, Natura, Gratia, Problem. 15. and 16. page 109 etc.

And 1. page 110. he tells us himself that [the Doctors commonly teach, that a
just and probable ignorance ought to excuse: and that it is probable, when one
has a probable foundation (or ground) as a Countryman, when he believes that
a thing is lawful, drawn by the Testimony of his Parish Priest or Parents: or
when a man seeing reasons that are probable on both sides, does choose those
which seem to him the more probable, which yet indeed are against the truth, to
which he is otherwise well affected: in this case he erreth without fault,
though he err against the truth, and so labor of the contrary ignorance]
[Hither is it to be reduced, when the Articles of Faith are not propounded in a
due manner, as by frivolous reasons, or by impious men: for then to believe,
were an act of imprudence, says Aquin. 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 4.]

So that if the truth of Scripture be so propounded as to seem most improbable,
it is no sin to disbelieve it: and if such are excused, as by a Parent or
Parish Priest are seduced, and that have not a due proposal of the Truth, then
it must follow, that the Heathens and Infidels are innocent, that never had
Christ proposed any way to them, and by their Parents have been taught
Mahometanism, or Paganism. But what if I can prove, that even the want of a due
proposal is a punishment for their sin? and that they ought themselves to seek
after the truth? and that it is long of their own sins that necessary truths do
seem improbable to them? will sin excuse sin?

And page 111. he tells us, [That as to the Ignorance of things necessary as
means (to salvation) the Doctors differ; for Soto 4. d. 5. q. 5. and l.
denatur. and great. c. 12. And Vega l 6. c. 20. sup. Trid. will have no more
explicit faith required now in the Law of Grace, then in the Law of Nature.
Yea Vega loco citato, and Gab. 2. d. 21. qu. 2. art. 3. and 3. d. 21. qu. 3.
think that in the Law of Nature, and in cases in the Law of Grace, a man may be
saved with only Natural Knowledge, and that the habit of faith is not required.
And Horantius (being of the contrary opinion) says, that they are men of great
name that are against him, whose gravity and great and painful studies moved
him, not to condemn them of heresy, in a doubtful matter, not yet judged] (O
happy Rome that has a judge that can put an end to all their controversies!
And yet cannot determine whether it be Necessary to salvation to be a
Christian!)

[Yea (says S. Clara) Alvarez de Auxil. disp. 56. with others, seems to hold
that to Justification is not required the knowledge of a supernatural object at
all. Other say that both to Grace and to Glory an explicit faith in Christ is
necessary, as Bonavent. 3. d. 25. and others. Others say that to salvation at
least an explicit faith in the Gospel, or Christ is required, though not to
Grace or Justification. And this is the commoner in the Schools, as Herera
declares, and follows it.]

And for Scotus S. Clara says [I take him to be of that opinion that is not
necessary as a Means to Grace or Glory to have an explicit Belief of Christ or
the Gospel. (ut 4. d. 3. q. 4.) he seems at large to prove.]

Page 113. he adds [What is clearer, then that at this day, the Gospel binds
not, where it is not authentically preached; that is, that at this day men may
be saved without an explicit belief of Christ: for in that sense speaks the
Doctor concerning the Jews. And verily what ever my illustrious Master hold
with his Learned Master Herera, I think that this was the Opinion of the Doctor
(Scotus,) and the common one, which also Vega, a faithful Scotist follows;
and Faber 4. d. 3. Petigianis 3. d. 25. q. 1. and of the Thomists Bannes, 22.
q. 2. a. 8. Cano, and others.]

And he gathers it to be the mind of the Council of Trent, Ses. 6. cap. 4. and
adds page 113. [Its effectually proved by the Doctor, from Joh. 15. If I had
not come and spoke to them, they had not had sin: I know the Dictors of the
contrary opinion answer, that such are not cendemned for the sin of Infidelty
precisely, but for other sins that binder the illumination and special help of
God. But verily the Doctor there argues, that the Jews might by circumcision
be cleansed from Original sin, and saved without the Gospel: and accordingly he
may argue as to all others, to whom the Gospel is not authentically promulgate:
Else his reason would not hold. And our most grave Corduba l. 2. qu. Theol. q.
5. subscribes to this opinion, saying -- since the promulgation of the Gospel
an Explicit Belief of Christ is necessary: except with the invincibly
ignorant, to whom an implicit suffices to the life of grace but whether it
suffice to the life of glory, is a problem; but it is more probable that here
also an implicit sufficeth]

Page 114. he adds the consent of Medina re recta in Deum fide, lib. 4. cap.
ult. and of Bradwardine fol. 62. that an Implicit belief of Christ is
sufficient to salvation.

And page 115. he says that this is the way to the end debates of them that
think the Article of the Trinity, of Christ, of the incarnation, etc. are
necessary to salvation, though not to Justification: and answering them, he
says that [such are not formally without the Church.] You see then formally
Insidels are in their Church and may be saved, in his opinion.

And page 116. after a blow at Vellosillus he cites also Victoria Relect. 4 de
Indis. and Richard. de Med. Villa, 3. 25. art. 3. qu. 1. and others for this
opinion: And tells you what his Implicit faith is [to believe as the Church
believes.]

And page 118. he answers from Scotus the Question, Whether such persons may
hold the contrary error to the truth that they are ignorant of: and says, No,
(out of Scotus:) while it is preached but in some one place, till he know it to
be believed as a truth by the Church, and then he must firmly adhere to it.
Which the charitable Friar applies to England as excusable for not believing
some of their Articles. And he cites Petigianis saying, [If a simple old woman
shall hear a false opinion from a false Prophet, (as that the substance of the
bread remains with Christ's body in the Eucharist) and believe it: does she sin
because of this? No: This were too hard and cruel to affirm.]

Page 119. he cites Angles, and agrees with him, [that such as have no
knowledge of these things to stir them up, are not bound so much as to seek
information.]

And page 120. he cites Vega lib. 6. cap. 18. saying that as [Ignorance purae
negationis about many Articles of faith, may be without fault: so there is the
same reason of Ignorance pravae dispositionis.] Which he maintains against
Gerson and Hugo. And S. Clara adds of his own [To speak my sense freely, I
think that the common people committing themselves to the instruction of the
Pastors, trusting their knowledge and goodness, if they be deceived, it shall
be accounted Invincible Ignorance, or probable at least: So Herera: which
excuses from fault. Yea some Doctors give so much to the Instruction of
Doctors, on whom the care of the flock lies, that if they teach hic and nunc
that God would be hated, that a rude Parishoner is bound to believe them.]

And so page 121. concludes that he hops many of us are saved.

Page 122. he cites the concent of Azorius, To. 1. l. 8. Just. c. 6. and
Corduba again.

And page 123. says [It seems to be the common Opinion of the Schools and
Doctors at this day, that the Laity erring with their Teachers or Pastors, are
altogether excused from all fault: yea by erring thus many ways materially,
they merit, for the act of Christian Obedience, which they owe their teachers,
as Valentia says, Tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 2. page 5. and others, with Angles,
Vasquez, etc.

Page 124, 125. After Cajetan, he cites Zanchez, teaching that those that are
brought up among Heretics are not bound presently to believe, and yet are not
to be accounted Heretics, till they refuse Belief sufficiently propounded to
them -- ] And he cites Alph. a Castro, and Simanchas, Aragon, and Tannerus, and
Faber for the same.

And page 126. he cites Eman: Sa, affirming that even among Catholics many are
excused from the explicit knowledge of the Trinity and Incarnation, specially
if there want a Teacher: For what (says he) shall we say that an infinite
number of Christians, otherwise good people, perish, that scarce know any thing
aright of the Mystery of the Trinity and Incarnation; Yea judge perversely, (or
falsely) of them, if you ask them?] And cites Rozella and Midina of the same
mind. Lastly gives also the judgment of Gr. Valentia fully, for his opinion,
Analys. fid. lib. 2. cap. 3. lit. D.

In the sixteenth Problem page 127. he puts another Question, Whether the Law
of Nature and Decalogue may be unknown without fault? And says that though
Alex. Ales say, No, yet [It is the more common and received Opinion, (citing
Adrian, Corduba, Herera, and alios communiter) that there may be such
invincible ignorance in respect of the Law of Nature and the Decalogue.]

And note for the understanding of all this, that this which they call an
Implicit faith in Christ, is no actual faith in Christ at all. He that only
believes as the Church believes, and knows not that the Church believes in
Christ, in the Resurrection of Christ, etc. has no actual belief in Christ or
the Resurrection at all. Ignoti nulla fides: If I believe that one of you is
true of his word, it does not follow that I actually believe the particular
propositions which I never heard. This which they call an implicit Belief, is
nothing but the explicit actual belief of the Formal Object of Faith, Divine
or Humane, as that God is True, or the Church True and infallible; but it is no
belief at all of the particular material object.

And note that every one in the world that believes that there is a God, must
needs believe that he is no Liar; and so has in God an Implicit belief. Now
if this will save men, without a particular belief in Christ, then Christianity
is not necessary: Every Turk, and Jew, and Infidel that believes in God, may
then be said to have an Implicit faith in Christ, in the Popish language;
because he believes all that God reveals to be true; But if an Implicit
faith in God will not serve, how should an implicit faith in the Church serve;
unless the Church, that is the Pope, be better then God.

See here, whether they make any more of the Christian faith then a mere
shooing horn, to draw and keep men to their side. By a General Council and the
Pope it is determined that no man can be saved out of their Church; as headed
by the Pope: To believe in the Pope is of Necessity to Salvation; but to
believe in Christ, in his Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, is not so. An
Implicit faith in the Pope or Church, yea or erring Doctors may save, and men
may merit by following them in error; but an Implicit faith in God himself
will not save, if we believe not in the Pope. So that if we were Infidels we
might be saved, so we were of the Church of Rome, and believed in the Pope: but
the Holiest Christian that believes explicitly in God, and all the Articles
of the faith, cannot be saved, if he believe not in the Pope. Do you think they
believe these Doctrines themselves? or rather frame them to the building of
their Kingdom?

And what a wonder is it that Learned Doctors see not their own contradiction?
they suppose a man to believe in the Pope, or as the Church believes, and yet
not to believe in Christ! And is not the Church essentially a company of
Christians; the spouse, and body, and school, and Kingdom of Christ? And is not
the Pope essentially the pretended Vicar of Christ? How then can they believe
in Christ's Vicar, or Christ's School, or Kingdom, or followers, before they
believe in Christ himself?

And by all this you may perceive the Holiness of the Roman Church, and the
nature of that Discipline or Church Government that all the world must needs
submit to, or be damned. Even such as takes in Infidels and all, and lays the
Church as common to the world, for as many as will but believe in the Pope and
Clergy.

You see here also another mystery opened: that a man may have enough to
Justify him, that yet will not save him: For most of them are here said to
hold that a man may be justified without an explicit faith in Christ, or that
the knowledge of Christ is not necessary to his Justification, but to his
salvation it is (Though the other half say, that its necessary to neither) And
if a man die in a Justified State, must he be condemned? when Paul says, Romans
8. 30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified.

You see also here what their Baptism does, that can ex opere operato
infallibly put away the sins of all these Infidels, and so the Eucharist, etc.
And yet they must not be saved for all that their sins are all done away. O
what a Maze is the Romish Divinity! And you see how well they are agreed about
these fundamentals, when half of them think that an Actual belief in Christ is
necessary to salvation, and not to Justification; and others that its necessary
to both: and a great part that its necessary to neither. And you see here the
benefit of having an Infallible Living judge of controversies, and expounder of
Scriptures: and how admirably he has ended all their differences.

And again I say, If formally these Unbelievers are in their Catholic Church,
they shall give us leave to say that the Greeks and other Eastern and Southern
Christians are in the same Catholic Church as we are, when we differ not so
much.

And when they have made the Non-belief of Articles of the faith consistent
with salvation, they will never while they breath be able to confute him that
on the same grounds affirms the contrary belief consistent with salvation, in
case of the same want of teaching and sufficient means.

And by this time I hope you see of how small moment the Popish Censures are,
when they judge that a Protestant cannot be saved.

Its true that S. Clara here judges otherwise: but 1. Its said his Book was
burnt or condemned at Rome for it. 2. He allows Infidels as much. 3. And he
proves himself a Heretic by it at Rome; seeing a General Council and Pope
have determined the contrary, even that it is necessary to salvation to be a
subject of the Pope of Rome.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Detect. 29. ANother of their Deceits, and I think the most successful of all
the rest is, Their suting their Doctrines, and Government and Worship to the
fleshly humors of the ungodly: by which means the Greatest and the Most are
always like to be on their side: When on the contrary our Doctrine, Discipline
and worship is all so contrary to carnal interest and conceits, that we are
still like to lose the most, if not the greatest, and consequently to be a
persecuted people in the world. This is their unanswerable Argument: By this
means they captivate the Nations to their Tyranny. The Most are every where
almost licentious, sensual, worldly and unsanctified: Wise men and Godly men
are few in comparison of the rest of the world. And it is the multitude
commonly that has the strength, and the Great ones that have the wealth. So
that I confess I take it for a wonder of mercy, that they are not Lords in
every Country, and that the Reformed Catholics be not used every where as
they be in Spain and Italy. For where they have but opportunity to show
themselves, the Principles and Practices of the Papists are such, as will be
most likely to win the Rabble rout to them, and make them Masters of the
multitude, and of all except a few believing Heavenly persons: (For the flock
is little that must have the Kingdom.) And then, when they have got the
multitude thus to follow them, and club'd the rest into prisons, or burned them
in the flames, they reckon of this as one of the surest Evidences that they are
the Catholic Church, because forsooth they are the greater number (in the
Countries where they have advantage,) and it is but a few whom they were able
to persecute or burn as Heretics that were against them. The very Argument of
the Jews against Christ and his Disciples.

The Reasons why they have not by this Policy won the Christian world to their
side, are (under God, the great Defender of the innocent) these four; 1.
Because in the Eastern and Southern Churches they have not had opportunity to
lay their snares, as they have had here in the West: And also those Churches
have too many corruptions and neglects at home for the gratifying of the worser
sort. 2. Because God has been pleased in some places so to bless the
endeavors of the smaller part, as to enable them against the multitude to
preserve some liberty. 3. Because God has sometime given Wise and Godly
Princes to the people, that will not be cheated with the Popular deceits. 4.
And principally because that the Papal Tyranny is directly contrary to Princes
Rights, so that its only those that are blinded by ignorance, or strengthened
by an extraordinary league with Rome, or forced by the multitude of Popish
subjects and neighbors, that put their necks into the Romish yoke. For what by
the Popes pretended Power in temporals, at least in ordine ad spiritualia, and
what by his excommunicating Princes, and his pretended power to depose them and
give their kingdoms to another, and to absolve their subjects from their oaths
and fidelity, (which is an Article of their faith, agreed on by the Pope and
General Council, Later. sub. Innoc. 3. cap. 3.) and what by his exempting the
Clergy from their Princes Power, and what by the pilling their Countries for
money, and what by their doctrine and practices of murdering Princes that are
not of their mind, by these and many other Evidences, they have awakened many
of the Princes of the earth to look about them, and consequently to befriend
the Truth against these Tyrannous Usurpers. Had it not been for these helps
under God, we had not been like to have a name where they can reach, nor to
have had liberty to breath in the common air.

It would be a voluminous work to show you how all the Doctrines, Government,
and worship of the Papists is suited to the humor of the sensual multitude, and
fitted to take with ungodly men. I shall but instance in twenty particulars
(which are far from all.)

1. The Reformed Catholics hold, that none should be taken into the Church by
Baptism, unless themselves, or their Parents, if they be Infants, do make
Profession of the Christian faith, and of an holy life, for the time to come,
and seem to understand what they say and do, and be serious in it; which
exasperateth the grossly ignorant and ungodly, when we deny them this Privilege
of Believers. But the Papists admit of the ignorant, ungodly, and such as
believe not explicitly in Christ, as you heard even now; and so please the
people, and fill their Church.

2. The Orthodox hold, that Baptism gives Remission of sin to none but true
believers and their seed. The Papists persuade many millions more, that all
their sins are not only pardoned, but actually abolished ex opere operato, in
their Baptism, which is comfortable News to such ungodly souls.

3. The Protestants say, that Original sin lives after Baptism in some degree;
though it reign not, or condemn not those that are true believers; and that
Concupiscence, that is, all inordinacy of the sensual appetite, or inordinate
inclination to sensual objects is a sin. The Papists tell them that when once
they are baptized, there is no such thing in them as Original sin, and that
Concupiscence is no sin at all.

4. The Orthodox hold, that none are to be admitted to the Eucharist and
Communion of the Church therein, but those that believe actually (or profess so
to do) the Articles of the faith, and understand the nature of the Sacrament,
and live according to the Laws of Christ. But the Papists give it to all, and
drive men to the Sacrament; so that Albaspinaeus before cited, says, he knows
not whether ever any one was kept away in his age.

5. The Protestants hold, that men are not to be let alone in scandalous sin,
but admonished privately, and then openly before the Church, and if yet they
Repent not, and Reform not, to be cast out; and not to be absolved or
readmitted, without a Public Confession and Penitence answerable to the sin:
And this wicked people hate at the very heart, and will not endure. But the
Papists have got a device to please them by Auricular secret Confession to a
Priest, where if he will but confess and sin, and sin and confess again, he may
have a pardon of course without any open shame or true Reformation. If we durst
but imitate the Papists in this one particular, we should do much to please the
people that are now exasperated: for I find, that almost any of them will
confess in secret that they have sinned, that will not endure the open shame.

6. The Protestants hold, that every sin deserves death, and that every breach
of the Law is such a sin; (though God will not inflict the Punishment on them
that have a pardon) But the Papists tell us of a multitude of sins that are but
venial, that is, sins that deserve pardon, and yet deserve not Hell, and are
indeed no sins, but analogically so called. And they make those to be such
venial sins, which Protestants account abominably gross; as some lying, some
swearing in common talk, some drunkenness, some fornication, and the like, are
with them but venial sins, which are properly no sins (And yet here also they
are by the ears among themselves, some saying that venial sins are properly
sins, and most denying it) Yea all sins that are not deliberated on, are with
them but venial sins. So that if they will but sufficiently brutifie themselves
by suspending the exercise of reason, and will swear, curse, murder, without
deliberation, they are then free from sin and danger. And how easy and
pleasing is this to the ungodly? Those are but Evangelical Counsails with the
Papists, that are the Precepts or Laws of Christ to the Protestants.

7. The Protestants teach men, that it is their duty to seek the understanding
of the holy Scripture, and to meditate in it day and night: but the Papists do
forbid the Common people to read it in a language which they understand, and
save them all that labor that Protestants put them on: Nothing can win the
people more then cherishing them thus in sloth and ignorance.

8. The Protestants say, that a man cannot be justified or saved without an
actual faith in Christ (or being the Infant of a believer Dedicated to Christ)
and that this faith must extend to all things that are Essential to
Christianity. But what the Papists say of the Justification and Salvation of
Infidels, if they believe in the Pope, you heard in their own words in the last
Detection. A comfortable doctrine to the unbelieving world, to whom God has
spoken no such Comfort.

We confess that those that never had the Gospel, are under the Law of nature
or works, and that the penalty of this is such as God can in some cases
dispense with (or else we could not be saved by Christ) and so that all Pagans
are not under the Peremptory undispensable threatening of the Gospel against
final Privative unbelievers: But yet, though God may pardon some of these, he
has made them no promise that he will; and therefore they can have no positive
hope grounded on a promise; nor can any man say, that God will save any of
them, or that he will not; it being certain that they are under the
condemnation of the Law, which God can dispense with, in ways of security to
his Justice and Ends, but uncertain whether he will or not; and therefore is to
be left among his unrevealed things. The true believer is under a certain
promise of salvation. The unbeliever that has had the Gospel, or might have
had it and would not, is under the Gospel sentence of damnation, which is
certain and irreversible, if he die in that Condition. The negative unbeliever
that never had or could have the Gospel, is under the Condemning sentence of
the Law (of works or nature,) that is, his sin Deserves eternal death; but
this sentence is not peremptory and indispensable; but yet it is such as God
will not dispense with rashly, but on terms that may secure his Ends and
Justice. This is the true mean between extremes in this weighty point.

9. The Protestants say, that all our best works are imperfect, and the sin
that adhereth to them deserves Gods wrath, according to the Law of works,
though he pardon it by the Law of Grace: and that when we have done all, we are
unprofitable servants, and properly Merit nothing of God for the worth of our
works, or in Commutative Justice. But the Papists take those very works to
Merit heaven, ex Condigno, and (for here they are by the ears again) say some
of them, by the Proportion of the work, and in Commutative Justice, which the
Protestants say, deserve damnation for their sinful imperfections, and
therefore need a pardon through the blood of Christ. Yea they take these works
to be perfect, and the man to be perfect, and say, that by such works as these,
they may Merit for others as well as for themselves. And how easy and pleasing
is this to proud corrupted Nature?

10. The Protestants think, that no Faith Justifies, but that which is
accompanied with unfeigned Love and Resolution for Obedience. But the Papists
make Faith that is separated from Charity, and joined with Attrition, to be
sufficient for admission to the Sacrament, which shall be instead of Love or
Contrition, and so shall put away all sin.

11. The Protestants knowing that God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in
Spirit and truth, do teach people a spiritual way of worship, which Carnal men
are undisposed to, and unacquainted with. But the Papists do accommodate them
by a multitude of Ceremonies, Images, and a Pompous histrionical kind of
worship, which is easy and pleasant to flesh and blood. To have an Image
before them, and Copes, and Ornaments, and abundance of formalities, and to
drop so many Beads, and be saved for saying over so many Ave Mary's, or such
like words; what an easy kind of Religion is this, and how agreeable to flesh
and blood? How much easier is it to say over their offices, then to Love God
above all, and desire after Communion with him in the spirit, and to delight in
him, and to pray in Faith, and heavenly fervor?

12. Protestants tell men of Hellfire, as the remediless punishment of those
sins, which Papists say deserve but a Purgatory: and they have hopes of coming
out of Purgatory; but there is none of coming out of Hell.

13. Protestants tell them of no hope of ease or pardon of sin after this life,
if it be not pardoned here. But Papists tell them, that when they are in
Purgatory, the Pope has power to pardon them, and the saying of so many Masses
for their souls, may ease them, or rid them out; and the Merits of other folks
may deliver them.

14. Protestants tell them, that they must be holy for themselves: but Papists
tell them, that they may hire another man to say their prayers for them, which
may serve turn.

15. The Protestants do ingenuously confess, that they have no way to end all
Controversies in this life, but that we have a sufficient way so far to decide
them as is necessary to the peace of the soul, of the Church, and of the
Commonwealth; but no way for a final absolute Decision, till the day of
Judgment. The Pastors of the Church are to be Judges, so far as they are to
execute: And the Magistrates are to be Judges so far as they must execute: And
every Christian has a judgment of Discerning so far as he is to execute. But
the absolute final judgment is reserved to the last day; when God will fully
end our controversies. But this satisfyeth not men that would have all in hand,
and the sentence past before the Assizes: And therefore the Papists better fit
their humor, and tell them (and they do but tell them) of an End of all their
controversies at hand; of an easy cheap remedy by believing the Infallible
Pope and Council; and so putting an end to all divisions and doubts.

16. The Protestants would have none but seeming Professing Saints in their
Churches: But the Papists Canonize a Saint as a wonder; and shut them up in
Monasteries, and call a few [Religious] that are separated from other
Christians, as Christians formerly were from the world: which brings the people
to think that Holiness and Religion is not necessary to all but to a few
Devotaries that will be better then they are commanded to be.

17. The Protestants bind men to keep their vows, and fidelity to their
Governors: But the Papists tell them that the Pope has Power to free them from
their fidelity, and dispense with their oaths.

18. The Papists teach men to fast: by eating the pleasantest meats: but the
Protestants use a total abstinence while they fast, unless in mere necessity.

19. The main business and administration of Protestant Pastors, is against
that flesh that is predominant in the unregenerate, and therefore must needs be
distastefull to the multitude of the ungodly. Our preaching is to open men's sin
and misery, and cause them to perceive their lost condition, and so to reveal
to them a crucified Christ, and then to set them on the holy selfdenying
heavenly life that Christ has prescribed them. And to speak terror to the
rebellious, and to cast the obstinate out of our communion, and to comfort none
as the heirs of heaven, either in life or at death, but only the truly
sanctified and renewed souls. But for the Papists, their Preaching in most
places is but seldom; but they have a Mass in Latin: And as the old saying
is, [The Mass does not bite.] It galleth not a guilty conscience to see a Mass,
and here a many of Prayers which he understands not: And when they do preach,
when they should show wicked men their misery, they flatter and deceive them
too often by their false doctrine: They cannot humble them in the sense of
their Original sin and Misery, for that they tell them was quite extinct and
done away in Baptism: And for their following sins, Absolution upon their
customary confessions, has done away all the guilt at least: so that here is
no Misery for the Miserable souls to see: but like a Constables presentment at
a Sessions, an Omnia been: Unless perhaps some gross actual sin be apparent
among them: and then they shall have an Oration against it, to drive them to
auricular confession, and to receive the Body of Christ, and be Absolved. And
so do they by Ceremonies and Sacraments ex opere operato quiet the Consciences
of unsanctified men, and humor them in all their rites and customs, and at
last curn them to Heaven or Purgatory with an Absolution, and Extreme Unction.
And how pleasing a Religion this is to the ungodly people, those Ministers can
tell, that see the rage of such, against those that deny them even better Forms
and Ceremonies when they desire them; to pacify their Consciences instead of
real Holiness and Obedience.

20. Lastly, how the Jesuits have fitted their whole frame of Moral doctrine
and Case Divinity to humor the unconscionable, Montaltus the Jansenist will
fully show you through the whole (forecited) Mystery of Jesuitism. Those that
would escape any worldly trouble or danger, the Jesuits have a help at hand
for, even their doctrine of Equivocation, and Mental reservation (which makes
the Popes Dispensation with oaths and promises needless.) What accommodations
they have for him that has a mind to Murder his adversary, to calumniate
another, to take Use without Usury, to forbear restoring illgotten goods, to
commit fornication, to rob another, and many the like, you may see in their own
words cited in the said Book. Yea what comfort they have for a man that loves
not God, so he will not hate him. Trust not my report, but read the Book; for
its worth the reading.

So that we see the advantage that the Papists have to sweep away the vicious
ignorant multitude, and then to boast that they are the Catholics, and we but
Schismatics, because they are the greater part: and then they are armed also
by the Multitude, to oppress us by their violence.

Now what remedy to use against this Fraud, I cannot tell, but only to deal
plainly and faithfully, though it do displease, and to administer Gods
Ordinances as he prescribes, though never so distastefull to flesh and blood;
and so to commit our selves to God, and trust him with his Church and cause,
who is able to preserve it, and is most engaged to appear for us when we lay
all upon him, and have none to trust but himself alone. Let us not hearken in
this case to flesh and blood that would advise us to remit the reins of
Discipline, and to bend our Administrations to some pleasing compliance with
carnal minds. We disengage God when thus we begin to shift for our selves out
of his way. But withal we must acquaint those Princes that are faithful to
Christ, how much it is their duty in this case to assist us; not by any cruelty
to the Papists (that I desire not) but only by quieting the ungodly part of our
People in a state of Catechumens, or expectants, or a Learning condition fitted
to their state; and to restrain such in the mean time as would take advantage
of their discontents, to seduce them by pleasing licentious doctrines to their
undoing.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Detect. 30. ANother of their frauds is, by culling out all the harsh,
unhansome passages, or mistakes that they meet with in any Protestant Writers,
and charging all these upon the Protestant Religion, as if they were so many
Articles of our Faith: or at least were the common doctrines of our Churches.

They will not give us leave to do so by them, when yet we have much more
reason for it. For 1. They teach the People that they are bound to believe as
their Teachers bid them: and they reproach us for confessing that we are not in
all points of Doctrine infallible: And yet we still confess this fallibility,
and say in plain terms, that we know but in part. 2. Diverse of their particular
Doctors that we use to cite, are such as the Pope has Canonized for Saints:
and they tell us that in Canonizing he is infallible: And therefore an
Infallibly Canonized Saint must not be supposed to err in a point of faith. 3.
They boast so much of Unity and Concent among themselves, that we may the
better cite particular Doctors. And yet we think our selves bound to stand to
their own Law in this, and to charge nothing on them as the faith of their
Church but what their Church does own: and therefore while they refuse to stand
to particular Doctors, we will not urge them to it: for its good reason that
all men should be the Professors of their own belief.

But what reason is there then that we may not have the same measure from them
which they expect? We profess to take no man, nor Council of men, for the Lords
of our faith, but for the Helpers of our faith. They tell us, that they know
not where to find our Religion. We tell them it is entirely in the written word
of God, and that we know no other Infallible Rule; because we know no other
Divine Revelation (supposing what in Nature is revealed.) They tell us that,
All Heretics do pretend to Scripture, and therefore this cannot be the Test of
our Religion? I answer, that so all cavillers, and defrauders and extortioners,
may pretend to the Law of the Land, to undo poor men by quirks of wit, or tire
them with vexatious suits: And yet it follows not that we must seek another
Rule of Right, and take the Law for insufficient: And what if Heretics pretend
to Tradition, to General Councils and the Decretals of the Popes (as you know
how frequently they do) Will you yield therefore that these are an infufficient
Rule, or Test of your own Religion? Open your eyes, and judge as you would be
judged.

But I will come to some of the particular Opinions which they charge us with.
And because I know not a more weighty renowned Champion of their cause then
Cardinal Richleiu (then Bishop of Lucion:) I shall take notice of his twelve
great errors which he so vehemently charge on the Reformed Churches, as
contrary to the Scripture. And sure I shall do much to make clean our Churches,
if I fully wipe off all the pretended blots of error, that so wise a man could
charge upon them. In his Defens. contra script. 4. Ministr. Charenton. cap. 2.
page 12. etc. he begins his enumeration thus.

1. [The Scripture says, Jam. 2. that a man is not Justified by Faith only;
but you say, that he is Justified by Faith alone, and by Faith only, which is
found in no place of Scripture: and do you not then resist the Scriptures?]

Answ. 1. We believe both the words of Paul and James. that a man is Justified
by Faith without the Deeds of the Law, and saved through Faith -- not of works,
lest any man should boast, Romans 3. 28. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. and also that a man is
Justified by works, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2 Did not this Learned man know
that we believe all the Bible? why then should he charge us with denying that
which we retain, and publicly read in our Churches as the word of God? Did he
think that we set so much by Luthers, or any man's writings, as by the Bible? 2.
But if he can prove that we understand not these words aright, he should have
evinced it better then by the use of the words [Faith alone] For our Churches
by [Faith alone] do profess openly to mean no more then Paul does by [Faith
without works] And can they find fault with Paul? 3. Indeed we are not all
agreed upon the fittest Notion of the interest of Faith and works in our
Justification: but our difference is more in words and notions then matter, of
which see my Disput. of Justification. 4. And. why do you not quarrel with your
own Cardinal Contarenus de Justif. and others of your own, that join with us in
the doctrine of Justification.

His second Accusation is, [The Scripture says, that we can Love God with all
the heart: you say, that no man can Love God with all the heart, which is no
where read in Scripture: and yet do you not resist the Scriptures?]

Answ. 1. Unprofitable Confusion! we distinguish between Loving God with all
the Heart, as it signifies the sincerity and predominant degree of Love, and
so every true Christian has it: and as it signifies some extraordinary degree
above this mere sincerity; and so some eminent stronger Christians have it, and
as it signifies the highest Degree, which is our duty, and which excludes all
sinful imperfection: And thus we say, that no man actually does Love God
perfectly in this life: nor do we think he speaks like a Christian, that dare
say, Lord I Love thee so much, that I will not be beholden to thee to forgive
the imperfection of my Love, or to help me against any sinful imperfection of
it. Your own Followers whom you admire as the highest Lovers of God, do often
lament the imperfections of their Love (as M. de Renty, for instance, in his
Life.) But now if the question be only of the posse, and not the act, we say,
that the Potentia naturalis is in all: and the Potentia Moralis, which is the
Habit, is in the sanctified: but this Moral Power is not perfect it self, that
is, of the highest degree, and without any sinful imperfection; though yet it
has the perfection of sincerity, and in some, the perfection of an eminent
degree. And will not this content you?

His third Accusation is, [The Scripture says, that the Eucharist is the Body
and Blood of Christ, with the adjunction of those words that signify a true
Body and Blood: you say that it is not Christ's Body and Blood, but only a
figure, sign, and testimony, which the Scripture no where says.]

Answ. 1. The Scripture says not that it is his Body and Blood substantially,
or by Transubstantiation: And we say not, as you feign, that it is not his Body
and Blood, but a figure, etc. For we say, that it is his Body and Blood
Sacramentally and Representatively: as he that personateth a King on some just
account, is called a King; and as in actions of Investiture and Delivery; the
delivering of a Key is the delivering of the House, and the delivery of a twig
and turf, is the delivery of the Land; and the deliverer may say, Take, this is
my House, this is my Land, which I deliver thee. If you be among many Images in
a room, you will not blame him that says, This is Peter, and this is Paul, and
this is the Virgin Mary. 2. The Scripture often calls it Bread after the
Consecration; which you condemn us for: therefore we are taught to call it so.
3. The Scripture says, 1 Cor. 10. 4. [That Rock was Christ] and he says, [I
am the door, John 10. 7. I am the true Vine, John 15. 1.] David says, [I am a
worm and no man, Psalm. 22. 6.] we believe all this. But must we be therefore
reproached, if we say, that David was a man; that the Rock was Christ
typically; that he was a Vine and Door Metaphorically only? And yet these are
as plain as, This is my Body, and This is my Blood.

His fourth Accusation is, [The Scripture says, that Baptism saves us, and
that we are cleansed and regenerate by the washing of water: On the contrary
you say, that Baptism does neither save us, nor regenerate us, but is only to
us a symbol of salvation, ablution, and regeneration, which is no where said in
Scripture.]

Answ. A childish contest about words! we say, that two things go to our full
possession of our state of Regeneration, Justification, and Cleansing: One is
our fundamental Right, which the Promise of the Gospel gives us upon our Heart
consent or Covenant with God: the other is our Solemn Investiture: in regard of
the former, we are Christians, and Regenerate, and Justified before Baptism: In
regard of the later, we are made Christians, regenerate, justified, saved by
Baptism. This we commonly hold, and so never denied what you falsely say we
deny. As a man is made a King by his Coronation, that yet in a sort was one
before; or as Marriage makes them Husband and Wife by public solemnization,
that were fundamentally so before by Private Covenant; or as possession is
given by a Key, a twig and a turf (as I said) of that which a man had right to
before; so are we solemnly invested with those benefits by baptism, which we
had a fundamental Title to before. Do not your own writers confess this of a
man that is Baptized many years after he had Faith and Charity? Do you think
Cornelius and the rest that had the Holy Ghost before Baptism, Act. 10. had not
Justification before? Do you think that Constantine the great was unpardoned,
unregenerate and no Christian till he was Baptized? Or rather would you make
quarrels against your own Confessions?

His fifth Accusation is [Scripture says, that Priests do forgive sin: on the
contrary you say that they do not remit them, but only testify that they are
remitted, which the Scriptures no where say.]

Answ. As if Testification could not be a Remission. We say, that whose sins
the Pastors of the Church remit, they are remitted. Do you not know that these
very words were used to every Presbyter in our Ordination here in England? We
say 1. That Pastors do as Gods Ambassadors, proclaim his General Conditional
Pardon unto all. 2. That they are Gods Ministers to make a particular
Application, and delivery of pardon in Baptism, on supposition that the
Baptized be qualified for pardon. 3. That they are as his Ministers, to make
the same Application by Declaration and Delivery in the Absolution of the
Penitent; on supposition that their penitence be sincere. 4. And as Church
Governors, they may on good considerations sometimes remit some humbling
disgraceful acts that were imposed on the penitent for the testification of his
repentance, and the satisfaction of the Church. And are not these four
concessions enough? Or are you minded to pick quarrels, that your selves and
others may have fuel for the rancour and uncharitableness of your minds?

But indeed we do not think that any man can primarily as the chief Agent
forgive sins; but God must be the first pardoner: Nor that any man can pardon
the sins of the dead, and abate or shorten the pains of the soul in a fire
called Purgatory. Here we leave you.

And verily if the Pope have power to remit but the very temporal punishment,
he is a cruel wretch that will not forgive men, even good men, the torments of
the Gout, and the Stone, and an hundred diseases; nay that will not remit them
to himself, no nor the pains of death, when he is so loath to die: (But I
forgot that the Pope has no body to forgive him, because none above him) He
that connot remit the punishments which we see, and feel, how shall we believe
him (without any Divine Testimony) that he can remit a penalty that he never
saw nor felt, nor no man else, that can be proved.

His sixth Accusation is [Scripture says, If a Virgin marry she sins not:
but you say that the just sin in all works: which Scripture mentions not.]

Answ. 1. Do you believe in your Conscience that the Scripture means that a
Virgin sins not at all in any circumstance or defect in the manner or
Concomitants of her Marriage? Then I pray tell your Nuns so, that if they marry
they sin not. Tell Priests so, that if they marry they sin not. Your own reason
can expect no other sense in the words, but that Marriage, as such, is no sin
to the Virgin. And this we grant: But yet if you think that in this or in any
other work, you see God as apprehensively, and believe as strongly, and
restrain every wandering thought as exactly, and Love God as much as you are
bound to do by the very Law of Nature it self; so that you are perfectly
blameless, and need not be beholden to the blood of Christ, to the Mercy of
God, to the Spirit of Grace, either for the forgiveness of these failings; or
the cure of them, you show then a proud Pharisaical spirit, unacquainted with
it self and with the Gospel. Do you go on and say, Lord I thank thee that I am
not as other men: and I will rather say, Lord be merciful to me a sinner: and
which shall be rather justified, Christ has told us. The streams cannot be
perfectly sinless, till the fountain be so: and [Who can say, I have made my
heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20. 9.] [For there is not a just man
upon earth, that does good, and sins not, Eccl. 7. 20.] Christ tells us
that the fruit will be like the Tree, the actions like the heart: and therefore
an imperfect Heart will have imperfect duties. If you dare say there is no
remnant of sin in your hearts, you have so much of it that hinders you from
seeing it. Humility and self-knowledge would soon end this controversy. We say
not that all our works are sins, that is, either materially forbidden, or done
in wickedness, and from vicious predominant habits; But that the same works
which Materially are good, are tainted with our sinful imperfections, having
not in them that measure of knowledge, faith, love, etc. as we ought to have;
and therefore that we must beg pardon for our imperfections, and fly to the
blood and merits of Christ, through whom God will accept both our works and us,
for all the imperfections, which he pardons to us of his grace.

His seventh Accusation is [Scripture says that there are wicked men and
reprobates, that believe in Christ: But you contend that they believe not, but
have only a shadow of faith: which no Scripture says.]

Answ. Again, a quarrel about the name of faith, unworthy serious men! We say
that Reprobates do believe, and we say that they believe not, taking belief in
different senses. We believe what ever the Scripture says, even that the
Devils believe and tremble: and yet as Believers and Christians are all one, we
are loath to call the Devils Believers and Christians; but you may do it, if
you please. As Belief signifies a bare uneffectuall conviction or superficial
Assent which you call fides informis, so we still confess that the wicked may
believe. But as Belief signifies our Receiving of Christ, and Coming to him,
and being planted into him as his members, and taking him heartily as Christ,
our Lord and Savior, and so becoming Christians and Disciples: as it
signifies such a faith that has the promise of pardon of sin, of Adoption,
and of Glory, so we say that the wicked have but a show or shadow of it. And
this is the sense of the words of Calvin, P. Martyr, Beza, and Danaeus, whom
you cite. And do you not think so your selves? Indeed you know not what to
believe in this, as I have showed in Postscript to my Disput. of Sacraments.

His eighth Accusation is this [Scripture says, that there are some that
believe for a time, and after at another time believe not. You deny that there
are any that believe for a time, and then fall from faith, and that he that
once believes does ever lose that faith, which is not in any Scripture to be
found.]

Answ. It is too light in serious matters, to play thus upon words. 1. We still
maintain that there are some that believe but for a time, and afterward fall
away: but we say it is but with an uneffectual or common assent that they
believe, such as you call fides informis. Your accusation therefore is false.
The semen vitae and faith that Calvin speaks of, in the place which you cite,
is meant only of a saving faith, such as you call fides charitate formata. If
any of you think that faith is called charitate formata, or justifying or
saving faith, only by an extrinsecal denomination, from a concomitant, and that
there is no difference in the faith it self between that of the unjustified and
of the justified, you are mistaken against all reason. Your own Philosophers
frequently maintain that the will (which is the seat of charity) follows the
practical dictates of the Intellect (which is the seat of Assent.) And
therefore according to those Philosophers, a Practical Belief must needs be
accompanied with charity. And those that deny this, do yet maintain that a
powerful clear Assent of the Intellect will infallibly procure the
determination of the Will, though every assent will not, and though it do it
not Necessarily. So that on that account (and in common reason) there must
needs be an intrinsic difference between that Assent which prevails with the
will to determine it self, and that which cannot so prevail: And therefore your
unformed and your formed faith, have some intrinsic difference.

2. the Lutherans that are half the Protestants, do think that justifying faith
may be lost. So that (be it right or wrong) you cannot charge this on them all.

3. The rest which be not of their mind, do hold a brotherly communion with
them; and therefore take not that point to be of so much moment as to break
communion.

4. Are you not at odds among your selves about perseverance? some laying it
first on man's free will, and some with Austin, ascertaining perseverance to the
Elect, because Elect, and laying it on Gods free Gift; and some Jesuits and
School men affirming that the confirmed in Grace are not only certain to
persevere, but that they necessarily believe and are saved, and cannot mortally
sin (strange doctrine for a Jesuit!) Of all this controversy of perseverance,
I desire the Reader to see a few sheets called An Account of my Judgment
hereabout. When I wrote those I knew not whom Alvarez meant (lib. 10. Disp.
104. page 419.. 1. de Auxil.) When he disputed against this sort of men: But
since I find it in his Respons. ad Object. Lib. 2. cap. 9. page 522, etc. Where
he tells us that it is the Jesuit Greg. de Valentia, Tom. 2. disp. 8. q. 3.
punct. 4.. 2. and Tom. 1. d 1. q. 23. punct. 4.. 7. Ubi docet non solum esse
praeelectos ut salventur, sed ut necessario salventur, ac per consequens non
posse peccare Mortaliter, and Necessario persever are in gratia, ac eatenus non
libere, sed necessario salvari.

And also that he meant Alexand. Ales. 3. p. q. 9. Et Almainin 3. d. 11. q. 2.
Qui asserunt confirmatos in Gratia non habere libertatem, etc. Quam sententiam
Medina impugnat. 3. p. q. 27. art. 4.

This is more then Protestants say, And yet will you quarrel?

His ninth Accusation is this [Scripture says, If thou will enter into life,
keep the commandments: You say that there is no need of keeping the
Commandments, and that he that says, it does deny Christ and abolish faith, of
which the Scripture speaks not a word.]

Answ. Still confusion plays your game, and you strive about words. We
distinguish between the keeping of that Law of Works, or Nature, which made
perfect obedience the only condition of Life: and the keeping of the Law of
Moses as such, and the keeping of the Law of Christ. For the two first, we say
that no man can be justified by the works of the Law. Is this a doubt among
Papists, that believe Paul's Epistles? But as for the Law of Christ, as such, we
must endeavor to keep it perfectly (that's necessary necessitate praecepti;)
and must needs keep it sincerely (necessitate medii) if we will be saved. This
all Protestants that ever I spoke with are agreed in: And dare any Papist deny
it? If we be not all (nor you neither) agreed on the sense of that text of
Scripture, yet are we agreed on the doctrine, and yet you quarrel.

His tenth Accusation is [Scripture says, that some that were illuminated and
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, did fall, and crucify again to themselves
the Son of God. But you defend, that whoever is once partaker of the Holy
Ghost, cannot fall from his Grace: which Scripture speaks not.]

Answ. The same again: and a mere untruth! We still maintain that those words
of Scripture are of certain truth. But we distinguish between the common and
the special gifts of the Spirit. The common gifts may be lost: we never denied
it: The special gifts that accompany salvation, some of us judge are never
lost: others of us think are left only by those that are not predestinate, as
Austin thought, and your Dominicans think. And what cause is here of your
quarrel?

His eleventh Accusation is this [Scripture says that God takes away, and
blotteth out our iniquity as a cloud: and puts our iniquities far from us, as
the East is from the West, and makes us as white as snow; You say, that he
takes not away, nor blotteth out our sin, but only does not impute it, and does
not make us white as snow, but leaves in us the fault and uncleaness of sin:
which Scripture no where speaks.]

Answ. This is half falsehood, and half confusion, raked up to make a matter of
quarrel with. 1. Its false that we say, He does not take away, nor blot out our
sin, nor make us white as snow: Do not all Protestants in the world affirm all
this? 2. There are these things here considerable. 1. The Act of sin. 2. The
Habit. 3. The guilt, or obligation to punishment. 4. The culpability, or reatus
culpae. 1. As for the Act, how can you for shame say, that God takes it away,
when it is a transient act that is gone of it self as soon as acted, and has
no existence, as Scotus and all your own take notice. 2. As to the Culpability,
you will not sure for shame say, that God so put away, e. g. David's Adultery,
as to make it reputable as a virtue, or not a vice. 3. As to the Reatus ad
paenam, the full Guilt, we maintain that it is done quite away: and if your
eyes be in your head, you may see that it is in regard of this guilt and
punishment that the Scriptures mentioned by you speak (or principally speak at
least) For I pray you tell us, what else can they mean, when they speak of
actual sins that are past long ago, and have no existence. Learned wranglers!
would you make us believe, that Grace is given to David to put away the Act of
his Murder and Adultery, so that it may be quid praeteritum, and non jam
existens? a thing past and gone, which it is without grace? so that when you
feign us to say, that God takes not away sin, but only not imputes it, you
feign us to make synonymal terms to be of different senses. He takes them away
by not imputing them.

4. But if you speak not of the sense of a particular Text, but of the Matter
in difference, it can be nothing but the habit of sin that you mean, that we
say, that God takes not away. And here you play partly the Calumniators, and
partly the erroneous Pharisees. 1. You Calumniate, in feigning us to deny, that
habitual sin is done away. Because our Divines say, that it is not the work of
mere pardon (which we call Justification) to put it away, therefore you falsely
say, that we hold it is not put away at all: whereas we hold (without one
contradicting vote that ever I read or heard) that all that are Justified, are
Sanctified, Converted, Regenerate, Renewed, and must live an holy life: And
that all their sins are so far destroyed, that they shall not have dominion
over them: that Gross and Wilful sin they forsake, and the least infirmities,
they groan, and pray, and strive against to the last, and then obtain a perfect
conquest. 2. But if you mean, that no degree of habitual or dispositive sin, or
absence of holy qualities remains in the Justified soul, it is a Pharasaical
error, yea worse then a Pharisee durst have owned. And it seems this is your
meaning, by the words of Calvin's which you cite. And dare you say that you have
no sin to resist, or purge, or pardon? Are you in Heaven already? The whole
have no need of the Physician, but the sick: and have you no need of Christ to
heal your soul? would you be no better then you are? O proud souls! and strange
to themselves and the purity of the Law! Has not the Holy Ghost pronounced him
a Liar and Self-deceiver, that says he has no sin, 1 John 1. 8. 10. In many
things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. I shall but recite to you two Canons of a
Council, which if you use the Lords prayer, are fit for you to consider.
Council. Milevit. cont. Pelagianos Can. 7. [Item placuit, ut quicunque dixerit
in Oratione Dominica ideo dicere sanctos, Dimitte nobis Debita nostra, ut non
pro seipsis hoc dicant, quia non est e^ jam necessaria ista, sed pro aliis, qui
sunt in suo populo peccatores, and ideo non dicere unumquemque sanctorum,
Dimitte mihi debita mea; sed Dimitte nobis debita nostra, ut hoc pro aliis
potius quam pro se Justus petere intelligatur, Anathema sit.

Can. 8. Item placuit, ut quicunque verba ipsa Dominicae Orationis, ubi
dicimus, Dimitte nobis debita nostra, ista volunt a Sanctis dici, ut humiliter,
non veraciter hoc dicatur, Anathema fit. Quis enim ferat Ora^tem, and non
hominibus, sed ipsi Domino mentientem, qui labiis sibi dicit dimitti velle, and
Cord dicit, quae sibi dimittantur debita non habere?]

You see here the Council curses all those as intolerable Liars, that say the
Lords prayer, desiring him daily to forgive or remit their sins, and yet think
that they have no sins to forgive, yea or that every Saint has not such sins.
What can a Papist say to this, but by making Councils as void of sense, as they
feign the holy Scriptures to be?

Hus twelfth and last Accusation is this [The Scripture says, that Blessedness
in the Reward, the Prize, the Penny, the wages of Laborers, and the Crown of
Righteousness: you contend that its merely the free gift of God, and not a
Reward, which no Scripture does affirm]

Answ. A mere Calumny, and perverting of Calvin's words, who often says, as we
constantly do, that Eternal life is given as a Reward and Crown of
Righteousness. But we distinguish between the Act of God in his Gospel Promise,
which is a Conditional Deed of Gift of Christ and Life to all that will Accept
them, and the execution of this by Judgment and Glorification. And we say that
it was Antecedenter merely of Gods free Grace that he made such a Deed of Gift
(the blood of Christ being the purchasing cause,) and nothing of our works had
a handin the procurement (Dare you deny this?) But that our Justification in
Judgment, and our Glorification, which are the Execution of the Law of Grace,
do make our works the Reason; not as having merited it ex proportione operis,
or in Commutative Justice, but as having performed the condition of the free
Gift, and so being the persons to whom it does belong. And this is the sense of
Scotus and of one half of the Papists, (for still you are together by the ears)
who say that Merit of Condignity is but ex pacto by virtue of Gods Promise.

And now I leave it to the Conscience of any sober Papist, whether we be guilty
in any one point that this great Cardinal charge us with? And whether Papists
and Protestants were not in a fair way for reconciliation, if we differed not
more in other things then in these?

And here again I must let them know, that Scripture only is the Rule and Test
of our Faith and Religion. Their Polidor Virgil in this speaks truly of us,
saying [They are called Evangelical, because they maintain that no Law is to be
received in matters of Salvation, but what is delivered by Christ or his
Apostles] (so sapless and putid is their scorn of the Evangelium quintum.) If
therefore Luther, Calvin, or any man speak in any word amiss, blame the man
that spoke it for that word; but blame not all, or any others for it, if you
are men. Austin Retracted his own errors, and which of us dare Justify every
word that has fallen from our mouths or pen, before God? How many hundred points
do Schoolmen and Commentators charge on one another as Erroneous, among
yourselves? shall all the errors of the Fathers be charged on the Catholic
Church, or all your writers errors upon yours?

And that we do well to stick to the Holy Scriptures as the sufficient Rule, we
are the more encouraged to think, by the concessions of our adversaries of
greatest Note (as well as by the Testimony of the Scripture it self, and the
concent of the ancient Doctors of the Church, and the unprovedness of of their
pretended additonals.) Among others even this great Cardinal Richlieu says
thus, page 38. [Nos autem nullam aliam, etc. i. e. As for us we put (or assert)
no other Rule but Scripture, neither of another sort, nor total: Yea we say
that it is the Whole Rule of our Salvation: and that on a double account, both
because it contains immediately and formally the sum of our salvation; that
is, all the Articles that are necessary to man's salvation, by necessity of
means (N. B.) and because it mediately contains whatsoever we are bound to
believe, as it sends us to the Church to be instructed by her, of whose
infallibility it certainly confirms us.]

Note here that 1. He grants us that all Articles necessary to our Salvation,
as Means, are immediately and formally in the Scripture: And then surely they
may be saved that believe no more then is in the Scripture: 2. That we are to
believe no Church but that which the Scripture sends us to, and to believe its
infallibility no further then the Scripture does confirm it. And that the
Scripture is our whole and only Rule. O that all Papists would stand to this!
But let them not blame us now for standing to it. Had this Cardinal done no
more by Policy and Power then by Disputing against the Reformation, he might
easily have been dealt with.

CHAP. XL.
Detect. 31. ANother of their frauds is, By ranking the Protestants among the
rabble of Sects and Heresies that are in the world, and then asking ignorant
souls, If you will needs be of any sect, how many are here before you? and what
reason have you rather to be of the Protestants, then of any other?

Answ. Indeed this question is worth the considering by a Papist, or any
sectary; but the true Catholic is quite out of the reach of it. The Church of
Christ is one, and but One. This one Catholic Church contains all the true
Christians in the world. This is the Church that I am a member of, which is far
wider then the Roman Church. The Church that I profess my self a member of,
contains three parts; 1. The most sound and healthful part; and that is the
Reformed Churches. 2. The most unsound in doctrine, though possessed of many
Learned men; and that is the Papists themselves; (not as Papists simply, but as
Christians, though infected with Popery.) 3. The middle part, which is sounder
then the Papists in doctrine, but less learned; and below the Protestants in
both: and that is all the Greeks and other Eastern and Southern Churches that
are no subjects of the Pope. All these, even all true Christians, are members
of the Church that I belong to, though some of them be more sound, and some be
leprous or lamentably polluted. To these I may add many particular lesser
sects, that subvert not the foundation, as some Anabaptists, and diverse others.
And will you ask me now why I will not be of another sect, as well as of the
Protestants? Why, my answer is ready: A Sect divided from the body, I abhor: I
am of no Sect, It is the Unity, Universality and Antiquity of the Church that
are its honorable attributes in my eyes. Protestants that unchurch all the
rest of the world, and count themselves the whole Church of Christ, do in some
sort make themselves a Sect: But where is there any such? I know none such, nor
I hope ever shall do: And therefore I may say that Protestants are no more a
sect, then the Patients in an Hospital that are almost healed, or then the
higher form of Scholars in a school, or then the Merchants or richer sort of
Tradesmen in a City: And such a Sect God grant that I may be of, even one in
the Church that shall be of soundest understanding, and of purest worship, and
of the most careful, holy, honest life; But still I shall acknowledge them of
the lowest form, even them that learn the A. B. C. to be in the same School
with me: And if they (Papists or any others) will disclaim me, that shall not
unchurch me, as long as Christ disclaims me not: Nor shall it provoke me to
disclaim them any further then I see Christ leading me the way. So that the
Papists may see that if they will deny the Church that I am of, they must deny
their own, and all the Christian world.

But how will they answer this themselves? Seriously I profess, that besides
their other errors, it is one of the greatest reasons why I dare not be a
Papist, because then I know I must be a Sectary. What is a Papist but as mere a
sectary as any that retains a name in the Church? They are a company of men
that have set up a Humane Usurping Head or Vice-christ over the Catholic
Church, owning him themselves, and unchurching and condemning all the Church
that will not own him. The Church that I am of is near thrice as big as the
Papists Church is. Theirs is but a piece, and a polluted piece, that would
divide it self from all the rest by condemning them.

And now I would seriously desire any Papist living to resolve the question, If
he will needs be of a sect, and forsake the Universal Church, why of the Popish
sect rather then another? If because it is the greatest, I answer, its less
then the whole. If because it is the purest, it is one of the most impure: If
for Antiquity, it is founded (as Papal) upon Novelty. If because it is the
Richest, their money perish with them that measure the Church and truth of
Christ by the Riches and splendour of this world. For my part I cannot help you
out of this snare.

CHAP. XLI.
Detect. 32. ANother of their juglings is, By working upon the peoples natural
affections, and asking them, Where they think all their forefathers are that
dyed in the communion of the Roman Church? Dare they think they are all damned?
Intimating that its cruelty to say their ancestors are in Hell; and if they say
they be in Heaven, then there is but one way thither, and therefore you must go
the way that they went.

But a weak understanding may easily deal with this kind of Sophistry, if it be
not mastered by affection. For 1. What if we grant that many of our
forefathers that dyed Papists are in Heaven? Does it follow that we must
therefore be Papists? No: because it was not by Popery that they came to
Heaven, but by Christianity. What if many recover and live that eat not only
Earth and Dirt, but Hemlock or Spear-wort, or other poisons; must I therefore
eat them? Or does it follow that there is no other way to health?

2. Our forefathers were all saved that were holy, justified persons, and no
others. But among so many and great impediments as Popery cast in their way, we
have great reason to fear that far fewer of them were saved, then are now among
the Reformed Churches. And must I needs go that difficult way to Heaven,
because that some of them get thither? Must I needs travail a way that is
commonly beset with thieves, because some that go that way do escape them? This
is our case.

3. If this were a good way of Reasoning, then may all the Heathens, Infidels,
Mahometans, use it, that have been educated in darkness. And indeed it is the
Argument which the barbarous Heathens use, when the Gospel is preached to them;
[What think you, say they, is become of our fathers? If they were saved without
the Gospel, so may we.] The story of that Infidel Prince is common, that being
ready to go to the water to be baptized, stepped back, and asked, Where are all
my Ancestors now? And when he was told that they were in Hell, and that the
Christians go to heaven, he told them then he would be no Christian, for he
would go where his Ancestors are.

4. If this be good reasoning, then we may use it much more then you. For we
would ask you, where be all our fore fathers that are dead since the
Reformation? and where be all those that dyed between the Resurrection of
Christ and the appearing of Popery, or the prevailing of it in the world? And
where be all that die in the Eastern and Southern Churches, that are no
subjects of the Pope of Rome? Have we not as little reason to think that all
these millions of men are damned, as to think so of our Popish Ancestors.

5. Why should we be more foolish for our souls then for our bodies? I would
not be poor because my Ancestors were so: Nor would I have the Stone or Gout
because my Ancestors had them: Nor will I say that they are no diseases, for
fear of dishonouring my Ancestors that had them. And why then should I
wilfully lick up any Popish errors, because my Ancestors by the disadvantage
of the times and of their education were cast upon them.

6. It is not our forefathers but God that we must follow: It is he, and not
they, that is the Lord of our faith and of our souls. It will not excuse us in
judgment for disobeying God, to say that our forefathers led us the way; Nor
will it ease us in Hell to suffer with our forefathers. Christ tells us, Luke
16. of a Rich man that in Hell would have had his brethren warned, lest they
should follow him: But these men would have us to follow our forefathers, even
in their sin against God. Whereas the Scriptures constantly make it an
aggravation of a peoples sin, when they follow their fathers in it, and take
not warning by their falls. The Jewish Christians were redeemed from the vain
conversation, received by Tradition from their fathers, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Stephen
tells the Jews, Act. 7. 51, 52. [As your Fathers did, so do yet which of the
Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted?] Christ condemns the Jews for
allowing the deeds of their fathers, Luke 11. 47, 48. Mat. 23. 32. Nay God
asks wicked men where their fathers are, with a clean contrary meaning to
this question of the Papists, [Zach. 1. 4, 5, 6. Turn unto me says the Lord of
Hosts be not as your fathers unto whom the former Prophets have cried, Turn --
your fathers, where are they, and the Prophets, do they live for ever?] Ezekiel.
20. 18, 27, 30. [I said unto their children, -- walk ye not in the Statutes of
your Fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile your selves with
their Idols: I am the Lord your God, walk in my Statutes -- 30. Say unto the
house of Israel, Thus says the Lord God; Are ye polluted after the manner of
your fathers? and commit ye whoredom after their abominations? Jer. 44. 9.
[Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers -- They are not humbled even
to this day.] The 18. of Ezekiel. is almost all of this, that the son that
follows his father in his sins, shall die, and he that takes warning and
avoideth his fathers sins, shall live. A hundred more such texts there are.

7. Our forefathers might be saved that sinned in the dark, and yet we be
damned if we will follow them in the Light, or at least we shall be beaten with
more stripes then they, if both must perish. They had not our means, or
liberty: If they had seen and heard what we have done, many of them would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. Shall we sin wilfully after the
knowledge of the Truth, because our fathers sinned ignorantly for want of
information?

CHAP. XLII.
Detect. 33. ANother of their frauds is, By pretending to a Divine Institution
and Natural excellency of a visible Monarchical Government of the Church. And
so they would derive it from Peter, from Christ yea from Nature, and God the
Author of Nature.

All their writings take this as their strength. I shall at this time tie my
self to Boverius his Cheating Consultation, de Ratione verae fidei, etc. ad
Carolum Principem, intended for the perverting of our late King then in Spain.

In his Part. 1. Reg. 6. he asserteth that [besides Christ the invisible Head
of the Church, there is a necessity that we acknowledge another certain visible
Head subrogate to Christ, and instituted of him, without which none can be a
member of Christ, or any way subsist alive.] (Yet Cardinal Richlieu will not
have the Pope called Another Head.)

He begins his proof with a cheat, as gross as common, even an abuse of
Cyprians words, l. 1. Ep. 3. where Cyprian speaks for the necessity of obeying
One in the Church, meaning a particular Church, (as the whole scope of his
Epistle testifies): And this man would make them simple believe that he speaks
of the Universal Church.

His Reasons proceed thus: First (p. 128. etc.) he tells us, that [the
invisible God thinks meet to Govern the world by visible men.] Answ. And who
denies that Christ also governs his Church by men?

But he concludes hence [Num alia ratione, etc. Shall we believe that Christ
does govern his Church in another way then God governs the whole world?]
Answ. Reader, does not this man give up the cause of the Pope, and say as much
against it fundamentally as a Protestant? Says Boverins [We must not believe
that Christ does govern the Church in another way then God does govern the
world.] But (says common sense and experience) God does not govern the whole
world by any one (or two, or ten) Universal Vice-monarch: Therefore Christ does
not Govern the Church by any one Universal Vice-monarch.

His next Reason is, [Because Christ was a visible Monarch once on earth
himself. And if the Church had need of a visible Monarch then, it has need of
it still.] Answ. 1. Here the Reader may see, that it is to no less then to be
Christ's successor, or a Vice-christ, that the Pope pretends. And then the
Reason, if it were of any worth, would as well prove, that there must be one on
earth still that may give the Holy Ghost immediately, and make Articles of
Faith de novo, and Laws for the Church (with promise of Salvation) and may
appoint new Offices and orders in the whole Church, etc. And why not one also
to live without sin, and to die for our sins, and rise again, and be our
Savior? And why not one to give us his own body and blood in the Sacrament?

2. Christ himself does oppose himself to all terrestrial inhabitans, saying,
[One is your Master, even Christ.] And what then? why [Be not ye called
Masters? But he that is greatest among you, shall be your servant.] And [Be not
ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren,]
Mat. 23. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. where most evidently he shows that neither Peter, or
any of his own Disciples were to be called Masters, as Christ was, nor was any
such to be on earth, and so no Vice-christ; yea that all his Apostles being
Brethren, were not to be Masters one to another, but servants: so that here is
a plain bar put in against any of Peter's Mastership or Headship of the
Universal Church.

3. We do on these and many other Reasons, deny your consequence. It follows
not that we must still have a Christ on earth, because we once had.

4. Christ has chosen another Vicar (though invisible) as Tertullian calls
him: and that is, the Holy Ghost, whom he sent to make such supply as was
necessary, by various gifts proportioned to the several states and members of
the Church.

5. If Christ would have left a Vice-christ upon earth, which should have been
an Essential part, even the Head of his Church; he would doubtless have plainly
expressed it in Scripture, and described his Office and Power, and given him
directions to exercise it, and us directions how to know which is he, and to
obey him: But there is not a word of any such matter in the Scripture, (nor
Antiquity) when yet it is a point (if true) of such unspeakable importance.

6. You might at well feign, that if it were then necessary to have twelve or
thirteen Apostles, it is so still: and if then it was necessary to have the
gift of tongues and miracles, it is so still: which yet the Pope himself is
void of.

7. It is not enough for your silly wit, to say its fit that Christ have a
Successor, therefore he has one: but let him that claims so high an honor
as to be the Vice-christ, produce his Commission, and prove his claim if he
will be believed.

8. Christ is still the visible Head of his Church, seen in Heaven, and as much
seen over all the world, except Judea and Egypt, as ever he was. When he was on
earth, he was not visible at Rome, Spain, Asia, etc. He that is Emperor of the
Turkish Monarchy, perhaps was never personally an hundred miles from
Constantinople. The King of Spain is no visible Monarch in the West Indies. And
if all the world except Judea might be without a Present Christ, then why that
may not as well as the rest, you must give him an account, if you will tie him
to be here resident.

9. And yet if the Pope would usurp no more Power then Christ exercised visibly
on earth, it would not be all so bad as it is or has been. He would not then
divide inheritances, nor be a temporal Prince, nor wear a Triple Crown, nor
keep so glorious a Court and Retinue, nor depose Princes, nor deny them
tribute, nor exempt his Prelates from it, nor from their judgment Seats, nor
absolve their Subjects from their fidelity, etc. nor trouble the world as now
he does: He would not exercise the power of putting any to death: much less
would he set up Inquisitions, to burn poor people for reading the Scriptures,
or no being of his mind.

Page 133. He makes Christ the visible Pope while he was on earth, and tells us
that Promulgating the Gospel, sending Apostles, instituting Sacraments, etc.
were Pontificalia munera, Papal Offices. Answ. And indeed was Christ a Pope?
and is the Pope a Christ? Jesus I know, and Peter and Paul I know: but this
Vice-christ I know not. If indeed the Vice-christ have power to do these Papal
works, to promulgate a new Gospel, to send out Apostles, to institute
Sacraments, etc. as Christ did, let us but know which be the Popes Sacraments,
and which be Christ's; which be the Popes Apostles, and which be Christ's; and
which is the Popes Gospel, and which is Christ's, and we shall use them
accordingly. The Law and Testimony will help us to distinguish them.

Page 134. He comes to prove that Christ has a Successor: and his first proof
is from Mic. 2. Let the Reader peruse it, and judge without any help of mine,
what proof there is that the Pope is a Vice-christ.

The next is in Hosea 1. which speaks of the return of the Israelites from
Captivity. Let the Reader make his best on it for the Pope, for I think it not
worth my labor to confute the Papists impudent perverting such Texts as these.

By the way he tells us (as Card. Richlieu and the rest commonly do) that [its
no dishonor to Christ to have a Deputy, no more then for the King of England
to have a Deputy, or Vice-king in Ireland.] Answ. 1. But our first question is,
Whether de facto such a thing be? Prove that Christ has Commissioned a
Vice-christ, and we will not presume to say that he has dishonored himself.

2. Thought it should not dishonor Christ, it is such a transcendent honor to
man, as we will not believe that any man has, that proves not his claim. It
was no dishonor to the Godhead to be united to the manhood of Christ in
Personal union; but if the Pope say, that the Godhead is thus united to his
manhood, verily I will not believe him.

3. Though we should not have presumed to question Christ if he had done it,
yet we must presume to tell the Pope that he is guilty of dishonouring Christ
by his usurpation. 1. Because he sets up himself as Vice christ, without his
Commission; and takes that to himself, that is, Christ's Prerogative. God says,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased, Hear him] And the Papists say
of the Pope, This is the Vice-christ, Hear him] 2. Because the Power of a King
is more communicable, then the Power of Christ, it being such as is fit for one
mere man as well as for another. But the Power of Christ is such as no mere man
is fit for. The capacity of the Subject is Considerable as Necessary to the
reception of the form of Power. He that is God as well as Man is fit for an
Universal Monarchy, when he that is mere man is not. From whence we argue thus.

If there was never such a thing by Gods institution as a mere man to be the
Christ or Universal Head of the Church, then there is no such thing to be
imagined now: But there never was such a thing: Therefore there is no such --
Christ that was the visible Head was God and Man: when the Pope is so, we will
believe in him as his Successor.

4. It would ruin the Church to have built on so sandy a foundation, and to
have laid so much work on one that is so unable to perform it. Doubtless common
reason tells us, that if God made any one man the Monarch of the whole world
(especially leaving his Commission as obscure, as the Popes is, were it any)
and should not give him a divine or supra-humane strength to execute it, it
would be the confusion of the world. I am not well acquainted with the Power of
Angels; but I hope without dishonouring them, I may suspect, that the due
managing of such an Universal Monarchy is above their abilities: At least I am
confident, it is an honor that their Modesty and Reverence of Christ will not
permit them to own, as the Pope does. If this Vice-christ be not a false
Christ, he may apply that of Heb. 1. [Being made so much better then Angels, as
he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they: For unto which
of the Angels said he at any time] thou art the Successor of Christ, thou art
the Universal Head of the Church? Whether the Pope will be called the Vice-son
of God, the Vice-saviour, and say, [Let all the Angels worship him; sit thou on
my right hand, etc.] I leave to his modesty to consider? But I must profess
here to the Reader, that though my modesty and consciousness of my weakness,
has made me so suspicious, lest I understand not the Apocalips, as to suspend
my judgment, whether the Pope be the Antichrist, the Beast, etc. yet the
reading of their serious immodest arguings, to prove the Pope to be the
Vice-christ on Earth, does exceedingly more increase my suspicion that he is
The Antichrist. For to be Peter's Successor, as a first Apostle, is a
contemptible thing in these men eyes. This is not it that they plead for.
Bellarmine (ubi supr.) expressly tells us, that the Pope succeeds not Peter as
an Apostle. No, it is as a Vice-christ to the whole Church, as Boverius here
professedly maintains. And this they make the Foundation of their Catholic
Church, and the acknowledgement of it Essential to every member of it. Which I
even tremble to read and think of.

Next Boverius comes to his proofs from the New Testament. And those are the
same that I have answered (as Bellarmines) in my [Safe Religion] and are an
hundred times answered by our writers, and therefore the Reader may excuse me,
if I put him to no long trouble about them.

The first is the old [Tues Petrus, and in hanc Petram, etc.] Answ. 1. He does
not say [Thou art Christ, or the Vice-christ, or my Successor, or the Universal
Monarch of the Church: No such words as these. 2. It is Christ himself her that
is called the Rock, and not Peter. q. d. [Thy name is Peter who confessest me,
in allusion to which I tell thee, that I whom thou have confessed am Petra, the
Rock upon which I will build me a Church, which the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against.] As the Apostle says of the spiritual Rock, 1 Cor. 10. That
Rock was Christ.] So may I of this.

3. But if it had been spoken of Peter, it had been no more then is spoken of
the other Apostles, on whom as on a Foundation the Church is said to be built,
Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20.

But what need we more, if we put not out our eyes, then to find in all the New
Testament, that Peter was never called or taken for a Vice-christ by the
Apostles, (unless Secundum quid, as every Ambassador of Christ is that speaks
his message in his stead, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.) and that he never is said to
exercise any Universal Government over the rest of the Apostles, nor so much as
give them a Law, or Convent them before him, or send them out, or do any more
in Ruling them, then they in Ruling him, nor so much as Paul did in rebuking
him to his face for disorderly walking, etc. Gal. 2. Yea when Paul calls them
carnal that sided with Peter, though but in the same over-valuing way as
others did of Apollos and Paul, saying [I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I
am of Cephas,] 1 Cor. 1. 12. He says to them that said [I am of Christ] [Is
Christ divided?] as showing that he was the common Universal Head and Master of
them all. But when he mentions mere men, he has no such word: He says not
[Is Peter divided] But implying all in one, he says [Was Paul crucified for
you, or were ye baptized into the name of Paul?] And [Who then is Paul, and
who is Apollo? (implying also, Who is Peter) but Ministers by whom ye believed
as the Lord gave to every man, 1 Cor. 3. 5.] See 1 Cor. 4 6.

Page 144. Boverius plays his game with Metaphors and Similitudes, and says
[The Church is Christ's Kingdom, an Army, a Sheepfold, a House, a Ship, or Noah's
Ark; and what is a Kingdom without a visible King: or an Army without a Visible
General: or a Flock without a visible Shepherd: or a House without a
Householder: or a Ship without a Pilot?] Answ. 1. The whole earth is Gods
Kingdom! And can he not Govern it without a Visible Monarch? Why then did the
world never hear of such a man? Yea the whole world is the Kingdom of Christ
himself, though not in that special sort as his Church is: For all Power in
heaven and earth is given him, Mat. 28. 18, 19. and for that end he Dyed, Rose
and Revived, that he might be Lord of the Dead and Living, Romans 14. 9. and he
is made Head over all things to the Chruch, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. And has this
Kingdom an Universal Visible Monarch? Yes: the Pope is the man: Long has he
laid claim to it. Princes, you see whose hands your Crowns and Kingdoms are in:
Deceive not your selves, they are the Popes: For certainly they are all
Christ's; and if he be to be believed, he is the Vice-christ, and so succeeds
him in the Monarchy of the world. But then why does not this simple Pope lay
claim to the Empire of Indostan, and Tartarie, and China, and Constantinople,
as well as of these smaller Kingdoms of Europe?

2. And for the Metaphorical title of an Army, I answer, It suffices that it
has an Universal General in Heaven, that can command it twice as well there as
the Pope can on earth, yea and is as Visible to the Antipodes, yea to me, as
ever the Pope was. All the world is Gods Army: But I will not say that the Pope
or any man is General of it (save Christ) nor will I call him, The Lord of
Hosts.

3. And for the Sheepfold of Christ, he ahth appointed particular Shepherds to
watch for the several parts of the flock. But if one man were to look to all
the sheep in the world, he would make such work as the Pope would do with the
sheep of Christ. If you tell us still that Christ is out of sight, I answer, He
is even at hand: he is coming: he will not be long: In the mean time it is the
duty of every Pastor [to feed the flock of God that is among them -- not as
Lords over Gods Heritage (as the Vice-christ would be:) and when the chief
Shepherd does appear, we shall receive the Crown,] 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Peter
never dreamed, poor man, that he was the chief Shepherd himself.

4. For the Metaphor of a Family, I answer, That God can Govern all the
Families in the world: and when the Pope can do so, then all the world shall
acknowledge him the Master of the Family. Till then we have learned that the
whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named of God, and of the
Redeemer-God-and-Man: but not of the Pope of Rome.

5. And for the similitude of a Ship, I answer, One man can Govern a ship of
the common size; but a ship as big as all the world, I think no man but Christ
can govern: And so confident am I in this opinion, that I profess I will not be
in that ship as big as the world which the Pope shall undertake to Govern, if I
do but know how to get out of it.

Page 146. He goes on to tell us, that even the bruits have their Governors,
and instanceth in the Bees. Answ. I am not well acquainted with Irrational
Governors or Governments: but seriously it is no Article of my faith, that one
Be can Govern all the Bees in the world: Nor one Ape all the Apes in the
world. Let it suffice the Pope that every particular Church be a Bee-hive, and
every Hive have its proper Governor.

Next he again tells Prince Charles [that we should not deny that to the Church
which we see is necessary to all humane Societies] Answ. Was this man in his
wits! Have all Societies, or any Society an Universal Humane Governor? Who is
it that is the Universal Chancellor of all the Academics on Earth? Who is it
that is the Ruler of all the Colleges of Physicians in the world? I know what
Schoolmaster we have in our own School here; but I never heard of an Universal
Schoolmaster for all the world; nor for all England: who is the Universal
Governor of all the Companies of Merchants in the world? Or who is the
Universal King?

In the Conclusion he gathers up all into seven reasons, Why the Church should
have a Vice-christ [1. That the militant Church might be like the triumphant,
who have one Invisible Head.] Answ. 1. Christ is visible to the Church in
Heaven. 2. When you have proved that any mere man is Christ, or Head in Heaven,
then we will grant that a mere man shall be Christ and Head on earth. 3. Earth
is not yet fit to be conformed to Heaven in its Government. 4. Is it not the
truest conformity, that Heaven and Earth have one and the same Lord, though
visible to them and not to us, yet ruling us by visible officers? 5. But if
this will not serve, lets have on earth a visible Government: therefore let us
have no Pope that is invisible to almost all the world; but Pastors that are
visible in their particular Churches.

The second Reason is [That the militant Church differ not from it self, but as
each particular Church has one Visible Head or Pastor, so the whole should
have.] Answ. 1. Content, if the Pope can show as good a Commission for the
whole, and be as able to Govern the whole, and will really be present with the
whole, and visible to them. 2. Is the world unlike it self, if all the world
have not one King, as every particular Kingdom has? Or one Schoolmaster, as
every particular School has?

The third Reason is [For preserving Unity.] Answ. 1. And well it is done by
you? And what unity will you keep at the Antipodes? Or in the vast dominions of
Heathen and Mohammedan Princes, where Christians are dispersed, but you come not
near them? 2. We have a better unity already in One God, One Christ, One
Spirit, One Gospel, One Baptism, One Hope, etc. 3. The Mahometans have more
unity then you.

The fourth Reason is [To fulfill the doctrine of the Prophets and Christ.]
Answ. You should have better showed such a doctrine before you had made use of
it as a reason.

The fifth Reason is [That the Christian Church may be like the Jewish] Answ.
When the Christian universal Church is no bigger then the Jewish, that one may
Govern it as well, we will hearken to you: Let the Pope undertake no larger a
Circuit.

The sixth Reason is [That there may be some one Supreme judge to punish
Bishops, and define matters of faith, call Councils, extinguish heresies and
schisms.] Answ. 1. One Christ is enough for the Catholic Church for all these
uses. I find the Articles of says as well defined by Christ, as by the
Vice-christ. I have searched the writings both of Christ and the Vice-christ,
and in my poor judgment there is no comparison between them, nor has the Pope
one jot mended the Scripture. 2. And for Heresies and Schisms, Christ has
extinguished many, but for ought I see the Pope rather increases them. In good
sadness, did God send John the twenty second, alias the twenty third, to
extinguish Heresies, with all those Abominations and all that Infidelity that
was charged on him by a General Council? And was John the thirteenth a Vice
christ to extinguish Heresies by all that diabolical villainy that he was
deposed for by a Council? 3. And for calling Councils, they have learnt more
wit, since Constance and Basil have let them know what Councils mean to do by
them. Unless they can pack up forty or fifty (or what if it were an hundred, or
two hundred) as they did at Trent, to say their lesson, as it was brought to
them from Rome, and to call themselves a General Council for folks to laugh at
them. Is this all that we must have a Vice-Christ for? How many General
Councils did the Pope call for six hundred years after Christ? Tell us without
Lying, and let us see why he was created.

The seventh Reason is [That the Divine Institution of Christ, and the plain
Scripture about Peter's Primacy may take place.] Answ. 1. Where shall a man that
has eyes find your pretended institution? The blind may sooner find it by the
half. 2. Primacy and Monarchy are not all one. And Bellarmine can tell you,
that its one thing to be the first Apostle, and another thing to be the
Vice-christ to the Church Universal. Peter was none such. 3. No nor was he
properly any more the Bishop of Rome then of many another place. Antioch claims
the inheritance by birthright, as Peter's first supposed seat, and Jerusalem
before them both.

Well, Reader thou see now how Babel is built, and what is the strongest
stuff that the learned Spaniards had to assault Prince Charles with: For verily
I have not bawkt their strength: And were it not for the loss of precious time
to you and me, I would quickly thus show you the vanity of abundance more of
their most applauded writings.

CHAP. XLIII.
Detect. 34. ANother of their Devices is, to take nothing as Evidence from
Scripture, but the Letters or express words.

They will not endure to hear of consequences, no nor Synonimal expressions.
Bellarmine himself says (de verb. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 3.) [Convenit inter nos
and adversarios, ex solo literali sensu, peti de bear argumenta efficacia: nam
eum sensum qui ex verbis immediate colligitur, certum est sensum esse spiritus
sancti.] But this may admit a fair interpretation. It was Cardinal Peronius in
his Reply against King James that is judged the deviser of this Deceit: but
Gonterius and Veronius the Jesuits have perfected it. I shall say but little
of it, because it is already detected and refelled by Paul Ferrius 1618. and
Isaaccus Chorinus 1623. and Nic. Vedelius 1628. at large. Yea Vedelius shows,
cap. 6. p. 50. etc. that it was hatched in Germany by the Lutherans for the
defending of Consubstantiation, and from them borrowed by the Revolter Perron.

For our parts, the cunning Sophisters shall find us very Reasonable with them
in this point: but if they be fallen out with Reason it self, there is no way to
please them but by turning bruits. And we will not buy their favor at those
rates.

Our judgment in this point, I shall lay down distinctly, though briefly, as
follows. 1. The Holy Scripture is the Doctrine, Testament and Law of Christ.
And we shall add nothing to it, nor take ought from it. The use of it as a
doctrine, is to inform us of the will of God in the points there written. The
use of it as a Testament, is to signify to us the last will of our Lord
concerning our duty and Salvation. The use of it as a Law, is to appoint us our
Duty and Reward, or Punishment; and to be the Rule of our obedience, and in a
sort, the Rule by which we shall be judged.

2. All Laws are made to Reasonable creatures, and suppose the use of Reason
for the understanding them. To use Reason about the Law, is not to add to the
Law.

3. The subject must have this use of Reason to discern the sense of the Law
that he may obey it. And the judge must Rationally pass the sentence by it.

4. This is the Application of the Law to the fact and person: And though the
fact and person be not in the Law, yet the Application of the Law to the fact
and person is no addition to it. Otherwise to use any such thing would be to
add to it.

5. As the fact is distinct from the Law, so must the sentence of the Judge be,
which results from both.

6. To speak the same sense or thing in equipollent terms, is not to add to the
Law in matter or sense.

7. Yet we maintain the Scripture sufficiency in suo genere, in terms and
sense: So that we shall confess that equipollent words are only Holy Scripture
as to sense, but not as to the terms.

8. But there is no Law but may many ways be broken, and no Doctrine but may
be diverse ways opposed. And therefore though we yield that nothing but the
express words of God are the Scripture, for terms and sense, yet many thousand
words may be against Scripture, that be not there expressly forbidden in terms.

9. The Law of Nature is Gods Law, and the Light of Nature is his Revelation.
And therefore that which the Light of Nature sees immediately in Nature, or
that which it sees from Scripture and Nature compared together, and soundly
concludes from these premises, is truly a revelation from God.

10. The Conclusion follows the more debile of the Premises, in point of
evidence or certainty to us. Where Scripture is the more debile, there the
conclusion is of Scripture faith: but where the fact or Proposition from the
Light of Nature is more debile, there the conclusion is of Natural Evidence:
But in both, of Divine discovery. For there is no Truth and Light but from God
the Father of Lights. This is our judgment herein.

Now for the Papists, you may see their folly thus; 1. If nothing but the bare
words of a Law may be heard in Trials, then all Laws in the world are void and
vain. For the subjects be not all named in them; nor the fact-named: And what
then have witnesses, and jurors, and judges to do? The Promise says, He that
believes shall be saved: But it does not say that Bellarmine or Veronius
believes: Does it follow, that therefore they may make no use of it for the
comforting of their souls in the hopes of Salvation: The Threatening says, that
he that believes not is condemned: But it says not that such or such a man
believes not: should they not therefore fear the threatening?

2. By this trick they would condemn Christ himself also, as adding to the Law
in judgment. He will say to them, I was hungry and ye fed me not, etc. But
where said the Scripture so, that such or such a man fed not Christ? It needs
not: Christ knows the fact without the Scripture. The Scripture is sufficient
to its own use, to be Rule of Obedience and Judgment: but it is not sufficient
to every other use which it was never made for. The Law said to Cain, Thou
shall not murder. But it said not to him, Thou have killed thy brother,
therefore thou shall die. It was the Judges part to deliver this.

3. By this trick they would give a man leave to vent any Blasphemy, or do any
villainy, changing but the name. But they shall find that the Law intended not
bare words, but by words to signify things: And if they do the things
prohibited, or hold the opinions condemned, what ever names or words they
cloth them with, they shall feel the punishment.

4. By this they would leave almost nothing provable by the Scripture, seeing a
Papist or Heretic may put the same into other terms, and then call for the
Proof of that. For example, they may ask where God commands or instituteth
any one of the Sacraments in Scripture? And when we tell them where Baptism and
the Lords Supper were instituted, they may reply, that there is no mention of
Sacraments; and so turn real Controversies into verbal.

5. Yea it seems by this they would make all Translations to be of little use.
And a man might lawfully sin in English, because God for bad it only in Hebrew
and Greek.

6. If this be the way of it, let us remember that they must in Reason stand to
their own Rules. Let them tell us then what Scripture says, that Peter was the
Vicar of Christ, or the Head of the Catholic Church: or the Bishop of Rome, or
that the Pope is his Successor, or that the Pope is the Vice-christ, or
Universal Bishop. Where is there express Scripture for any of this? Yea so much
as Bellarmines Literal sense.

7. And why do not these blind and partial men see, that the same course also
must be taken with their own Laws? And that all their Decretals and Canons are
insufficient, according to these Rules. It Is easy for any Heretic to form up
his Error into other words then those condemned by Pope or Council: And if you
go again to the Pope, and get him to condemn those new expressions, the men in
Mexico may use them long to the detriment of the souls of men, before the
damnatory sentence be brought to them. And when it comes, they can again word
their Heresy anew. The Jansenists in France show how well the Popes decision
of wordy Controversies is understood, and does avail. But really if they will
hold that no part of the Popes Laws oblige but in the literal sense, or that
none offend that violate not the Letter, they will make a great alteration in
their affairs. And perphaps any of their subjects may Blaspheme the Pope
himself in French, Dutch, Irish, English, Slavonian, etc. because he forbids it
only in Latin; For if Translations be not Gods Word, then they are not the
Popes word neither. A pretty crochet for a Jesuit. It is mendacium, and not a
Lie, that the Pope forbids. It is said that a Traitor or Murderer may be
hanged: but it is not said that such or such a man shall be hanged; or that he
was a traitor or murderer.

Their common instance is, [The Scripture no where calls it self the whole word
of God; nor no where tells us which be Canonical Books, etc. and yet these are
Articles of Faith.] Answ. 1. The Scripture does call it self the Word of God,
and signify its own sufficiency, and several Books have particular testimonies
to be Canonical. 2. Though secondarily so far as Scripture affirms its own
Divinity, it be to be believed: yet Primarily, that this is Gods Word, and that
these are the Books, and that they are not corrupted, and that they are all,
etc. are points of knowledge antecedent in order of nature to Divine Belief of
them. There are two great Foundations antecedent to the Matter of Divine Faith.
The one is Gods veracity; that God cannot lie: The other is, His Revelations;
that This is Gods Word: The first is the Formal Object of Faith: The second is
a Necessary Medium between the formal object and the subject; sine quo non,
without which there is no possibility of Believing. The Material object called
the Articles of Faith, presuppose both these, as points of Knowledge, proved to
us by their proper evidence. And that this is All the Word of God, is a mere
Consequence, from the actual Tradition of this much and no more.

To give you an undeniable illustration by instance. Let us enquire which be
the Administering Laws of this Commonwealth. And we shall find that 1. The
Authority of the Lawgivers is none of them, for that is in the Constitution,
before the Administration; and it is the formale objectum of every Law, which
is more noble then the Material object: 2. And the Promulgation of these Laws,
is not it self a Law; but a necessary Medium, sine quo non, to the actual
obligation of the Law. 3. And that there is no other Laws but these, is not a
Law; but a point known by the non-promulgation of more. 4. And that all these
Laws are the same that they pretend to be, and that they are not changed or
depraved since, this is not a Law neither, but a Truth to be proved by Common
Reason, from the Evidences that may be brought from Records, Practice, and
abundance more.

So is it in our Case. 1. That God is True, and the Sovereign Rector, is first
a point to be known by evidence; the one being the formal object of Faith, and
the other the formal object of obedience: and easily proved by Natural Light,
before we come to Scripture. 2. And that this is Gods Revelation, or
Promulgation of his Law, is a point also first to be proved by Reason, not
before we see the Book or hear the Word, but out of the Book or Doctrine it
self, (propria luce) together with the full Historical Evidence, and many other
reasons, which in order of Nature lie before our Obligation fide divina to
believe. So that this is not Primarily an Article of Faith, but somewhat
higher, as being the Necessary Medium of our believing. 3. And that there is no
other Law, or Faith, is not Primarily a Law or Article of Faith, but a Truth
proved by the Non-Revelation or Promulgation of any other to the world. He that
will prove us obliged to believe more, must prove the valid Promulgation or
Revelation of more. 4. And that these Books are the same, and not corrupted, is
not directly and primarily an Article of Faith, but an Historical verity to be
proved as abovesaid. And yet secondarily, Scripture is a witness to all or most
of these, and so they are de fide. But of this I refer the Reader for fuller
satisfaction to my Preface before my second Part of the Saints Rest.

And thus it is manifest, that it is an unreasonable demand of the Papists to
call for express Scripture, for these that are not Articles of Faith in proper
sense.

CHAP. XLIV.
Detect. 35. ONE of their Practical Deceits consists in the choosing of such
persons to dispute with, against whom they find that they have some notable
advantage.

1. Commonly they deal with women and ignorant people in secret, who they know
are not able to gainsay their falsest, silliest reasonings.

2. If they deal with a Minister, it is usually with one that has some at
least of these disadvantages. 1. Either with some young or weak unstudyed man,
that is not verst in their way of Controversy. 2. Or one that is not of so
voluble and plausible a tongue as others. For they know how much the tonguing
and toning of the matter does take with the common people. 3. Or with one that
has a discontented people, that bear him some ill will, and are ready to
hearken to any one that contradicts him. 4. Or else with one that has fixed
upon some unwarrantable notions, and is like to deal with them upon terms that
will not hold. And if they see one hole in a man's way of arguings, they will
turn all the brunt of the Contention upon that, as if the discovery of his
peculiar Error or weakness were the Confutation of his Cause. And none give
them greater advantage here, then those that run into some contrary extreme.
They think to be Orthodox by going as far from Popery as the furthest; About
many notions in the matter of Justification, Certainty of Salvation, the nature
of Faith, the use of Works, etc. they will be sure to go with the furthest. And
a Jesuit will desire no better sport, then to have the baiting of one that
holds any such opinion, as he knows himself easily able to disgrace. One
unsound Opinion or Argument is a great disadvantage to the most learned
Disputant. Most of all the insultings and success of the Papists, is from some
such unsound passages that they pick up from some Writers of our own (as I said
before.) And they set all those together, and tell the world that This is the
Protestant Religion. Just as if I should give the Description of a Nobleman
from all the blemishes that ever I saw in any Nobleman. As if I have seen one
crook-backt, another blind, another lame, another dumb, another deaf, another a
whoremonger, another a drunkard, etc. I should say, that A Nobleman is a
whoremonger, and drunkard, etc. that has neither eyes, nor ears, nor limbs to
bear him, etc. So deal they by Protestants; And what a Character could we give
of Papists on these terms?

But I would entreat all the Ministers of Christ to take heed of giving them
any such advantage. By over-doing, and running too far into contrary extremes,
you will sooner advantage them, and give them the day, then the weakest
Disputants that stand on safer grounds. Inconsiderate heat, and
self-conceitedness, and making a faction of Religion, is it that carries many
into extremes: when Judgment, and Charity, and Experience, are all for
Moderation, and standing on safe ground. A Davenant, a Lud. Crocius, a Camero,
a Dallaeus, etc. will more successfully confute an Arminian, then a Maccovius,
a -- so it is here. The world sees in the Answer of Knot, what an advantage
Chillingworth had by his Principles; when the Jesuit having little but the
reproachful slander of a Socinian name and cause to answer with, has lost the
day, and showed the world how little can be said for Popery.

CHAP. XLV.
Detect. 36. ANother of their Practical frauds is in seeking to Divide the
Protestants among themselves, or to break them into Sects, or poison the
ductile sort with Heresies, and then to draw them to some odious practices, to
cast a disgrace on the Protestant Cause.

In this and such Hellish practices as this, they have been more successful
then in all their Disputations. But whether the Cause be of Heaven or Hell that
must be thus upheld, I leave to the considerate to judge.

What they have done abroad in this way, I leave others to enquire that are
more fit; But we all smart by what they have done at home.

Yet this I may well say, that if their own secular Priests are to be believed,
(as Watson and many more) It is their Jesuits that have set many Nations in
those flames, whose cause the world has not observed. And I may well set down
the words of a Priest of their own, John Brown, aged seventy two, in his
Voluntary Confession to a Committee of Parliament, as it is in Mr. Prins
Introduct. page 202.

Says he [The whole Christian world does acknowledge the prediction which the
University of Paris does foresee in two several Decrees they made Anno 1565.
When the Society of Jesuits did labor to be members of that University: Hoc
genus hominum natus est ad interitum Christianae Reipubliae and subvertionem
literarum. They were the only cause of the troubles which fell out in Muscovie,
when under pretense to reduce the Latin Church, and plant themselves, and
destroy the Greek Church, the poor King Demetrius and his Queen, and those that
followed him from Polonia were all in one night murdered by the monstrous
Usurper of the Crown, and the true progeny rooted out. They were the only cause
that moved the Swedes to take Arms against their lawful King Sigismund, and
chased him to Poland: and neither he nor his successors were ever able to take
possession of Sweden. For the Jesuits intention was to bring in the Romish
Religion, and root out Protestants. They were the only cause that moved the
Polonians to take Arms against the said Sigismund, because they had persuaded
him to marry two sisters, one after the other; both of the house of Austria.
They have been the sole cause of the war entered in Germany since the year one
thousand six hundred and nineteen, as Pope Paulus 15. told the General of their
Order, called Vicelescus, for their avarice, pretending to take all the Church
lands from the Hussites in Bohemia to themselves; which has caused the death
of many thousand by sword, famine and pestilence in Germany. They have been the
cause of civil wars in France, during all which time moving the French King to
take Arms against his own subjects the Protestants, where innumerable people
have lost their lives, as the siege of Rochell and other places will give
sufficient proof. For the Jesuits intentions were to set their society in all
Cities and Towns conquered by the King, and quite to abolish the Protestants.
They were the cause of the murder of the last King of France. They were the
only projectors of the Gunpowder Treason, and their Penitents the actors
thereof. They were the only cause (namely Father Parsons) that incensed the
Pope to send so many fulminate Breves to these Kingdoms, to hinder the Oath of
Allegiance and lawful Obedience to their temporal Prince, that they might
still fish in troubled waters. Their damnable doctrine to destroy and depose
Kings, has been the cause of the Civil wars, likely to befall these Kingdoms,
if God in mercy do not stop it] So far the Popish Priest.

You see here, if their own pens are to be credited, those very Actions of the
Swedes, Germans, French, which they cast as a reproach in the face of the
Protestant; (as you may see in a Book called The Image of the two Churches)
were indeed their own, and to be laid at their own doors. I omit abundance of
better proof, because I will give them the words of none but themselves in this.

How far they were the causes of the old broils in Scotland, Knox, and
Spotswood, and all their later Histories will tell you.

How busy they were in England in Queen Elizabeth's days, the Popes Bulls, and
the many Treacheries committed signify. Even in King James his days, who
wrote against them, they so far prevailed, as to cause him to swear to those
Articles for Toleration of Popery, in order to the Spanish Match, which you may
read in Prins Introduct. page 44, 45. Yea so far as to prevail with King James
before the Lords of his Council to say, that [His Mother suffered Martyrdom in
this Realm for the profession of the Catholic Religion; a Religion which had
been publicly professed for many ages in this Realm, confirmed by many great
and excellent Emperors, and famous in all Ecclesiastical Histories, by an
infinite number of Martyrs, who had sealed it with their blood: that the
Catholics well knew that there was in him a grand affection to the Catholic
Religion in so much that they believed at Rome that he did but dissemble his
Religion to obtain the Crown of England: That now he had maturely considered
the penury and calamities of the Roman Catholics, who were in the number of
his faithful subjects, and was resolved to relieve them; and therefore did
from thenceforth take all his Roman Catholic subjects into his protection,
permitting them the liberty and entire exercise of their Religion, and liberty
to celebrate the Mass with other Divine offices of their Religion without any
inquisition, process or molestation from that day forwards.] And so he goes on
restoring them to their estates, commanding all Officers to hold their hands,
and for what cause so ever it be, not to attempt to grieve or molest the said
Catholics neither in public or private in the liberty of the exercise of
their Religion, upon pain of being reputed guilty of high Treason, etc.] Prin
ubi sup. p. 30. and Mercur. Gal. To. 9. p. 485.

So far prevailed they with Prince Charles our late King, as to cause him to
write that Letter to the Pope which you may read Mercur. Franc. To. 9. An.
1623. p. 509, 510. and in Prins Introduct. p. 38. which I have no mind to
recite: and also they prevailed with him to swear to the Spanish conditions,
and also that he would [permit at all times, that any should freely propose to
him the Arguments of the Catholic Religion, without giving any impediment: and
that he would never directly or indirectly permit any to speak to the Infanta
against the same.]

What a hand the Papists had in the late Innovations, and wars in England, and
Scotland, and Ireland, is too evident. How they designed the reducing of
England to the Pope in the Spanish, and after in the French match, and how in
prosecution of it, they had their Nuntio's here at London, and erected their
houses of Jesuits, Capuchins, and Nuns; how far they instigated the Court and
Prelates to silence, and suspend, and banish Godly Ministers, and to ensnare
them by the bowing to Altars, by the Book for dancing on the Lords days, and
many such things; how far they urged them on against the Scots, I had rather
you would read in Mr. Prins Works of Darkness brought to Light, and
Canterburies Trial, and his Romes Master piece, and his Royal Favorite, then
hear it from me: And if any reader be disaffected to the reciter of it, let
them at least peruse impartially the Evidences produced by him.

It was one of their own Religion, who in remorse of Conscience opened the Plot
in which they were engaged, to Andreas ab Habernfield, Physician to the Queen
of Bohemia, who told it Sr. Will. Boswell, the Kings Agent at Hague; which was
to subvert the Protestant Religion, and set up Popery, and reconcile us to
Rome; and to that end to attempt the perverting of the King, and to engage us
in a war with Scotland, and if the King would not be perverted, then to poison
him.

The Jesuits (of whom four sorts were planted in London, and had built them a
College, having Cardinal Barbarino for their Protector) crept into all
Societies, and acted all parts, (save the peacemakers,) and being a foreseeing
Generation, they looked further before them then the short witted men whom they
over-reacht. When they had by the Countenance of the Queen got so considerable
a strength at the Court, and so much interest in the Prelates, and influence on
all Ecclesiastical affairs, they set afoot the foresaid innovations in worship,
against the Lords Day, etc. and the foresaid persecutions of faithful, yea and
conformable Ministers; and still they went Dilemmatically to work, thinking to
make sure which way ever things went, to effects their ends. They see that
either their first attempt would prevail without opposition or not: If it do,
then the Calvinifts, and Puritan, and Protestant Preachers will be removed, and
the places filled with Arminians, and masked Papists, and ignorant men, unable
to resist them, and ductile worldlings, that will always be on the stronger
side, and their ends will be easily attained. But if there be any Opposition,
Murmuring, Discontents, either it will provoke the Discontented to open Defense
and Resistance, or not: If not, their Discontents will hurt none but
themselves. If it do, then either they will be crushed in the beginning, or able
to bring it to a war. If the first; then we shall have the Day, and this to
boot, that they will lie under the Odium of Rebellion, and be trod the lower,
and be the less able ever to rise: and we shall be able with ease to drive on
the change to a higher degree, in Opposition to so odious a party. But if they
he able to make a war of it, either they will be conquered, or conquer, or make
Peace. The last is most unlikely, because Jealousies and Engagements will
presently be multiplied, so that an apparent necessity will seem to lie on each
party not to trust the other: And the flames are easier to be kept in then
kindled: And if so unlikely a thing should come to pass, yet it must needs be
to our advantage. For we will openly all appear for the King, and so in England
and Ireland we shall be considerable: He will remember that he was helped by us,
and look on the Protestants and Puritans as Rebels, and take his next advantage
against them, or at least be at a greater distance from them then before: For
such a war will never out of his mind, nor will he think himself safe till he
has disabled them from doing the like again. But if one part conquer it will
be the King, or the Puritans (for so the Protestants must now be caled) If the
King prevail, then will the Puritans be totally trod down, and we by whose help
the victory was got, shall certainly be incomparably better then we are, if not
have presently all our will. For our fidelity will be predicated: the Rebels
will be odious: So that their very names will be a scorn, and there will be no
great resistance of us (For says Mr. Middleton in his Letter to the A. B. of
Canterb. in Prins Introduct. p. 142, 143. The Jesuit (at Florence, lately
returned from England, who pretends to have made a strict discovery of the
state of England as it stands for Religion) says, that the Puritans are shrewd
fellows, but those which are counted good Protestants are fair conditioned
honest men, and think they may be saved in any Religion.) But if the Puritans
get the day (which is a most unlikely thing) yet shall we make great advantage
of it; For 1. They will be unsettled and all in pieces, and not know how to
settle the Government: And says the Jesuits Letter, found in the A. B. of
Cant. Study in Prins Introduct. page 89, 90. [Our foundation must be Mutation:
this will cause a Relaxation; which serves as so many violent diseases, as the
Stone, Gout, etc. to the speedy destruction, etc.] 2. We shall necessitate the
Puritan Protestants to keep the King as a Prisoner, or else to put him to
death; If they keep him as a Prisoner, his diligence, and friends, and their
own divisions, will either work his deliverance, and give him the day again by
our help, or at least will keep the State in a continual unsettledness, and
will be an Odium on them. If they cut him off (which we will rather promote,
lest they should make use of his extremities to any advantage) then 1. We shall
procure the Odium of King-killing to fall upon them, which they are wont to
cast upon us and so shall be able to disburden our selves. 2. And we shall have
them all to pieces in distractions. For 3. Either they will then set up a new
King, or the Parliament will keep the power, changing the Government into a
Democracy. The first cannot be done without great concussions, and new wars;
and we shall have opportunity to have a hand in all. And if it be done, it may
be much to our advantage. The second will apparently by factions and
distractions give us footing for continual attempts. But to make all sure, we
will secretly have our party among the Puritans also, that we may be sure to
maintain our Interest which way ever the world go] The event with common reason
and many full discoveries show, that this was the frame of the Papists plot.

And what power and interest they had in the Kings Armies and Counsels in the
wars, is a thing that needs no further discovery. But had they any Interest in
the Councils and Forces of the Parliament? Answ. It will be expected that he
that asserteth any thing in matters of this moment, should prove it by more
then moral evidence of greatest probabilities: and therefore I shall be sparing
in my Assertions: but yet I shall say in general, that though the business
would be troublesome, chargeable and tedious, to call together the Witnesses
that are necessary, yet Witnesses and Evidences may be had, to prove that the
Papists have had more to do in our affairs, then most men are aware of, without
any positive Assertions; therefore I desire them that can see a cause in its
effects, but to follow these streams till they find the Fountain. 1. Whence
came those motions against the Ministry and Churches into our Councils? Whence
was it that so many men of note did call the friends of the Ministry [Priest
ridden fellows] and the Ministers [Iack Presbyters] to teach the Nation to
bring them into scorn? I well know that all this came from Hell. But whether by
the way of Rome. I leave to your inquiry. Yea, whence was it that motions have
been made to pull down all the Ministry at once? Was this by Protestants?

2. Whence came the doctrine contended for by Sir H. V. and others, against the
Power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, and for Universal Liberty in
Religion? I know the Papists are not for such liberty in Spain, or any where,
where they can hinder it: but with all I know, that it is one of their
fundamentals, that such matters belong only to the Pope and Prelates, and
Magistrates must but be their Executioners; and I know that its truly the
Magistrates Power for which the usurping Pope contendeth: and I know that the
Papists are most Zealous for Liberty of Conscience in England, though deadly
enemies to it elsewhere.

3. And whence came the Hiders Body of Divinity, that has infected so many
high and low? How come so many called Seekers to seem to be at a loss; whether
there be any Scripture, Church, or Ministry? or which be they?

4. How came we contrived into a war with Scotland and Holland, when we could
keep Peace with Spain? with them, or us, or both, there was some sorry cause.

5. How came our Armies so corrupted with principles of impiety, Licentiousness
and Anarchy, that so many turned Levellers (to say nothing of all the rest),
and rose up against their Commanders, and were fain to be subdued by force, and
some of them shot to death, and many cashiered? etc.

6. How came it to pass that Papists have been discovered in our Armies, and in
the several parties in the Land?

7. And where are the swarms of the English Jesuits and Friars, that are known
to have emptyed themselves upon us from their Colleges beyond Sea?

8. How came it to pass, that the Petitions of the Protestant Presbyters of
London, and of other Protestants for the Life of the King, could not be heard?
but that the Levelling party carried on their work, till they had set the
foreign and domestic Papists on reproaching the Protestants as King-killers?
and had (though very falsely) turned the odium of that horrid kind of crime
upon the innocent Protestants, which the Papists are known to be most deeply
guilty of: And now in all Nations they make the ignorant people believe, that
the death of that King was the work of the Protestants or Presbyterians, and
the blot of their Religion.

9. Whence came it to pass, that Levelling went on with continued success till
the House of Lords, with the Regal Office was taken down, and an engagement put
(on all those ductile souls that would take it) to be [True to the
Commonwealth, as established without a King or House of Lords?]

10. Whence came it that the Weekly News Books contained the Letters of the
Agents of the Agitators from France, telling us how good men the Jesuits were,
and how agreeable to them in their principles for a Democracy, (which they
vainly call a Republic, as if there were no Commonwealth, but a Democracy)
and telling us what exceeding meet materials for such a Commonwealth the
Jesuits would be. The Agencies of particular men with Jesuits I shall
purposely omit.

11. Whence came it that all the maddest dividing parties had their liberty;
and the reproach and envy was most against the united Ministry? and if the Lord
Protector had not stepped in, they had been likely to be taken down.

12. And whence came it that Sexby, and others, that have been Soldiers in our
Armies, have confederated with Spain to murder the Lord Protector? And whence
came their Jesuitical Treasonable Pamphlets (such as Killing no Murder)
provoking men to take away his life?

Much more may be proposed tending to a discovery, how far the Papists have
crept in among us, and had to do in our affairs. But I think God has yet much
more in season to discover. Truth is the daughter of time.

As concerning the death of the King, I shall not meddle at this time with the
Cause, nor meddle with the Reasons brought for it or against it. But, suppose
as bad of it as you can, the Providence of God has so contrived it, that
nothing but ignorance or blind malice can lay it upon the Protestants,
Episcopal, or Presbyterian, that strove so much against it, and suffered so
much for it as they have done. When many on the other side, charged the Scots,
and the imprisoned Ministers of London, with those that were put to death, for
going too far on the other side, in manifesting their distastes: Of which I
take not on me to be judge, but mention it only as Evidence that clears them
from the deed.

And to vindicate the Protestants openly before all the world, and to all
posterity, from that Fact, it is most publicly known, 1. That both Houses of
Parliament in their Protestations engaged themselves and the Nations, to be
true to the King. 2. That they openly professed to manage their war for King
and Parliament: Not against his Person or Authority, but against Delinquents
that were fled from Justice, and against evil Counselors. 3. That the two
Nations of England and Scotland did in the midst of the wars swear in the
Solemn League and Covenant to he true to the King. 4. That the Committees,
Commanders, Ministers and people through the Land, professed openly to go only
on these terms, as managing but a defensive war against the Kings miscarriages,
but an Offensive against Delinquent subjects. 5. In that it was known that the
Army was quite altered (not only by a new modelling, but) by an intestine
Jesuitical corrupting of multitudes of the Soldiers, before this Odious fact
could be done. 6. And it was known, that the corrupted part of the Army, though
the fewer, did so excel the rest in industry and activity, that thereby they
hindered their opposition. 7. And it is known that the Jesuited part (that
afterward so many of them turned Levellers) did draw into them the Anabaptists,
Libertines, and other Sects, upon a conjunction of Interests, and by many sly
pretenses, especially tying all together by the predicated Liberty for all
Religions. 8. And yet after all this, the world knows they were fain before
they could accomplish it, to Master the City of London, to Master the
Parliament, to imprison and cast out the Members, and to retain but a few that
were partly of their mind, and partly seduced or overawed by them, to join
with them in the work. 9. It is known that before they were put out, and
imprisoned by the Army, the Commons voted the Kings Concessions in the Treaty
to be so far satisfactory, as that they would have proceeded on them toward a
full Agreement. See Mr. Prins large Speech in the House to that end. And if
they had not suddenly been secluded and imprisoned, they had agreed with the
King. 10. And it is well known to all that dwell in England, that before and
since the doing of it, the thing is disowned, distasted and detested by the
main Body of the English Nation, Nobility, Gentlemen, Ministers and people:
Yea, to my knowledge multitudes that are now firm and loyal to the present
Power, supposing it to be set over us by God, (and therefore would abhor the
like practices against them) do yet detest that fact that intervened and made
way to it. So that experience may satisfy all men, that Protestants, even
those called Puritans, were the Enemies, and not the Actors of it. 11. And it
is well known how the Protestant Ministers that had engaged in the war for King
and Parliament, were so great Adversaries to the putting of the King to death,
that they opposed it, and dissuaded from it, and thereby drew the Odium of the
Corrupted part of the Army upon them; and that the London Ministers unanimously
concuered in an Address to the Lord Fairfax to prevent it, and printed their
abhorrence of it, and published it to the world: And that many of them were
imprisoned, and Mr. Love beheaded, and many others put to death, or other
sufferings, for being against these designs, and endeavoring to oppose the
progress of them. 12. And lastly, it is known, that the Kingdom of Scotland
disowned it from first to last, and so far proceeded in opposition to it, and
in adhesion to the ancient line, as cost them the miseries of a grievous war,
and a conquest of their Kingdom. I speak but of the matter of fact that is
known to the world. So that it is against all humane Reason and Equity, that
when we have all sworn to the contrary, and endeavored it, and the Parliament
men of one Kingdom are secluded, and Imprisoned for it, and the other Kingdom
conquered for it, and the Protestants still generally disown it, that yet it
should be charged on the Protestants, or their Religion, that they put to death
their King. This is most unreasonable in justice; especially from those men
that were the causers of it.

I do therefore leave it here to posterity (having been my self a member of the
Army four years, or thereabouts) that it was utterly against the mind and
thoughts of Protestants, and those that they called Puritans, to put the King
to death; the twelve Evidences forementioned are undeniable Arguments that it
was the work of Papists, Libertines, Vanists, and Anabaptists, and that the
Protestants deeply suffered by opposing it; as the face of Scotland and England
sadly testify to this day. And yet (though we have such open Evidence that
this cannot be charged on our Religion or us), I must needs add, that every
wise man sees that the Case it self much differs from the Papists. If the Body
of a Commonwealth, or those that have part in the Legislative Power, and so in
the Supremacy, should unwillingly be engaged in a war with the Prince, and
after many years blood and desolations, judicially take away his life as guilty
of all this blood, and not to be trusted any more with Government, and all this
they do, not as private men, but as the remaining Sovereign Power, and say they
do it according to the Laws; undoubtedly this case does very much differ from
the Powder Plot, or Papists murdering of Kings, and teaching that its lawful
for a private hand to do it, if he be but an Heretic, or be but deposed, yea
or excommunicated by the Pope. A war and a treacherous murder are not all one:
Nor is a part of the Sovereign Power all one with a private hand, or foreign
Prelate, pretending to a Dominion over the lives and states of Princes, and
over the Kingdoms of the world, and that the Vice-christ, and Vice-God on earth.

It is a grievous case that the Senate or Body of a Nation should think
themselves necessitated to defend themselves, and the Church and State against
their Prince, or any that act by his commands. It will strongly tempt them to
think that the end is to be preferred before the Means; and that it cease to
be a Means which is against and destructive to the End: and that it is
essential to a Governing Power to be for the common good: and therefore that
it is no Authority which is used against it: It will tempt them also to think
that God never gave power to any against himself or above his Laws, or against
the Ends of Government. And a Senate or the Body of a Nation will be apt to
think themselves fit to discern when the public safety is dangerously
assaulted; and will hardly be brought to trust any One to be the final Judge of
their Necessity, as thinking such a public Necessity proves it self, and needs
no judge but sense and reason to discern it. And if they also think that the
fundamental Constitution of the Government does make the Senate the highest
Judge of the safety or danger of the Republic, and so that the Law is on their
side, and that it is Treason against the Commonwealth (and as Politicians say,
against the Majestas Realis) to rise against them; the temptation then is much
the stronger. And where the Legislative power, and highest Judicial power is
by the Constitution of the Government divided between the Prince and Senate,
and so the Sovereignty divided, many will be ready to think with Grotius de
jure Belli, lib. 1.. 13. p. 91. that the Prince invading the Senates right, may
justly be resisted, and may lose his right: Quod locum (says Grotius) habere
censeo, etiamsi dictum sit, belli potestatem penes Regem fore: Id exim de bello
externo intelligendum est: cum alioqui quisquis Imperii summi jus partem
habeat, non possit, non jus habere, eam partem tuendi. Quod ubi fit, potest Rex
etiam suam Imperii partem belli jure amittere.] And indeed when a war is once
begun, the difficulty of re-uniting is exceeding great: If a Prince engage
either hired strangers, or fugitives, or homebred delinquents, or others, to
rise up against the Senate or people, either its lawful to Defend themselves
by Arms; or not. If not (especially if they have a share in the Sovereignty)
then is his power absolute and unlimited, and neither Laws nor any thing below
are any security against his will to the common safety (The contrary whereto
our late King declared in his notable Answer to the nineteen Propositions.) But
if their Defense be lawful, then if their Soldiers must know before hand,
that if they do purchase a victory by their blood, when they have all done they
must be all Governed by him whom they have conquered, and lie at his Mercy,
they would hardly ever have an Army to defend them: For who will do the utmost
that is possible to exasperate him that he knows must rule him when all is
done? I speak not this by way of Justification, or any way deciding such cases
as these, but leaving that (as a controversy that I am not here to decide) to
the judgment of others, I only show the world again that there is a great deal
of difference between such a war and conquest of a Prince by the Senate and
Body of the people, and their allowing Popes to depose them and alienate their
Dominions, and private men to rebel, and to murder them, if the Pope consent,
or excommunicate them. Whether they were in the right or wrong, I am not the
judge, but surely it was the judgment of the Parliament, that upon the
Division, the power was in them to defend themselves and the Commonwealth, and
suppress all subjects that were in Arms against them; and that those that did
resist them, did resist the higher powers, set over them by God, and therefore
were guilty of the damnation of resisters: And this they assured the people was
the Truth. And the forecited concessions of the King, (against the nineteen
Propositions) acknowledging their part in the Legislative power and defense of
the people, (which is known to be the highest part of Sovereignty,) did much
incline many to believe the Parliament: Especially knowing that they had so
long exercised the said Legislative power, and that we were all governed by
Laws of their making. So that those that did obey the Parliament, did verily
think that they obeyed the highest power that upon the division was left in the
Commonwealth; and that they had the Laws on their side, and did adhere to the
Common good, which is the end of Government.

And as they have thus caused our wars, and miseries, and scandals, so have
they continued to multiply sects among us of all sorts; so that there is scarce
a sect but is a spawn of the Jesuits and Friars; and scarce an honest party
but they creep in among them to work their ends. And here I shall briefly
mention some of the parties with whom they have insinuated to work their ends,
and then some of the sects that they have bred or animated.

1. As for the old English Bishops and conformable Ministers, who were of the
faith and doctrine publicly here professed, I confess I find but little
evidence that ever the Papists had much to do with them, save only to instigate
them against the Puritans, and draw some of them to a compliance with such as
did out-go them. Yet in their times Bishop Goodman of Gloucester was suspected
to be a Papist, and so professed himself by his last Testament at his death,
since the wars.

2. As for the Presbyterians, I do not see any reason to think that ever the
Papists had any interest in them of any men, there being none that they more
hate then these two sorts (the old sound Episcopal men, and the Presbyterians)
But yet both in France and Scotland they have cunningly wrought upon them ab
extra, alarming them into disturbances by the wildfire which they have cast in.

3. As for the new Episcopal party that followed Grotius (Arminius in doctrine)
and the Greek Church, and were for a reconciliation with Rome, on those terms
(which doubtless Rome would never have yielded to) the interest that the
Papists had among them, and influence that they had on them or their
proceedings, is evident from what is said before; and much from the copious
Proofs produced by Mr. Prin in his forementioned Book (Canterburies Trial, with
the Introduct.) The Jesuits Letter cited by Prin, ib. page 89. says [Now we
have planted that Sovereign drugg Arminianism, which we hope will purge the
Protestants from their heresy, and it flourishes and bears fruit in due
season.] The Articles exhibited in Parliament against many of the Bishops will
tell you by their works who were the instigators of them. Of themselves I know
of none but Goodman that has professed himself a flat Papist; and I shall not
think it my duty to suspect any one man of holding an Opinion which he
professes not himself, unless the evidence be very strong to move suspicion.
But that many Papists were at work with them in that pretended Reconcilement,
Francis. a S. Clara and diverse others put us past doubt. And that Papists crept
into places in the Chruch under the garb of conformable Arminians, is too well
known. It is no wonder therefore that Dr. Baily, Dr. Goffe, Dr. Vane, Hugh Paul
de Cressy, and many more of them did opnely revolt when the game seemed to be
spoiled that was played underboord. It had been far less hurt to us I think if
all the rest had been as open.

As for the King himself that was their Head, if any conjecture that he was a
flat Papist, as I have heard many rashly say, I think there is much evidence to
confute them. 1. That very Letter to the Pope (forementioned) on which the
suspicion is most grounded, if you mark it exactly, does intimate no more then
a desire of a union and Reconciliation, with some additions that may bear a
tolerable sense. 2. His own Profession of the Protestant Religion is sufficient
evidence. 3. His Disputation with the Marquess of Worcester clears it. 4. His
speech at death, and Papers since published clear it more. So that I think we
may be confident that he was no nearer to Rome then was the reconcilable part
of the Greeks: and that he desired no more then Bishop Bromhal, and other of
his Bishops offer them, to have the Church governed by Patriarcks, and the Pope
to be Principium Unitatis, etc. If any would know what Party Grotius was of, I
desire them carefully to peruse but these places in his writings (which I have
cited elsewhere) Discus. Apolog. Rivet. page 255. and page 7. and vot. pro
Pace, page 1, 2, 3. And of his friends in England among the Bishops in Paris
and all France, in Germany and Poland. See Discus. Apol. Rivet. page 16. and my
Discovery of Grotius Religion.

Yea for my own part I am persuaded, that the Papists were as much afraid of
King Charles and the Grotian design, as of any thing that of long time has been
hatched against them. They are not all of a mind at home. The French and
moderate party no doubt applauded the design, and liked such writings as S.
Clara's, and would gladly have married England and France in Religion. But
others (the Italian, Spanish Jesuited party) might easily foresee what danger
was in brewing for them. Had France, England, Sweden, Denmark, and the German
Lutherans agreed together, to bear down the Calvinists as unreconcilable on one
side (as Grotius intimates it necessary) and the Italians and their adherents
that set up the Pope above a Council, on the other side, it would have made the
Pope afraid, as no doubt he was. For though he was glad that we would draw
nearer him, and make him the Head in any sort, yet he knew not how to stop so
great an inundation as was like upon the union to overflow him. And hence was
the malice of the Jesuits against the life of the King (and withal that he
was fain into such hands where he was like to do them little service.) Secret.
Windebanks Letter recited by Prin, ubi sup. tells us that it was the Jesuits
that were the death of Father Leander, and so were the Enemies of Francis. S.
Clara and his Book, (which caused it to incur a Roman Censure) So that with one
part of them that is the best way, which the other is more afraid of then of
Protestants. We see it by the Jansenian contest. We see it in that Cassander,
Erasmus, Vives, etc. are excellent Catholics with some of them, and Heretical
and vile with the rest.

4. The persecuted Nonconformists of the Protestant party, though they were
most adverse to the Papists, yet had some of the Popish brood at last crept in
among them, not only to spy out their minds and ways, but to head the party,
and sow among them the seeds of further discontent and error, and to make them
a Nursery for various sects. For every where by their good wills the Jesuits
will have some. If you ask me for my proof of this, I shall at this time give
you but these two. 1. The fruits that sprung up from among them, and the manner
of Production, (of which more anon.) 2. The words of the Jesuits Letter
recited by Mr. Prin, Introd. page 90. [I cannot choose but laugh to see how
some of our own coat have re-incountred themselves: you would scarce know them
if you saw them; and it is admirable how in speech and gesture they act the
Puritans: The Cambridge Scholars to their woeful experience shall see, we can
act the Puritans a little better then they have done the Jesuits: they have
abused our sacred Patron St. Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart for
it in earnest. I hope you will excuse my merry digression, for I confess to you
I am at this time transported with joy, to see how happily all instruments and
means, as well great as lesser cooperate to our purposes.] Yet cannot I hear
of any considerable infection among this party that way before Sir Henry Vane's
days.

5. How far they crept into all Societies under the name of Independants, is
opened by so many already in Print, that I shall add no more of it.

6. And its a thing notorious, that they have crept in among the Anabaptists,
and formented that Sect. The story of the Scottish Missionary that pretended
himself a Jew, and gave the Anabaptists the glory of his Conversion, and
Rebaptizing at Hexham, and was discovered at Newcastle, is published and
commonly known: (whether he be yet in Prison, or releast, I know not.) And too
many more have more cleanly played their game. And though many of the more sober
Anabaptists would not be so useful to the Papists as they expected, yet
multitudes of them too far answered their expectations.

If you ask now what the Papists get by all this, I answer, you see in the
Instance but of this one sect, and the products of it. 1. By this means our
Councils, Armies, Churches have been divided, or much broken. 2. By this trick
they have engaged the minds and tongues of many (and their hands if they had
power) against the Ministry, which is the enemy that stands in their way. 3.
They have thus weakened us by the loss of our former adherents. 4. They have
found a Nursery or Seminary for their own Opinions, which one half of the
Anabaptists too greedily receive. 5. By this they have prepared them for more
and worse. 6. By this means they get an Interest in our Armies, or weakened our
own. 7. By this they have got Agents ready for mischievous designs (as has
been lately too manifest.) 8. By this they have cast a reproach upon our
Profession, as if we had no unity or consistence, but were vertiginous for want
of the Roman pillar to rest upon. 9. By this they have loosned and disaffected
the common people, to see so many minds and ways, and hear so much contending,
and have loost them from their former stedfastness, and made them ready for a
new impression. 10. Yea by this means they have the opportunity of Predicating
their own pretended unity, and hereby have drawn many to their Church of late.
All this have they got at this one game. What then have they got by all the
rest?

I shall next tell you of some of those Heresies or parties among us, that are
the Papists own Spawn or progeny; Either they laid the Egg, or hatched it, or
both.

And 1. It is most certain that Libertinism or Freedom for all Religions, was
spawned by the Jesuits, who hate it in Spain and Italy, but love it in
England. I have met with the masked Papists my self that have been very zealous
and busy to promote this Liberty of Conscience (as they deceitfully called
it.) For by this means they may have Liberty for themselves, and Liberty to
break us in pieces by sects, and also Liberty under the Vizor of a Sectary of
any tolerated sort, to oppose the Ministry and doctrine of truth.

2. But the principal design that the Papists have upon our Religion, at this
day, is managed under a sort of Juglers, who all are confederate in the same
grand principles, and are busy at the same work, and are agreed to carry it on
in the dark, and with wonderful secrecy do conceal the principal part of their
opinions; but yet they use not all one vizor, but take on them several shapes
and names, and some of them industriously avoid all names. The principal of
these Hiders are these following. 1. The Vani, whose game was first played
openly in America in New England, where God gave in his Testimony against them
from Heaven upon their two Prophetesses, Mrs. Hutchinson, and Mrs. Dyer: The
later brought forth a Monster with the parts of Bird, Beast, Fish and Man,
which you may see described in Mr. Welds Narrative, with the discovery, the
concomitants and Consequents. The former brought forth many (near 30.)
monstrous births at once, and was after slain by the Indians. This providence
should at least have awakened England to such a Godly Jealousy, as to have
better tried the doctrines which God thus seemed to cast out, before they had
so greedily entertained them, as in part of Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire, and
many other parts they have done. At least it should have wakened the Parliament
to a wise and Godly Jealousy of the Counsels and designs of him that was in
New England, the Master of the game, and to have carefully searched how much of
his doctrine and design were from heaven, and how much of them he brought with
him from Italy, or at least was begotten by the Progenitor of Monsters. Such
extraordinary providence are not to be despised. They had a great Operation in
New England among those wise and godly men that saw them, or were near them,
and knew the ways of them that God thus testified against. That which healed
them should have warned us. But God had a judgment for us, and therefore we
were left in blindness, to overlook that Judgment that should have warned us.
They are now dispersed in Court, City, and Country, and what God will suffer
them, and the Papists by them further to do, time will discover.

2. The next sort of Hiders, are the Paracesians, Weigelians, and Behmenists,
who go the same way in the main with the former, and are indeed the same party,
but think meet to take another name, and fetch their vizor from Jacob Behmen:
of their life of Community, and Chastity, and Visible converse (as they
profess) with Angels, you may see somewhat in the Narrative of Dr. Pordidge of
himself, together with Mr. Fowlers of him. The most clean and moderate piece of
their doctrine that has been lately published, is Mr. Bromleyes way to the
Sabbath of Rest; or Treatise of Regeneration.

3. Another sort of the Hiders are those called Seekers, among whom I have
reason to believe the Papists have not the least of their strength in England
at this day. They practice the lesson that Boverius in Apparat. ad Consultat,
taught Prince Charles long ago [Primum est, ut quoniam vera Religio tibi
inquirenda est, antequam ad eam investigandam accedas, omnem prius Religionem
apud te suspectam habeas: lubeatque tamdiu a Protestantium fide ac Religione
animum ac voluntatem suspendere, quamdiu in very inquisitione versaris -- ] We
must suspect all Religion it seems, and be first of no Religion, if we will
become Papists. A fair beginning! We must then be unchristned, and suspect
Christ and Scripture, that we may be espoused to the Pope. And this is the
Papists work by the Seekers, to take us off from all, or from our former
Religion, and blot out all the old impressions, that we may be capable of new.
And if they can accomplish this, they have us at a fair advantage. For he that
is not a stark Atheist or Infidel, but believes that he has a soul to save or
lose, must needs know the Necessity of seeking his Salvation in some Religion
or other: and therefore take him off from this, and you must needs bring him to
some other: And he that could prevail to take him off his old Religion, is
likeliest to have so much interest in him as may also prevail to bring him to
another. And the Papist thinks that on the pretense of Unity, Antiquity and
Universality (of which indeed they have but a delusory show) they can put as
fair for him that is once indifferent as any other can.

Of these Seekers there are these Sub-divisions, or Sects. The first and most
moderate do only profess themselves to be Seekers for the true Church and
Ministry; holding that such a Church and Ministry there is, but they are at a
loss to know which is it. A likely thing it is indeed, that men that take
themselves for extraordinary wise, should think there is existent such a Church
and Ministry as they predicate, and yet have no conjecture which it is. As if
they should believe that there is such a creature as the Moon, but be not able
to know it from the Stars.

The second sort of Seekers are to seek whether there be any Organized
Political Church, or any Ministry, or any Ordinances proper to a Church at all,
or not. Not denying them, but Doubting and Seeking; that so when they have
found them at Rome, they may prove but Finders, and not gross changlings: And
withal they yield that private men may Declare the Word, and pray together,
and read the Scripture. The most rational and modest that has wrote for this
way, is the Author of [Asober Word to a Serious People] A likely thing indeed
it is, that so rational a man should heartily believe, that Christ has planted
so excellent a Ministry, and Church, and Ordinances as himself describes, and
to those standing necessary uses which he mentions, even instead of Christ,
to take men into the holy Covenant, and yet that all should be left but for an
Age or two, and that ever since there is no such thing, or at least, no
certainty of it. The Style shows us that this Author is no such dotard as to
think as he speaks.

3. Another sort of Seekers are those that do not only Doubt of, but flatly
deny any Ministry, and Political Churches, and Church-ordinances on Earth, as
things that are lost in an Universal Apostasy.

4. Another sort of Seekers do not only doubt of, or deny these Particular
Churches and Ordinances, but also they are to seek for the Universal Church it
self, and the holy Scriptures; yea many of them not only Questioning them, but
flatly maintaining, that we have no certainty that the Scripture is true, or
that we have the same that was written by the Apostles, or that there is such a
thing as true Ministry, or State of Christianity in the World. Hence it is that
some of them pour out so many reproaches against the Ministry and the Holy
Scriptures, as you may find in Clem. Writer, in two ignorant Pamphlets, that
have scorn in the very Titles, as well as through the bulk; one called, The Jus
Divinum of Presbytery; and the other Fides Divina: In which he maintains the
cause of the Infidels. The opinion which this sort of men openly profess, is,
that no particular man is bound to believe the Gospel, but those that have
themselves seen Miracles to confirm it: and therefore in the first ages when
Miracles were wrought, those that saw them were bound to believe in Christ, and
at the second coming of Christ, when again he shall be witnessed by Miracles,
it will again become a duty to be Christians: but not to others that see no
Miracles, however they may hear of them. This doctrine Clem. Writer has
professed to me with his own mouth. But I may not censure him to be so weak as
to believe himself. It Is possible that such a silly soul may be found, that
shall think that Christ came into the world to set up Christianity as the true
Religion for those only in an Age or two, or more, that saw Miracles; but it is
unlikely that a man that has any considerable use of his reason should be so
silly. Who will not despise Christ that thinks he came on so low a design? Who
would not be an Infidel, that thinks ten thousand Infidels are saved for one
Christian? Yea who can be himself a Christian, that thinks that he is not bound
to be a Christian, because he sees not Miracles? It Is most evident therefore
that this is but a Juggle, and that such are either Infidels or Papists.
Infidelity is the thing professed, and therefore that we take them for
Infidels, they cannot blame us: But yet in Charity I hope (and not without
cause) that some of this Profession are but Papists; though others I have found
to be desperate Infidels.

A fifth sort called Seekers also there are, that own the Church and Ministry,
and Ordinances; but yet suppose themselves above them: for they think that
these are but the Administrations of Christ to men in the passage to a higher
state, and that such as have received the Spirit, and have the Law once written
in their hearts, are under (as they call it) the second Covenant, and so are
past the lower form of Ordinances, Scripture, Ministry, and visible Churches.

And a sixth sort of Seekers there are that think the whole company of
believers should now be overgrown the Scripture, Ministry and Ordinances: For
they think that the Law was the Fathers Administration, and the Gospel Ministry
and Sacraments are the Sons Administration, and that both these are now past,
and the season of the Spirits Administration is come, which all must attend,
and quit the lower forms. The David-Georgians were the chief that taught the
world this lesson, their Leader taking himself to be the Holy Ghost. All these
sorts of Seekers are bred or cherished by the Jesuits and Friars. And the
truth is, when a man is made a Seeker, he is half made a Papist: As a Dog when
he has lost his Master will follow almost any body that will whistle him; so
when men have lost their Ministry, Church and Religion, they are easily allured
to the Church of Rome: For they are a body as conspicuous to a carnal eye as
any other. And who will not rather be of the Roman Church and Religion then of
none?

4. Another sort of Hiders are the Quakers; an impudent Generation, and open
enough in pulling down; but as secret and reserved as the rest in asserting and
building up. What interests the Papists have in breeding and feeding this Sect
among us, has been partly proved from the Oaths of Witnesses, and Confessions
of Friars, and somewhat I have spoken of it in three several Papers against
them. The Doctrine of this fourth sort is the same, or scarce discernable from
the rest.

5. A fifth sort of Hiders, are those Enthusiasts, that shun the affected
bombasted language of Behmen, and such like, but yet give us much of the body
of Popery, Headed by an infallible Prophetic Spirit, instead of the Pope. Such
as the Authors of the Book against the Assemblies Confession, owned by Parker,
but said to be written by a London Doctor: And many such Doctors I know and
hear of abroad in England. They take on them to be adversaries to the Pope; but
they are friends to his Doctrines, and maintain the necessity of an infallible
living Judge, and send us to Prophets for this infallible judgment. And could
the Papists bring men once to this, it is an easy matter to strike off the the
feigned Prophetic head, by disgracing such as mere fantasticks, and to set on
the ancient Papal Head, which only will agree with the Body which they have
received. So much of the Libertines and the Hiders of their Religion, (of
several sorts).

3. Another sort that are spawned by the Papists, are stark Heathens, Atheists,
or Infidels: These carry their judgment as to the positive part as close as
any of the rest, and are grown in England to a far greater number and strength
then is commonly imagined. It is not only Leviathan or his Ocean that is guilty
of this Apostasy, (however they use the name of Christ) but abundance that
lurk under several names. A great while I knew not what to make of this close
Generation; but now I have found out that which should make a believing tender
heart to bleed: even gross Infidelity, causing them secretly to scorn at Christ
and the holy Scripture, and the life to come, as bitterly as ever Julian did:
And this is crept so high, and spread so far, that it is dreadful to those few
that are acquainted with its progress. Some that have lately professed to turn
Papists (for what ends I know not) are known to be stark Infidels: And some
that have long gone for leading men with them, have satisfied us by their
writings that they are Romanists of the most ancient strain; even of the Roman
Religion that was ancienter then Peter and Paul. And many of the unsettled sort
of Protestants, are so far forsaken of God, as to Apostatize to the same
condition. Montaltus the Jansenian takes the Jesuits for false unworthy
calumniators, for giving out that they have long had a design at Port Royal to
overthrow the Gospel, and set up Infidelity and mere Deism. But I am sure they
deserve much harder words of us in England, between them, for doing so much to
destroy the Christianity of many, in order to the setting up of Popery. I do
not charge it all and only on the Papists. I know the Devil has more sorts of
Instruments then one: But that they have had a notable hand in this Apostasy,
we have good reason to satisfy us. Not that they desire that men should be
absolutely and finally Infidels: But 1. they would make the world believe, that
all must be Infidels that will not receive the Christian Faith upon the Roman
account and terms: And in order to this they industriously seek to disgrace the
Scripture, and overthrow all the grounds of the Faith of such as they dispute
with. And so make them Infidels in order to the proof of that their
affirmation. 2. And then they think that they must take them off all Religion
(as Boverius before cited) to prepare them for the Popish Religion. 3. And the
malice of some of them is such, that they had rather men were Infidels then
Protestants; or at least they will venture them upon Infidelity in the way,
rather than not take them off from being Protestants. And no wonder, when they
allow Infidels so much more charity then Protestants, as to their salvation, as
all the Authors cited by S. Clara before do signify: And when Rome burns
Protestants, but gives toleration for Jews. And thus by these Devilish
devices, the Hiders in England that keep close their Religion, are discovered
at last to be one part of them Infidels or Heathens, and another part of them
Papists. And no wonder if they would lately have introduced the Jews here into
England, and if they have so many other designs to promote this Apostasy.

4. Another sort that Popery has here hatch or cherished are the Socinians; a
Sect with whom both Papists and Heathens do join hands, as the Bond of their
Conjunction. Yet I know that they were not bred at first by Popery: and I know
that the genuine Papist that holds fast the Articles of their Faith, must needs
disown the Socinian: But however it comes to pass, I am sure there are too many
of late (self-conceited men, innovaters in Philosophy) that have reduced their
Theology to their novel Philosophy, and expounded Scripture by such conceits
as suit with the Socinians.

I shall say nothing of the Millenaries, the Levellers, and many such like. But
here in the close, I would desire any Papist that is conscious of the promoting
of any of these forementioned abominations, to tell us whether this be like to
be the way of God? Or whether Peter or Paul did ever take such a course as this
to plant the Gospel, or build up the Church? And whether it be like to be the
Cause of God that must be maintained by such means? Is not their damnation
just, that say, Let us do evil that good may come thereby? Should not the
means be suited to the end? Has the glory of God any need of a lie? This
course will never ingratiate your opinions with any wise considerate men. This
is but working with the Devil for God: like one that does consult with a Witch
or Conjurer, to find the goods of the Church when they are stolen. Do you think
God needs the Devils help? Or is it like to be help that comes from him? But
the truth is, it is your bad Cause that requires these evils means: and it is
your bad hearts that set you on work to use them: Though you think perhaps that
you do God service by it, yet you know not what Spirit you are of. Christ
owneth not such ways as these, and therefore his servants will not own them.

CHAP. XLVI.
Detect. 37. ANother Practical fraud of the Papists is, In hiding themselves
and their Religion, that they may do their work with the more advantage.

I shall tell you briefly, 1. The way by which they do this, and 2. The
advantage they get by it. And 3. Help you to detect them.

1. The principal means by which they conceal themselves is, By thrusting
themselves into all Sects and Parties, and putting on the vizor of any side, as
their cause requires. It Is well known that formerly we had abundance of them
that went under the name of Protestants, and were commonly called by the name
of Church-Papists: But there is great reason to think that there are more such
now. Some of them are Prelatists, and some of them call themselves
Independants: some creep in among the Anabaptists; and some go under the cloak
of Arminians, and some of Socinians, and some of Millenaries, and all the other
Sects before mentioned. They animate the Vanists, the Behmenists, and other
Enthusiasts, the Seekers, the Quakers, the Origenists, and all the Juglers and
Hiders of the times: It is they that keep life in Libertinisms, and in
Infidelity it self. Among every one of these parties you may find them, if you
have the skill of unmasking them.

2. Another way of Hiding themselves is, by having a Dispensation to come to
any of our Assemblies, or join in worship with any party, good or bad: Or else
they will prove it lawful without a Dispensation, where the Pope interdicteth
it not. And their way is this: that all the old known Papists, especially of
the poorer sort, shall be still forbidden to come to our Assemblies, lest they
bring the blot of levity and temporizng on their Religion and lest there should
not be a visible party among them to countenance their cause. But the New
proselites, especially such as are of any power and interest in the world, and
may do them more service in a masked way, and can fairly avoid the Imputation
of Popery, these shall have leave to come to our Assemblies, when their cause
may make advantage of it. That you may see I feign not all this of them,
(besides the proof from certain experience which we daily see) let me lay
before you the Decisions of one of their principal Directors, in this work of
propagating their faith; and that is, Thom. a Jesu de Convers. Gentium. How far
they are for favoring of Heathens and Infidels, and Liberty of Conscience for
them (for all their cruelty to Protestants) you may see him, lib. 5. Dub. 4.
page 207. Where he tells you that the sentence commonly received in the Schools
is, that it is not lawful for Christian Princes to use any force against
Infidels, for sins against the Law of Nature it self: and cites Caject.
Victoria, Covarruv. Greg. de valent. And himself decides it in the middle way
of Azorius, [That Pagans may not be punished for despising the honor and
worship of God, though they may for not giving every man his own, and for
theft, murder, false witness, and other sins that are against men's right]
Compare this with Sir H. Vane's doctrine of Liberty.

And lib. 5. part. 1. Dub. 6. page 220. he teaches that [A Catholic living
among Heretics may (when the scandalizing of others forbids it not) for fear
of death, go to the Temples of bereticks, and be among them in their meetings,
and assemblies, because of it self it is a thing indifferent; For a man may for
many causes go to the Temples of heretics, and be among them in their
assemblies, as that he may the easilyer and more effectually and commodiously
confute their errors, or on other just occasions, (unless accidentally it
scandalize others.) Yea as Azorius says, he may do it to obey a Prince, though
he be an heretic, when he fears the loss of his honor, maintenance or life:
For in this he only obeys his Prince: especially if among the faithful (that
is, the Papists) he openly affirm, that he does it only to obey his Prince, and
not to profess the heretical sect: For by that open attestation he avoideth the
offense and danger of Catholics, and well declineth the unjust vexation of the
Prince.]

And that Papists may eat flesh on days when their Church forbids it, to hide
themselves among heretics, he determines in Dub. 5. p. 218, 219. So that the
Papists are abundantly provided for their security, against such as would
discover them when it stands not with their ends to disclose themselves.

3. Another most effectual way of Hiding themselves is, by Equivocation or
mental reservations, which we use to call Lying, when they are examined about
their Religion, their Orders or their actions. Lying that hurts not another,
they commonly maintain to be but a venial sin, which say most of them, is
properly no sin at all. And to equivocate or reserve one half of your answer to
your selves, say the Jesuits, is not Lying, nor unlawful, in case a man's
interest requires him to do it. See the words of their own Casuists cited for
this by Montaltus the Jansenist. Were it a thing that needed proof, I would
give you enough of it. Thom. a Jesu the Carmelite, ubi sup. Dub. 4. page 218.
secureth them sufficiently: His Question is [Whether one that denies it when
he is asked of a Heretic whether he be a Priest, or a Religious man, or
whether he heard Divine service, do sin against the confession of faith?] He
answers, [No: for that is no denying himself to be a Christian, or Catholic:
For it is lawful to dissemble or hide the person of a Clergy man or a
Religious man, without a lie in words, lest a man be betrayed and in danger of
his life; and for the same cause he may lay by his Habit, omit prayers, etc. --
because (N. B.) humane Laws for the most part bind not the subjects conscience,
when there is great hazard of life, as in this case Azorius has well taught.
Just. Mor. Tom. 1. lib. 8. c. 27.] So that by the consent of most, there is no
danger to a Papist in any such case from his own confession.

Another way of Hiding their Religion and themselves, is by false Oaths, which
we called, wilful perjury, but the Jesuits take for a Lawful thing, when a
mental Reservation or Equivocation supplyeth the want of verbal truth, as
their words cited by the forementioned Jansenian, testify. And who will ever
want so easy, so obvious, so cheap a Remedy against all danger of perjury, as
a mental Reservation is?

Yea that the Pope can sufficiently dispense with any of their Oaths of
fidelity or Allegiance, or the like, I shall show you under the last Detection.
The Parliament has imposed on them an Oath of Abjuration, but do they not know
how little the Clergy, and such as have their countenance will stick at that,
such Nets are too wide to catch them in. Hear the words of one of their own
Priests (Io. Browns Voluntary Confess. in Prins Introduct. p. 203.) says he,
[Its strange to see the Stratagems which they use with their penitents
concerning the Oath of Allegiance! If they be poor, they tell them flatly,
(when they are demanded to take the Oath) that it is damnable, and no ways to
be allowed by the Church: If they be of the richer sort, they say they may do
as their conscience will inspire them. And there be some of them that make no
conscience at all, to have it taken sooft as they are demanded.] What would you
have more, then such discoveries by themselves?

2. But what get they by this Hiding of themselves? Answ. 1. They hereby secure
themselves from danger. 2. They do the more easily prevail for the
multiplication of their sect: For worldly persons would not so easily flock
into them without some such security from suffering. 3. They preserve those
that are come over to them from revolting, by the discouragement of suffering,
especially the Rich and Honorable. 4. They angle for souls with the less
suspicion, when they stand behind the bush: Papists are become so distasted
with the people by the Power-plot, and many other of their pranks, that they
may take more with them, if they come masked under another name. 5. By this
means they may openly revile and oppose the Ministry, and Ordinances, and
Churches, and Protestant doctrine, without disturbance by the Magistrate. A
Papist in the Coat of a Quaker, an Anabaptist, a Seeker, or the like, may rail
at us and our doctrine in the open Streets, and Market place, and call us all
to naught, and teach abundance of their own Opinions, without a control. And
many a poor soul will take an Anabaptist Papist, or Seeker into their bosom,
and familiarly hear them, and easily swallow down what they say, that would be
afraid of them if he knew them to be Papists. 6. By this means they have easier
access to a greater number then openly they could have. 7. And by this means
they may insinuate into our Counsels, and know all our ways, and how to resist
us. 8. But above all, by this means they may be capable of any office and trust
among us. They may be Ministers, or Justices of Peace: They may be Parliament
men, and Leaders in our Councils, and have the conduct of our affairs: They may
have a great influence on the rest that know them not; They may come to have
power in our Armies. And if once the Masked Papists come to make our Laws, or
guide our Councils and Affairs, and influence or command our Armies, you may
soon know what would become of Protestants: Kings and Parliaments, Prelates and
Presbyters shall all go one way, if they can accomplish it: Its easy therefore
to discern that their principal Artifice lies in Hiding themselves (so be it
still there be a visible body of their open professors.) And for my own part, I
think I have good reason to fear lest the Papists are far stronger at this day
in England that are unknown, then that are known: and that wear the Vizard of
Seekers, Vanists, and other Sects, then that appear bare faced: Yea I believe
that our danger of the open Papists is nothing in comparison of our danger from
these Juglers. And I confess I think an ingenuous open Papist should have a
great deal more gentle dealing from our Magistrates, then these Deceivers that
have such stretching Consciences. For my own part I must confess I feel a great
deal of charity in my heart for a conscientious plain dealing Papist; and I
would never be guilty of cruelty or rigor to them. But this juggling in the
matters of God and Eternal life, my very soul abhors. I have been set upon by
these Juglers my self, and by some of the most renowned of them; but as soon as
I perceived any of them purposely choose the dark, and hide themselves in
affected cloudy terms or methods, I was more a verse from their documents, and
took them for men that were either enemies to truth, or else had not received
it into honest hearts themselves. Truth is most beautiful in its nakedness; It
loves plain dealing, and abhors fraud. It takes that for its greatest
friend, that lays it most naked to the view of all, and that for its enemy
that purposely obscureth it. We have all such a natural inclination to truth,
that he scarce deserves the name of a man, much less of a Christian, that would
not embrace it if he knew it. Did I think that the Papists had the truth, the
Lord knows I would run after them, and follow them till I had learned it: If
ever any of them would work on me, they must come bare faced: for I naturally
abhor a Jugler in Religion, and a friend of darkness.

3. But how shall these Hiders be Detected? Answ. 1. You have cause to suspect
all that use a Mask, and purposely hide their minds. To suspect them I say, to
be Papists or worse: They walk not in Gods way that walk in Darkness: It is the
Kingdom of Satan that is the Kingdom of Darkness, and it is he that is the
Prince of Darkness, and his servants that are the sons of Darkness. Me thinks a
man that intends Deceit, what ever his end be, should not take it ill to be
suspected for a deceiver, God is so good a master that no body should be
ashamed of him. Truth is so amiable, that the genuine sons of Truth are not
ashamed of it. Its no true Religion that assures not men of that which will
save them harmless, and bear them out against all the malice of earth and hell,
and repair all losses that they can sustain in the defending of it. Qui non
vult intelligi, debet negligi. He that would not be fully understood, shall
never be my Teacher, nor be much regarded by me. And therefore the Vane and
Steril language of Paracelsian Behmenists, and Popish Juglers, does serve with
me for no other use but to raise me into suspicion of their Designs and
Doctrines, and to signify a Vain and Steril mind. Who will not suspect that
Tradesmans weres that chooses a dark Shop, and refuses to open his wares in
the light? I know that Scripture has its difficulties, and strong meats. But
that is from our incapacity of understanding higher points, till we are
prepared by the lower: It is from the altitude of the matter, and not that God
does envy us the truth, which he pretends to reveal: If a Prophecy be
purposely obscured, which concerns not the world so nearly, yet so are not
the Doctrines that our life or death lies on. But says Clem. Writer to me,
(recited in his late Book against me) [Would you not hide your mind or Religion
in Spain? Answ. 1. No: I would not; whenever I found my self capable of serving
God most by the discovery; which is the common case. 2. Till then, I would not
put on the vizor of any thing that I knew to be false; and make use of Positive
Juggling and Dissembling to hide my Religion. 3. If Christians against Infidels,
or Protestants among Papists, had thought this dissimulation lawful, there had
not been so many thousands of them martyred or murdered as were. 4. What
Opinion is it that brings men in England into any great danger at this day?
Either your Opinion must be Atheistical, or at least Infidelity, if you suppose
it will bring you now into any great suffering: or if it be some small matter
that you fear, it seems you think not your Religion worthy to be openly owned
in so small a danger. I Will never be of a Religion that is not worthy my openest
confession, even to the death, when there is so much danger.

2. The Juggling Papists may be known by this, that they are always loosening
people from their Religion, and leading them into a dislike of what they have
been taught; that they may be receptive of their new Impressions. And therefore
of any one Sect in England, there is none to be so much suspected of a spirit
of Jesuitism, as the Seekers of all sorts.

3. The Juggling Papists may be much detected by this, that they are all upon
the Destructive part in their Disputes, and very little on the Assertive part.
They pull down with both hands, but tell you not what they will build up, till
they have prepared you for the discovery. They tell you what they are against.
But what they are for, you cannot draw out of them. As if any wise man will
leave his house or grounds till he knows where to be better: or will forsake
his staff that he leans on, or the food that he feeds on, till he know
where to have a better provision or support. Do they think wise men will be
made irreligious? They deal by the poor people, as one that should say to
passengers on Shipboard [What fools are you to venture your lives in such a
ship that has so much encumbrance and danger, and so many flaws, and but a few
inches between you and death, and is guided by such a Pilot as may betray you,
or cast away your lives for ought you know?] They know now that none but mad
men will be persuaded by such words as these to leap into the Sea to escape
these dangers: and therefore they do this but to make men willing to pass into
their ship, and take them for our Pilots. If you are wise therefore hold them
to it, and leap not overboard, but keep where you are, till they have showed
you a safer Vessel and Pilot: which they can never do.

When I did but privately desire of Cl. Writer that he would acquaint me with
that truth that he thought me ignorant of, and that we might privately and
lovingly consider how far we were agreed, and where we differed, that we might
debate the case, and try who was in the right, he resolutely denied to have any
debate with me, or to open any of his judgment, but page 46. reproacheth this
very motion, as proceeding from [my aims of a monstrous shape and ugly looks]
so monstrous a thing does it appear to these deceiving Juglers, to tell men
what Religion they are of, and would have us to receive, when they will freely
reproach the Religion which we profess.

4. And you may strongly conjecture at the quality of these Juglers, by their
constant opposition against the Ministry. It is Ministers that are their
eye-fore; the hinderers of their Kingdom: Could they but get down these, the
work were done, the day were their own: And therefore their main business,
whatever vizor they put on, is to bring the people into a dislike or contempt
of the Ministry. If they seem Quakers, they will rail at them: If they seem
Seekers, they will dispute against their calling: If they seem the gentlest
Behmenists, they have their girds at them, to acquaint the world that they are
misguided by them. But at first, they will not let you know which is the true
Ministry, if ours be not; or which is the true Church, if ours be not: Here
they leave you.

5. The Juggling Papist, what vizor soever he wears, is commonly putting in for
his own opinions, of the Necessity of a Judge of Controversies, an Infallible
Church, a state of perfection here, the magnifying of our own inherent
Righteousness, without any great esteem of Justification by the forgiveness of
sin: and many such like.

6. Papists have still an aching tooth at the Authority and sufficiency of
Scripture; and therefore on one pretense or other, are still disgracing and
impugning it, and leading men aside to some other Rule.

7. Papists have still an enmity against the Power of the Magistrate in matters
of Religion: For in such matters their Vice-christ must be the only Judge.
Whereas indeed, by that time the Magistrate has judged, Who is Punishable by
the Sword, and the Pastors and Particulars Churches have judged, Who is
excommunicable, (which are their undoubted works) there is nothing left for a
Pope to do. Suspect them that are for a Liberty for all; or at least for all
that are no worse then Papists. They that set open this door intend to creep in
at it themselves at last.

8. And it is a suspicious sign when you find men enemies to the Unity, Peace
and Settlement of our Churches, but would still keep us in division and
distraction. And yet some of these men will lament our Divisions, and cry up
Unity, but they will secretly hinder it, or do nothing to attain it.

9. And it is somewhat suspicious to see men hang loose from all our Churches
in their practice, and join with none, nor communicate in the Sacraments. If
they know not Sacraments and Church Communion to be both our Duty, and the
Means of our strength and comfort, it is doubtful whether they are Christians
or Infidels. But if they know this of the Necessity and use of Sacraments, and
Church Communion in general, and yet join not with any of our Churches herein,
it is a shrewd suspicion that they have an eye upon some other Church. For sure
a tender conscience would not be many years in resolving of so great and
practical a point, no more then he would live many years without prayer, on
pretense of being unsatisfied in the mode of Prayer.

10. And yet on the contrary side, there are some Juggling Papists, especially
in our Councils, Civil and Ecclesiastic, that play their game by over-doing,
and making every thing to be Popish and Antichristian, to drive us into
extremes, and into opinons in which we may easily be bafled. And it is not a
little that they have won of us at this game.

CHAP. XLVII.
Detect. 38. ANother of their Practical Frands is, In their exceeding industry
for the perverting of men of Power and Interest, that are likely to do much in
helping or hindering them.

Swarms of them are busy day and night, for the seducing of Princes, and
Nobles, and Rulers of all sorts, and of Commanders in the Armies. Of their
diligence abroad we may know somewhat by their success on diverse of the German
Princes, and the late Queen of Sweden, and on many of the Nobles of France, and
such others.

At home we have smarted by the fruits of their industry. What abundance of
assaults were made on the late King? from his going to Spain, and the Popes
Letters to him there, and to the Bishop of Conchen to take care for his
seduction, and so all along to the last, I need not mention. And what Noblemen
or Persons of Interest in England lay not under assaults and solicitations in
those days? And are all the Jesuits and Friars dead? Or have they not still
the same cause and industry as then? Is the Court, or Councils of the Land, or
the Nobility, Gentry or Army now free from their fraudulent solicitations? How
far they have prevailed time will fullier reveal: but what they will endeavor
we may easily judge. And certainly the number of Seekers and such other Sects
among them, does tell us that they have not lost their labor.

If these lines shall fall into the hands of any of our Rulers or Commanders, I
entreat them for the sake of their souls, and the Commonwealth, to be prudent
and vigilant in a matter of such consequence. I do not intend to entreat them
from error unto truth without sufficient light and evidence: But that which I
desire is but reasonable; 1. That you would not be too confident of your own
understandings to deal with such Juglers in your own strength, without
assistance. They have made it their study all their days, and are purposely
trained up to deceive: whereas you are much wanting in their way of study, and
much unfurnished to resist; how highly soever you may think of your selves.

2. That you would read a little more the learned solid writings of our Divines
against the Papists, such as Dr. Fields, Crakenthorps, Ushers, Chillingworths,
Jewels, Rivets, Chamiers, Ames, Reignolds, whittakers, and such like, beginning
with Sir Humfrey Linds Via Devia, and via Tuta, (and du Plessis of the Church,
and his Mystery of Iniquity, and Dr. John White. etc.)

3. That you will not hearken to Papists secretly, nor masked, nor coming to
you by indirect and Juggling ways: but open their persuasions, and call to some
able studied Divines to deal with them in your hearing, if needs you will hear
them, that so you may hear one side as well as the other.

4. That you take heed what Retainers, Servants, or Familiars are about you:
For some that pretend to be acquainted with these men, are much mistaken, if
they be not more frequent at your elbows, and in your Bed-chambers, then many
do imagine. If they cannot be of your Councils, and your near attendants, they
will rather be your Porters, or the Grooms of your Stables, then they will be
kept out. We fear not any thing that they can do in an open way, in comparison
of their secret whispers and deceits, when there is no body to gainsay them.
Had they the Truth, we should be glad to entertain it with them. It is not
therefore Truth in their mouths that we are afraid of: But seeing the Nations
and our Posterity have so much dependence on your Integrity, we call for so
much Justice at your hands, as that you will not cast open your ears to each
deceiver, especially in secret, or on unequal terms: Let not all our peace and
safety be hazarded by the self-conceitedness, or imprudence of you that are our
Rulers. Seeing it is you that must give us Laws, or set the Vulgar the pattern
which they are so much addicted to imitate; We adjure you in the Name of the
most High God, that you be not too forward and facile in hearkening to
Seducers, and corrupting those Intellects which the whole Nation has so great
an Interest in: and that you be not henceforth as children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine by the the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14. But we
beseech you mark them which cause Divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such, serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 17, 18. Hearken not to
every one that says, Lo here is Christ, or Lo there is Christ; here is the
Catholic Church, or there is the Catholic Church: As if Christ were divided,
or the Catholic Church were more then One? Or it were confined to a Sect or
Party, whether Papal or any other, and did not contain all Christians through
the world? All parts of this Church are not equally pure, but all are Parts: Be
you of the purest part, but do not therefore take that part for the whole: much
less the polluted part. Have compassion on the diseased and tumified part: but
do not therefore so far dote, as to love the tumor or disease, and say that
none is the Church but this. We are willing to be as Charitable to that Proud
Throne of Rome, and usurping Vice-christ, as will stand with the safety of our
souls and of the Church. But God forbid that we should therefore be so blind,
as to run into their Pesthouse, and drink the poison by which they are thus
tumified and intoxictaed.

Look on their Principles, and see what an aspect they have on Christ, on the
Catholic Church, and upon Princes? Look back on their Practices, and see what
their Principles proved in the fruits? Yea what need we go further for a
warning, then to remind you of that which one would think should be deep and
fresh in your minds; even what they have brought upon Kings, Queens, Lords,
Prelates, and this whole Land? But this leads me to the next Detection.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Detect. 39. THE last of their Practical frauds (at home) and the most
desperate is, Their Treasons against the lives of Princes, and the Peace of
Nations, and their dissolving the bonds of Oaths and Covenants, and making
Perjury and Rebellion to seem to be Duties and Meritorious works.

It would be a voluminous task to relate the Histories of the Papal Tresons:
How the Roman Vice-christ having laid a claim to both Swords, Spiritual and
Temporal, has played the Traitor against the Greek Emperors, dispossessing them
of the West; and against the Emporors of Germany, stirring up their own
subjects, and the Christian Princes and States against them; setting his foot
on the neck of one, and making another wait barefoot long at the Roman gates;
and keeping many of them in wars. It was this Horrid Treason and Tyrannical
usurpation over all the Christians Princes, that caused all those Treatises on
that subject wrote against him, in the Defense of Princes and their Rightt,
which Mich. Goldastus has preserves and conjoined in diverse Volumes. It was
this that caused England, Denmark, Sweden, and so many other Princes, to be the
readier to shake off his yoke. Kings are not Kings where the Pope is fully
Pope; except only the House of Austria, whom he is forced to gratify, as the
only prop of all his tyranny. France that has so much stood for its
Liberties, has felt the fruits of the Roman Principles, and League; and two of
their most renowned Kings successively have been basely and inhumanely
butchered by them: And to this day the numerous swarm of the Popes dependant
Clergy, does not only devour, as is thought, about a third part of the Lands,
but also aws and swaies the Princes. Even in Ireland before our wars, a Bishop
(Bedle in his Letter to Laud in Prins Introduct. page 102.) does open the Power
of the Clergy, and their insolences as such, that he concludes [His Majesty
is now with the greatest part of this Country as to their hearts and
consciences, King, but at the Popes descretion] And in another Letter to the
said Archbishop (ibid. page 112.) he says [I that know that in this Kingdom of
his Majesty, the Pope has another Kingdom far greater in number, and as I have
heretofore signified to the Lords Justices, and Council (which since is
justified by themselves in print) constantly guided and directed by the order
of the new Congregation, de propaganda fide, lately erected at Rome -- ] see
the rest.

Do I need to tell England of the many treacheries since the Reformation
against our Princes? Or who it was that would have deposed as well as
Excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, and exposed her Kingdoms to the will of others?
Or who it was that wrote against King James his Title to the Crown? Or who were
the Actors of the Hellish Powder Plot? Or who it is that has been still
blowing the fire, and casting all into disturbances for their ends? Do I need
to mention their approving of the Murdering of Princes, and the pretense of
power to dispense with oaths of Allegiance and fidelity, and who has actually
so often pretended to disoblige the subjects, and expose Princes and their
Dominions to the first occupant? I know that many of the seculars in England
disowned this doctrine: But 1. So never did the Pope, but has owned and
practiced it. 2. By disowning it, they disown Popery it self, if they know what
they do: For it is an Article of their Faith, and so Essential to their
Religion, as explicitly held; and is determined by a Pope and an approved
General Council, even 12. the fourth at Lateran under Innocent the third, as I
before recited the words at large in the third Argument against them here.

I know some of the Papists would persuade the world that it was none but
Mariana the Jesuit that wrote for King killing: and that it was first
condemned by themselves. But the Parliament of Paris tells another story of
them, as it is recited by Thuanus (who was President and then present) Hist.
lib. 130. ad. an. 1604. And Rivet names them Guignardus (that wrote in praise
of the murder of Henry the third) and of Ode Pichenatus, Barterius suborned by
Varada, etc. And Albineus the Jesuit did hear the Murderer of Henry the fourth
confess before he did the fact, and put off the examiners with this answer,
that God had given him that special gift to forget when once he had absolved a
sinner whatsoever was confessed by him. And why was it that France did expel
the Jesuits, and set up a Pillar of Remembrance of their villainies, till Henry
the fourth would needs gratify the Pope by calling them in again, and told the
Parliament, that the peril of it should be on him; and so it was; for it cost
him his life. And why did the same Parliament of Paris, November. 1610. condemn
Bellarmines book against Barclay, as an engine of treason and rebellion? And
the Theological faculty of Paris, April. 4. 1626. condemned Santarellus Book as
guilty of the same villainy, stirring up people to Rebellion and King-killing?
And May 12. the University confirmed it: And March 13. the Parliament condemned
the Book to be burnt.

And it is worth the reading which Rivet recites of the Answers of the Jesuits
in Paris, when the Parliament asked them their judgment of that Book, viz.
[Seeing their General had approved the Book, and judged the things that are
there written to be certain, whether they were of the same mind?] They answered
that [Living at Rome he could not but approve what was there approved of.] [But
say the Parliament, What think you? Say the Jesuits, the clean contrary. Say
the Examiners, But what would you do if you were at Rome? Say the Jesuits,
That which they do that are at Rome. At which said some of the Parliament,
What! have they one Conscience at Rome, and another at Paris? God bless us from
such confessors as these.]

But yet some of the Papists will seem so honest, as to say that private men
may not kill a King till he be deposed. Very true! But withal it is their
current doctrine, that if once he be excommunicate, he is then no King, yea or
if he be an Heretic; and so being no King, they may kill the man, and not kill
the King. This is the juggling of these seeming Loyal subjects. You may see it
in their own writings; Suarez advers. Sect. Anglic. lib. 6. cap. 4. Sect. 14.
and cap. 6. Sect. 22, 24. and Azorius Jesuita Instit. Moral. part. 1. l. 8. c.
13. He that would see more of their mind in this, let him read the Mysterium
Patrum Jesuitarum, and the Jansenians mystery of Jesuitism, and Bishop Rob.
Abbots Antilogia ad Apolog. Eudaemojohan: But what need we more then the
Decrees of a Pope and General Council, and the practice of the Church of Rome
for so many ages?

And for the Popes power to absolve them from all oaths of Allegiance and
fidelity, the foresaid Pope Innocent and his approved General Council have told
the world enough of their mind to put us out of doubt of it.

But (leaving abundance of foreign instances) I shall mention but one or two
at home. The Papists have lately had the confidence to affirm that the
Powder Plot and the Spanish invasion in one thousand five hundred eighty eight
were not upon a quarrel of Religion, nor owned by the Pope. King James has
said already so much against them in these points, that I think it needless to
say any more (especially also after Bishop Abbots Antilogia) but only here to
produce one Testimony of their own, concerning the Spanish Invasion.

Cardinal Ossatus in his 87. Epist. ad D. de Ville-roy, tells us that Pope
Clement the eighth (one of the best of all the late ones) did press for the
King of France to join with Spain in the Invasion of England, and the Cardinal
answered that the King was tied by an Oath to the Queen of England: to which
the Pope replied, that [The Oath was made to an Heretic, but he was bound in
another Oath to God and the Pope] adding withal [that Kings and other Princes
do permit themselves all things (or tolerate themselves in all things) which
make for their commodity: and that the matter is gone so far, that it is not
(or should not be) imputed to them, or taken for their fault: and he alleged
the saying of Franciscus Mariae Duke of Urbine, that indeed every one does
blame a Noble man, or Great man that is no Sovereign, if he keep not his
Covenants, (or fidelity,) and they account him infamous; but supreme Princes
may without any danger of their reputation, make Covenants and break them, lie,
betray, and perpetrate other such like things] This was good Pope Clement the
eighth. And can we look for better from the rest? You see what Oaths and
Covenants are with them.

And that the design was still carried on against the Queen upon account of
Religion, and the Realm to have been invaded by the Spaniard on that account,
and that the principal point of the Plot was to prepare a party within the
Realm that might adhere to the invaders; all this with much more Sir Francis
Walsingham (that well knew) has testified to Monsieur Critoy in his Letter,
Cabal. part. 2. page 39.

Thuanus a Moderate Papist (and a most knowing and impartial Historian) tells
you (lib. 89. p. 248, 249. ad an. 1588.) that, [the Spaniards pretended to
undertake the expedition only for Religion sake, and therefore took with them
Martin Alarco Vicar general of the Holy Inquisition, with abundance of
Capuchins and Jesuits: and that they had with them the Popes Bull, which they
were to publish as soon as they landed, and that Cardinal Allan was appointed
as the Popes Legate to land at the same time, and with full power to see to the
restoring of Religion. And that the said Bull had these expressions: that the
Pope, by the Power given from God by lawful succession of the Catholic
Church, for the defection of Henry the eighth who forcibly separated himself
and his people from the communion of Christians, which was promoted by Edward
the sixth and Elizabeth, who being pertinaceous and impenitent in the same
Rebellion and Usurpation -- therefore (the Pope) incited by the continual
persuasions of many, and by the suppliant prayers of the English men
themselves, (N. B.) has dealt with diverse Princes, and specially the most
potent King of Spain -- to depose that woman, and punish her pernicious
adherents in that Kingdom -- ] Read the rest there; for though wicked, its
worth the reading. The Pope there says, that Pope Sixtus before him prescribed
the Queen, and took from her all her Dignities, Titles, and Rights to the
Kingdom of England and Ireland, absolving her subjects from the Oath of
fidelity and obedience: He charge all men on pain of the wrath of God, that
they offord her no favor, help, or aid, but use all their strength to bring
her to punishment; and that all the English join with the Spaniard as soon as
he is landed: offering rewards and pardon of sins, to them that will lay hands
on the Queen; and so showing on what Conditions he gave the Kingdom to Philip
of Spain. This and more you may see in Thuanus.

And yet some of our Juglers that say they are no Papists, persuade the world
that Papists hold not the deposing of Princes, nor absolving their subjects
from the Oaths of fidelity; and that the Spanish invasion was merely on Civil
accounts, and that they expected not any English Papists to assist them: with
other such impudent assertions.

Even Dominicus Bannes (one of the best of them) in Thom. 22. qu. 12. art. 2.
says that [Quando adest evidens notitia, etc. i. e. When there is evident
knowledge of the crime, subjects may lawfully exempt themselves from the Power
of their Princes, before any declaratory sentence of a judge, so they have but
strength to do it.] Adding to excuse the English Papists for being no worse,
that [Hence it follows that the faithful (Papists) of England and Saxony are
to be excused, that do not free themselves from the power of their Superiors,
nor make war against them: because commonly they are not strong enough to
manage these wars, and great dangers hang over them.] Princes may see now how
far the Papists are to be trusted: Even as far as they are sufficiently
disabled.

And their August. Triumphus says (de Potest. Eccles. qu. 46. art. 2.) [Dubium
non est quin Papa possit omnes Reges, cum subest causa rationabilis deponere]
i. e. [There is no doubt but the Pope may depose all Kings, when there is
reasonable cause for it] Is not this a Vice christ, and a Vice-god with a
witness?

Add but to this, that the Pope is Judge when the cause is Reasonable; (for no
doubt but he must judge, if he must execute;) and then you have a Pope in his
colors, even in his Universal Sovereignty Spiritual and Temporal.

And (as I said before from Suarez and others) when the Pope has deposed a
King, any man may kill him. I will not trouble you with Mariana's directions
for poisoning him, or secretly dispatching him (de Reg. instit. lib. 1. cap.
7.) Suarez his moderate conclusion is enough (Defens. fid. Cathol. li. 6 c. 4.
sect. 14.) [Post sententiam, etc. After sentence past he is altogether deprived
of his Kingdom, so that he cannot by just title possess it; therefore from
thence forward he may be handled as a mere tyrant; and consequently any private
man may kill him] O Learned Suarez! No wonder if you and your Profession be
dear to Princes; and if Henry the fourth of France took down the Pillar of your
infamy, and received you into his Kingdom and Heart again? No wonder if the
Venetians at last have readmitted you, to procure some aid against the Turk.

I will conclude with one Testimony of a Roman Rabbi (cited by Bishop Usher,
who knew his name, but would not do him the honor to name him.) It is, B. P.
(...). Epistol. J. R. impresan 1609. Who has excused the Powder Plot from the
Imputation of cruelty, [because both Seeds and Root of an evil herb must be
destroyed] and does add a derision of the simplicity of the King in imposing on
them the oath of Allegiance, in these most memorable expressions, worthy to be
engraven on a Marble Pillar [Sed vide in tanta astutia, quanta sit simplicitas!
etc. But see what simplcity here is in so great craft! When he had placed all
his security in that Oath, ho thought he had framed such a manner of oath, with
so many circumstances, which no man could any way dissolve with a safe
conscience. But he could not see, that if the Pope dissolve the Oath, all its
knots, whether of being faithful to the King, or of admitting no Dispensation,
are accordingly dissolved. Yea I will say a thing more admirable. You know I
believe, that an unjust Oath, if it be evidently known to be such, or openly
declared such, obliges no man. That the Kings oath is unjust, is sufficiently
declared by the Pastor of the Church himself. You see now that the Obligation
of it is vanished into smoke, and that the bond which so many wise men thought
was made of iron, is less then straw.]

These are the words of Papists themselves. From their published writings we
tell you their Religion.

I know they will here again tell us abundance of false accusations of the
Protestants, such as [the Image of both Churches] heapeth up; and they will
tell us of our war, and killing the King in England. But of this I have given
them their answer before. To which I add, 1. The Protestant doctrine expressed
in the Confessions of all their Churches, and in the constant stream of their
writers, is for obedience to the Sovereign Powers, and against resisting them,
upon any pretenses of Heresy, or Excommunication, or such like.

2. The wars in England were raised between a King and Parliament, that joined
together, did constitute the Highest Power; and upon the lamentable division
(occasioned by the Papists,) the people were many of them uncertain which part
was the Higher, and of greatest Authority: some thought the King, and others
thought the Parliament, as being the Representative body of the people (in whom
Politicians say is the Majestas Realis,) and the Highest Judicature, and having
the chief part in Legislation, and Declaration what is just or unjust, what is
Law and what is against Law: Had we all been resolved in England which side was
by Law the Higher Power, here had been no war. So that here was no avowed
resisting of the Higher Powers. None but a Parliament could have drawn an Army
of Protestants here under their banner.

3. And withal that very Parliament (consisting of Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen
and Lawyers, who all declared to the people, that by Law they were bound to
obey and assist them) did yet profess to take up offensive Arms only against
Delinquents, or rather, even but defensive against those men that had got an
Army to secure them from Justice: And they still professed and vowed fidelity
to the King which, as I have showed, they manifested to the last of their
power, till they were imprisoned and secluded. Read Mr. Irins Speech for
Agreement with the King: and read the writing of the London Ministers presented
to the General, and published against the Kings death: and Read the Vindication
of the secluded members, and read the Passages of the war with Scotland, and of
the Imprisonment of many London Ministers, and of the death of Mr. Love and
others: and tell me whether you can do men greater wrong then to defame them
for being causers of that which they disowned, though it cost them the loss of
Liberty, Estate, or Life.

4. And really if you take either Vanists or Levellers (who were the chief
agents in this) for Protestants, you may as well say that Papists are
Protestants. The world knows that the Prayers, the Petitions, Protestations,
and other endeavors of the Protestants, even the Presbyterians, was for the
preventing the death of that King, how ever many of them disliked his course,
and joined with the Parliament against his adherents. This is the very truth,
which they that have been eye witnesses all along have good reason to know,
whatever any Papist say to the contrary.

5. And what Protestants be they that give power to any man on earth to depose
Princes, and give their Kingdoms to others; or to disoblige all their subjects,
and warrant them to kill them, and dispense with oaths, and turn them all into
smoke and straw as yours do?

Renounce your treacherous Principles, and we will cease to charge you with
them. Let a General Council and Pope but Decree the contrary to what the
forecited Pope and General Council have Decreed, or else do you all declare
that you think this Pope and Council erred, and then we will shake hands with
you; for then you will either cease to be true Papists, or at least become
tolerable members of humane societies. Why does not the Pope himself at least
condemn these doctrines, if really he disown them? The case is too plain.

CHAP. XLIX.
Detect. 40. THeir last course when all other fail, is, To turn from Fraud to
Force, and open Violence, stirring up Princes to wars and bloodshed, that they
may destroy the professors of the Reformed Religion, as far as they are able,
and do that by flames and sword, by halters, and hatches, which they cannot do
by Argument? Hence have proceeded the bloody butcheries of the poor Waldenses
and Albigenses, formerly and now again of late; and the wars in Bohemia, the
League and wars, and Massacres in France, the desolating wars of Germany, the
plots, invasions and wars in England: Most of the flames in Christendom of late
ages have been kindled for the Pope by his Agents, that he might warm him by
that fire that others are consumed by. Hence his own pretenses to the Temporal
Sword, and so many volumes written to justify it, and so many Tragedies acted
in the execution. And yet these men cry up Antiquity and Tradition. I wonder
what Bishop in all the world for above three hundred years after Christ, did
ever claim or exercise the temporal sword, as much as to be a Justice of Peace?
nay it was their judgment that it did not belong to them. Neither the Pope nor
any Bishop on earth, as such, has any thing to do with the coercive power of
the sword; nor may not inflict the smallest penalty on body or purse, but only
guide men by the Word of God; and the utmost penalty they can inflict is, to
excommunicate them. And they have nothing to do to destroy men, when they have
excommunicated them, nor to cause the Magistrate to do it: but rather should
still endeavor their Conversion. Synesius Epistol. 57. against Andronicus
says as follows [(...), etc. To join together secular government with the
Priesthood, is to tie together things that are incoherent (or such as cannot be
tied together) The old times made the same men Priests and Judges: For the
Egyptians and Hebrems did long make use of the Government of Priests. But
afterward, as seems to me, when Gods work began to be done in an humane manner,
God separated the two sorts of life, and one of them was made sacred, and the
other appointed for Rule and Command. For some he turned to these Material (or
common, secular) things, and some he associated with himself: The former were
appointed for secular business; the later for prayer. But from both does God
require that which is honest (or Good.) Why then do thou revoke this? Why
will thou conjoin what God has separated? who would not have us indeed to do
the work of secular Rulers, but by doing it to deprave (or mar) it; then which
what can be more unhappy? Do thou need a Ruler? (or Patron) Go to him that
manageth the Laws of the Commonwealth. Do thou need God in any thing? Go to
the Bishop (or Priest) of the City: not that thou shall be sure there to have
all that thou desire, but that I will afford thee the best assistance that I
can (or will do my best in it.) So far Synesius: Which I wonder how Petavius
could pass over without some distorting observation, considering how low it
treads the Roman Kingdom. But Baronius had the cunning as to extract even from
hence some advantage to his cause, even to show the Power that Pastors have to
excommunicate Rulers (ad An. 411.) as Synesius with the Council did Andronicus.
But 1. He went not out of his own circuit to play the Bishop in other men's
Diocese. 2. Much less did he take up the Temporal Sword against him, but
disclaimeth and detesteth any such thing. Why does not the Pope when he has
past his Excommunications, content himself that he has done his part; but he
must excite Princes, yea force them to execute his rage, and fall upon the
Lives and Dominions of such Princes as he will call Heretical? He knows how
small account would be made of his brutish thunderbolts, if he had not a
secular Arm to follow them: Nay why is he and many of his Cardinals and
Bishops, secular Princes themselves? Why joyneth he those Functions of
Magistracy and Priesthood which Synesius here tells us God has separated, and
made incoherent in one and the same person? Let the Pope usurp what
Ecclesiastical power he please, he would not so much disturb the Church by it,
if he did not second it by another power. It is violence that he trusts too.
He knows if it were not for Arms and Violence, he would soon be spewed out by
the Christian world. And yet many of his followers that seem more moderate,
confess he has nothing to do as Pope with any but the Spiritual Sword (which
works no further then Conscience does consent and yield.) And yet his Kingdom
stands on those legs, which the doctrine of these more moderate men do disown.

The same doctrine also Bernard taught the Pope himself. Ad Eugen. P. R. de
Considerat. l. 2. Saying [Quid tibi dimisit S. Apostolus? etc. What did the
holy Apostle leave thee? Such as I have says he, that give I to thee: And what
was that? One thing I am sure of; it was not gold, nor silver, when he said
himself, Silver and gold have I none. If thou can claim this by any other
title, so let it be; but not by Apostolical right: For he could not give thee
that which he had not: such as he had, he gave, a care of the Churches, but did
he give thee a domination? Hear himself [Not as Lords (or Ruling as Lords)
says he, in the Clergy (or heritage) but as examples of the flock. And less
thou think that he spoke it only in humility, and not in verity, it is the
voice of the Lord himself in the Gospel: The Kings of the Gentiles rule over
them, and they that have power over them, as called Benefactors, (or Bounteous)
and he infers [Butlyou shall not be so] It is plain, that Domination is
forbidden the Apostles. Go thou therefore, and usurp if thou dare, either
Apostleship whilst thou Rulest as a Lord, or a Lordly Rule (or Domination)
while thou art Apostolic. Plainly thou art forbidden one of the two: If thou will have both alike, thou losest both.] So far Bernard. By whose verdict the
Pope and his Bishops are deprived of both; by grasping at both long ago.

Nay the Pope makes himself a Temporal Prince in every Princes Dominion on
earth, where he is able to do it, and takes all the Clergy out of their
Government into his own. So that actually he has dispossessed them of part of
their Dominion already, by taking so considerable a part of their subjects from
under their power, yea and those that have so great an influence upon all the
rest: What by public Preaching, and Churchgoverning, and secret Confessing,
and dependence on them for the Sacraments, one would think it should be no hard
matter for a Romish allowed numerous Clergy, to be Masters of any Kingdom where
they are. And thus Princes are more then half conquered already, without a war.
If any believe not that the Pope does not thus exempt his Clergy from the
secular power, it is because he knows not their most notorious principles and
practices. Nay even in England, in King Charles his Articles for the Spanish
match, the Pope had the confidence to demand this Prerogative, and therefore
himself added to the sixteenth Article, which freed them from Laws about
Religion, [Ecclesiastici vero nullis legibus subjaceant, nisi suorum superiorum
Ecclesiasticorum] that is [Ecclesiastick persons shall be under no Law, but of
their Superior Ecclesiastics (or Churchmen)]. Is not this plain English? See
Prins Introduct. p. 6. So that no Churchman must be under any Law of the Land,
or Government of Secular Princes. And when they have such a strength in our own
Garrisons, a foreign Enemy is easily let in. To the exciting of whom they will
never be wanting, having their Agents in one garb or other at the ears of the
Princes and States in Christendom, and of most of the Great and Noble persons
that are deeply interessed in the Government. Yea, and with Infidel Princes
sometimes, as Cyril the Patriarck of Constantinople proved, to the loss of his
life, for being so much against the Papists. And the more cause have all
Christian Princes and States to be vigilant against these incendiaries, 1.
Because they trust to War and Violence, and build their Kingdom on it, and
therefore study it day and night. 2. And because they have such a fry of
politic Jesuits all abroad continually upon the design; whose contrivances
and endeavors are day and night to bring Princes and Nations to their will,
and to kindle divisions and wars among them to attain their Ends. They make a
trade of this employment. And expert prepared men, that follow a business all
their days, are like enough to make something of it at last; especially while
others sleep, or silently look on, and let them alone to play their game. If
the Papists can but get into the Saddle, either by deceiving the Rulers, or
Commanders, or by bringing foreign force against us, they will give us leave
to dispute, and write, and preach against them, and laugh at us that will stand
talking only, while they are working: And when the Sword is in their hand, they
will soon answer all our Arguments, with a faggot, a hatchet, or halter;
Smithfield confuted the Protestants, that both the Universities could not
confute. Their Inquisition is a School where they dispute more advantagiously
then in Academies. Though all the Learned men in the world could not confute
the poor Albigenses, Waldenses and Bohemians, yet by these Iron Arguments they
had men that presently stopped the mouths of many thousands, if not hundred
thousands of them: Even as the Mahometans confute the Christians. A Strappado
is a knotty Argument. In how few days did they confute thirty thousand
Protestants in and about Paris, till they left them not (on earth) a word to
say. In how few weeks space did the ignorant Irish thus stop the mouths of many
thousand Protestants? Even in Ulster alone, as is strongly conjectured, by
testimony on Oath, about an hundred and fifty thousand men were mortally
silenced: Alas we now find that the poor Irish commonly know but little more of
Christ, but that he is a better man of the two then Saint Patrick: And
therefore how long might they have been before they could have silenced so many
Protestants any other way? There Is nothing like stone-dead, with a Papist. They
love not to tire themselves with Disputes, when the business may be sooner and
more successfully dispatched.

Well, seeing this is the way that they are resolved on, and no peaceable
motions will serve for the preventing it, all men that have care of the Church
and Cause of Jesus Christ, and the happiness of their posterity, have cause to
stand on watch and guard: Not to be cruel to them (leave that to themselves,)
but to be secured from their cruelty. I should be abundantly more earnest then
I am, to press all men to such a patience and submission in Causes of Religion,
as leaves all to God alone, but that we all see how the Papists are still at
the door with the Swords in their hands, and watching for an opportunity to
break in. And if in modesty we stand still and let them alone, they will give
us free leave when they have the day, to call them Traitors, or perfidious, or
what we please. Let loosers talk: Let them have the Rule, and then make the
best you can of your Arguments. If they can once get England and other
Protestant Countries, into the case of Spain and Italy, their Treachery shall
not be cast in their teeth; for they will leave none alive and at liberty to do
it. When we see in good sadness that it is Navies, and Armies, and stabbings of
Kings, and Powder-plots, and Massacres that we have to dispute against, it is
time to be able to Answer them in their own way, or we lose the day. It is not
a good Cause, or wit, or learning, or honesty, that will then serveturn. I know
God is all-sufficient for his Church, and in him must be our Trust: But he
requires us to expect his blessing in the use of lawful probable means. He can
give us Corn without plowing, and sowing: but we have little reason to forbear
these and expect it: He can Convert men without preaching: But yet the blessing
of God does presuppose Paul's planting, and Apollo's watering. He can Rule and
Defend us without Magistrates, but it is not his appointed way. And he can save
us from deceitful bloody men, without our care, and vigilance and resistance:
but it is not his ordinary appointed course in which he would have us look to
him for deliverance.

And therefore in the Name of God let Princes and Parliaments be vigilant: for
they watch for the outward security of the Church and Commonwealth (as
Ministers do for our spiritual welfare) as those that must give account. And
let the people take heed what Parliament or Magistrates they choose: And let
all that love the Gospel, and the prosperity of the Christian world, and of
their posterity, have their eyes in their head, and take heed of that bloody
hand, that has in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Savoy, Low Countries,
Germany, Bohemia, etc. already spilt so many streams of Christian blood. If the
Wise, the Learned, Moderate Lord du Plessis, was so zealous for the Lawfulness
of Necessary Defense, as Grotius charge him, as to put it into his Testament,
(whom he makes also the Author of Junius Brutus, I know not on what ground)
doubtless he knew with whom he had to do, and thought that every Guisian League
was not a Law of God or of the King.

Some Princes think that it is their safest way to please the Pope and
Jesuits, and so will be Papists, on the terms as some of the Indians worship
the Devil, because he is so naught, that he may not hurt them. But these men
were wiser, if they understood, that the malice of Infernal Spirits is not to
be avoided by pleasing them, but by resisting them. They are too bad to be ever
pleased by any means, but what will be your utter ruin: And they are not
stronger then the Devil himself, who will fly if we resist him. If the best
were not the most Powerful, what would become of the world? And if God be
stronger then the Devil, he should rather be pleased then the Devil; for he is
able to defend you from the Devils displeasure: and he is most able to hurt you
if you be dispisers of his power: which Justice will effect more certainly on
the bad, then Satan's malice can do upon the good. Men think themselves wise,
that shift for their safety by carnal and unlawful means: But they shall all
find at least, that plain honesty is the best policy, and the favor of God the
best security, and a life of faith the most prudent life; and that shifting for
your selves in unbelieving ways, is the greatest folly. It is the design of the
Papists by the strokes of Clements, Ravilliacks, Vauxes, and such others, to
terrify Princes, that they may not dare to resist them, but may see that they
have no hold of their lives while they are under their displeasure. But yet
such as have most displeased them have escaped best. It is recorded by one, that
the great King Henry of France, being persuaded to stand it out against the
Jesuits, answered, [Give me security for my Life then] And what a security did
he find in his unbelieving way?

A thousand pitties it is that Protestant Princes should not be united among
themselves, that they might be strengthened for their joint Defense; But that
the envious man should be able so far to over-wit them, as to sow among them
the seeds of war, while they sleep, or selfishly mind their own affairs and
interests: And a greater pity and shame it is, that the Ministers of the
Gospel of peace should be the causes of these divisions, or should not do their
best to heal them: But it is the greatest shame of all to us, that so many
years experience of the calamitous effects of our Divisions, and so much
industry of many worthy peaceable men, should do no more to a fuller
Reconciliation then yet is done. The names, and pacifying Labors of such as
Duraeus, Davenant, Hall, Morton, Usher, Hayne, Dr. Morin, Amyraldus, Hottonus,
Conradus, Bergius, Johannes Bergius, Georgius, Calixtus, Jerem: Buroughs, and
many more that have labored for peace, do live as Monuments of their honor and
our dishonor, and do reflect much shame upon the faces of those Reformed
Ministers and Churches that after all this are so much unreconciled: yea, that
are not by the strongest motives and perswasives, so much as excited to zealous
endeavors for the healing of our sad division; no nor some of them restrained
from the passionate prosecution of their increase.

If yet any Papist, believing such false Histories as [the Image of both
Churches] does contain, or really finding any Protestants culpable, shall say,
that we are as bad as they in wars or cruelty, and that Illiacos intra muros
peccatur, and extra. I again reply, 1. That true History and experience tells
the world, that there is no comparison between their excessive cruelties and
ours. 2. Yet it is none of my desire or intent, to defend any person or people
that have been truly guilty in the least degree. 3. Our doctrine is against
that which theirs does own. 4. If either our Doctrine or practice have been
amiss, we desire reproof and information, and are willing to reform them. The
Word of God being our only Rule, if it appear that we have in any point
misunderstood it, we desire nothing more then to be rectified, and then we
shall confess our former faults before the world, and promise reformation. For
our Principles fix us not in Sin or Error. But the Papists are fixed in their
Errors, and think there is a necessity lies on them never to amend. Now the
Pope and a General Council has already decreed that the Pope may depose
Princes, and Absolve their subjects, and give their Lands to others; to amend
this abominable error, is with them to give away all their cause, and to cease
to be Papists. So that all Princes and People must necessarily despair of their
amendment.

CHAP. L. Some Proposals for a (hopeless) Peace.
IT is A Defensive conflict that I have been hitherto managing; This work is
put upon us by our adversaries. But in the conclusion I will add a few words of
that whith enticeth by its amiable aspect, and which we gladly follow, without
importunity or constraint. And were our Power but answerable to our Desires, we
would soon put an end to these contentions of the Church, without the hurt of
any of the Dissenters: Yea did there appear but any considerable Hopes of
success, I should venture to be more large in Proposals to that end: But when
wiser men, of greater interest can do no good, and the case appears as next
to desperate, a few words may suffice to satisfy my own conscience, and to
please my mind with the mention of a Peace, and to help some others to right
Dispositions and Desires, though we have never so little expectation of success.

And in order to what follows, I must first desire every Reader rightly to
understand the meaning and design of all that I have hitherto said. It is but
to be a necessary help to the Discovery of the Truth, and the confutation of
the contrary errors, and the just defense of the doctrine of Christ, and of his
Churches, I solemnly protest that it is none of my design or desire, 1. To make
any believe that the Difference is wider between us and the Papists then indeed
it is. Nay I am satisfied that in many doctrinall points it is not so great as
commonly it is taken to be by many, if not most, on both sides: as in the
points of certainty of Salvation, of Pardon, of Justification, of Works, of
Faith; and in almost all the controversies about Predestination, Redemption,
Free Will, the work of Grace, etc. The Dominicans in sense agree with the
Calvinist (as they call them) and the Jesuits with the Lutherans and
Arminians: and so in diverse other points. The diverse understanding of words
among us, and the weakness and passions of Divines, and a base fear of the
censures of a party, has occasioned may on both sides to feign the differences
to be much wider then indeed they are: so that when an Alvarez, a Bannes, a
Gibieuf, have spoken the same things as the Protestants do, they are presently
fain to pour out abundance of unworthy slanders against the Protestants, for
fear of being accounted Protestants themselves. And to show their party how
much they differ from us, they must feign us to be monsters, and to hold that
which commonly we abhor: And some Protestants are too blame also in some
measure in this kind. This unchristian dealing will gripe the conscience, when
once it is awakened. Let me be rather numbered with those that are ambitious to
seem as Like to all the Churches of Christ, and as much to agree with them, as
honestly and possibly I may, what party soever distaste that union and
agreement. And let my soul abhor the desire of appearing more distant and
disagreeing then we are, what censures so ever I may incur. Our students would
not so ordinarily read Aquinas, Scotus, Ariminensts, Durandus, etc. if there
were not in them abundance of precious truth which they esteem. How near does
Dr. Holden come to us in the fundamental point of the Resolution of our faith?
How near come to the Scotists to us in sense, about the point of Merit? and
Waldensis and others yet nearer? How near comes Contarenus to us (and many
more) in the point of Justification? How near comes Cardinal Cajetan to us in
the Liberty of dissenting from the Fathers in the Exposition of the Scriptures?
and so does Waldonate and many another. How near comes Cardinal Cusanus (lib.
de Concord.) to us, even in the Essential point of difference, about the
Original and Title that Rome has to its supremacy? How near comes Gerson to us
in the point of Venial and Mortal sin? perhaps as near as we are to our selves.
How near come the Dominicans and Jansenians to us in the points of
Predestination, Grace and Free- will? For my own part, I scarce know a
Protestant that my thoughts in these do more concur with, then they do with
Jansenius, (that is indeed, with Augustine himself.) There are very few points
of the Protestant doctrine, which I cannot produce some Papist or other to
attest (and easily thus be even with Mr. Brerely, upon fairer terms then he
deals with us.)

2. I do also protest that it is none of my desire or design, to create any
unjust Censures of the final state of Papists in any Readers: nor to persuade
men that they are all damned, or that there are no honest godly men among them.
When I read such writers as Gerson, Barbanson, Ferus, and others, I am fully
satisfied that there are many among them (how many God only knows) that truly
fear God, and are sanctified gracious people, with whom I hope to dwell for
ever. And therefore I think it my Duty not only to forbear unjust Censures of
them, but also to love them with that entire special Christian Love by which
Christ would have us known to be his Disciples; and to persuade all others to
do the like. Though still I am constrained to say, that in my small
acquaintance with them, I find no comparison between the English Papists and
our Churches in point of Holiness. I would they were much better.

3. I do also protest that it is not my desire or design to make any innocent
Papist to be accounted guilty of the faults of others which he disowns.

4. Nor is it any of my desire or design to provoke the Magistrate to any
cruelty or injustice toward them; nor to lay any penalty on them, but what is
truly of necessity for the safety of himself and the Commonwealth, and a just
restraint of them from perverting others, and doing mischief to the souls of
men, as I shall open more at large anon.

5. Nor is it any of my desire or design to make the generality of them
unjustly more odious with Rulers or People, then the measure of their
corruptions do deserve: Or to hide any of their virtues, or deprive them of any
honor which is their due. This much my conscience witnesses of my intents;
though I know the partial will hardly believe it, when they feel themselves
smart by that Contradiction which they have made necessary for our own defense.
And this I thought necessary to premise, before I lay down the following
Proposals, that prejudice and passion do not turn away men eyes, or cause them
to misinterpret them. For it is prejudice, partiality, and faction, that has
hitherto frustrated all such Proposals and attempts.

CHAP. LI.
THere are five several Degrees of Peace which lie before us to be attempted
between the Roman and Reformed Churches: We shall begin with the highest, and
upon supposition of the failing of our Designs for that, come down to the next,
and so to the Lowest.

1. The first Degree of Peace to be Intended and Desired is, That we may so far
Agree, as that we may hold personal Communion in the same Assemblies, in the
worship of God, and live under the same particular Pastors.

2. If that cannot be attained, the next Degree desirable is, That we may hold
a Catholic Christian Communion in several Assemblies, under several Pastors,
acknowledging each other the true Churches of Christ and joining in Synods when
there is need, or at least, giving each other, as Christian Brethren, the right
hand of Fellowship.

3. If that may not be attained, the next Degree desirable is, That we may take
one another for Christians and Churches of Christ, though under such
corruptions as we think we are bound to disown by denying the present exercise
of Communion: as we do with particular Offenders, whom we only suspend, but not
condemn.

4. If this much may not be had, but we will needs excommunicate each other
absolutely, the next degree of Peace desirable is, That we may at least so far
regard the common truths that we are agreed upon, and the souls of the people,
as to consult on certain terms on which we may most peacably manage our
differences, with the least hatred, and violence, and disturbance of the Peace
of Christendom, and with the least impediment to the general success of those
common truths that we are all agreed in.

5. If this may not be attained, the lowest Degree desirable is, That at least
we may take each other for more tolerable adversaries then Mahometans and
Infidels are, and therefore may make a common Agreement to cease our wars and
bloodshed, and turn all our Arms against the great and common enemy of the
Christian name.

Were it not for the Devil, and wicked minds, all these might be attained: but
if men be not themselves incarnate Devils, we may expect the last. And
understand that the terms of the lowest Degrees are all employed in the Higher.

And now for the Highest and most desirable Degree of Peace, viz. That we may
meet in the same Assemblies, under the same Pastors, there is so little
probability that ever it should be accomplished, and withal the various
apprehensions of Christians does make it so necessary to bear with one another
in this, that I shall say but little of it, as knowing that I am like to lose
my labor. Only this much concerning the terms.

If you will impose no more in point of Belief, as necessary to Salvation, but
what is contained in the holy Scriptures, yea and in the three Creeds, and four
first General Councils; and will leave the Pastors of the particular Churches
to worship God according to the Rule of the holy Scriptures, prudentially
themselves determining of mere Cireumstances left to their determination;
according to the general Rules, of Order, Decency and Edification, and bearing
with a difference herein according to the different state of the Churches or
judgment of the Pastors, this is the only probable way to bring us to this
highest degree of Peace. Though according to this course, men should be left to
some liberty to join with what particular Congregation they see best, and so
would most commonly join with those that are nearest to their own judgment;
yet the minds of most would be so mollified by mutual forbearance, and by being
satisfied in the way that is thus commonly agreed on, that they would not
scruple to join with one another in worship in the several Assemblies.

And here I shall further add, that if these terms cannot be yielded to, yet
all that will yield to the terms of the next Degree of Peace, may be admitted
into our Assemblies, though we cannot join with them in theirs. For the Papists
have much more in the manner of their worship to keep us back, then we have in
ours to keep them back. For their errors lie in Excess, and they suppose ours
to lie but in Defect. Now Conscience may well yield to perform one part of a
duty when it cannot perform the rest: But it can never yield to commit one
actual sin, by doing what is forbidden by God. E. G. If the Papists think that
we sinfully omit the Sacrament of extreme unction, they may nevertheless be
present at the Sacrament of Baptism. If they think we preach not all the truth
that we ought, they may nevertheless hear and receive that which we do preach.
But in their Assemblies we must do those positive actions which our Consciences
tell us are sins against God. And therefore unless they will yield (as they
will not) to the above mentioned terms, we cannot join in their Assemblies; but
upon the terms in the next Chapter we can admit them into ours.

But if the Churches have not a necessary Liberty in this, they will never
agree, but be still breaking into pieces, or persecuting one another, to force
men to join with such Assemblies as best please them that bear the Sword.
Though we readily grant that to hear and learn the principles of Religion, and
submit to the state and duty of Catechumens, men may with less inconvenience be
forced, and ordinarily should so be.

CHAP. LII.
THe second Degree of Peace desirable, below the former, is, That if we cannot
live under the same particular Pastors, and join in the same Assemblies, yet we
may hold a distant Catholic Communion in several Assemblies, without
condemning or persecuting one another; and may afford the special Love of
Christians to each other.

This will not be done as long as we take each other for Heretics; and
therefore the causes of those censures must be removed, partly by a nearer
agreement in our Principles, and partly by a greater Moderation in our Censures
of one another. And this a man would think among Christians might be obtained.
The terms on which it must be had are these.

Suffer us to confine our selves in Worship and Church Government to the Word
of God; and the Determination of our particular Churches or Pastors about mere
Circumstantials left to their determination, and do you confine your selves
accordingly, or not extending your practice beyond the Canons of the four first
General Councils, and the rest called [Canones Ecclesiae Universalis]
(published by Justellus, Tillius, or the Codex Dionysii Exigui) and for matters
of Faith, we will all profess to receive the Scripture, and what ever is
contained in the said Councils and the three Creeds, and to insist upon no more
as necessary. And on these terms we may live in Love as Brethren.

Here note, 1. That in matter of Faith we will not be bound to take more then
is in the Scripture, and yet we will take all as aforesaid that is in the
Creeds, because we are persuaded that there is no more then is in the
Scripture. 2. We will not tie each other to profess on what Grounds we receive
the Doctrine of these Creeds and Councils. If you receive it as Tradition
superadded to Scripture, and if we receive it as being the same with Scripture
Doctrine, or a meet Exposition of it, we will leave each other in this without
examination to their liberty, as long as it is the same things that we believe.
3. In matters of Worship and Government we may not be compelled to take in all
that is in all these Councils; but only we will promise not to go beyond them,
and take in any more, and so shall you: so that if some of us confine our
selves to the Holy Scripture, and others will go further, as far as all those
Canons do extend; we will yield to live as Brethren in Christian Love, and
forbear the censuring of one another. And herein you may well condescend to us,
when in many things you have cast off the Canons of those Councils your selves;
and abundance of them concern not our times or Countries, and so many of your
own Writers confess that all things necessary to Salvation are in the
Scriptures, and that Canons are mutable, and Churches may vary in these lesser
things.

CHAP. LIII.
COuld the former terms of Peace be yielded to, it would be happy for the
Churches; and I am persuaded were it not for the Italians, the French would
yield to them. And some Protestants will go further, and yield to Rome; that if
Papists will confine their Faith, and Government, and Worship but to those
limits as the Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians, etc. do, they will readily hold
this Catholic Communion with them. But then we must still remember, 1. That we
will not be bound to approve of all that they do. 2. Nor shall they go about to
force all others to rise up to their pitch; nor do as the English Bishops would
have done, to silence and cast out all those Ministers that will not go beyond
the Scriptures. You shall bear with all that will be Ruled by the Scripture,
and we will bear with all that will not go beyond the said General Councils, or
Codex Canonum Ecclesiae universalis: Yea, and admit such to our Society and
Assemblies.

But now supposing that Rome will not yield to this (though me thinks France
and other Nations may do it without them) the next Degree desirable is, that
[At least we may take one another for Christians and Churches that have such
corruptions, as yet leave us good hopes of the salvation of multitudes, though
we suppose salvation more rare and difficult where those corruptions are, then
where they are not, and though we are forced to suspend that Communion with
such which with sound members we should hold.]

And indeed the obtaining of this much Peace, requires no more but Christian
Charity conducted by a right understanding of each other. And for my part I
have already this much peace with the Church of Rome, and so have many millions
more of Protestants as well as I: and I think the generality of them: But Rome
has not so much Charity for us: But we shall not answer nor be condemned for
other men's uncharitableness. I need not therefore propose any means for that
peace which we have already attaired to, or may if we will. But then let this
be accompanied by the following forbearances.

CHAP. LIVE.
THE fourth Degree of Peace desirable, whether the last mentioned be attained
or not, is, [That we may so far lay by our hatred, wrath, and striving about
the Controverted-points, as to consult together of the terms on which we may
manage our differences with the least disturbance to the Peace of Christendom,
and the least disadvantage to the Truths that we are agreed in, and to the
peoples souls.]

Religious Reason must needs confess the Reasonableness of this proposal in the
General: But all the difficulty lies in the particulars. If you ask me what
the particular terms are on which we should agree, I answer, There are many at
hand, that Reason must needs approve of; but because there is no likelihood of
accepting them, I shall spare the labor of proposing them. And the rather,
because we have much ado to agree on this much among our selves, or the Papists
among themselves: with what hope can we move that the Agreement should be
Universal? But this much I may propose, 1. That a Consultation of the Agents of
Christian Princes and Divines might do much to further such a thing. And till
that can be had, some few of the more Peaceable Princes and Divines should lead
the way, and give the rest a good example. 2. And that an Universal Liberty of
Conscience, with necessary restrictions, might be a probable way.

Where note, 1. That it is an Universal Liberty only that we move for, or at
least on equal terms. It is not that the Papists may have Liberty in England,
and we have none in Spain and other Countries. The Author of the Image of both
Churches makes a long and subtle persuasive for Liberty of Conscience: But
where would he have it? Let them take this equal motion, and yield to it if
they dare. Let the Protestants have liberty in Italy, Spain, Flanders,
Portugal, Austria, Bavaria, etc. and we shall consent that the Papists have as
much Liberty in England, Holland, Sweden, Denmark, etc. But it must in reason
be on equal terms. Yet this advantage we know they have, that their Agents and
Missionaries are incomparably more numerous then ours, by reason of the
multitude of their Friars, Jesuits, etc. and their doctrines are more suitable
to corrupted nature, and carnal interest, and the people are more engaged by
worldly obligations to their ways: And yet we are so confident of the Power of
Truth, that I would this Proposal were accepted. The Bible it self without any
Preachers, would shrewdly shake the Kingdom of the Pope, where men have liberty
to use it.

2. The limitations of this Liberty are, 1. That one party have no more of it
then the other. 2. That it extend not to allow a disturbance of Ministers and
Churches in Gods Worship, nor any unpeaceable tumultuary proceedings. 3. That
no Party be tolerated under this pretense, to teach any thing against the
Essentials or Necessary points that we are agreed on, nor any thing that is
against the peace of the Commonwealth, or lives, or dignities of the Governors
thereof.

Two parties among our selves will dislike this proposal.

1. Some will say, If Liberty be desirable, why may not we grant it in England,
though Spain, Italy, etc. will not?

Answ. This Liberty is not Desirable for it self, but as a means to that end
which is so Desirable. And therefore it is no further desirable then it tends
to that end. And a partial Toleration of them, that tolerate not us, is so far
from being such a means, as that it is the next way to destroy the end that we
desire, it will but put our necks under their feet, and open our bosoms to
their Swords, and so make our desired Peace impossible. No friend of the Gospel
and Reformed Churches will prosecute that motion.

2. Others will say, It is unlawful to grant such a Liberty to Papists, because
it is false doctrine which they will preach, and Idolatry which they will
exercise; and we must not do evil that good may come by it.

Answ. We may do no evil, but we may omit that which at another time is a
duty, in a season when it is no duty. To punish such offenders is a positive
duty, which at all times is not a duty, but unseasonably performed is a sin.
For a Magistrate therefore to punish such offenders, when it apparently tends
to hinder the progress of the Gospel, and overthrow the peace and safety of the
Christian State, is not a Duty, but a sin. Would any of these Objectors be
against a Magistrates releasing of a Jesuit out of Prison, in exchange for a
faithful Minister of the Gospel, especially of many; as prisoners are commonly
exchanged in war? If not, why should they be against the releasing of such a
man to higher ends, even to save men's souls? To give Liberty is but to Permit,
or not to Hinder, or not to Punish: and therefore is but the notdoing of a work
when it is unseasonable (as Sacrifice is when God requires Mercy.) And he that
may Permit, or forbear to punish, may on a just reason promise so to do. So
that this is but forbearing the punishing of Papists, when we cannot punish
them without the exceeding hurt of the Church, and wrong to many thousand souls.

But I know I speak all this in vain, for the Pope will never consent that
Protestants shall sow their seed at Rome, lest it quickly unneast him. But in
the mean time let the Papists here confess if they be reasonable, that we have
no reason to give Liberty to them, that will give none to us, or upon unequal
terms. If they claim a special Title to it, as having the juster cause, we
desire no more then a fair trial of that, and let them that have the juster
cause take all.

3. Another particular that should here be agreed on is this, (whether the
former be consented to or not;) That on both sides where the Teachers have any
Toleration or forbearance, they may be forced by the Magistrate to teach the
Ignorant people that adhere to them, the great Articles of the Christian faith
(both words and sense) which we are all agreed in. Which was Bishop Ushers
motion to the Papist Priests in Ireland. For says he, among the Papists the
people are suffered to perish for want of knowledge; the vulgar superstitions
of Popery not doing them half that hurt, that the ignorance of those common
principles of faith does, which all true Christians are bound to learn] (Sermon.
at Wansted, page 33.)

4. Another necessary particular to be agreed on is, that we use not bitter
invectives against each other, nor uncharitable contendings, especially in the
ears of the ignorant people that have not yet learned the common truths which
we agree in: but that our Debates be managed only in such Assemblies as are
capable of them, and in a sober Christian way.

5. Another is, that such Magistrates that will not grant Toleration, may yet
on both sides avoid cruelties, and inflict no more penalties for matters of
mere Religious worship, then necessity shall require: and that herein they may
agree upon some equality in the several Nations. And in this let Spain, Italy,
Austria, and the rest, for shame consent, to be as moderate as the Turk, and to
shut up the doors of their bloody Inquisition.

6. Let us all agree to renounce all Treachery and unfaithfulness against the
Sovereign Powers, and all seditious disturbances of the Peace of Commonwealths.

7. Let those afford us the common Love of men, that think us not capable of
the special Love of Christians: and so let us Love our Neighbors as our
selves, and study to do good, and not hurt to one another; and give over
plotting to undermine one another, and destroy one another civil interest, and
get our Neighbors under our feet. This much well practiced, would do something
to the peace of the Christian world.

CHAP. LV.
THE lowest Degree, that none but incarnate Devils one would think should
resist is this; that if we will needs live as enemies, yet we may remember that
we have all greater enemies; and therefore let us give over our wars, and let
every Nation be quietly governed by their own Laws and Sovereigns, and let us
all join together against the common enemies of Christ.

We cannot but know that much of Christ's interest lies in our hands, and that
if either party were devoured by the Turk, it would be a heavy blow to the
Christian cause: If God should suffer that proud enemy to come and make a third
among us, to end our quarrels, we must justify him in his judgments; and must
to our perpetual shame confess that by our proud and passionate contendings,
and unpeacebleness, and self-seeking, we did betray the Christian cause. O
wonderful stupidity and impiety of great men, and Learned men, professing so
much zeal for God, that they can no more agree, nor bear in Love and Compassion
with each other, nor cease their wars, when a raging potent enemy stands over
them, ready to devour them both. Let the Venetians take the honor, and we the
shame: How ever their own Interest may engage them, yet materially their wars
are more honorable then ours. The Pope is eager for a General Peace among his
subjects, that they may be strenghthened to devour us: But it were an honester
design, that would give him more comfort at last, to mediate a Peace among all
Christians, that in this at least they might be one, to oppose the Turk, and
rescue the Heritage of Christ which he has oppressed.

And O what a blessed thing it were, if the Jesuits, Friars and Protestants
could but agree, to join together for the conversion of the poor Indians. And
either preach in the same, or several Countries, without seeking the
destruction there of one another; yea and afford each other help: that the
English, Hollanders, and others might send Preachers as well as Merchants into
the Indies; and we might there contribute our endeavors to propagate the
Gospel, though in our different ways, not envying, hating and hindering each
other: but remembering we all confess one Christ, though not one Vice-christ.

Conclusion.
I Have cast out these Proposals merely to acquaint the peaceable Christian,
what he should desire, that the frame of his heart may be right before God: and
not with any expectation that they should be so regarded as to procure what
they drive at. I am not so weak, or ignorant of the inconsiderableness of the
Proposer, or of the selfishness and ungodliness of the world. But yet I may
lawfully take the comfort of the most uneffecutal desires and endeavors that
are honest.

And for those that would have us Reconciled upon the Grotian terms, or upon
the French Foundation of a General Council, and would have all forced, as our
Bishops attempted to come over to their way, and deny Liberty to the rest, that
cannot thus close with them; and all that think that the Church must have some
Visible Head or Sovereign to unite in, I shall show them their error in a
distinct Disputation, which I am publishing next to this, as a supplement: and
therein I shall give them such further Proposals for a just Reconciliation, as
men that are Studious of Peace may prosecute, with hope of some success.

And because I have lately met with a Paper called [An Explanation of the Roman
Catholic Belief,] etc. which pretends to much moderation, in diverse points;
I purpose next to enquire, whether it mean as it pretends, that if it do, we
may give it welcome; if not, we may Detect its Fraud: For as I should much
rejoice to hear of so much amendment of the Roman Belief, which I thought had
been supposed by themselves to be incorrigible; So I must confess that I am so
much for plain and open dealing, that I think it my duty to help to bring their
works into the Light, and try how they agree with the Truth and among
themselves; that men may judge of them as they are.

FINIS.
The Second Part: PROVING That the Catholic Church is not a Political Body
Headed by any Earthly Sovereign, nor any such Unity to be Desired or
endeavored, by any that would not Blaspheme, Divide and Destroy, under the
pretense of Unity. SPECIALLY Directed against the Sovereignty (and Necessity
too) of General Coucnils: to the followers of Grotius, and others of that
Party, that at least would give them a Part in the Sovereignty with the Pope.
And propounding the true grounds and means of the Churches Unity and Peace.

By Rich. Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in
Kederminster, Anno Dom. 1659.

Quest. Whether the way to heal any Divisions in the Churches of Christ be by
drawing them all into One Universal Visible Political Body, under One Universal
Visible Head or Government? Or Whether the Catholic Church be a Body so United
and Governed? Neg.
CHAP. I.
Showing the Occasion and Reasons of this Writing, especially as from the
Grotians; which are Vindicated from the frivolous exceptions of Mr. Tho. Pierce.

I HAVE already in the first Part of this Book (and formerly in another)
disproved the Popes Universal Headship, and answered what Bellarmine, Boverius,
and some others say for the maintaining of it: And it is a work already done so
fully by Chamier, Whitaker, and many others, but most triumphantly and
copiously by David Blondell in a French Treatise in Folio de primatu in
Ecclesia against Cardinal Perron, that I need not, and therefore intend not to
say much here upon that subject. But this Disputation I principally intend, 1.
For the subverting of the Foundation of Popery, which is the supposition, that
the Visible Catholic Church must needs be united in some Humane Visible Head.
2. To confute the Opinion of the moderate sort of French Papists and Grotians,
that take a General Council to be the Legislative Head, and the Judicial Head
while they are in Being; and the Pope ruling by the Laws of Councils, to be the
ordinary Judicial Head. 3. To deliver some persons from a dangerous Temptation,
that by Grotius, or his followers here in England are drawn into a conceit that
the Catholic Church is such a Body as we here deny, and think that the unity
that the Scripture so commends to us cannot be attained without an Universal
Visible Head: which Temptation of theirs is much increased by observing the
differences of Opinions in the world; which every good man does lament, as we
do all the sins and frailties that on earth accompany us in the state of
imperfection. As I blame not those that desire perfect Knowledge, or Holiness;
but blame them that promise it to the Church on Earth, when it is the
prerogative of Heaven; and much more should blame him that would say we shall
be perfectly Wise and Holy if we will but be of this Opinion, that the Church
has an Infallible Humame Head; even so I blame not them that desire perfect
Concord (the Consequent of perfect Knowledge and Holiness;) for this is to
desire Heaven: But I blame them that promise us this Heaven on Earth; and them
much more that tell us we shall have it if we will but believe that a Pope or
Council is the Universal Head; and so will condemn the Church on Earth, because
it has not attained that Celestial perfection, which they have once fancied
that it may and should attain.

Concerning Grotius his opinion, design and great endeavors to reduce the
Churches to Popery, under the pretense of a Conciliation, I have lately by the
Invitation of Mr. Thomas Pierce given in my Evidence (I think beyond all
further question) out of his own writings, in his frequent and express
assertions. And Rivet in his Dialysis and his Apologet. and other writings has
sufficiently confuted him. The mistakes of many in their judging of Grotius,
are caused by their supposition, that the man was the same in his first
Conciliatory enterprises, and in his last, which is not true. He often professes
his mutations himself, and how apt he was to dislike that which he had but
lately thought or said: At first he thought out of Reconciling the Protestants
among themselves: But afterward his design was to Reconcile them with the
Papists, and that by drawing them all to be Papists, that is, to unite in the
Pope of Rome as the Universal Governor, ruling according to Canons and
Decrees; and this he thought was the only way to the union of the Churches.

The Truth of this, and the Mischiefs of the Enterprise, must be apprehended by
him that will understand my endeavors in this dispute, and escape the snare
that's laid for their perversion. And for the Truth of it, I refer you to my
foresaid writing of the Grotian Religion. Since which it pleased Mr. Pierce to
publish a sheet containing (not any thing that has the least aptitude to
persuade a rational man that Grotianism is not Popery, but) some Reasons why he
does not, at least, as yet perform the vindication, with a General profession
how easily he can do it, and make me a Winding sheet, at least as suitable as
that which I made for Popery (which when he has confuted, I shall better know
his mind and strength) This with two or three frivolous Exceptions, and many
swelling words of Vanity, with certain Squibs and empty jeers, according to the
manner of the man, is the matter of his Advertisement. Nothing could have been
easier for him then to say [or almost to say, that I am very liable, in every
line] and that his advantages are too many, and that I am an advocate for the
crimson sins of others, and an encomiast of my own. Nothing more vain then his
ostentation of the mild discharge of his Censorship, and his senseless
intimation that I take the Virtues of Episcopal Divines, for glittering sins,
when he never had a word from me of such a sense or tendency. (But Grotians
will now be but Episcopal Divines, and their glittering sins, must be their
Virtues.) Because I had acknowledged how civilly he dealt with me (no doubt on
a supposition that I was nearer his conceits then those that he had so
copiously reproached,) he takes it as an acknowledgement of his moderation, as
if it were the proof of a man's moderation, that he can give a civil word to
any, and a while refrain abusing one, while he is abusing many. I am thankful
to him that spits in most men's faces, that he speaks to, that he spitteth not
in mine; when I give a civil man no such thanks. When I commend a man for not
belying me, reproaching me, or otherwise abusing me, as he does others, I
should suspect he would take it for a dispraise: For I use not to thank good
men for doing me no mischief. His valuing the security of his own estate above
David's or Peter's (that had such special Testimonies of their Holiness, and
Promises from God, before theirs falls,) and his defending his Malignant sins
as virtues, his venomous reproaches of Puritans and Presbyterians as
Protestants frightened out of their wits, men of sedition and violence, and a
bloody Generation, with abundance of the like, and then telling us that he
meant no Puritans but such (as if one should say, the Arminians are a
perfidious bloody Generation; and then say, Its well known that he meant no
Arminians but such,) these and such like passages show the quality of the man
and his Advertisement. He that durst openly and frequently charge his
adversaries with slanders, and yet tell the world, that I [pretend that the
difference between him and his Antagonists is merely Verball] (because I said
that Most of our contentions about those points are more about words then
matter, and that such eager men as he and his Antagonist, do make themselves
and others believe that we differ much more about them then we do.] Is this
equipollent to [a difference merely verbal?]) this man its like dare do the
same by others.

But it is the business of Grotius upon which I am to meddle with him. And
first he says [that on the same Reasons as I conclude him a Papist, I must
conclude him a Protestant, unless I think as hardly of the Augustine Confession
as of the Council of Trent.] Answ. I shall yield it, when you have proved [that
a Protestant is one that holds to the Council of Trent, and the New Creed by
Pope Pius, made long after the Augustine Confession, and that the Common
Government in which all the Catholic Church must unite, is the Universal
Headship of the Pope, governing according to the Canons and Decrees, and that
the Augustine Confession is so 'to be expounded (by fair means or foul) as
shall be agreeable to, or consistent with all this.] We use not to call such
men as these Protestants, but Papists, but if this be your meaning when you
call your self a Protestant, you should have told us sooner, if you desire to
be known.

He says (the proof of which we wait for) that I [mistake at once the whole
drift of Grotius his excellent Discussio Apol. and that I translate not his
Latin into English, or lamely, etc.] Answ. 1. Nothing more easy, then to tell
me I mistake! Are not his words plain enough, and frequent enough to open to us
so much of his mind as I have charged him with? Let the Readers of his words
recited by me, be the Judges: (For him that will believe you, either to save
him the labor of reading, or against his eye sight, he is not one of them that
I write for; but shall have Liberty for me to be deceived.) 2. That I
translated not the words of Grotius, was purposely done, foredeeming that such
men as you would have said they were mistranslated, and that they were not his
own but mine: I am sure now that I give you but his own: And if you think him
wronged if the English Reader know him not, by a Translation, I pray you
translate the words your self; for I suppose you will least quarrel with your
own. But to pleasure you, I will Translate (as well as I can) the passage which
you choose out to defend, and a few more. Discus. Apol. page 255. [Those that
knew Grotius, know that he always wished for the restitution of Christians
into One and the same body: But he sometime thought, even after he was known to
the most Illustrious Vairius, that it might be begun by a Conjunction of the
Protestants among themselves: Afterward he saw that this was altogether
unfeasible; because, besides that the genius of almost all the Calvinists is
most alien from all peace, the Protestants are not joined among themselves by
any Common Government of the Church; which are the causes that the parties made
cannot be gathered into one Body of Protestants; yea and that more and more
parties are ready to rise out of them. Wherefore Grotius now absolutely
judges, and many with him, that the Protestants canno be joined among
themselves, unless at once they be joined to them that cohere to the Sea of
Rome: without which there can no common Government be hoped for in the Church.
Therefore he wishes that the divulsion which fell out, and the causes of that
divulsion may be taken away. The Primacy of the Bishop of Rome according to the
Canons is none of these, as Melanchton confesses.] I think this is the English
of Grotius words (be it spoken with a Salvo to the pre-eminence of Mr. Pierces
Translating faculty.) But here he has a quarrel, and that so momentous, as to
be his grand, if not only instance of my misdealing; and so he has written
enough against the Contagion of my Volume! A happy generation! that can make
what they will true or false by asserting it, and can give themselves the
victory at their pleasure by triumphing, and by wiping their mouths, can make
themselves innocent! and by saying any thing, or such a nothing as this, can
prove Popery to be the Protestant Religion, and make many Worshipful Gentlemen
of their mind, that were of their mind before they knew it, implicitly
believing in them, and in their Church. Well: but what is my miscarriage? Why
[the later part of these words, which are the chief, Mr. Baxter takes no notice
of in the English account which he renders of them.] Answ. 1. He supposed that
you and all that he wrote this for understood Latin, though in Answer to an
English Cavil, he wrote his Discourse in English. And he that Translated none
of the sentence, thought it no injury, to give account in English but of part.
2. But open your eyes, and look further into his words, and see whether you
wrong him not, by leaving out the rest of his account, as much as he wronged
Grotius: And look into your own advertisement, and see whether you recited not
Grotius his words your self without a Translation, committing the same error
which you reprehend, while you do reprehend it. But says the Episcopal Divine,
(for so he will needs be called) [He is deeply silent as to the causes of the
breach which Grotius did wish might be taken away, and which he charged the
Papists with.] Answ. 1. Was I deeply silent that Grotius would have the causes
taken away? What! When I recite his very words? Or was I deeply silent of the
particular causes? Do you mean Here, or Throughout? If Here, so I was deeply
silent of ten thousand things more, which either it concerned me not to speak,
or I had not the faculty of expressing in one sentence. If you mean Throughout,
you read without your eyes, or wrote either with a defective Memory or Honesty.
Read again, and you shall find that I recite the causes. 3. But did I not all
that my task required, by reciting the Negation of the causes [It was not says
Grotius, the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome according to the Canons?] And I
showed you partly, and the Canons show you fully, that that Primacy is the
Universal Headship, which Protestants (I mean not Roman, Grotian Protestants)
have ever used to call Popery. But says Mr. P. Grotius charge the Papists
with it.] Answ. 1. True! but the Protestants much more, as making many more
faults by their withdrawing from Rome then they mended. 2. And he charge not
that which we have called Popery with it, though he charge the Papists with it.
That some sins of the Papists did occasion it, he confesses, and all the
Papists that ever I spoke with of it do confess. But I am referred for these
causes charged on the Papists, to Grot. Votum page 7, 8. and thither I Will
follow Mr. P. that I may know how much he charge on the Papists himself. And
there I find that the things that Grotius found faulty in the Papists, were but
these two. 1. That to the true and ancient doctrine, many quirks of the
Schoolmen that were better skli'd in Aristotle then the Scriptures, were
introduced, out of a liberty of disputing, not out of the Authority of
Universal Councils. And the Opinions stablisht in the Church were less fitly
explicated. 2. That Pride and Covetousness, and manners of ill example
prevailed among the Prelates, etc. And really did you think that he is no
Papist that is but against the Schoolmens Opinions, and the Prelates Pride,
Covetousness, and Idleness? and holds all that they call the Decrees of
General Councils? Has not the Council at Lateran and Florence decreed that the
Pope is above a General Council? and the Council at Lateran decreed that
Princes are to be deposed, and their Subjects absolved from their fidelity, if
they exterminate not Heretics (such as Protestants) out of their Dominions? Is
he no Papist that holds all that is in the Council of Trent, if he be against
some School-points not determined, and against the Prelates Pride? Well Sir, I
understand you better then I did: And though you thought meet (that your words
might be conform to one another, and not to truth) to say that I called you
Arminian and Pelagian, I purpose (if I had done so) to call you an Arminian no
more: But I beseech you cry not out of persecution till the men of your mind
will give us leave to be Rectors of Churches in their Dominions, as you and
others of your mind are allowed to be in these. And demand not of Mr. Hickman
the bread he eats, nor the money he receives, as if it were yours, till we can
have license to be maintained Rectors, or at least to escape the Strappado in
your Church.

But I promised you some more of Grotius in English to stop your mouth, (or
open it whether you see cause:) and you shall have it. Discus. page 14.
[Grotius distinguishes between the Opinions of Schoolmen, which oblige no man
(for, says Melchior Canus, our School allows us great liberty) and therefore
could give no just cause of departing (as the Protestants did;) and between
those things that are defined by Councils, even by that of Trent: The Acts of
which if any man read with a mind propense to peace, he will find that they may
be explained fitly and agreeably to the places of the holy Scriptures, and of
the ancient Doctors, that are put in the Margin. And if besides this, by the
care of Bishops and Kings, those things be taken away which contradict that
holy doctrine, and were brought in by evil manners, and not by authority of
Councils, or Old Tradition, then Grotius, and many more with him, will have
that with which they may be content.] This is Grotius in English. Reader, is it
not plain English? Durst thou or I have been so uncharitable as to have said
without his own consent, that Mr. Pierce would have defended this Religion, and
that we have Rectors in England of this Religion? and that those that call
themselves Episcopal Divines, and seduce unstudied partial Gentlement, are
crept into this garb, and in this do act their parts so happily? If words do
signify any thing, it here appears, that Grotius his Religion is that which is
contained in the Council of Trent with all the rest, and the reformation which
will content him is only against undetermined School-Opinions, and ill manners
that Cross the doctrines of the Councils. I Will do the Papists so much right as
to say I never met with a man of them that would not say as much: Especially
taking in all Old Tradition with all the Councils (how much together by the
ears, now matters not) as Grotius does.

Yet more, Discus. p. 185. He professes that he will so interpret Scripture
[God favoring him, and pious men being consulted, that he cross not the Rule
delivered both by himself, and by the Council of Trent, etc.]

Page 239. The Augustine Consession commodiously explained, leath scarce any
thing which may not be reconciled with those Opinions which are received with
the Catholics, by Authority of Antiquity and of Synods, as may be known out of
Cassander and Hoffmeister. And there are among the Jesuits also that think not
otherwise.]

Page 71. He tells us that the Churches that join with Rome have not only the
Scriptures, but the Opinions explained in the Councils, and the Popes Decrees
against Pelagius, etc. [They have also received the Egregious Constitutions of
Councils and Fathers, in which there is abundantly enough for the correction of
vices: but all use them not as they ought. They lie for the most part hid in
Papers, as a Sword in the Scabbard. And this is it that all the lovers of piety
and peace would have corrected.] And gives us Borromaeus for a president.

Page 48. [These are the things, which thanks be to God the Catholics do not
thus believe; though many that call themselves Catholics so live as if they
did believe them: but Protestants (so live) by force of their Opinions, and
Catholics by the decay of Discipline.]

Page 95. What was long ago the judgment of the Church of Rome, the Mistress of
others, we may best know by the Epistles of the Roman Bishops to the Africans
and French, to which Grotius will subscribe with a most willing mind] Rome you
see is the Mistress of other Churches.

Page 7. [They accuse the Bull of Pius Quintus, that it has Articles besides
those of the Creed. But the Synod of Dort has more. -- But those in the Bull
are new, as Dr. Rivet will have it. But very many learned men think otherwise,
that they are not new, if they be rightly understood: and that this appears
by the places both of holy Scripture, and of such as have ever been of great
authority in the Church, which are cited in the Margin of the Canons of Trent.

Page 35. [And this is it which the Synod of Trent says, that in that
Sacrament Jesus Christ, true God, and truly man is really and substantially
contained under the form of those sensible things, yet not according to the
natural manner of existing, but Sacramentally, and by that way of existing,
which though we cannot express in words, yet may we by cogitation illustrated
by faith be certain that to God it is possible] And the Council has found
words to express it [that there is made a change of the whole substance of the
bread into the Body, and the whole substance of Wine into the Blood, which
conversion the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation.

Page 79. [When the Synod of Trent says, that the Sacrament is to be adored
with Divine worship, it intends no more but that the Son of God himself is to
be adored]

I Will add no more but that which tells you who is a Papist with the Grotians,
and who is none. Page 15. [In that Epistle Grotius by Papists meant those that
without any difference do approve of all the sayings and doings of Popes, for
honor or lucre sake, as is usual]

Ibid. He tells us that by Papists, he means not them [That, saving the right
of Kings and Bishops, do give to the Pope or Bishop of Rome, that Primacy which
ancient custom and Canons, and the Edicts of ancient Emperors and Kings assign
them. Which Primacy is not so much the Bishops, as the very Roman Churches,
preferred before all other by common consent (It Is well it has so mutable a
foundation) -- so Liberius the Bishop being so lapsed that he was dead to the
Church, the Church of Rome retained its right, and defended the cause of the
Universal Church.]

This and much more I had given the Reader before in Latin, but because Mr.
Pierce thinks, that I wrong Grotius if you have it not in English, I have born
so much respect to his words, and to the Reader, as to remove the wrong, and
thus far to satisfy his desire.

Having told you some of the Occasion of this writing, I shall add somewhat of
the Reasons of it; but the less, because I have given you so much of them
already in my foresaid Discovery of the Grotian Religion.

1. My principal Reason is that before expressed, that Popery may be pulled up
by the very roots: For Italians, French, and all build on this, that the Church
must have one visible Head.

2. That I might take in those parties of the Papists, that I have past by or
said less to in the former Part of the Book.

3. Because I see what Influence the conceit that I dispute against has on the
minds of many well-meaning less judicious people.

4. Because I perceive in part what influence the design of Grotius had upon
England, in the changes that were the occasion of our late wars; He says
himself Discuss. page 16. [That the labors of Grotius for the Peace of the
Church were not displeasing to many equal men, many know at Paris, and many in
all France, many in Poland and Germany, and not a few in England, that are
placid and lovers of peace: For as for the now-raging Brownists, and others
like them: with whom Dr. Rivet better agrees then with the Bishops of England,
who can desire to please them, that is not touched with their venom?] So that
he had Episcopal Factors here in England. And whereas some tell me, that
Grotius was no Papist, because he professed his high esteem of the Church of
England, and say they, had Church-preferment here offered him, and thought to
have accepted it. I answer 1. Either it was Grotius in the first Edition, or
the Church of England in the second Edition then in the Press, that this must
be spoken of, if true. 2. Was not Franciscus a Sancta Clara, (still the Queens
ghostly Father) a Papist, for all he reconciled the Doctrine of the Church of
England to that of Rome? Grotius and he did plainly manage the same design. 3.
Mr. Pierce assures you by his Defense, that Grotius has still his followers in
England of the party that he called the Church of England: And is it any more
proof that Grotius was a Protestant for joining with them, then that they are
Papists that join with him? Is not his Doctrine here given you in his Englished
words? Do you doubt whether the Council of Trent were Papists? This makes me
remember the words of the late King to the Marquess of Worcester: when the
Marbuess came into the room to an appointed conference about religion with him,
and leaned on D. Bayly's arm, he told the King that he came leaning on a Doctor
of his own Church: and the King replied, My Lord, I know not whether I should
think the better of you for the Doctors sake, or the worse of the Doctor for
your sake] (or to this purpose) And indeed the Doctor quickly showed, by
professing himself a Papist, what an Episcopal Divine he was: And I think we
have as fair advantage to resolve us, whether to think the better of Grotius
for the Church of Englands sake, or the worse of those that he called the
Church of England, and that were of his mind, for Grotius sake.

In a late Treatise De Antiqua Ecclesiae Brittanicae liberate Diatribe,
written by I. B. a Divine of the Church of England, and printed at Bruges, 1656
page 34, 35. These. 4. it is averred [That since the ancient liberty of the
British Church was by the consent of the whole Kingdom resumed, remaining
Catholic in all other things, it may retain that Liberty without losing its
Catholicism, and without any note of Schism or Heresie] This Liberty then was
the Reformation. And this he says was maintained by Barnes, a Papist and
Benedictine Monk and Priest in a M. S. entitled Catholico-Romanus Pacificus,
c. 3. and that for this sober work of his the Peaceable Monk, though of
unblamed life, and unspotted fame, was snatch out of the midst of Paris, and
stripped of his habit, and bound on a Horseback like a Calf, and violently
carried into Flanders, and so to Rome, and so to the Inquisition, and then put
among the Bedlams, where he dyed; and not contented with his death, they
defamed him to have dyed mad] Though Rome give Peace no better entertainment,
the Learned Author thinks that France will; and therefore adds concerning the
French Church, [Quacum (...) optanda foret etiamnum veteris redintegratio
concordiae, quam constat plus mill ab hinc annis amicissime intercessisse
inter Ecclesiam utramque Gallicanam and Brittanicam, etiam tum cum Ecclesia
Brittanica non communicabat cum Romana, and certe si utraque pars absque
prejudicio, sese mutuo intelligeret, and pars extrema de rigore suo vellet
remittere, ea Brittanicae Ecclesiae cum Gallicana concensio non foret adeo
improbabilis, atque prima front videtur Ecclesiam utramque vel alterutram
ignorantibus.] I add this but to show the Judgment of those on whom the
judgment of Grotius had any influence, for a Communion with the French, as if
we little differed from them. Still professing that I would run with the
forwardest to meet them upon tolerable terms: And that the remembrance of the
moderation, wisdom, charity of the Cassandrian party in France (that resisted
the violence of the rest long in vain, and lamented the massacres, and were
oppressed by them) is very greateful to my thoughts, and the names of many of
them very honorable in my esteem. And it grieves me that Grotius called by Mr.
Pierce a Protestant, should so far out-go them in Popery, whom the same man
confesses to have been Papists. He goes much further then

Cassander: Much further then Thuanus, that so plainly and truly opens
abundance of the Popish evils that Grotius patronizeth; and so long and
successfully did his part to keep out of France the Authority of the Council of
Trent, which was part of Grotius his Religion. And how far he went beyond that
excellent man Michael Hospitalius, the Head of that party (so much commended by
Beza as well as by Thuanus) and Foxius, and others, is easy to manifest.

5. And I am the more provoked also to perform this task, because I see by many
more as well as Mr. P. that the design is still on foot: and that the Papists
that are got so strong in England, under the mask of the Vani, the Seekers, the
Infidels, the Quakers, the Behmenists, and many other Sects, have so much
addition to their strength by Grotians that go under the mask of [Episcopal
Divines.] Which yet I should the less be troubled at, if France, Savoy,
England, Holland, Poland, Bohemia, and all parts where they prevail, did not
acquaint us by bloody, tormenting, thundering, flaming evidence, how they use
their power where they dare.

6. And it moves me much also to consider the consequence of the point in
hand. It is not a mere speculation, but a point so practical, that the right
decision and understanding of it, is as much as the Peace of millions of souls,
yea of all the Churches and Commonwealths in Christendom is worth. All that
have any thing of the love of God alive within them, are somewhat sensible of
the sinfulness and misery contained in the divisions and discord of Believers;
and therefore they must needs be solicitous for the Cure, and lay out
themselves and all they have or can do to accomplish it, if they knew the way.
And the more zealous any man is for Peace, the more resolutely will he carry on
his work, and bear down all opposition that would hinder him in that which he
thinks the way of Peace. And when persons thus disposed by humanity and grace,
shall be quite mistaken in the very thing they seek, even in the Nature of the
Churches unity and peace, they will think themselves bound with all their zeal
and diligence, to endeavor the doing of an evil work, and to accomplish a
work neither possible nor desirable. And it is not hard for a man of an
indifferent wit to foresee what uncharitableness, discomposure of minds, of
Churches and Commonwealths, and abusing and endangering of souls, is like to
be the fruit of such mistakes about the Churches Unity and Peace. And as the
School uses to say (from Boethius and Anselm) Malum non est nisi a bono and
propter bonum, so it will be like by experience to be made a proverb, that
Bellum and discordia non sunt nisi a pacificis and propter pacem: The greatest
discords and wars will be from the Love and Endeavor of Unity and Concord, and
for the obtaining of them by impossible means. These following evils may
easily be foreseen.

1. If men mistake about the Nature of the visible form of the Catholic
Church, and its unity, it is like to pervert their judgments in many other
weighty points of Religion. For when they have received this Error as a Truth,
then they will be exceedingly inclined to bend the rest of their opinions to
it, and contrive them into a Consistent Form. For Truth would to Truth, as Fire
would to Fire, and Water to Water. Yea all that is flexible within them shall
be bended to the interest of this conceit.

2. As soon as ever any man has received this opinion of the necessity of an
Universal Visible Head, or common Government of the whole Chruch, he is either
a Papist, or of an opinion equivalent in folly, tyranny, and impiety, to
Popery. For if such a Visible Head must be, there is no other that can pretend
to it with Reason or Honesty any more then the Pope: Nor is it our quarrel
against Rome, that their Bishop rather then another should be this usurping
Head, but that they would have such a one at all! It is not who shall be the
man, or power, but whether there shall be any such man or power that we
dispute. This Error about the Necessity of an Universal Visible Head, is the
very thing that turns most to Popery, and this is the common argument that is
managed by deceivers to that end, as their writings commonly declare.

3. And then when men are drawn over to be Papists for the avoiding of Schism,
and the obtaining of Unity, they are unawares involved in the most desperate
Schism; which I have proved that party to be guilty of: (and with it drink in
the dregs of all the Roman abominations.) When men have set up a new
Church-form, by setting up a new Head and Center of Unity, and then judge of
all particular Churches and Members by this standard, it leads them
unavoidably to separate from all the Churches and Christians upon earth, that
conspire not, and center not with them in their new devised Head.

4. And by this means Charity is much destroyed in men's souls, (and he that
has least of Love, has least of God) and the Preachers and Pastors turn all
their studies into matter of Controversy, and their labors into wranglings,
and all under pretense of Catholic Unity: And having not charity, they prove
not only sounding brass, and tinkling Cymbals in their most learned labors, but
too often burning brass (like Perillus Bull,) and military Trumpets, and all
this under pretense of Charity, when they have destroyed it. Hence is it that
uncharitable censures are so common, and the Lambs of Christ so often clothed
in the skins of Wolves, by the Wolves that have by exchange put on the skin of
the Lamb. Scarce a man that crosses or displeases (that is, dissenteth from,
or disobeyeth) the uncharitable Clergy, but he is stigmatized for an Heretic,
and charged with almost as much wickedness, as their mouths are wide enough to
utter, and the ears of other men to hear. What horrid things have they spoken
of the poor Waldenses and Albigenses, and Bohemians? Of Luther, Oecolampadius,
Calvin, and who not? Though I have had applauding flattering Letters from some
of them that tried whether I were flexible and ductile, yet I doubt not but I
shall have my share my self before they have done with me: and I wonder I hear
not of it before now. Hence among other reasons its like that Mr. Pierce became
so destitute of Charity, as to disgorge his sold of so many bitter reproaches
and calumnies against the Puritans and Presbyterians, whom if he know not, he
sins but as Paul did, but if he know, he terrifieth us from his principles
by the fruits: that which shows the want of Charity, shows the want of saving
Grace: and consequently the want of right to Glory. Hence it is that the
greatest Schismatics are the commonest accusers of their Brethren with schism,
Pharisaically saying, I thank thee Lord that I am not as other men, nor as
these Schismatics. Hence also it is that so many learned well-meaning Papists
do so pervert their studies and endeavors, and abuse and lose (and worse then
lose) their wits and parts to draw men to their way; compassing Sea and Land to
make a Romish Proselite, especially of a Prince, or man of power, interest, or
ability to serve them. What pains take they to draw Nations to their minds, and
to embroil the world in contentions and confusions to attain their ends? What
horrid persecutions, Massacres, and barbarous inhumane cruelties have
multitudes of men of learning and good parts and natures been engaged in, by
the very Principle that I now confute, and for the promoting of their kind of
Unity and Concord, in wicked and impossible ways?

7. Besides this, it takes men off from seeking the true Peace of the hurch,
while they mistakingly pursue a false peace. The Devil, the cunning Enemy of
Concord, has not a more effectual way to take men off from the ways and means
of holy Concord, then by starting them a false game, and causing them to lay
out all their labor to build a Babel, when they should be building Zion. Oh
what a blessed state might the Church be in if all the Jesuits, Friars,
Prelates, Priests and others, had laid out that labor for a righteous possible
Unity and Peace, in Gods appointed way, which they have vainly and impiously
laid out to unite the world in a Vice-christ or Vice-god?

Fore seeing, and at present feeling many of these calamitous consequences to
the Church, I think it of exceeding moment, that men's judgments should be
rectified that are misled, concerning the nature of the unity of the Church:
Still professing that to me they are the dearest Christians, and nearest to my
heart, that are most for Unity and Concord, so it be in Christ, and upon
righteous possible conditions.

CHAP. II.
The true State of the Controversy, and how much we grant.

HAving given you an account of the Occasion and Motives that produced this
Disputation, I shall now briefly state the Controversy between us. And because
the terms are all plain, and my sense of them explained in the foregoing part,
I shall think no more here necessary, then to tell you in certain Propositions,
How much we Grant, and How far we are Agreed, and then to tell you what it is
that we deny, and wherein we differ.

Prop. 1. We are Agreed that Christ has a true Catholic Church on earth, and
ever has had since first he planted it, and ever will have to the end of the
world, and that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, or has it ever
had an Intercision for a day or an hour: and that this Church is so far
Infallible, as that it never was, nor ever will be ignorant of, or erroneous
against any Article of faith, or part of obedience that is of absolute
Necessity to salvation (otherwise by that error it should have ceased to be the
Church of Christ.)

Prop. 2. We are agreed that this Catholic Church in respect of the Internal
faith and charity of the Members, and their Communion with Christ by the
quickening Spirit on his part, and holy sincere returns of devotion on theirs,
may be called, Mystical, or Invisible. The thing is utterly undeniable, though
some Papists in the perverseness of contentious Disputations seem to deny it.
And doubtless when they assert that Christ has no Invisible Church, they must
mean it simply, and not quoad haeo interiora, or else they speak against all
sense and Reason. No man is simply Invisible: but every man as to his soul is
Invisible.

Prop. 3. We are Agreed that this Catholic Church in regard of the outward
Profession of this Inward Faith and Holiness, and in regard of the discernable
numbers of persons making this Profession, has ever been visible, since first
it began to be visible: And that the visibility has never had any intercision.
If some Protestanss say otherwise, it is clear that this is all that by the
common judgment of Protestants is maintained, viz. That Christians, and the
Catholic Church containing the Professing Christians through the world, have
ever since their first planting had a visible being; but yet 1. That the
Visibility was not such but that Heretics (as the Arrians did) might make a
controversy of it, whether they, or the true Christians were the Church
indeed, and by their greater numbers or Power might blind men, that they should
not see which was the true Church. 2. And that in the Catholic Church some
parts may be much more corrupt, and others much more pure; and the Purer part
be so much the lesser, and oppressed and vilified by the more corrupt, that the
most part should not discern their Purity, but take them (as they did the
Waldenses) for Heretics. 3. And that two parts or more of this Catholic
Church may so fall out among themselves, as that one of them shall deny the
other to be part of the Catholic Church, when yet they really for all that
censure remain parts of it, as much as they: And hereupon may grow a contest
between them, which of the two is the true Catholic Church, and one part may
say, It is we and not you; and the other may say, It is we and not you: and no
man shall be able to discern which of the two is the Catholic Church, because
it is neither of them, but each are a part. 4. And though the Bodies of the
members are visible, and their Worshipping actions Visible, and their
Profession audible, yet the faith Professed is not Visible; nor the Truth of
their Profession, or of their Christianity, or Church; Truth being the object
of the Intellect, and not of sense. 5. And though the true members of the
Church do know the true Church, and so it is apparent unto them, yet most that
are not members of it, do not know it. Arrians and Mahometans know us to be men
professing such and such Articles of faith: but they know not that to be the
true faith, nor us to be the true Church, but judge the contrary. In this sense
(contained in these Propositions) it is that Protestants deny the Church to
have been always Visible, and not as the Papists commonly mistake them.

Prop. 4. We are agreed that this Catholic Church is but One: There are not
two Visible, nor two Mystical Catholic Churches: Nor are the Mystical and
Visible, two: Bellarmine might have spared all his labor that he has bestowed
in vain upon this point, to prove that the Visible and Invisible are not two
Catholic Churches. The Protestants are further from that Opinion then the
Papists: and it is more suitable to the Popish Interest and Cause to be of that
Opinion, then to the Protestants. If it were not that they are past learning,
by the advantage of their Infallibility, and especially of one man, and one so
mean, condemned by them, and that it is unlawful to be a Teacher of Error, I
could tell them of a new device by the advantage of this distinction of
Catholic Churches, for the modelling their mistakes into a more specious
plausible form, then now it appears in to the rest of the Churches. But we
are glad of their company in any Truth, and therefore will not disagree from
them in that which makes against themselves.

One Objection I once heard a Learned Anabaptist cast in our way, viz. There
may be a Visible Church of hypocrites: therefore the Mystical and Visible may
be two. Answ. But the Question was of the Catholic Church, and not of a
particular Church. We confess that some members of the Catholic Church are
Mystical and Visible in the several respects before mentioned: and that some
are Visible and not Mystical, or as Bellarmine well calls them, Dead Members,
and not Living; and that the Church as Visible, is more comprehensive then the
Church as Regenerate, or Invisible, and yet all but One Church, though it have
more members in it in one respect then in another: And we confess that its
possible for twenty or an hundred of these Dead members to constitute a
particular Church by themselves (though it is not usual for Visible Churches to
be without Living members:) and so there may be a particular Visible Dead
Member (Analogically called a Member,) or a particular Visible Church that is
thus Dead; and these be parts of the Catholic Church as Visible. But yet there
is not two Catholic Churches, One Visible, and the other Invisible, one alive
and the other Dead. In a Corn field there are, 1. Good Corn. 2. Stricken,
blasted Corn, that has a name and show, but in deed no Corn. 3. Tares,
darnell, cockle, and such weeds. It is called, A Field as it contains them
all: It is called [a Corn field] only from the Corn. The Univocal proper parts
of a Corn field, is the Corn only: The Visible and Analogical parts are also
the blasted ears: The darnel and cockle are no parts, but noxious accidents.
There are not two fields of Corn, one of true Corn, and the of other blasted
ears: And yet the Corn field, taken largely and Analogically, has more parties
in it then true Corn: and you may perhaps have some particular sheavs that are
wholly of that which is blasted: which you will call a sheaf of Corn
Analogically only: but a sheaf of weeds you will not at all call a sheaf of
Corn. Even so in the Catholic Church, there are sincere Christians which are
true and living members; and there are Hypocrites which are Analogically
members; and there are locally mixed many that by denying essential points of
the Christian faith, or by notorious Impiety, do declare themselves to be
weeds, and no members of the Church at all.

Prop. 5. We are also Agreed that this One Visible Catholic Church, is One
Political Holy Society, as united in Jesus Christ the Head, who teaches and
rules it by his Ministers and other Officers, in the several parts, according
to the necessity of each. We call it One Political Society, 1. Principally
because that all the Church is united in this One Sovereign, or Head, the Lord
Jesus: and therefore it is called his body. 2. They have all the same holy
doctrine of faith, and Law to live by, and be judged by. 3. They have all
Church Officers of the same sort under Christ to teach and govern them. 4. They
have all the same kind of Holy Ordinances, as Reading, Preaching, Praying,
Praise, Sacraments, etc. appointed them by the Lord. 5. They are all engaged in
One and the same Holy Covenant to the Lord: More might be mentioned (and shall
be God willing, in a peculiar Treatise of Catholicism, or the Catholic Church)
And though Christ himself be not now seen among us, yet may he truly be called
a Visible Head. For 1. He sometime lived visibly on earth. 2. And is now the
Visible King of all the Church, as he is in the Heavens. Though we see him not,
the Celestial Inhabitants do. It is but little of the world that sees the
Pope, any more then they see Christ: If one unseen to us may be a pretended
Visible Head, the other may be truly so. So that the Body, Head, Laws, Worship,
etc. being Visible, so is the Policy.

Prop. 6. We are agreed also, that all these Christians, and particular
Churches, are obliged by Christ, even by the very Law of Nature, and the ends
of their calling, and the General Laws of the Gospel, to live in as much Love,
and Unity, and Peace as they can; and to hold as full and extensive communion
as they can: that is, as far as their work requires, and their Capacity will
permit and enable them; those that are cohabitans and members of one
Congregation, must hold local communion in that Congregation, unless Necessity
prohibit. Those that through distance are incapable of joining in the same
Assemblies, should yet be conjoined, 1. In the same Lord, Faith, Baptism,
Covenant, Profession. 2. In the same bond of Christian special Love. 3. In the
use of the same sort of holy worship, as to the Substance, though they differ
in circumstances, as in the Word, Prayer, Praises, Sacraments, etc. 4. And in
one sort of Church Officers and Government. And as far as we have to do with
each other, all this should be manifested, and we should readily own one
another as Brethren and true Churches, notwithstanding lesser differences.

Prop. 7. To these ends it is meet that the Bishops or Pastors of the Churches
should hold in way of Association, as frequent Assemblies as is needful, for
the maintaining of mutual Love and Correspondency, and right understanding of
each other, and to manifest their unity, and assist each other in the work of
God, that it may be the more successfully carried on by united strength against
all oppositions.

Prop. 8. These Associations should so far know the members Associated, as is
necessary to the holding of a Christian Communion with them, and therefore
should not admit all into their Association, but such as either produce the
Evidences of sound faith and Holy life, or literas communicatorias,
certificates from credible members of their communion, that the persons are fit
for their Communion.

Prop. 9. These Associations are principally for the Union and Communion of
Churches, and therefore must apply themselves to the maintaining and promoting
of Unity.

Prop. 10. Such Associations should therefore have their set times of frequent
meeting in Synods, for Ordinary help of one another, besides extraordinary
meetings on extraordinary occasions, which none should neglect.

Prop. 11. We agree that such Associated Pastors may have their Moderators
either pro tempore, or stated at the cause requires. And that it is no great
matter whether he be called a President, Bishop, Moderator, etc. in which all
should have liberty, so far as that the peace of the Church be not cast away
for such names.

Prop. 12. We are also agreed that whatsoever shall be concluded in order to
the Union and Communion of Churches, in any of these Synods, the particular
Associated Members must observe, they being thereto obliged, by Virtue of those
General precepts thet require us to do all in Unity and Concord, and with one
mind and mouth to glorify God, and to avoid divisions, etc. Except they be
such things as cannot be obeyed, unless we violate the Law of God. Thus far the
Canons, that is, Agreements of lesser Synods or greater are obligatory.

Prop. 13. We are also Agreed, that when ever the good of the Church requires
it, there may be Greater Assemblies also held, consisting of many of these
conjunct, or special members delegate by the rest: And that this course should
extend as far as our capacity will allow in needful cases.

Prop. 14. Lastly we shall grant, that where Pastors cannot through distance or
other Impediments, hold Synods, or any particular Churches cannot send any
competent members to such Synods, yet may they, when its needful, by
messengers certify each other of their faith, professions, practices, and
particular doubts and cases, and so hold communion, in some degree; owning each
other as Brethren in one Lord, and by such intercourse of Messengers and
Letters as we are capable of, assisting, and seeking assistance from each
other: As Basil and the rest of the Eastern Bishops did to the Western in their
distress while they had hope. And the faith of all the Churches that are near
enough for any external communion, being thus known, their Literae
Communicatoriae may be valid and satisfactory, when any member passes into
other parts.

Thus far I hope we are Agreed: This much I am sure we hold our selves: But now
the difference follows.

We hold that this Universal Church (which is one in Christ their Head, as the
world is one Kingdom in God the absolute Sovereign King) is by Christ
distributed into many Congregations, dispersed over the face of the Earth, and
that these as several Corporations in one Kingdom, have all their particular
Governors and Order. All forcible Government we ascribe to the Magistrate, and
deny it to the Pastors of the Church. And that teaching and Guidance which is
called Ecclesiastic Government, we suppose is the work of every Pastor in his
flock, and the Ordering of the communion of Churches, by Canons, Agreements
(and their execution in part) is the work of Synods. And as in this Kingdom,
all the Free-schools are governed by the Schoolmasters, who are all under the
Prince and Laws, without any General Schoolmasters to Teach, or Oversee, and
Rule the rest, (and without Synods too, though they may meet when their mutual
Edification requires it,) and yet all the Schools in England are in Peace,
because no Archscoolmasters presume to rob the Magistrate of his power: Even so
we judge, that if Pastors do but Teach and Guide their several flocks, and the
Magistrate keep and use his power of forcible Government, that is, in seeing
that they do their Offices faithfully, and no Archpastors presume to take the
power of the Magistrates out of their hands, the Churches may have quietness
and peace: (still allowing a greater Necessity of Communion, and so of Synods,
among Churches then among Schools, and reserving the rod to the secular power.)
And we concieve, that most of the stir that Popes and Popish Prelates have made
about Church Government, has been but to rob the Magistrate of his due, and to
become themselves the Church-Magistrates through the world.

But that the Church has any Political Universal Head but Christ alone,
either a Vice god, or Vice-Christ, either Pope or Council; that any one is as
Pope Julius says of himself, [in the place of God, the maker of all things and
Laws,] this we deny; That the whole Church on Earth, is so one Political
Society, as to be under any one terrestial numericall Head, whether personal or
collective, Pope, Council, or Patriarks, having power of Legislation, or
judgment over the whole, and by whom each member is to be Governed, this we
deny: and think it as absurd (and much more sinful) as to affirm that all the
world must needs have one Visible Monarch under God to represent him; and that
he is no subject to the God of Heaven, that acknowledges not this Visible
Universal Monarch. We deny that the Church is such a Society: We deny that it
has such an Head: We deny that it has any such universal Humane Laws: We deny
that the parts of it are to be conjoined by the subordinate Officers
(Cardinals, Patriarks, Archbishops, or what ever) of such an usurping
Sovereign. We affirm that no Christian should fancy or assert that any such
Head and Order for unity is appointed by Christ; or that it is Desirable, or
Rome to be the better liked of because it pleads for such an Order, or vainly
boasts of such of an unity; or that any should dare to contrive the promoting
of it. Yea we maintain that such fancies and contrivances are the most notable
means of the division, or desolation of the Churches; And that it is the
notable hinderance of the unity of all the Christian Churches, that such a
false Head and Center of unity is set up, and an Impossible Impious unity
pleaded for, and furiously sought by fire and sword, instead of the true
desirable unity: And that the Churches will never have true unity and peace if
these principles of theirs be not disgraced and disowned, and the true
principles better understood.

I shall now give you some Arguments for our Assertion, and then in the End
shall give you the true Grounds and Means of unity.

CHAP. III.
Our Arguments for the Negative.

IN the management of the Arguments for the Negative, I shall principally deal
with them that would Head the Church with a Council, that is, would make the
Church to be autonomicall, and be the Sovereign, or chief Governor of it self,
or the Church Representative of the Church real (as they use to call them.) As
to them that Head it with the Pope, I have said enough already, and others much
more, especially Blondell unanswerably. Yet I shall partly take them also in my
way, though I deal principally with the other.

And these brief Arguments may serve to confute the Vice-christship or
Sovereignty of the Pope.

1. There is no such Head Instituted by Christ. The Scripture pretenses for it
I have before confuted, and they are so poor, that they vanish of themselves.

2. The Popes Sovereignty is against the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers, and
practice of the Primitive Church, as I have proved in this and a former Book.

3. It is against Tradition, as brought down to us by the greatest part of the
Church on earth by far, as is before proved.

4. It is against the Judgment of the far greatest part of the present
Catholic Church, as is proved.

5. It is the the mere effect of pride and tyranny: a plain design to set up
one man over all the world for his greatness, and their hurt.

6. The pretense of this Sovereignty is the consequent only of Romes greatness,
and the will of Emperors, that to conform the Ecclesiastical state to the
civil, did give a Primacy to the Bishop of Rome within the Empire.

7. It is a mere impossibility for one man to be the Sovereign of all the
Churches in the world, and do the work of a Sovereign for them. He had need of
many millions and millions of Treasure to defray the charge (which Peter had
not.) While he pretends to govern all the world, he does but leave them
ungoverned, or not by him. How can he govern all those Churches in the
Dominions of Infidels, that will not endure his Government? There are more then
all the Papists in the world now from under his Government voluntarily, that
could not be governed by him if they would.

8. There are yet visible many great Churches that were planted by the
Apostles, or in their days, and never were under Romes Sovereignty to this
day, as the Aetheopians, Persians, Indians, and most that were without the
verge of the Roman Empire.

9. There is no use for such an Head, as I shall show anon, of Councils.

10. There is not so much Reason for it, or possibility of it, as that One man
must be King or Monarch of all the world. Considering that spiritual Government
requires residency, and can less be done by Deputies then temporal: And that
Princes are truly Church Governors also in their kind and way.

11. It is an intolerable usurpation of the Power of all Christian Princes and
Pastors, who conjunctly in their several ways are entrusted by God with the
Government of the Churches under them.

12. To make such a Sovereign, is to make a new Catholic Church, that Christ
never made.

13. And its the most notorious schism, dividing themselves from all the
Catholic Church, that are not their subjects.

14. And inhumane cruelty to damn all (as much as Heathens at least) that
believe not in the Pope, be they never so holy.

15. To set up a Vice-god (as Pope Julius paraphrastically called himself) and
a Vice christ on earth over all the Church (as the Papist commonly do,
maintaining that the Pope is the Vicar of Christ) is to set up an Idol, and a
name of Blasphemy, against Jesus Christ, whose prerogative it is to be the sole
Universal Head; And therefore he must needs be an Antichrist, whether he be The
Antichrist or not. This much to the Pope.

These. The Catholic Church of Christ is not one Visible Political Dr. Hammond
on 1 Timothy 3. e. says, [And such all the particular Churches of the whole world
considered together under the supreme Head, Christ Jesus, disspensing them all
by himself, and administering them severally, not by any one oeconomus, but by
the several Bishops as inferior Heads of Unity to the several bodies so
constituted by the several Apostles in their plantations; each of them having
an (...), a several distinct Commission from Christ immediately, and
subordinate to none, but the supreme donor or plenipotentiary.]
body, as joined to one Universal Visible Head or Sovereign, (save only
Christ:) And consequently it is not the way to heal the Churches divisions, to
draw all into such a body, or endeavor such an Union.

This I make good by these following Arguments, which reach both the Italian
Papists, that would have the Pope to be the Head or Sovereign; and the French
and Cassandrian, who would have a General Council to be the Head, and the Pope
only to be the chief Patriarch, and the Principium Unitatis: For if I prove
that the Body is not one, as Headed by any except Christ, I shall say enough
against both these opinions: But yet as is said, it is principally against the
later (who are for the Headship of a Council) that I shall direct my Arguments;
because they are the busy Reconcilers, and because the rest are so largely
confuted already on both sides.

Argument 1. That which is the true form of the Catholic Church of Christ, it
retains de facto at this day: But it retains not a Political Union under a
Visible Terrestrial Universal Head: therefore this is not the true form of the
Catholic Church.

Or, what the Catholic Church is quoad essentiam, that it is also quoad
existentiam: But it is not such a Body quoad existentiam; therefore not quoad
essentiam.

If any will grant the conclusion, quoad essentiam vel formam, and say that
this Policy, Head and Union are not essential to the Church, but separable
accidents tending only ad melius esse, he will give away his cause: For the
Pars Imperans and pars subdita are the two essential parts of a body Politic,
or Republic, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, as a soul and body are the parts
of man: and if it want either part, the essence is destroyed; It has lost its
Political form. But I need not stand on this, because the case is past
controversy, and I know not of any that make the objection, or will go on such
terms: I am sure those do not that I have now to deal with. Another thing there
may be that is called a Church, without this Form or Head, but not this same
thing or body that now we speak of.

The Major proposition I prove thus: The Church of Christ is a true Church at
this day, or retains its essential parts: therefore it retains its form. If
its essentials were not in existence, the Church were extinct, or did not
exist: But that the Church is not extinct or nulled, the opponents will easily
grant, and the promise of Christ will easily prove; The gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.

The Minor I prove thus; If the Catholic Church be now Headed with one Visible
Head (beside Christ,) then it is either the Pope or a General Council. But it
is neither of these. That it is not the Pope, the French will grant. And 1. Its
proved at large by many a volume of Protestant writers; and 2. By the present
visible state of the Church; The greatest part of the Church on Earth (and all
those in Heaven) disown the Universal Sovereignty or Headship of the Pope; The
Greeks, Abassines, Armenians, Protestants, etc.

That it is not a General Council appears, in that there is no such thing in
Natural or Moral Existence. Not in Natural existence; For where is it? when
called? how long have they sat? But this none will affirm.

Not in Moral existence; For there is no such thing pretended, nor possible. I
confess the Common wealth is not dissolved at the death of the Prince; because
a Successor being determined of by Law (as in hereditary Government,) there is
one has presently right to the place, though he want solemn admittance; or if
elective, yet Rex non moritur, both because the successor has an Intentional
Moral being in the Fundamental Law, and the Intention of the Electors
conjunctly, and they presently make an actual choice, or else the power so far
as is necessary for execution, falls in the mean time into the hands of some
Trustees of the Republic, while they are electing, and the sovereign is in
fieri: Or if it be in some dissolvable body, whose actual Session is
intermitted, yet they are still in Moral being, and ready to assemble, and the
Sovereignty for so much as is of ordinary exercise, even over the Universal
body, is in the mean time in the hands of some other Assembly, who therefore
may be said to partake of the Sovereignty.

But none of this is so in the present case. Here is no General Council
ordinarily in natural being; and therefore in the vacancy not in Moral being:
There is none that pretends to be in Moral being: For the Council of Trent,
which was the last pretended General Council, is dissolved; and the Pope would
not take it well if any shall call another without him: and no time is
appointed for it: The Decennial Council determined of at Constance, is an empty
name: and that Decree did but serve to prove, that really General Councils are
not the Supreme Governors of the Church: For no one obeys them in that. And
whether ever the Pope, or any one else will call a General Council again, we
cannot tell. So that now there is none; nor we know not whether there ever will
be. But further.

Argum. 2. That which is the Head, or form of the Catholic Church (or any way
Necessary to its Being or Unity) has ever been found in it, or at least within
this thousand years, or at least in the primitive purer ages, or sometime at
least: But a true General Council is not always in being, nor ever was within
this thousand years, no nor in the purer ages, nor ever at all: therefore it is
no Head of the Church, nor necessary to its unity.

The Major will not be denied. The proof of any branch of the Minor may serve
turn: much more of all. 1. That a General Council has not been this forty
years in being, all men will confess. If the Church have been Headless forty
years, or wanted any thing Necessary to its Being or Unity, then was it so long
no Church, or many Catholic Churches, which are known untruths.

2. If the Church have had any General Council within this thousand years, it
was either that of Trent, that of Canstance, Basil, Florence, the Laterane,
etc. But none of these were such. For 1. there were no Bishops from the most of
the Christian world. I have told you before how few at Trent did the most
egregious parts of their work (few more then forty:) The Churches of Syria,
Armenia, Ethiopia, and the most of the Christian world, were never so much as
fairly invited to be there. If at Florence the Patriarch of Constantinople, and
two or three Greeks more were present, what is that to all the Churches of the
Greek Profession through the world? besides all others. The ancient Councils
called General, contained All the Bishops that could and would come. For all
were to be there, and not one Bishop chosen by two hundred, or by a Prince,
instead of two hundred. But at these later Councils were neither all, nor so
much as any Delegates (though but chosen by hundreds to represent them) from
most of the Churches of the world. Besides the packing and fore-resolutions of
the Popes, that ruled all, and many other Arguments that nullify these
pretended General Councils. I say not that all of them were useless; but none
of them were any more like to Ecumenical or Universal, then Italy and its few
servants are like to all the Christian world.

And that the Ancient Councils were not General, I mean, the four first, or any
like them, I easily prove. 1. From the Original of them, and the Mandates, and
the Presidents, and Ratifications, and Executions. It was the Roman Emperors
that called them, and that sent their Mandates to the Lieutenants and other
secular Officers to see to the execution, and to the Bishops to be there: It
was the Roman Emperors that by themselves or their Lieutenants, were present to
Rule them all according to the proportion of secular interest. It was the same
Powers that Ratified them, and what they ratified went for current, and their
Ratification was sought by the Bishops to that end. It was the same Power that
banished them that obeyed not, and compelled men to submit to them. Now let any
man of Reason tell me, what Power Constantine, Theodosius, Martian, or any
Roman Emperor had to summon the Bishops that were subjects in the Dominions of
all other Princes through the world? What Authority had they out of their own
Dominion?

2. Yea de facto, the case is known, 1. That they did not summon the Bishops of
other Princes Dominions. 2. That those Bishops (at least no considerable number
were there.) What Mandates or Invitations were sent to all the Churches of
India, Ethiopia, Persia, or the parts of Parthia, Armenia, Ireland, Scotland,
etc. that were out of the Roman Power? Whoever those one or two were that
Eusebius calls Bishops of Persis, Parthia, Armenia, it is a plain case, that
there were no due Representatives of all or any of these Churches there, that
were without the verge of the Empire. No British, Irish, (that is, then
Scottish) Bishops were there, nor any from abundance other Churches. And the
other Councils after that at Nice, make less pretense to such a thing. So that
it is most evident that General Councils then were but of the Bishops of the
Empire, or the Roman world, unless a Bishop or two sometime might drop in that
lived next them. And was the Church no wider then the Empire? Let Baronius
himself be judge, that tells you of the Churches planted by the primitive
Preachers, in India, Persia, and many other parts of the world. Let Godignus be
judge, that confesses the Ethiopians had the Gospel since the Apostles days
(and I pray in what age were they Papists?) Let Raynerius be judge, that says
the Churches of Armenia and others planted by the Apostles were not subject to
the Church of Rome? Let the Antiquities of Britain and Ireland be evidence.
But the case is undeniable. All this noise then of General Councils comes but
from a supposition that the Roman world was the whole Christian world. A small
mistake! We homebred Rusticks may shortly be as well able to prove that a
London Convocation was a General Council! Pighius pleading for the Pope, says
plainly, that General Councils were the devise of Constantine. And the Popes
themselves do fetch the most specious Evidences for their primacy from the
Decrees or Edicts of Emperors, Valentinian, Gratian and others. And what power
had those Emperors at the other side of the world?

3. And then before the Nicene Council, what General Councils were there since
the Apostle days? None doubtless that the world now knows of. It Is senseless
enough to think that 350 Roman Bishops at the second Council of Nice, or the
150 Bishops in the third Council at Constantinople, or the 165 Bishops at the
second Council at Constantinople, or the 150 Bishops at the first there, were
the Universal Church of Christ? But it will be more ridiculous to say, that the
newfound Concilium Sinuessanum, imagined without proof to meet in a certain
Cave, for the deposition of an Idolatrous Pope, were a General Council. Where
then was the Head, the unity, the form of the Church for 300 years? Was it
governed all that time, think you, by a General Council? yea or ever one day
since the Apostles?

Well, but was there ever such a thing at all? Indeed men have a fairer
pretense when the Church was contained in a family, or a City, or a narrow
space, to call the meetings of the Apostles or other Christians then, by the
name of a General Council, but they are hard put to it, if this be all. The
great Instance insisted on is the Council, Act. 15. But were the Bishops of all
the Churches there? or summoned to appear? Act. 14. 23. they had ordained them
Elders in every Church; but few of them were there, Timothy, Titus, abundance
were absent. It Is plain, that it was to the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem
as the Fountain, and best informers that they sent. Not because these were the
Universal Church, but because they were of greatest knowledge and authority. If
it could be proved that all the Apostles were there, it would no more prove
them a General Council, then that the Deacons of one Church were ordained by a
General Council, Act. 6. And Matthias and Justus put to the Lot by a General
Council, Act. 1. and that Christ appeared to a General Council after his
Resurrection, and gave the Sacrament of his Supper to a General Council before
his death. So that it is most evident from the event, that Christ never made a
General Council the Head or Governor of his Church; and that there never was
such a thing the world, much less continually.

Argum. 3. The form or unity (no nor the well-being) of the Catholic Church,
depends not on that which is either unnecessary, unjust, or naturally or
morally impossible: But a true General Council is none such: It cannot be: or
if it were it would be unnecessary and unjust. Therefore it is not the Head or
Sovereign Governor of the Church, on which its being, unity, (or well being)
does depend.

I have nothing here to prove but the Minor. And 1. I shall prove the
Impossibility. 2. The non-necessity. 3. The unjustice of a General Council: and
so that no such thing is to be expected.

A true General Council consists of all the Pastors or Bishops of the whole
world; or so many as Morally may be called All. A General Council of Delegates
from all the Churches, must consist of so many proportionably chosen, as may
signify the sense and consent of all, or else it is a mere name and shadow.
Both these are Morally, if not Naturally Impossible: as I prove.

1. From the distance of their habitations, some dwell in Mesopotamia, some in
Armenia, some in Ethiopia, some in Mexico, the Philippines, or other parts of
the East and West Indies: some at St. Thome's, some dispersed through most of
the Turks Dominions. Now how long must it be, before all these have tidings of
a Council, and summons to appear, or send their Delegates? Who will be at the
cost of sending messengers to all these? Will the Pope? Not if he be no richer
then Peter was. How many hundred thousand pound will it cost before that all
can have a lawful summons? And when that is done, it will be long before they
can all in their several Nations meet, and agree upon their Delegates, and
their instructions. And when that is done, who shall bear their charges in the
journey? Alas, the best of the Churches Pastors have had so little gold and
silver, that they are unable themselves to defray it. A few Bishops out of each
of these distant Countries, will consume in their journey a great deal of money
and provision. To provide them shipping by Sea, and Horses, and all other
necessaries by land, for so many thousand miles, will require no small
allowance.

And then consider, that it must be voluntary contribution that must maintain
them. And most love their money so well, and know so little of the need of such
journeys and Councils, that doubtless they will not be very forward to so great
a contribution.

And it is not to be expected that Infidel Princes will give way to the
transporting of so much money from their countries on the Churches occasions,
which they hate.

But suppose them furnished with all necessaries, and setting forward; How long
will they be in their journey? Shipping cannot always be had: Many of them must
go by land: It cannot be expected that some of them should come in less than
three, or four, if not seven years time to the Council. And will ever a General
Council be held upon these terms?

2. Moreover the persons for the most part are not able to perform such
journeys. Bishops are Elders: Most of them are aged persons. The wisest are
they that are fit to be trusted in so great a business by all the rest: And few
attain that maturity but the aged: Especially in the most of the Eastern and
Southern Churches that want the helps of Learning which we have. And will the
Churches be so barbarous as to turn out their aged faithful Pastors upon the
jaws of death? Some of them are not like to live out so long time as the
journey, if they were at home. They must pass through raging and tempestuous
Seas, through Deserts and enemies, and many thousand miles where they must
daily conflict with distress. It were a fond conceit, to think that (without
unusual providence) ten Bishops of a thousand should come alive to the
Council, through all these labors and difficulties.

And moreover, it is known how few bodies will bear the Seas, and so great
change of air: How many of our Soldiers in the Indies are dead, for one that
does survive? And can ancient Bishops, spent with studies and labors, endure
all this? Most studious painful Preachers here with us are very sickly, and
scarce able to endure the small incommodities of their habitations: And could
they endure this?

3. Moreover abundance of the Pastors of the Churches live under Mahometans and
other Infidels, that will not give them leave to travail so far into the
Countries of Christian Princes on such occasions. They hate us and our
Religion. They are often at war with us, and then would hang those Bishops as
Intelligencers that should offer to come among us.

4. And they must many of them pass through the Countries of other Princes,
that are Infidels, and often in war with the parts which they come from or go to.
And it cannot be expected that in such cases they should allow them passage
through their Countries. If one do, all will not: When poor Lithgow had
travailed nineteen years, he was tortured, strappado'd and disjoynted, and made
a cripple at Malaga in the Spanish Inquisition. And thanked God and the English
Ambassador that he sped so well.

5. Even at home in Europe, the Princes are so commonly in Wars (as are France,
Spain, Venice, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, the Emperor, Brandenburgh, Holland,
Portugal, England, Transylvania, etc. at this very day) that there is not the
least probability that they should all or half consent to have so many of their
subjects pass into their enemies Countries to reside so long. Jealousies raised
by particular Interests would make it Treason.

6. Moreover many Princes understand that the Pope has no power to call such
Councils, nor any man else: and they know the design of the Pope to subject the
world to himself. And therefore they will abhor that their subjects should
travail so far at his call, that has such designs, (or at another man's that
has no authority to call them.) This has made the Emperor of Habassia so
resolutely resist the Popes pretensions (as Godignus, Maffaeus, and others do
declare) Few Princes will endure to have their subjects brought under a
foreign Power.

7. And if you suppose all the Bishops come to the Council, the very number out
of all the Christian world, (to make any thing like a General Council) would be
so great, as would be unfit for one, or two, or ten, or twenty Council houses
or Assemblies.

8. And they would be incapable of conferring, through diversity of languages.
Few of the Abassines, Egyptians, Syrians, Armenians, or of most of the world,
understand and speak any language that would commonly be understood and used in
a Council. Nor is it possible to do it by Interpreters. For so many
Interpreters cannot be used to tell all that understand not, what every man
says, and to expound their minds to others. This would waste an age in a
Council; so that such a Council would be a very Babel.

9. And Councils use to be so long, that it cannot be expected that after so
many years journey, old men should live to see the issue, or do any great
matters there. Eighteen years at Trent would consume a great many of the
Bishops: How many even of the Popes own Legates dyed before that Council could
be finished?

10. And if they should live to see the end, can you dream that they should
live to perform the like tedious dangerous journeys and voyages to bring back
the Decrees of the Council to their Churches? Judge now whether such Councils
are not Naturally Impossible.

I will add but this. No men can be compelled. And to make all the world at
once agree to so difficult a task, and agree upon the time and place, must be a
Miracle. One will be for it, and another against it. One for one time and
place, and another for another, through most of the world. We see how hardly
any two Princes can agree upon times, places, and all circumstances in their
Treaties.

2. Let us next enquire, of what Necessity such a Council is. If it be
Necessary for Church government, it is either to make Laws, or to execute them.
But for neither of these: therefore they are not Necessary.

1. Christ has made us Laws already sufficient for salvation. And I hope he
has not constituted so loose a Society, and left his Body to such mutations,
as that they must so frequently have new Laws. And if it must, sure it must be
from their Sovereign, who has reserved the Legislative Power to himself as his
Prerogative. Legislation is the highest act of Supremacy, and chief flower in
the Crown of Sovereignty. The Church is Christ's subjects, and shall subjects
make their own Laws? Scripture is sufficient. If this be all that we need
General Councils for, to make Universal Laws to the Church, we can spare them
as well as Traitors in a Commonwealth.

And for Execution of Laws, it is either Magisterial, by force of the Sword;
and this they have nothing to do with, it being the Princes right. Or it is for
the Excommunicating Church offenders: And to cast them out of particular
Churches is the work of the Pastors of those Churches. Others cannot know the
persons, and hear the cause. If all Churchcauses should come to a General
Council, Millions of men must be attending them at once.

And if it be to judge who shall be cast out of the Communion of the Churches,
and what Churches themselves are to be excommunicated, the Synods of neighbor
Pastors are to do as much of that as is to be done. Where then is the Necessity
of such Councils at such rates? Augustine said that drunkenness in his time was
grown so strong, that there must be a Council to suppress it. Could they do
such feats as to cure Drunkenness, Whoredom, Covetousness, Pride, I would be
for them.

3. If a General Council were called, it must be a most unjust Assembly. For,
1. It would be guilty of cruelty and destroying the Church of Christ, by
killing so many of the Pastors as aforesaid.

2. It would be guilty of cruelty and Church destoying by the starving and
desertion of the flocks at home. What will become of the poor peoples souls,
when they are left to the Wolves, to Heretics, and Deceivers, and to the
temptations of their own flesh, and the world, being for ten or twenty years,
or for ever deprived of their Pastors under pretense of a General Council?
Basil in his seventieth Epistle tells the Western Bishops, that they of the
East could not come to solicit their own cause with them. For, says he, If
any one of us (N. B.) do for the least moment leave his Church, he presently
leaves his people to deceivers. And on this ground he shows that they could
not so much as spare Bishops to be mere Messengers to them. Much less could
they have spared a sufficient number to stay seven or ten years together. If
any think that such Necessities are unusual, he knows not the world. And
Councils are most useful if ever, when necessities are greatest.

3. In Councils things are carried by Votes: and so Abassia, Armenia, Mexico,
and places so remote that they can send but one or two, would be out-voted by
that corner of the world where the Council is called, that can send in
proportionably an hundred for one; and so under the name of a General Council,
a faction might promote any heresy or carnal interest, and no Churches would
be so enslaved as those that send at the dearest rates. Italy and a few more
parts, at Trent, would over-vote all the Churches of East and South, and set up
what interest or opinion they please: And so if one corner of the Church can
err, all may err, for all the Council: Where there is an equal interest, there
should be an equal power in Councils: which will certainly be otherwise.

4. If the Pope be he that must call General Councils, we shall have none, till
it will stand with his interest. And if he have not the power of calling them,
no one else has, for none pretends to it. And if they must be called by
universal consent, three hundred years is little enough for all the world to
treat of the time, place, and other circumstances, and consent.

5. And if the Pope must call them, he will easily by the very choice of the
place, procure the accomplishment of his own designs.

6. Those that think it the Popes prerogative to call a Council, do also affirm
(as I before showed in the express words of Binnius and others) that a Council
has no more power then the Pope will give them, and that when they are
convened by him, and have done their work, it is all of no Validity, if he
allow it not: If he approve one half, that half is valid, and his approbation
will make their Decrees the Articles of our faith; when as the other half which
he disapproveth shall not be worth a straw. And is it not a most foolish thing
for all the world to put themselves to so much charge to defray the expenses of
their Bishops, and hazard their lives, and lose their labors at home for so
many years, and hazard the Churches by their absence, when for ought they know
the Bishops of the whole Christian world do but lose all their labor, and
nothing shall be valid if they please not the Pope of Rome? And is it not most
abominable justice in him thus to put all the world to trouble, and cost, and
hazard the Churches and the Pastors lives, for nothing, when if the infallible
spirit be only in himself, he might have done the work himself, and saved all
this cost and labor.

7. By what Justice shall all the Catholic Church be obliged by the Decrees of
such a General Council? Is it by Law, or Contract? If by Law, it is by Divine
Law, or by Humane. If by Divine, let it be showed that ever God made such a
Government for the Catholic Church, and then take all. If by Humane Laws, it
is impossible, and therefore not to be affirmed. For no Humane Sovereign has
power to make Laws for all the world. If you say is it by contract, then 1. All
those Nations that thought not meet to send any Bishops to the Council, will be
free. 2. And so will all those be that sent Bishops who dissented from the
rest. For contract or Consent binds none but Contracters or Consenters. And
so England is not bound by the Council of Nice, Ephesus, Calcedon,
Constantinople, etc.

8. By what Justice shall any people be required to send Delegates, on such
terms as these to Councils, or to stand to their definitions when they have
done? When our faith and souls are preciouser things then so boldly to cast
upon the trust of a few Delegates so to be chosen and employed? What Bishops
other Countries will choose, we know not. And for our own, 1. In almost all
Countries it is the Princes that choose, or none must be chosen but who they
will, which is all one. 2. If the Bishops choose, its those that are highest
with the secular power that will have the choice, who perhaps may choose such
as are contrary to the judgment of most of that Church that is thought to
choose them. Most Nations have a Clergy much at difference. The Remonstrants
and Contramonstrants in Holland would not have chosen like members for the
Synod. In the Bishops days men of one mind were chosen here in England to
Convocations: The next year we had a Learned Assembly that put down the
Prelacy, for which a Convocation had formed an Oath to be imposed on all
Ministers but a little before. And why should the judgment of the Prelates be
taken for the judgment of the Church of England, any more then the other, when
for number, learning and piety (to say the least) they had no advantage (laying
aside ignorant, ungodly men, in point of number.) Till the Spanish match began
to be treated on, the Bishops of England were ten, if not twenty to one
Augustinians, Calvinists, or Antiarminians: Now the Arminians would be thought
the Church of England, and their doctrine, agreeable to the doctrine of that
Church. Would they not accordingly have differed, if they had been sent to a
General Council? How bitterly are the Articles of the Church of Ireland decryed
by the Arminian Bishops since sprung up both in Ireland and England? so that if
Delegates be sent to any Council, they may speak the minds of those that sent
them, (which perhaps is the King, or a small prevailing party,) but not of the
rest: (which perhaps may the best and most.) If Jeremiah of Constantinople be
of a Council, he will go one way. If Cyril be of a Council, he will go another
way: And his counterfeit Successor undo what he did.

9. No Church that sends three or four Bishops to represent a thousand or two
thousand Pastors, can be sure how those Bishops will carry it when they come
thither. For ought we know they may betray our cause, and cross their
instructions: They may be perverted by the reasonings of erroneous men, or
bribed by the powerful: And to cast our faith on so slender an assurance, is
little wisdom.

10. If consent only bind us to the Decrees of Councils (to submit to them as
our Rule,) then is Posterity bound that did not consent as their Fathers did,
or are they not? If not, we are free? If yea, by what bond? And then why do not
the Grotians in Ireland and England obey the Antiarminian Decrees of the
Churches in both? Did not the Church of England send Bishop Carlton, Bishop
Hall, Bishop Davenant (afterward a Bishop) Dr. Ward. Dr. Goad, and Balcanquall
Episcopal Divines to the Synod of Dort, and so England was a part of that
Synod? And yet the Grotians and Arminians think not themselves bound to receive
the Doctrine of that Synod, nor to forbear reproaching it.

11. It is unjust that any (especially most) of the Churches should be obliged
by the votes of others, and oppressed by Majority, merely because their
distance, or poverty, or the age, or weakness of their Pastors disableth them
to send any, or an equal number, or to defray the charge of their abode, etc.
Ah if good Pope Zachary, or Archbishop Boniface had considered that the essence
or unity of the Church did consist in a General Council, that must be fetched
partly from the Antipodes, they would have thought better on it before they had
excommunicated Virgilius, for saying that there were Antipodes, or quod alius
mundus, and alii homines sunt sub terras. Dr. Heylin tells us in his Geography,
Lib. 1. page 25. that Bid (de ratione temporum, cap. 32.) calls it a fable
that there are Antipodes, and not to be believed: and adds that Augustine,
Lactantius, and some other of the Learned of those better times condemned it as
a ridiculous incredible fable, whose words (says he) I could put down at
large, did I think it necessary.] And did that age dream that the Being or
Unity of the Church, or the salvation of the Believers soul depended on this
Article, that a General Council, partly called from the Antipodes must be the
Churches Head or Governors? or that the Pope at least must be acknowledged and
obeyed by every Christian soul that will be saved at the Antipodes? And Sir
Fradcis Drake and Cavendish would not have been so famous for compassing the
world, if men had understood, that when the Gospel is spread through the earth,
so many poor old Bishops must ordinarily take half such Journies or voyages to
do their business. If the Decree of the Council of Constance had been executed,
to have had a General Council evry ten years, many would scarce have had time
to go and come. But the charitable Church of Rome has found out a Remedy, not
only by the rarity of their Councils (let them decree what they will to the
contrary) but also by condemning the most of the Churches, and the remotest, as
Heretics, and sending them to Hell, to save them a journey to the General
Council.

12. Moreover such Councils are unjust, because of the multi tude of Bishops
that must there meet and cannot be heard speak. As the case stands already,
there are many more Bishops in the world then can meet, and speak, and hear in
one, or two, or three Assemblies: And many thousand more may be made. If I
should say that all the Rectors of particular Churches, whom they call Parish
Presbyters, are Bishops, and have votes in Councils, they would easilyer deny
it then disprove it, or invalidate the proofs already brought: But (to proceed
on their own grounds) me thinks they that make him a Bishop who has Presbyters
and Deacons under him, should admit all those Pastors of particular Churches
that have Presbyters under them, as their Curates, which are many. Or if they
say that only Cities must have Bishops, yet must they on their own grounds
admit a Bishop for each City: And if every City in a few Kingdoms in Europe had
a Bishop in the Council, there would be no room for all the rest of the world.
But how prove they that Country Parishes may not have Bishops? Why may not (on
their own grounds) every four or six parishes have one? Has God forbid it?
where? and when? sure they will not say it is of Divine institution that a
Bishop have just so many Parishes and Presbyters under him, and neither more
nor less. The number is confessed to be left undetermined. And what if Christian
Princes, Bishops and people agree to settle Bishops in every such small number
of Parishes, by what Law can they exclude them from a General Council? If they
say, by the Canons of former Councils; I answer 1. Those Canons are contrary to
Scripture. 2. They contradict one another. 3. They themselves do not obey the
Canons of many such Councils. 4. Those Councils have no power to make Laws;
much less Laws that shall reach to this time and place. But they will say Paul's
command to Titus 1. 3, 5. and the example Acts 14. 23. is only of ordained
Elders or Bishops in every City: therefore they may not ordain them any where
but in Cities. But I deny the consequence. Most ancient interpreters by Elders,
Acts 14. 23. Understand mere Presbyters: And then it would as much follow that
Presbyters must be ordained no where but in Cities: What if I can prove that
the Apostles never gathered a solemn Assembly of Christians for Divine Worship
any where but in Cities; or that they never administered the Lords Supper any
where but in Cities? will it follow that therefore we ought not to Assemble or
administer the Sacrament any where but in Cities? But what if this were
granted? they cannot deny but every corporation, such as most of our Buroughs
and Market Towns in England are, may truly be called Cities in that Scripture
sense. And if every such City had a Bishop, Even England, France, Germany, and
Italy, a little spot of the world, would make Bishops enough for two or three
Councils; and more then could Assemble and do the work.

Two shifts they have against the over-greatness of the number. One is the
course now taken: to have but one Bishop over many Cities, and a very large
Circuit of the Country.

The other is, to depute one out of many from every Country to represent the
rest; and so it shall be a Representative General Council, though not a Real.
But for the first, 1. Who has authority to make such diminutions? 2. What if
those that are supposed to have that authority, shall be otherwise minded? 3.
Its apparently against the word of God, and tends to the frustrating of the
Office that true Bishops should be so rare. By their own Rule, each City should
have one. And let Brerewoods Enquiries, or any such writers help you to
conjecture how many that would be.

And for the other way, 1. A Representative General Council is another thing,
quite different from a Real. 2. What word of God have they to prove such a
Representative Council? Doubtless none: And will they give us a Church form,
and center of Unity, merely of their own brains, upon supposition that it is
prudential? 3. Men are of exceeding different degrees of understanding, and of
different judgments actually: so that if e. g. England should send one, or
two, or ten men to represent the rest to a General Council, its more then
possible that they may give their judgments in many points so far contrary to
the minds of those that sent them, that twenty or an hundred to one at home may
be against them. For we cannot send our understandings and all our reasons with
them to the Council when we send them. And so no man can say that any such
Council does express the mind of the greater part of the Church. 4. By this
rule you may reduce a General Council to a dozen men, or to the four or five
Patriarks: For all the rest may choose them as their representatives. 5. But
its not to be expected that all the Churches should be satisfied of the
lawfulness or fitness of such substitutions and representations: And therefore
they will not consent or elect men for such a power and work: And who may
justly force them?

13. Moreover such Councils are unjust, because there can be no just
satisfaction given by men that live at so vast a distance, that this great
number that come thither are truly Bishops: yea or Presbyters either. Its not
possible under many years time, so much as to take any satisfactory account of
their ordination, and abiding in that office, and the truth of their
deputations or elections. And when (in their elected Representative Councils)
there will be perpetual controversies between several parties (as there is in
Parliaments) whether it be this man or that which is truly elected, in how many
years will all these be decided, before they begin their work? So that I may
well conclude, laying all these seven considerations together, the distance of
places, the age and state of the Bishops, the state of the Civil Governments
which they live under, their necessary labors at home, and the ruin that will
befall their Churches by so much absence, the diversity of their languages, the
multitude of the Bishops, and the difficulty of knowing the Ordination and
Qualifications of persons so remote to prove their capacity, I say all these
together do plainly show that such General Councils are impossible and unjust:
and therefore not the standing Government or form of the Church, or the center
of its Unity.

Argum. 4. As the Synod it self is impossible, needless, and unjust; so it is
Impossible that they should do the work of a Head or Sovereign Power, if they
could Assemble: therefore they are not appointed thereunto.

The Antecedent is partly manifest by what is said from their different
languages and other considerations. Moreover 1. The persons that will have
appeals to them, and causes to be judged (if really they will do the work of a
Sovereign Power and Judge) will be so many millions, that there will be no room
for them about their doors, nor any leisure in many years to hear their It was
one of the Reasons of the Council of Carthage to P. Celestine to prove the
invalidity of the Papal judgments up on appeals from other Countries, because
the witness necessary to a just decision could not go far.
causes. If you say, It was not so in former Councils, I answer, that is
because they were not truly General, or were called in such times when the
Church did lie in a narrow compass, and not in such remote parts of the world;
and because they were assembled indeed but occasionally, to advise upon and
determine some one particular man's case, or few, and never took upon them to be
the Sovereign power or head of the Church, or its essential form or Center of
Unity. 2. These millions of persons that have so many causes, will have so far
to travail, that it will put them to great cost and labor to come and attend
and bring all their witnesses. And if they be not sounder bodyed then our
English Soldiers, the poor people of Mexico and other parts of those Indies
(to look no further) will be a great part of them dead by the way before they
can reach the General Council. e. g. if it should be in the midst of Europe. 3.
And the Council will not be competent Judges of so many causes which by
distance must needs be much unknown in many weighty Circumstances, whose
cognizance is necessary. 4. And lastly, such Councils will sit so seldom, that
the work will be undone.

Argum. 5. If God had intended that such a Council should have been the form of
his Church, or the necessary Governor of it, he would have acquainted us with
his will concerning some certain Power to summon them, (or would have
authorized some or other to call such a Council) But he has not acquainted us
with his will herein, nor authorized any to call such a Council: therefore it
was not his intent that it should be the form or necessary Governor of his
Church.

Either this Council must meet by an Authoritative call, or by consent. If by
such a call, who must call them? The Popes pretense to this Authority is
voluminously and unanswerably confuted long ago; and its well known, what ever
Baronius say, that the ancient Councils were called by the Emperors; and many
since have been called by Emperors and Cardinals. And if you say that it
belongs to the Emperor, I answer, what has he to do to summon the subjects of
the French, Spaniards, Turks, Ethiopian, etc? And by this it appears that we
never had true Universal Councils: They were but General as to the Roman world,
or Empire. For (who ever precided) it is certain that the Emperors called
them. And what had Constantine, Martian, Theodosius, or any Roman Emperor to
do, to call the subjects in India, Aethiopia, Persia, etc. to a Council? Nor de
facto, was there any such thing done. Is it not a wonderful thing that the
Pope and all his followers should be, or seem so blinded to this day, as to
take the Empire for the whole earth, or the Roman world for all the Christian
world! yet this is their all. If you say that it must be done by the consent of
Princes, then either of Christian Princes or of all. If of the Christian only,
you must exclude the Bishops that are under Mohammedan and Heathen Princes, and
then it will be no General Council; especially if it be now as it was in the
time of Jacob a Vitriaco the Popes Legate in the East, who says that the
Christians of the Easterly parts of Asia alone, exceeded in number the
Christians both of the Greek and Latin Churches. And whether it be all
Princes, or only Christian Princes that should consent, who can tell whether
ever it will be? God has not promised to lead them to such a consent: And they
are unlikely of themselves, as being many and distant, and of different
interests and apprehensions, and usually in wars with one another, so that if
an age should be spent in treating of a General Council among them, its ten to
one that the treaty will be in vain, and its next to an impossibility that all
should consent. Besides; no man can show a Commission from God to enable them,
and only them to such a work.

But if you say that it must be done by the consent of the Bishops themselves,
the Impossibility (moral) is apparent, who will be found that will be at the
cost and pains to agitate the business among them? No one can appoint the time
and place but by consent of the rest. Who does it belong to, to travail to the
Indies, Aethiopia, Egypt, Palestine, and all the rest of the world, to treat
with the Bishops about the time and place of a Council? And how many lives must
he have that shall do it? And when he finds them of a hundred minds, what
course shall he take, and how many more journies about the world must he make,
to bring them to an agreement? But I am ashamed to bestow more words on so
evident a case.

Argum. 6. The Head or Sovereign of the Church (as of every body Politic) has
the Legislative Power over the whole. The Pope or a General Council have not
the Legislative Power over the whole. Therefore the Pope or General Council are
not the head or Sovereigns of the Church.

The Major is of unquestionable verity in Politics. Legislation is the first
and chief work of Sovereignty.

The Minor is proved, 1. Ad hominem by the confession of the The Papists
confess that Pope and Council cannot make new Articles of faith, in se, but
quoad nos only. And they say they have received by Tradition the doctrines
which they teach,
chief Opponents, Grotius de Imperio summar. potest. does purposely maintain
it: and so do others: (See of this Lud. Molinaeus new Book supposed against the
Presbyterians: his Paraenesis.) 2. It is the high Prerogative of Christ the
true King and Sovereign of the Church, which none must arrogate. He was
faithful in all his house as was Moses. His Law is perfect: It is sufficient
to make the man of God perfect: even a sufficient rule of faith and life: No
man must add thereto, nor take ought therefrom, but do whatsoever he has
commanded, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not
according to these, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20.

Object. But men may make Bylaws under Christ and his Laws. Answ. True: but as
those are in this case no proper Laws, so no man or men may make them for the
Unversal Church. For the business of those Laws is only to determine of
circumstances which God has made necessary in genere, and left to the
determination of men in specie: And we may well know that there was some
special reason why Christ did not determine of these himself. And the reason is
plain; even because that they depend so much on the several states, capacities,
customs, etc. of men, that they are to be varied accordingly in several times
and places. If one standing Law would have fitted all the world, or all ages in
these matters, Christ would have made it himself. For if you say he makes some
Laws, and neglect others that are of the like kind, and might as well have been
done by himself, you make him imperfect and insufficient to his work. And if it
be not fit that one Universal Law be made for the world, then a Council must
not make it.

And as the sufficiency of Christ's law, so the nature of the things declare it,
that these matters must not be determined of by an universal Law. Should there
be an universal Law to determine what day of the week, or what hour of the day
every Lecture or occasional Sermon shall be on? Or what place every
Congregation shall meet in? Or where the Minister shall stand to preach? Or
what Chapters he should read each day? Or what Text he should preach on? or how
long? Whether by an hourglass or without? in what habit of apparel
particularly (when many a poor man must wear such as he can get) yea or what
gestures or postures of body to use (when that gesture in one Country
signifies reverence, which in another rather signifies neglect) with
abundance the like.

And the same is plain from the nature of the Pastoral office. Every Bishop or
Pastor is made by Christ the Ruler of the flock in such cases, and they are
bound to obey him, Heb. 13. 17. And therefore a General Council must leave them
their work to do which Christ has put upon them, and not take it out of their
hands: especially when being in the place, and seeing the variety of
circumstances, they are more competent judges then a General Council at such
distance.

The plain truth is, Christ has left them none of that work to do which
belongs to a Head or Sovereign, but they make work for themselves, that there
may seem to be a Necessity of a power to do it. The Church needs none of
their Laws. Let us have but the Holy Scriptures, and the Law of Nature, and the
civil Laws of men, and the guidance of particular Pastors pro tempore, and the
fraternal Consultations and Agreements of Councils, not to make any more work,
but to do this foresaid work unanimously, and the Church can bear no more;
there is nothing left for Legislators Ecclesiastical to do. We can spare their
Laws, and therefore their power and work. Their business is but to make snares
and burdens for us; and therefore we can live without them, and cannot believe
that the felicity, or unity, or essence of the Church consists in them.

Argum. 7. All the inferior officers do derive their power from the supreme.
All the other officers of the Catholic Church do not derive their power from
the Pope or a General Council: therefore a Pope or General Council are not the
supreme.

The Major is an unquestioned Maxim in Politics. Its essential to the
Sovereaign to be the fountain of power to all under him. Yea if it be but a
deputed derived Sovereignty, secundum quid so called, as the Viceroy of Mexico,
Naples, etc. yet so far he must be the fountain of all inferior power.

The Minor is maintained by most Christians in the world. Every Bishop or
Presbyter has his power immediately from Jesus Christ as the Efficient cause,
though man must be an occasion, or causa sine qua non, or per accidens. The
Italian Bishops in the Council of Trent could not carry it against the
Spaniards, that the Pope only as Head was immediately jure divino, and the rest
but mediante Papa.

Moreover it is easy to prove out of Scripture that God never set up any
Sovereign power in his Church (personal or collective) to be the fountain of
all other Church power, nor sends us to have recourse to any such for it. Nor
can they prove such a power, on whom it is incumbent.

And lastly its most easy to prove de facto, that the Bishops or Presbyters
now in the several Churches in the world, did not receive, and do not hold
their power from any such visible Head, whether Pope or Council. Though the
Popelings do, yet so do not all the rest of the Christian world. Who are not
therefore no Ministers or no Church of Christ, whatever these bare affirmers
and pretenders may imagine: Nor are all the Ministerial actions in the world
null, which are not done by a power from him. And even the Papists themselves
will few of them pretend to receive their several powers of Priesthood from a
General Council. This therefore is not the Sovereign power, or head of the
Church.

Argum. 8. The Head or Sovereign Power has the finally decisive Judgment, and
in great causes all must, or may appeal to them. A General Council has not the
finally decisive judgment, nor may all men in great causes appeal to them.
Therefore a General Council is not the Head or Sovereign power.

The Major is undeniable. The Minor is proved, 1. In that it is not known, nor
has the world any rule or way to know in what cases we must appeal to a
General Council, and what not; and what is their proper work. 2. In that an
appeal to them is an absolute evasion of the guilty, and in vain to the
innocent, because of the rarity of such Councils, or rather the nullity. 3.
Because the prosecuting of such an Appeal is impossible to most of the world
(as is before showed) and were it possible, it would be so tedious and
laborious a course, that its ridiculous in most to mention such Appeals.

Argum. 9. The Sovereign or Head of the Church (as of every Body Politic,)
has power to deprive and denude any other of their power. The Pope or General
Council has not power to do so: therefore they are not of the Head or
Sovereigns of the Church.

The Major is a known principle in polity: He that gives power, can take it
away: And it is confessed by the Opponents in this case.

The Minor I prove, 1. Because else it would be in the power of the Pope or
Council, whether Christ shall have any Ministry and Church or not. They may at
least make havoc of it at pleasure. But that is false. 2. As is before said, we
receive not our power from them: therefore they cannot take it from us. 3. The
Holy Ghost does make us Overseers of the flock, Act. 20. 28. and lay a
Necessity on us, and denounce a woe against us, if we preach not the Gospel:
and has no where given us leave to give over his work, if the Pope or a
Council shall forbid us. 4. And they can show no Commission from Christ that
gives them such a power.

Arg. 10. If it were the form or Essence of the Church to have a humane visible
Head, then our Relation to such a head would be essential to our Membership or
Christianity. But the Consequence is false: therefore so is the Antecedent.

The falseness of the consequent is apparent, 1. In that it cruelly and
ungroundedly unchristeneth all that do not believe in such a visible Head: That
is, the greatest part by far of the Christians in the world; And 2. By the
ensuing argument: And the necessity of the consequence is evident of it self.

Argum. 11. If such a visible Head were essential to the Church, and so to our
Christianity, then should we all be Baptized into the Pope or a General
Council, as truly and necessarily as we are baptized into the Church. But we
neither are nor ought to be so baptized into the Pope or a General Council;
therefore they are not essential to the Church or our Christianity.

The Major (viz. the Consequence) is clear, and not denied by the Papists, who
affirm that Baptism engages the baptized to the Pope. He that is united to the
body, is united to the head: he that is listed into the Army, is listed to and
under the General. He that is entered into the Commonwealth, is engaged to the
Sovereign thereof.

But that we are not baptized to the Pope or a General Council, is proved, 1.
Because neither the form of Baptism, nor any word in Scripture does affirm such
a thing. 2. No persons in Scripture times were so baptized: Men were baptized
before there was a Pope at Rome, or a General Council. And afterward none were
baptized to them, at least for many hundred years: otherwise then as they were
entered into the particular Church of Rome, who were Inhabitants there. 3. Never
any was baptized to Peter or Paul, or any of the Apostles says Paul, 1 Cor. 1.
13. was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? They
must be baptized into the name of no visible Head, but him that was crucified
for them. 4. The Apostle fully resolves all the doubt, 1 Cor. 12. describing
the body into which we are baptized, ver. 13. And he entitleth it from the
head, Christ, verse. 12. but acknowledges no other head, either coequal with
Christ, or subordinate: The highest of the other members are called by Paul but
eyes and hands, and thus Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Miracles, gifts of
healing, helps, Governments, are only said to be set in the Church, as eyes and
hands in the body; but not over the Church as the Head or Sovereign Power: ver.
17, 18, 19, 28, 29. so that though he that is baptized into the Church, is
baptized into an Organical body, and related to the Pastors, as to hands and
eyes, yet not as to a head, nor as to a representative body neither. And me
thinks neither Pope nor Council should pretend to be more then Apostles,
Prophets, and Teachers, and Governments. If the form of baptism had but
delivered down the authority of the Pope or a Council, as it did the authority
and name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Tradition would have been a
tolerable Argument for them, though Scripture had been silent. But when the
Baptismal Tradition it self is silent, and it is a doctrine so monstruously
strange to the Primitive Church, that all the baptized are baptized to the Pope
or a General Council, I know no remedy but they must both put up their
pretenses.

Argum. 12. The Essence of the Church into which they were baptized, was part
of the doctrine which the Catechumeni were taught, (and all at age should
learn) before their baptism. The Sovereignty or Headship of Pope or Council was
no part of the Doctrine which (by the Primitive Church) the Catechumeni were
taught, and ought to learn, before their baptism. Therefore the Sovereignty or
Headship of Pope or Council was not then taken to be of the Essence of the
Church.

The Major is evident, 1. In that the Catholic Church was in the Creed: and
it is essentials there briefly expressed in those terms [Holy Catholic Church,
and Communion of Saints.] 2. In that Church History fully acquainteth us that
it was the practice of the Catethists and other Teachers to open the Creed to
them before they baptized them, and therein the Article of the Catholic
Church, and the Communion of Saints.

The Minor is proved by an induction of all the Records of those times, which
in gross may now suffice according to our present intended brevity to be
mentioned. There is no one Writer of many hundred years, no not Origin,
Tertullian, Irenaeus, or any other that purposely recite the Churches belief
which the Catechumeni were taught, nor Cyril, (or John) Hierosol. or any other
who open those Articles to the Catechumens, that ever once mention the Doctrine
of the Headship of the Pope or Council, when they open the Article of the
Catholic Church; nor yet at any other time. If they affirm that they did, let
them prove it if they can.

Argum. 13. As it is high Treason in a Republic to deny the Sovereign, and to
be cut off from him, is to be cut off from the Commonwealth; so it would be a
damning unchristening sin to deny the Headship of the Pope or General Council,
if they were indeed the Head of the Church. But it is no such damning
unchristening sin: Therefore they are not the Head of the Church.

The Major is plain from the Nature of Sovereignty. The Minor is certainly
proved, 1. Because it is never mentioned in Scripture, nor any ancient Writer
for many hundred years, as a state of Apostasy, nor as a damning sin, nor as
any sin, to deny the said Headship of the Pope or Council. 2. Because else most
of the Christians of the world at this day are Apostates and unchristened: Or
if that seem a tolerable conclusion to the Romanists; Yet 3. Because then
Christ had no Church for some hundreds of years, which I know they will not
think so tolerable a conclusion; For to dream that the ancient Christians did
know any Head of the Church but Christ, or were engaged in loyalty to the Pope
or Council, is a disease that few are liable to, except such as are strangers
to the writings of those times, or such as read them with Roman spectacles,
resolved what to find in them before hand.

Argum. 14. All Christians are bound to study or labor to be acquainted with
the Laws of the Sovereign power of the Church: All Christians are not bound to
study or labor to be acquainted with the Laws of Popes and Councils: Therefore
the laws of Popes and Councils are not the Laws of the Sovereign power of the
Church.

The Major is proved, in that all subjects must obey the Laws of the Sovereign
power: But they cannot obey them unless they know them. Therefore they are
bound to endeavor to know them.

The Minor is proved, 1. In that they being written in Latin and Greek which a
very small part of the Christians of the world do understand, and their
Teachers not sufficiently expounding them, and they being more copious and
voluminous, more obscure and uncertain (of which next) then for all private
Christians to understand, the people cannot learn these, having enough to do to
learn Gods Word. 2. The Papists that deny the use of the Holy Scriptures to the
people in a known tongue, and deny the necessity of understanding them, will
sure say the same of their Decretals and Canons, unless they mean to set them
up above the Scripture, as well as equal them thereto.

Argum. 15. The Sovereign Head of the visible Church and Center of our unity,
must be evident, that all the Christian world may know it: The Pope and General
Council are not such. Therefore neither of them are the Head of the Visible
Church.

The Major is confessed by the Opponents; and it is plain, because men cannot
obey an unknown power.

The Minor is known by common experience. For many a year together (by
Bellarmines confession) learned and wise men could not tell which was the true
Pope; yea their Councils could not tell. Most of the Christian world to this
day cannot discern his Commission for that power which he pretends to. A true
General Council now no man can know, because it is a non ens. Their pretended
General Councils are so ravelled in confusion, that they are not agreed among
themselves which are indeed such, and which not: but many are rejected, and
many suspected (of which Bellarmine gives us a list) and those that one
receives, another rejects; and the most by far are rejected by most of the
Christian world. And when some would take up with the four first, and some with
six, and some with eight, the Papists deridingly ask them, whether the Church
has not as much authority now as it had then? And how shall the Christian
world know whether it were a true General Council or not? Of which see the
difficulties first to be resolved, which I have recited in my Disputations
against Popery.

Argum. 16. The Laws of the Sovereign Power of the Church must be certain (or
else how shall we know what to obey) The Laws of Popes and General Councils are
not certain: Therefore, etc.

The Minor is proved by experience. The Popes Decretals are many unknown, and
many proved forgeries (by Blondell ubi sup. and many others) beyond all
question: and none of them proved Laws to the Church. The Canons of the first
Council of Nice are not agreed on among the Papists. Many others are proved
forged: Many are flatly contrary to each other (as I have showed ubi sup.) and
how then shall Christians know what to obey? The ancient Canons condemned the
gesture of kneeling on the Lords day (and consequently then at the Lords
Supper) the reading of the Heathens Books, and many such things which are now
taken for lawful: The later Councils that contradict the former, do seem to
most of more questionable authority then they. And what Councils are to be
received and what rejected, they are not agreed among themselves, nor have any
certain Rule to know by on which they are agreed: Nor will their Popes or
Councils yet resolve them this great question. So that Christians are at a loss
concerning these Laws, and know not which of them they are obliged by, and
which not.

Argum. 17. If the Pope or Council be the Head of the Church, then must their
Laws be preached to the people by their Teachers. But the Laws of Popes and
Councils need not be preached to the people by their Teachers: Therefore, etc.

The reason of the Major is, because the Laws that they must obey in matters
spiritual in order to salvation, the Ministers must preach to them. But these
are pretended to be such: Therefore, etc.

As to the Minor, 1. It would be but an unhansome thing in their own hearing,
for Preachers to take their Texts out of the Canons or Decretals, and preach
these day after day to the people: which yet they have need to do many a year,
if the obedience of them be our necessary duty. 2. Ministers are commanded to
preach only the Gospel, and it is said to be sufficient or able to make us
perfect, and build us up to salvation. Therefore we need not preach the Canons
or Decretals.

Argum. 18. While a Visible Head cannot be agreed on even by those that would
have the Church united in suoh a Head, it is all one to them as if there were
no such Head, and the union still is unattainable by them. But even among the
Papists themselves a Visible Head is not, cannot be agreed on: Therefore, etc.

What good will it do to say we must center some where, and know not where, and
obey some body, and know not who? The Italians and Spanish make the Pope the
Infallible Head, and say a General Council without him may err, and is but the
body. The French make the Council the Head, and say the Pope may err; and that
the infallibility (such as they plead for) is in the Council. It is not a Head,
but this Head in specie, that is, the form of the Church, if any such be: And
therefore they must needs (according to their own principles) be of diverse
Churches, while they place the Sovereignty in several sorts and persons. Till
they better agree among themselves in their Fundamentals and Essentials of the
Church, we have small encouragement to think of uniting on any of their grounds.

Argum. 19. The Sovereign Power or Headship over the Church is a thing
undoubtedly revealeed in the Holy Scripture: (For we cannot imagine that the
Scripture should be silent in so weighty a point, without intolerable
accusation of it.) The Sovereign Power or Headship of Pope or Council is not
revealed in the Holy Scripture. Therefore, etc.

They have not yet produced a Text to prove either of them. Those produced by
the Italians for the Popes Headship, are disclaimed by the French, as meaning
no such thing; and our Writers have largely manifested their abusing of the
Text. So have they done of those that are brought for the Headship of Councils.
These texts are spoke to so fully by Chamier, Whitaker, Amesius, and abundance
more, that I think it in vain to do it here again. That of 1 Timothy 3. 15. that
the Church is the pillar and ground of Truth, does not speak a word of a
General Council, nor a word of Headship: The whole Church united in Christ, is
the Pillar and Ground, that is, the certain Receptacle and retainer of the
Truth, the Law of Christ being written in their hearts.

None seems more to favor their concecit then Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. which Grotius
fastens on: But even that is against them, and not for them. For 1. It is
Christ and only Christ that is here said to be the head, and all other parts
contradistinguished, and excluded from Headship, and the Body is not said to be
united in them. 2. And it is by association, and mutual communication of their
several gifts, that the parts are compacted together, and edify the whole; and
not by meeting in any one, and deriving from it.

Object. But were not the Apostles General Officers, and so the Church united
in General officers? Answ. This is little to the Question. For 1. the Apostles
had one among them to be the Sovereign or Head of the rest, but were of equal
power. 2. Nor did a major part of their whole number make such a Head for the
Church to unite in, nor do we read that ever a Major vote carried it among them
against a Minor; for they were all guided by the Spirit. Yet its true that they
met ofter together then a General Council can. 2. The Apostles as
extraordinarily qualified, and as the Secretaries of the Spirit, have no
successors: But the Apostles as ambulatory unfixed Ministers, had even then
many companions: For Barnabas, Luke, Apollo, and abundance more, did then go up
and down preaching, as well as the Apostles; yet had not any one of them a
special charge of Governing all the Churches: nor yet all of them united in a
body: For the Apostles called not the Evangelists and other fellow workers to
consult in Councils about the Government of the whole; But both they and their
helpers, did severally what they could to teach and settle the Churches. 3. Who
be they now that are the Apostles successors? If all the Bishops in the world,
the case is as we left it. If any small number of Primates or Patriarcks, how
shall we know which and how many? If they be not twelve, why should one Apostle
have a successor, and not others? But there are no twelve only that lay claim
to the succession. And if you go further, who can limit, and say who, and how
many they be, and how far the number may be increased or decreased, and by
whom? In Cyprians days he and his fellows in the Council at Carthage declare
that all Bishops were equal, and none had power over other. And so thought
others in those times. Nor was there then any number of Bishops that claimed to
be the sole successors of the Apostles, to rule all the rest. And if they had,
when the Church increases, the Rulers must increase. But this is not to the
main point.

Argum. 20. The Scripture does appropriate the Universal Headship to Christ
only, and deny it to all others: therefore neither Pope nor Council are the
Universal Head.

Ephesians. 5. 23. It is the peculiar Title of Christ to be Head of the Church, to
whom it must be subject, 1 Cor. 11. 3. The Apostle would have us know that the
Head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and the Head
of Christ is God. So that there is a particular Head over some parcel of the
body below Christ: but to be the Universal Head of every man, is the proper
Title of Christ. In 1 Cor. 12. the unity of the body and diversity of the
members is more largely expressed then any where else in Scripture; and there
when the said unity of the body had been so fully mentioned, the Apostle comes
to name the Head of that Unity, Verse. 27. which is only Christ. [Now ye are the
body of Christ, and members in particular] The Church is never called the body
of the Pope, or of a Council, but the body of Christ: yea (as was even now
said) in the next words the Apostles, Prophets, and Teachers are enumerated to
the particular members, contradistinct from the Head, so far are all, or any
one of them from being the head themselves. And in Col. 2. 10, 17, 19. it is
Christ only that is called the Head, and the body is said to be of Christ, and
he only is mentioned as the Center of its Unity [And not holding the Head, from
which all the body by joints, and bands having nourishment ministered and knit
together, increases with the increase of God.] And Col. 1. 18. And he is the
Head of the body, the Church.] If any say that you cannot hence argue
Negatively that therefore no one else is the Head, I answer, They may as well
say, when it is affirmed that [the Lord he is God] you cannot thence conclude
that Baal is not God. The Apostle plainly speaks this of Christ as his peculiar
honor: And he spoke to men that knew well enough that natural bodies have but
one Head, unless they be Monsters: And he would not so often insist on this
Metaphor, intending so great a disparity in the similitude, and never discover
any such intention; So in Ephesians. 1. 22. He gave him to be Head over all things
to the Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.]

And in Ephesians. 4. the Apostle purposely exhorts us to the observation of this
unity; and purposely tells us by a large enumeration wherein it does consist:
but in all he never mentions the Pope or a Council: yea he plainly excludes
them, Verse. 3, 4. etc. [Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace: There is one body, and one spirit, even as you are called in one
hope of your calling, One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all: But unto every one of
us is given Grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ -- He gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the Edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith,
etc. -- ] so then you see there is but one Lord of the Church; therefore the
Pope or Council is not Lord (in name or deed.) And Apostles, Prophets, Pastors,
and Doctors, are the member contradisting guished from this One Lord, and whose
diversity is purposely mentioned, they being the matter or parcels that must
have their unity in some other, but not the Church to be united in them. Here
is then no mention among all these [Ones] of one earthly Head, whether Pope or
Council, not of One Apostle that was the Head of the rest. If such a thing had
ever come into the Apostles mind, he would sure have mentioned it on such
occasions as these, and not have quite forgotten it; yea and contradict it so
evidently.

1 Cor. 6. 15, 17. Our bodies are the members of Christ, (not of the Pope) and
he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit (not he that is joined to the Pope.)

Gal. 3. 28. We are all one in Christ Jesus (not in an earthly Head) Many and
many times does the Apostle exhort them to be of one mind, and acord, and take
heed of schism, and maintain peace, and he reproves their divisions at large:
yet does he never mention such a sin as dividing from an earthly Head, nor ever
once direct them to a Pope or General Council as the Center of their unity, or
the necessary means of curing divisions. Peter himself exhorts them to be all
of one mind, 1 Pet. 3. 8. but never to be all united in him as their head. The
Apostle Paul is punctual in describing the Officers of the Church, and the
peoples duty to them: But he never describes a Pope, or any earthly Head of
that Church: nor ever tells the people of their duty to such: And if such a
supposed fundamental should be quite forgotten by men that belieived it, and
taught others that which was necessary to be believed, it were incredibly
strange. That Paul writing to the Romans should never mind them of the honor
of their Sea, or their duty to their supereminent Prelate, was his
forgetfulness or unbelief. And surely he would never have so sharply reproved
them of Corinth for contentions, in saying I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I
of Cephas, and I of Christ, if he had thought they must have been united in
Cephas; without once telling them of such a means of union and reconciliation.
He says [Is Christ divided?] as much as to say, you must be all united in him:
but he says not [Is Cephas divided?] but plainly makes the exalters of Cephas
a party that was guilty of division, and Chap. 3. 3, 4, 5. tells them plainly
that this showed that they were carnal. And speaking of all others in his own
person and Apollos, says [Who then is Paul, or who is Apollo, but Ministers by
whom ye believed?] They had not then learned to answer [Why Cephas is the Head
of the Church.] And 1 Cor. 46. He speaks as if it were purposely to a Papist
[All these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to my self and to
Apollo for your sakes: that ye might learn in us not to think (of men) above
that which is written: that no one of you be puffed up for one against another]
What not for Peter? no not for Peter himself. And doubtless Paul did not
believe his supremacy, when he so presumed to reprove him to his face, Gal. 2.
So 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. there is mention of our being all one bread, and one
body: but that's because we are all partakers of that one body of Christ, and
not because we are united in the Pope or any other.

Moreover when the Disciples strove who should be greatest, Christ expressly
rebukes such thoughts, and instead of granting any of them that desire, he
denies it to them all, Mat. 22. 25, 26. Luke 22. 26. The Kings of the Gentiles
rule over them, and are called gracious Lords, but with you it shall not be
so.] Bellarmine indeed can merrily hence gather that there must be one
appointed to be the greatest, because Christ says, He that will be Greatest,
let him be the servant of all.] This is to make good their charge against the
Scripture, that it is a nose of Wax by their presumptuons abuse of it; as some
men would prove the Apostasy of the Saints, by their own Apostatizing, when yet
they prove it not, though they ruin themselves. Did not Christ by these words
reprehend their seeking of a Supremacy? And yet does he grant it?

Oh but it is only Tyranny that Christ forbids them. Answ. That which Christ
acknowledges in the Kings of the Nations, without reprehension, that is it
which he denies to his Disciples. But it is not Tyranny but Dominion which
Christ thus acknowledges in, and allows to the Kings of the Nations:
therefore it is not Tyranny but Dominion which he forbids to his Disciples;
That which Christ here speaks of the Kings of the Nations, is somewhat common
to all Kings, and so as Kings. But Tyranny was not common to all Kings, nor to
them as Kings: therefore it is not Tyranny that he speaks of. Moreover its
plain that it is a Greatness in Desire and Affectation that is the subject of
Christ's speech, and not an allowed supremacy, and that he forbids this
Supremacy in the following words, [Let him be the servant of all] q. d. [I
allow in my Kingdom to the Preachers of the Gospel no other Greatness or
superiority above others, but what consists in holiness, and humility, and
doing good, and so in disclaiming of Ruling Greatness.] In Luke 9. there is
mention of [him that was least, etc.] It follows not thence that one was
appointed to be the lowest. And if the will of Christ were known to them that
one should be the Supreme, and this was Peter, what need they strive any
further about it; or why does he not rebuke them for resisting their Supreme?

Again I say, that I cannot see how it can stand with the wisdom or goodness of
Christ the Lawgiver of his Church, or the perfection of his Laws, or how it
can be any way probable, that he should be wholly silent of so great a point as
the Headship and Center of the Churches Unity; never giving us either the Name
or Titles of such a Head, nor the seat of his Empire, nor appointing him his
work, nor directing him how to do it when he has the greatest work in the
world to do (as these men suppose) and such as surpasses the strength of man,
yea of a thousand men; never giving him any advice and direction for the
determining of his very many occurrent difficulties; nor once giving us any of
his power, nor telling us of his prerogative, nor telling us what officers he
shall appoint under him, and how; nor once telling any man of his duty to obey
him; never telling us any thing of the succession of this Sovereign in whom it
shall reside; nor once telling us historically of the exercise of any of his
power: I say that not a word of this should be mentioned by Christ or his
Apostles, even when there was so great occasion, when Peter was among them,
when there was striving for supremacy, when the Churches were lamentably
contending about the pre-eminence of their teachers, and some were for one, and
some for another, and some for Cephas himself; and when so many heresies arose,
and hazzarded the Churches, as among the Corinthians, Galathians, and others
there did; This is a thing so hard to be believed by one that believes the
wisdom and love of Christ, that I must say for my part, it surpasses my
belief. Especially (as is said) when also so much is said against the Supremacy
contended for. All this I speak of any earthly Head, whether Pope or Council.

Object. But (say the Papists) you can allow Princes to be the Heads of the
Church: why then not a Pope? Answ. We acknowledge Princes and Pastors over
parts of the Church, but not over the Church Universal. Every Corporation may
call the Major or Bailiff a subordinate Head of that Corporation, but not of
the Kingdom.

Object. There may be a Prorex, a Viceking: and why not then a Vicarious Head
of the Catholic Church? Answ. 1. Because a Kingdom is not so big as all the
world, or all that is and may be Christian. 2. Because a King having Dominion,
has power of doing all that by others that he cannot do himself: But a Pastor
being a Minister, has no such power given him, but must do his work himself.
3. Because the work of the Ministry requires far more labor and attendance. So
that it is an utter Imopssibility that any man should be able to do the work of
a supreme Ruler of all the Christian world, yea or the hundredth part of it, as
it must be done. 4. And lastly, because Christ has made no such Prorex, or
Vice-head: and none can have it without his commission.

Object. But the Civil power has been exercised by an Emperor over more then
all the Christian world: And why then may not the Ecclesiastical? Answ. 1. Its
notoriously false that ever Emperor had so extensive a Dominion. 2. The Gospel
must be preached over all the world; and therefore we must consider the
possible future extent of the Church, and not only the present existent state.
3. There are many millions of Christians mixed in the Dominions of Infidel
Princes among other Religions, which makes the Government of them the more
difficult. 4. I showed before from the nature of the work many other
difficulties, which make a difference.

Object. Monarchy is the best Government; therefore the Church must have it.
Answ. The Monarchy of God is best: but among men it is according to the state
of the Rulers and subject. One way is better in some cases, and another in
others. 2. For one man to be Monarch of all the Christian world, is not best,
when by taking a thousand times more upon him then he can do, he will ruin
instead of ruling well. 3. You may as well say, An Universal Civil Monarch over
all the world is best; therefore so it must be: but when will you prove that?
But if I mistake not in my conjecture, it is the thing that the Jesuits have
lately got into their heads, that the Pope must have the Universal Sovereignty
Ecclesiastical and Civil; that so an Universal peace may be in the world.

Obj. There was but One High Priest before Christ. Answ. 1. No more there was
but one Temple; Will you therefore have no more? Nor but one civil Monarch in
that Church: Would you have no more? I partly believe it. 2. It was easy for
one to Rule so small a Nation as Judaea in comparison of all the world. 3.
Prove you the Institution of your Supremacy, as we can prove the Institution of
Aarons Priesthood, and the taking of it down again, and we will yield all. 4.
That Priesthood was a Type of Christ the Eternal Priest, and is ended in him,
as the Epistle to the Hebrews shows at large.

Object. There is a Monarchy among Angels and Devils. Answ. 1. Its a hard shift
when you must go to another world for your pattern: But for your Argument
fetched from Hell, I will leave it with you: but for that from Heaven, I say,
there is no proof of it. And if there were, till you can prove that our work and
fitness for it is the same as Angels, and that the Lord has appointed the same
form here, you have said nothing.

But because this Question is largely handled by abundance of our Learned
Writers, I shall say no more to it here, but conclude, that by this which is
already said in brief, it is manifest, that The Catholic Church of Christ is
not one Visible Political Body, as joined to any One Universal Visible Head or
Sovereign, besides Christ.

If any being driven from this hold, shall say, that yet there are several
Patriarcks that Govern the several Provinces of the Christian world, though
there be no head but Christ. I answer. 1. If there be no earthly Head and
Center of unity, then I have the main cause. These Patriarcks may and do at
this day, unreconcilably disagree among themselves. This therefore will not
serve for a unity. 2. When (as is aforesaid) you have well proved the
Institution of these Patriarcks, and how many they be, and who, and the power
of Princes to make new ones, (and not to forbear it, and to pull down the old
ones:) and when you have answered the foregoing Arguments, as many of them as
extend to Patriarchal power also, as well as Unversal Headship, then we shall
take this further into consideration. In the mean time, I supersede, as having
done that which I think necessary to take off men, from inclining to Rome, and
reproaching of Churches, upon the erroneous Conceit of the Nature and unity of
the Catholic Church; as if it were One, as under One Earthly Visible Head.

CHAP. IV.
Opening the true Grounds on which the Churches Unity and Peace must be sought,
and the means that must be used to attain so much as is here to be expected.

Quest. BUT if this be not the way of the Churches Unity, which is? and what
should we desire and endeavor for the attaining it? For the distractions of
the Church are so great through our divisions, that it makes us still apt to
suspect that we are out of the way.

Though it be a great work to answer this question rightly, and a hundred, a
thousand times greater to answer it satisfactorily (that is, to satisfy
prejudiced incapable men with a right answer,) yet I shall attempt it by
casting in my thoughts; or to speak more confidently, by declaring so much as I
am certain is the will of God concerning this weighty thing.

And here I shall first lay down those grounds upon which we must proceed, if
we will do our duty for the union of the Church. 2. I shall tell you what must
be done to reduce them into Practice.

1. THE first General Ground is this [Peace and Holiness must be carried on
together: Yea Peace must be sought as a Means to Holiness: and therefore
Holiness which is the End, must be preferred.] The wisdom that is from above,
is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, easy to be entreated, etc. Jam. 3. A
man may be saved that cannot attain Peace with men: and therefore we are
commanded to seek it as an uncertain good, Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as
much as in you lies, live peacably with all men: But no man can be saved
without Holiness, Heb. 12. 14. Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without
which no man shall see God. There is a kind of Unity among Devils. For if Satan
were divided against Satan, how could his Kingdom stand? Mat. 12. There is a
Peace in a state of misery and sin, which hinders men's recovery. For when the
strong man armed keeps his house, the things that he possesses are in Peace.
It is a state of greatest danger on earth to be United in evil, and to have
Peace in a way of sin. And therefore it is no wonder if there be more lovers of
Peace then of Holiness, and more that will cry out of our Divisions then of our
ungodliness, and more that cry out of so many Religions, then of
irreligiousness and ungodliness. For nature may make a man in love with Unity
and Peace, but not with Holiness; for with that it is at Enmity. Hence it is
that we hear so many Worldlings, Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers cry up
unity, and cry down so many minds and ways: And hence it is that so many, such
wicked livers do turn Papists on supposition that there is more unity with
them. And so the Popish party among us are the sink into which the filth and
excrements of our Churches are emptyed.

2. The second General Ground. From hence it follows that the first closure
of the members of the Church must be upon principles of Faith and Holiness: and
therefore only between the Professors of Faith and Holiness. And therefore we
ought not to be solicitous of obtaining a Unity with open ungodly men; For what
Communion has light with darkness? or what concord has Christ with Belial? If
men will not agree with us in the great Principles of Godliness, nor join with
us in avoiding crying sins, and living an Holy life; it is they that are the
Separatists, and withdraw from our communion. If they will not come to us in
Piety, we must not come to them in Impiety. And to attempt a union with them in
Government and Ceremonies, when we cannot bring them to a Union with us in
seeming Godliness, is as vain as to attempt to an Association with the dead,
and to make a marriage with a stinking Corpse. It is therefore but a carnal stir
that Papists, and some Reconcilers make to have a Union so General, as shall
take in the most impious rabble that ought to be excommunicated, and should
conjoin the living and the dead. And therefore in some cases we are all called
to separate, by him that calls us in other cases to unity: And he tells us
that he came not to send peace, (with such) but division.

3. The third General Ground. Unity and Peace are such excellent things, and so
much depend upon Love and Holiness, and suppose also so much Illumination, that
the perfection of them is reserved for Heaven: and as it is but a small measure
of Illumination, and Love and Holiness that is here attainable, in comparison
of that which we shall have in heaven; so it is but a small measure of Peace
and Concord: And therefore though our desires and endeavors should go as high
as we can, yet our expectations on earth must not fly too high. This has been
my own error. I have not sufficiently considered, that perfect Peace, as well
as perfect Holiness is the prerogative of Heaven, and that true Peace will be
imperfect while the Light and Virtue which is supposed to it is imperfect. And
it is a blind absurd conceit of them that wonder we have not perfect Unity,
when yet they murmur at Piety, and think a little may serve the turn, and any
sin is tolerable that's directly against God, but not disunion.

So much for the General Grounds: The Particular Grounds are these following.

1. Ground IT is the Prerogative of the Lord Jesus to be the only Head and
Sovereign of the Church. And his will revealed is our Law, and in him only must
we center: and not in any Vicarious Universal Head: And from him must all
receive their power: and all must worship God according to his praescript. Ephesians.
4. 3, 4, 5. and 1. 21, 22. Mat. 28. 18, 19. Col. 1. 18. Acts 4. 12. and 3. 22.
and 7. 37. Mat. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 3. 5, 22. 1 Cor. 1. 12. Gal. 2. 9, 10.

2. Gr. The Holy Scriptures with the Law of Nature, are the only Laws of
Christ: unless as he may possibly by extraordinary Revelation, oblige some
person to a particular duty, not contrary to that word, but left undetermined:
which yet is so rare a thing that men must not rashly presume of such a matter,
1 Timothy 1. 3. Gal. 1. 7, 8. 9. Isa. 8. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 6. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Deuteronomy. 12.
32. Mat. 15. 9, 11.

3. It is the prerogative of Christ himself to be the supreme, absolute and
final Judge of the sense of his own Laws, and of the causes that are to be
tried thereby.

And therefore it is treasonable folly to attribute any of this to man: and to
cry out for an Absolute Judge of Controversies here on earth: when one says,
This is the sense of Scripture, and another says that is the sense: says the
Papist, [But who shall be Judge?] To which I answer, How far man is Judge, I
shall tell you in the next: but the Absolute Judge, and the final Judge is only
Christ. He that made the Law is the proper Judge of the sense of his own Laws:
Do you not know that Christ will come to judgment, and that all secrets must
then be opened by him, and he must decide what man cannot? Man is to Judge but
in tantum; ad hoc; secundum quid; limitedly; so far as he must execute; but
Christ only Judges entirely, finally and absolutely, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy
5. 24. Jam. 4. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 1. 17. and 2. 23. 1 Cor. 2. 15. Act. 23. 3. 1
Cor. 13. 9, 10, 11, 12. Mark 7. 9, 13.

4. All Councils whether General, or Provincial, or Classical, which consist of
the Bishops or Pastors of several Churches met together, are appointed and to
be used directly, but gratia Unitatis, and Communionis Christianae, and not
directly gratia regiminis for the Governing of Pastors, in order to Unity and
Communion, and not as a Regimental, as to the Pastors. This Proposition which
is of exceeding consequence, was voluntarily asserted to me, without my own
asking his opinion, by that Learned, Judicious man Archbishop Usher; a man
well known to be acquainted with the Judgment and practice of the Ancients, if
any other whoever. His words were these. [Councils are not for Government, but
for Unity; not as being in order of Government over the several Bishops; but
that by consultation they may know their duty more clearly, and by agreement
maintain Unity; and to this end they were anciently celebrated] Himself a
Primate, recommended to others these moderate Principles. And this middle way
of Reverend Usher is the true healing Mean, between them that would have
properly Governing Councils, and them that would have none, or think them
needless, or but indifferent things.

But yet (as is before mentioned in the tenth Proposition) consequentially we
are obliged to perform the Agreements of these Councils, if they be agreeable
to the General Rules of the Scriptures, or if our performance be not forbidden
by the Word of God; Because we are under the General obligation to do all
things in as much unity, concord and peace as we can, Gal. 2. per totum. 1 Cor.
3. 5, 22. 2 Cor. 13. 11. and 1 Cor. 1. 10. and 4. 6. Mat. 20. 25. Phil. 3. 16.
and 4. 2. Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10. 1 Pet. 5. 3.

And I grant that Pastors are related to the Universal Church, as well as to a
particular, and are to have a common care of the whole, though they have a
special charge only of their particular flocks. Therefore many Pastors in a
Synod are Pastors as well as disjunct, and therefore their acts are
authoritative Governing Acts as to the flock. But 1. to the Pastors themselves,
they are not properly Governors, no more in Synods then out. 2. And as to the
flocks, they are not in a direct superior order above their particular
Pastors; but only from their concord are accidentally more to be regarded and
obeyed then a single Pastor, as a College of Physicians is more to be regarded
then a single Physician, not as being of higher authority, but of greater
credit, in cases where men must be trusted.

5. A Council consisting of Bishops or Pastors that by distance are not
incapable of ordinary local Communion, whether it be a General Council (as they
are commonly called, which are not such properly) or National, or Provincial.
1. As they are Christians singly, have a Judgment of Discerning, what is sound
Doctrine, and whom to judge Catholics and fit for their Communion: And 2. As
they are single Pastors, they have the Judgment of Direction, what Doctrine to
recommend as found to their people (limited to the Superior Direction of God
by his Word,) and whom they must hold or not hold Communion with: And this is
an Authoritative Direction, which may be accompanied with a Commanding, as an
Herald or Pursevant may command in the Princes name. 3. And as they are many
Pastors in Council assembled, they have a Judgment of Concord, or Power to
enter solemnly into Consultations for mutual information, and then into
Agreements, for the right performance of their duty, in recommending that which
is sound Doctrine to their people, and receiving the true members of the
Catholic Church, and rejecting such as are to be rejected.

So that the most General Councils of true Pastors caeteris paribus, are to be
most reverenced by the Princes and people, and in cases where they are sure it
is lawful to follow their Agreements, though they be not satisfied of the
necessity of it a natura rei, they ought to follow them on the account of
unity; and also in cases merely doubtful to them in point of Doctrine, to be
balanced by their judgments rather then by the Judgment of single Pastors,
and more then by any other humane judgment caeteris paribus: which exception I
add, because a smaller Assembly, yea a single Pastor or private man, speaking
according to the Word of God, is to be believed and regarded more then the
greatest Assembly contradicting the Word: yet we are not easily to think,
without evident proof, that one man should be rather in the right then so many;
seeing it is easier for one to err then so many, and the promises are more to
the public, then any single persons, so far as they can be known to others:
And yet an Assembly of an hundred, or twenty, or ten apparent humble, holy,
Judicious men, is likelier to be in the right, and more to be regarded, then an
Assembly of a thousand ignorant unlearned wicked Bishops. One clear eye may see
further then ten thousand purblind ones, Act. 6. 5. Act. 5. 34. 1 These. 2. 14.
1 Cor. 11. 16. and 14. 33. and 10. 32.

6. As the properest matter for such General Assemblies to Consult and Agree
upon, is General things; as, What Doctrine is sound, and what unsound in
General; what persons in General fit for the Churches Communion, and what
unfit, etc. so smaller Assemblies that are capable of ordinary personal
Communion, and know the persons and circumstances of the cases, are fittest to
consult and agree whether such or such particular persons are fit for their own
Communion; yea and for their Churches Communion in difficult cases: And also
may consult and agree what Doctrines and practices to recommend to their own
people, as most agreeable to the Word of God: And thus far these two sorts of
Synods may be said to have a power of Judging; viz. ad hoc, in order to such
agreements and practice, Act. 6. 5, 6. Romans 15. 26, 27. 2. Cor 8. 19.

7. The Postors of particular Worshipping Churches, are the Authorized Guides,
Rulers or Teachers of those Churches, and each Member thereof: and must first
discern in their own minds, and next (if they be many over a Church) Agree
among themselves, and then teach the people, what is to be believed and
practiced, and with whom in General, and in Particular to hold Communion, and
whom to avoid, and may charge the people in Christ's name to obey their just
directions; and when they have done, must themselves execute their own part
herein (as by avoiding the Rejected, and not delivering them the Symbols or
Sacrament of Communion, etc.) And though they must consult with neighbor
Churches for carrying on the work of God in unity, and to the best advantage of
the Common cause, yet are they not under the proper Government of them, or any
Assemblies (Ecclesiastical,) though obliged in all just things to Agree with
them. So that Canons as Canons, I mean the Conclusions of such Assemblies, are
but properly Agreements, and not Laws, though by consequence they may be said
to oblige, or rather we by another Law obliged to accord and practice them,
Heb. 13. 17. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Act. 20. 28.

8. The work of Councils how large so ever, is not to make new Scriptures to be
the Rule of our Faith and Life, nor to make new Articles or Doctrines of Faith,
nor to frame God a new Worship in whole or in part; But by Consultations and
Agreements to strengthen each other, and Direct the people in the faith of
Christ, and the maintaining and propagating the Doctrine of the Holy
Scriptures, and doing those duties in the Worship of God, and in Righteousness
and Mercy to men, which the Scriptures do impose, and in agreeing upon those
Modes and Circumstances of Worship which God has made necessary in genere, and
left to occasional humane determination in specie: Nor may they under this
pretense, either contradict the just determination of the Magistrate concerning
such Circumstances, or impose any ensnaring, needless Ceremonies upon the
Church; but only order the service of God according to the General Directions
of the Scripture, and the Light of Nature, which by the consideration of the
case may help to discern the fittest order. It is therefore a strange assertion
of some, that Governors have nothing to do if they may not appoint new
Ordinances or Symbolical Ceremonies on the Church, and make new Laws, seeing
God has done the rest already. As if it were nothing to see to the execution
of Gods Laws? Or as if this were not the fittest work for such kind of Rulers,
whose Rule is only by Ministerial Guidance? Or as if the determination of
Necessary Circumstances requisite ex natura rei, were not enough for them to
do, beside what is written? There being no more necessary to the reducing of
the Laws of God into practice: Me thinks mere servants and Ambassadors should
not be very forward in making Laws, if they understand their office, Jam. 4.
12. Heb. 8. 10, 16. Gal. 3. 15. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Ezekiel. 2. 7. and 3. 10, 11. 1 Cor.
3. 5. and 4. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Cor. 6. 12.

9. Those necessary Circumstances in Religious Worship which are of humane
determination, and left undetermined by God, are unfit matter for General
Councils or remote Assemblies to make standing General Laws of: For 1. the
Nature of the things are such as are mutable, and unfit to be fixed, but must be
frequently varied as occasions require. 2. The occurring circumstances will be
the fittest guide to determine them. 3. They may be meet in one Country, or
Church, which are unmeet in another. 4. Upon such reasons God himself has left
them undetermined: Therefore he left them not to any fixed General
determination. 5. The Pastors that are in the place are the fittest Judges of
those occasions that must determine them. 6. And it is the office, and in the
Commission of those Pastors to be the Guides of their own actions and
Congregations. 7. And Councils are not their Lords. So that all this laid
together, may tell us that it is rather the work of particular Pastors or
Bishops, and of nearest Associations in those cases where Concord is requisite,
then of Provincial, or National, or General Councils to determine of such
Circumstances. For example: The command of preaching, reading, administering the
Sacraments, singing Psalms, etc. do imply that I must have some time and place
to do them in: I must use some gesture, vesture, necessary utensils, but it
tells not what in particular: I must read some particular Chapter, Psalm, etc.
or so much of it: Now common prudence will tell me what to do in these cases my
self, or else I am not fit to be a Pastor, or entrusted with so great a work as
Gods public Worship, or the care of souls. Shall a Council now make Laws that
all the Ministers in the World, or in this Nation, shall preach only on such a
day, and only at such an hour, and in this or that part of the Church, and only
on such Texts such days, appointing them a Text for every day; or that they
shall use only such words in praying and preaching as is written for them; or
shall pray or preach just so long; or shall sing only such a Psalm, in such a
tune, using only such clothes, and such gestures, with an hundred the like?
This is to make themselves Masters of the Church, and use their power to the
destruction of Ministry, Worship and Church, and not to the Edification of it.
The present state of the flock, by sin; or affliction, or the like, may make
such a Text fittest for me to preach on, and such a Chapter to be read, or such
a Psalm to be sung, when by the Impositions of proud usurpers I am commanded to
use the contrary, viz. Subjects of Joy, in a time of Humiliation, or of
Humiliation in the time of Joy, etc. Many the like inconveniences might easily
be manifest. These unnecessary Impositions are the Engines of Division, Act.
15. 28. Romans 14. throughout. Romans 15. 1, 7. Phil. 3. 15, 16. Mat. 23. 4. and
11. 28. 1 Cor. 6. 12. 2 Cor. 1. 24.

10. Where some Impositions by Magistrates or Agreements by Ministers in such
Circumstances are thought lawful or fit, yet must not the Churches Unity or
Peace be laid upon them: So that if through the weakness of Christians they
could not perceive the lawfulness of them, but did think they should sin
against God if they used them, it is a cruel dividing course for Magistrates
here by sore penalties, or Pastors Excommunications to seek to drive them upon
that which they think is the way to hell, or the wrath of God, when in the
Judgment of the Imposer it is a thing indifferent: The peace of the Church and
of Conscience is more worth then a Ceremony, and better kept by gentle
recommending such things (if fit,) and a tender rebuke or check to the weak,
then by forcing all to that which they neither can nor need to use. But some
say, if all may use what way they will, what order shall we have? I answer;
therefore make no unnecessary Laws: cast not a football of contention before
them: These presumptuous Impositions are the fire brands of the Church. For
example: we had here a Law that Ministers should read only such a piece of a
Chapter called an Epistle and Gospel such a day (which yet I would not
disobey:) here now arose contention about it: The same Ministers were left at
liberty what Text to preach on: and this liberty made no breach in the Church.
Ministers were commanded to wear a Surplice, and this raised contention: But
what kind of hat, or cap, or shoes, or hose to wear, they were left at
liberty, and this made no contention, nor occasioned any undecency. The Lords
Supper was to be taken only kneeling: and this raised contention: But they were
left at liberty whether to kneel, or stand, or sit at Sermon, or reading, or
singing Psalms, and this bred no undecency nor division. They were enjoined to
bow at the name of Jesus in the reading of the Gospel only: And this raised
division. But they were left at liberty to bow or not to the Name of God;
Christ, Lord, etc. and to the Name Jesus in Sermon, or the Epistle, or the same
Gospel read in the whole Chapter: and this bred no division, nor discontent:
Lay the Churches peace upon no new humane Impositions, if you would have it
hold. Peruse Romans 14. and the other Text last cited, 1 Cor. 6. 12.

11. The Churches Peace or Unity must not be laid on any bare words of man's
devising. It Is not a work for Councils or Prelates to form the Christian
doctrine in new methods and terms, and then to force others to subscribe or use
those very terms: If the same men that refuse this, be willing to subscribe to
the whole Scripture, or to a Confession in Scripture terms, you may force him
to no more.

Object. But Heretics will subscribe to Scripture. Answ. 1. They must wrest it
then, or wrest their Consciences: And by either or both these shifts, they may
also subscribe to any of your Confessions. 2. If his Heresy be latent in his
mind, you know it not, nor can call him an Heretic, nor does it hurt the
Church: If it he published or preached to others, let civil Governors question
him for corporal punishment, and let the Associate Pastors question him to his
Reformation or Rejection. You will have a better ground to reject him for
delivering falsehood in his own words, then for not subscribing to Truth in
your words, when he subscribed the same Truth in Gods Words.

There is no Unity to be expected, if you will so far depart from the Scripture
sufficiency, as to make any more for sense or phrase, of absolute necessity to
our peace. By phrase or terms, I mean either the same numerically (as in the
Original) or equipollent (as in translations.) And I say not that it is
necessary to the unity of the Church, that every word in Scripture (Original or
Translations) be subscribed to; (for some may doubt of the corruption of a word
or Book) But that no more is necessary. If all Scripture be not of that degree
of Necessity, much less humane additions, Isa 8. 20. 1 Timothy 3. 17. 2 Timothy 1.
13. 1 Cor. 9. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 20. Act. 20. 32.

12. The Churches Unity and Peace must not be laid upon all Divine Truths: as
not on lesser darker points, which neither the being nor well-being of
Christianity is concerned in so much as to rest upon them, Phil. 3. 15, 16.
Romans 14. 15, 17, 20. Heb. 5. 11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 7. 19. Gal. 5. 6. and 6.
15. Col. 3. 11.

13. We ought to love and esteem as Christians and members of the Catholic
Church all those that profess to believe the Essentials of Christianity, and to
be sanctified by the Spirit of God, and lead a holy upright life; so they make
a credible profession, not evidently contradicted by words or deeds: though
these persons may differ from us in many lower points of Doctrine, Worship or
Government, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Ephesians. 6. 24. Gal. 6. 15, 16. Phil. 3. 16. Romans 15. 1,
2. and 14. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 8. 9.

14. We ought so to manage the Worship of God in our particular solemn
Assemblies, that no sober peaceable Christian may be repulsed or forced from
our local Communion, through differences in things of indifferent nature, Heb.
8. 5. Mat. 15. 9. Romans 14. 13. and 14 1. 2 Cor. 11. 3. Joh. 4. 23, 24.

15. If any Churches differ from us in Ceremonies or smaller things, or if any
particular Christians differ, so that they cannot in conscience hold local
Communion with us in the same Assemblies for Worship (E. G. if we sit at the
Lords Supper, and they dare not take it without kneeling: if we sing a version
of the Psalms which they scrup'e to join in; If we permit none to join that
will not conform in disputable things) in such cases, though it be first our
duty to do our best to remove all offenses, yet if that cannot be done, we may
and ought in several Assemblies to take each other for Brethren, and of the
same Catholic Church, so be it we all hold the same essentials of Faith and
Godliness, and walk accordingly, and especially if we also hold those weighty
superstructures, that the welfare of the Church is most concerned in.

Though here were few or no instances of this case in the days of the Apostles,
when divisions were not so great as now, yet the general rules in the
forecited Texts do prove it.

16. Ecclesiastical Ministerial Government (by whomsoever exercised) must not
degenerate into a secular coercive Government; nor may we use carnal weapons,
nor meddle by force with men's bodies or estates; nor yet can we oblige the
Magistrate to do it, merely to execute our censures, or without sufficient
Evidence to prove it his duty; nor can we oblige the people against the Word of
God, clave errante: so that neither Bishop, nor Council has any such power as
is properly decisively Judicial obliging to execution, be the sentence right or
wrong: But our people must know that though we be their Guides or Rulers, yet
are we but Ministers, and that they have a higher power to regard, and must not
obey us against the Lord, but in and for him. The Power of Pastors therefore is
not like Magistrates, or absolute Judges (as is said before, but like a
Physician in his Hospital, or in an infected City among his Patients, and like
a Reader of any Science to voluntary Scholars, in his School: and as an
Ambassador to them to whom he is sent. So that our Governing being but by the
Word, and on the Conscience, is of the same nature with our Directing. 1 Pet.
5. 3. Luke 22. 25, 26. 3 John 9. 10. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.

17. Magistrates are Governors of the Church even as a Church, and of
Christians as Christians, though not Absolutely, nor in the same respects, by
the same means, and to the same nearest Ends, as Pastors. Magistrates must
force us to our duty, and punish us if we be wicked or negligent, even as
Pastors, and cast us out of our Benefices, and deny us encouragements, if we be
insufficient: so that ad hoc the Magistrate is the only Judge what is sound
doctrine, and what heresy, what Ministers are sufficient or insufficient,
culpable or not; I say, ad hoc, so far as to Judge who shall have public
Liberty and Countenance, and who shall be punished, restrained and
discountenanced: Thus far the Mastrate is Judge in Religion; (besides that
Judgment of Choice which every private man has) And therefore the Princes of
the Christian world should hold some correspondencies like General Councils,
among themselves by their agents for carrying on the work of Christ, and much
of the unity and prosperity of Christians lies on their hands, Isa. 49. 23.
Psalm. 2. 12. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 King. 2. 27, 35. and 2 King. 18. 4. and 2
King. 23. 8, 20. 2 Chronicles. 14. 3, 5. Josh. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 2. 2.

18. Yet are the Pastors of the Church in their places Rulers or Guides of
Princes and Magistrates: that is, we Guide them by Doctrine and Church
discipline, as they Rule us by force. The Pastors are the Judges of Heresy and
Vice, ad hoc thus far, so as to judge who shall be Denounced by themselves
unmeet for the Churches Communion; and Judges of sound Doctrine so far as to
resolve what is by themselves to be taught to the people: and Judges of that
Magistrate so far, as to determine whether he be a fit subject for their
Administrations and Communion. For every man is to judge when he is to act and
execute (in these cases;) and therefore when the Question is, Who is to be
tolerated or forcibly restrained, the Magistrate is the only Judge, and the
Minister but a teacher: But the Question is, whom should I admit or not admit
to my Communion, and whom should I persuade and require the Church to avoid or
to receive? Here the Pastors are the Judges: And when the Question is, Whether
the Pastor go according to Gods Word or not, here the people have Judicium
Discretionis, and cannot be forced; though they ought to obey where they see
not sufficient reason to the contrary, Mat. 28. 18, 19. Heb. 13. 17. 1 These. 5.
12. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Luke 12. 42, 44. 1 Samuel 28. 18. Dan. 9. 8, 10. Joh. 20. 23. 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 15, 16.

19. The honor and power of the Pastors is for their work: And so great is that
work, that as to fleshly accommodations, it lays us under abundance more
trouble, then the power and honor affords us relief from. All true Pastors
therefore should be so far from striving for Power, and Greatness, and Rule,
and extent of their Diocese as matters of advantage, that they should still
look on their Power but as Power to thresh, or plough, or sow, or reap; a Power
to give alms to all the poor in the Town, to visit all the sick, to cure mad
men that will abuse me, etc. such a Power to labor and suffer in doing good.
And thus he that will be the Greatest, but think of no other kind of greatness,
but a power to become the servant of all: If men had these true apprehensions
of the Episcopal office, they would be no more forward in contending for power
and large Diocesses, then now they are in contending who shall Instruct most of
the ignorant, or go to the poor ungodly families to further their reformation;
or entreat, beseech, exhort most of the obstinate from man to man; or who
should relieve the most of the poor of all the Country about. And if this be
it they contend for, they may Rule without a Commission from the Prince: Who
will hinder them, that has any fear of God? 1 Cor. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16.
Act. 20. 18. to the end. 2 Cor. 1. 24. Mark. 10. 44. 1 These. 2 9. Luke 10. 2.

20. No man is called by God to more work then he can possibly do, nor should
desire and undertake more. And therefore if Prelates, and Councils, and Popes
would but conscionably bethink them of the work, what it is, and how to be
done, and of what weight, and how strict will be the account, and then consider
how they can do it, our differences would quickly be at end: For though godly
men would put off no service they can do, yet when they looked on the
undertaking of these Impossibles, they would tremble to think on it. All
conscionable men are sensible of their weakness, and the weight of the work,
and say who is sufficient for these things; And I dare say the strongest of
them all would feel the weight of the burden of one Parish, and be readyer to
beg and seek about for help, then to contend for a a larger Diocese, unless as
the mere necessity of the Church for want of laborers might call them to labor
in other parts. Duty supposes Authority, and Authority supposes ability and
opportunity; even natural ability and mental qualifications, Psalm. 131. 1, 2. 2
Cor. 2. 16.

BY this much you may see what Unity may be expected in the Church on earth. 1.
A unity of internal Faith and Love, and Spirit among all real Christians. 2. A
Unity of Profession, all professing the same Belief, that is of the word of God
in General; and of the Creed and Essentials of Religion in particular; and as
many more of the particular truths as they can reach.

3. A Unity of Professors in local communion in the same Assemblies in Gods
public Worship, in the Word, Prayer, Praises, Sacraments, etc. Where they
cohabite, or have opportunity for such communion.

4. Among those that are out of our reach, or being near us, yet differing in
some smaller things, where a difference is tolerable, we may yet in word,
writing and deed own each other as Brethren, and combine for the promoting of
the common good, and the commonly received truths and duties. So that we have
in these four, the unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace: One Body: (the
Catholic Church comprehending all properly called Christians) One Spirit (The
sanctifying Spirit of Christ:) One Hope of our calling (One Promise or Gospel,
and One Heaven and End:) One Lord (even Christ the only Head of the Church) One
Faith (Both objective, in Scripture, and the Creed: and subjective, specifical,
which is our Reception of Scripture doctrine, and of Christ with his benefits:)
One Baptism (entering all one and the same Covenant with Christ, to be his, and
take him for our Lord and Savior, renouncing the world, the flesh and devil,
and signifying this by external washing in the name of that Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.) One God and Father (Our Creator, Preserver, our End and Happiness)
Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5.

And is all this Nothing to you that seemed so much to Paul? that unless you
have also an Earthly, Universal Head, and an Unity in Ceremonies (wherein all
must be of your mind, and conform to you as if you were Gods) you will revile
at our divisions, and run to Rome for further Unity.

HAving laid down those Grounds or Principles on which the Unity and Peace of
the Church must be built, there appears not any great need of adding any more
for the reducing these to practice; if these were but received, the way of
practice would be obvious. But briefly I shall lay down these few Propositions,
employed in those expressed before.

1. Let every man profess his belief of the Holy Scriptures in General; and in
particular of all that Scripture has expressed to be of Necessity to Salvation:
by denouncing death to them that have it not; And let them also Profess to
consent that God be their God, and Christ their Savior, and the Holy Ghost
their Sanctifier, and that they renounce the flesh, the world and Devil,
resolving to live a holy life. And let this be by a credible way of Professing.
And all that do thus, let us esteem, love, and use them as Christians, till
they some way plainly disown this Profession.

2. Let every such Baptized Professor, owning also the Ministry, Church and
Worship Ordinances, plainly required in Scripture, be a member of some
particular Church, where he may worship God in the Communion of Saints.

3. Let those that make not the foresaid Christian Profession, be excluded the
number of Christians, and those that own not the Fundamentals of communion,
(the Church, Ministry, Word, Prayer, Praise, Sacrament of Communion) be taken
as unmeet for actual communion with us, though yet we censure them not to be no
Christians.

4. Let those that are obstinate and impenitent in any Errors, contrary to the
said Profession and Ordinances, or in actual gross sin, or discovering an
ungodly heart, be rejected by the Church, after due admonition and patience.

5 Let all the Pastors Associate, and hold constant correspondency according to
their neerness and opportunity, for helping and strengthening each other, and
unanimous carrying on the work of Christ.

6. Let these Associations have standing Presidents, where the peace of the
Church requires it.

7 Let no particular Pastors set up any thing in Gods public Worship which is
not Necessary, and may tend to make divisions by driving tender Consciences
from his communion.

8. Let Associations forbear making Laws to others, and imposing as Governors,
and let them make Agreements for certain Duty, and not Laws that pretend to
make new duties; and let them Agree on nothing unnecessary.

9. Let them study Holiness as much as Peace, and keep clean themselves and
their societies as far as they can, and look at labor and suffering, and not
at any other honor and power, but what is for duty; and let them look abroad
and help the dark parts within their reach, and lay out themselves freely and
industriously for God, and have the chief regard to the most public good.

10. Let him that is justly cast out of one Church, be received by none into
communion till he be reconciled; and if they suspect that he is unjustly cast
out, let him not be received till the Church that cast him out be heard, and
the injury or his Repentance manifest.

11. Let those that cannot hold local communion, because of some smaller
practical difference (as gestures, words, etc.) and yet agree in the foresaid
Profession, and Fundamentals of Communion: yet own each other professedly as
Brethren, and maintain Love and communion in other respects.

12. Let all differing Christians consult and agree how to hold their
differences, so as may least prejudice the common truths which all receive, and
as may least hinder the salvation of the ungodly, or offend the weak.

13. Let none judge or defame each other till they are heard, and see they have
sufficient cause by certain proof: And then admonish them, and bring the cause
to the Association, before they proceed further.

14. Let the correspondency of Pastors extend as far as there is Capacity,
Opportunity, and need. We cannot correspond with the Antipodes, nor much with
the Ethiopians, nor such remote parts: there is seldom opportunity, and seldom
necessity of actual correspondence with foreign Nations: But yet when public
occasions require it, (the publickest cases being the weightiest) we should by
Delegates or Messengers from several Associations, perform our duties in all
such correspondencies, whether in Councils or otherwise.

15. If any members of our Churches travail into other parts, they should take
Certificates or Communicatory Letters, that they may be admitted to the
communion of the Churches where they travail or abide.

16. The chief consultations for General Peace and effectual promoting the
healing of the Churches, and the propagation of the Gospel into the unbelieving
parts of the world, should be done by Christian Princes by their Agents: and
though Ministers are fit to be (partly) their Agents in such consultations, yet
not merely as Pastors, but as fit men employed by their Princes. He that lives
to see but this much reduced to practice, will see a better unity and peace in
the Church, then ever was or will be attained by an earthly Head and Judge of
the Universal Church, whether Pope or Council, or then the Agreement of the
five Patriarks, and the later Primates and Metropolitans will procure. Let us
be content with one Head, and one Heart; and center there: but though the
fingers and toes be more, we can well bear it. Take up with the Holy Scriptures
as the sufficient Rule: Let the Profession of that be the mark of a believer:
and all such believers be taken to be, as they are, the Catholic Church; and
no faction Schismatically and presumptuously confine it to themselves; Let this
Intellectual Unity of faith, be seconded with a cordial Unity of Holy Love, to
Christ and his Members: (that so our Unity may begin at the Head and Heart, and
not perversely at the fingers and toes of smaller matters, or at the hair and
nails of Ceremonies and indifferent Modes;) Let this be manifested in
Professions of Love, and public ownings of the Catholic Brotherhood, and of
Christians as Christians; and by public disclaiming all selfishness, and
partiality, and private Interests, and all reproachful words and writings, and
by actual communion as far as we can. Let the Worship of God be performed in
such holy simplicity that none may be driven from the sacred Assemblies; and
let the people be suffered to go the same way to heaven as Peter and Paul did
go themselves, and lead their hearers in; Let us not be ambitious of Church
Union or Communion with those that ought to be cast out of the Church, and whom
we are in Scripture commanded to avoid; but let the three attributes of [Holy
Catholic, and Apostolical] be still affixed to the Church; and be practically
considered; and those considerations issued in [The Communion of Saints] And
then we shall have so much Unity and Peace, as may honor the Christian
Religion, and strengthen us in the way to our Perfect Peace, which is not to be
expected in this dark, diseased, imperfect world. This is the way, and none but
this.

But is there any hope that while men are as they are, such healing Truths
should be received and obeyed? Yes: by here and there a man; who shall have the
Peace of their peaceable Affections and Endeavors; but not by the most either
of the people or the Pastors; let the evidence of the truth be never so clear.
Who can expect any great success of such Proposals, that knows the world? (till
the time come when Light shall go forth with an absolute resolution to
prevail.) God is one; and all that Deny themselves and center in him, must
needs be One: But self is as various and numerous as Persons are. And this self
is the Heart of the Natural man, and the Center of all the unsanctified. And
every self is a grain of Sand, that's hardly made coherent with another. The
Darkest mind, is self-conceited: and the poorest child or beggar is
self-affected; and high and low, Princes and people have self-interests, which
draw them several waves. And in the sanctified this self is mortified but in
part, and is the first living, and strongest, and last dying sin, in all; and
gives strength to all the rest. What hope then of Unity, while every man has
a numerically different Center, Principle, and End, and so few forsake it, and
devote themselves to God the common Center, and End of the Saints? and those
few so Imperfectly; permitting self to live and do so much within them. And
though the Papists have devised a way to make this sand into a rope; or cement
innumerable selves together, by finding out such a Carnal Head and Center where
every man may find his own Carnal Interest involved in the Interest of that
Head and his body; and so may have a carnal unity of a multitude of carnal ones
to glory in; Yet Christ is another kind of Head and Center, condemning and
destroying carnal self, and commanding all his followers upon pain of damnation
to deny it, though to nature it be the dearest thing in the world. No wonder
therefore if the number of his Adherents be few, and the unity of those that
center in him, be less conspicuous and glorious in the world. With strong
Desires therefore, but Low Expectations I propound these terms of Unity to the
Church; as knowing how many thousand of the Dark and selfish will not only
neglect them and reject them, but rise up against them (if they come into their
hands) with no small self-conceited confidence and scorn.

But the Church is the Lords, who has purchased it by his blood; his Interest
in it is more then mine; and it is infinitely dearer to him then to me; and his
wisdom is fittest to dispose of the success of our endeavors, and to determine
of the season and measures of its cure: He is the Physician, and has
undertaken the work, and in the fittest way and time will perfect it, and be
the finisher as well as the Author of our faith. The eye of the chief Shepherd
is even now upon all his scattered flock, and of those that are given him to be
saved, he will lose none; he is neither insufficient for them, nor careless of
them; but will gather into one the Elect that are dispersed; and present them
all pure, unblamable, and spotless to his Father at the last; and as much as
they seem now to us, to be uncurably divided, we shall then see them perfectly
healed and united, and made up One Glorified Body of our Head. For that blessed
Marriage day of the Lamb, and the Glory of the New Jerusalem, we therefore
Pray, and Hope, and Wait, in our passage through this sinful and distracted
world.

THere are three common sayings in which I am much delighted that conduce to
the Illustration of what I have said.

1. Servanda in Necessariis Unitas; In non-necessariis libertas: in utrisque
charitas. Vulg.

2. Contra Rationem nemo sobrius; Contra Scripturam nemo Christianus; Contra
Ecclesiam nemo pacificus. August.

Scripture is the test of Christianity, and must show us sound in the faith;
though the Church may show us Peacable.

3. Vnitatem Querit Homo Socialis Invenit. Catholicus Speculativus Possidet
Sanctus Charitativus Vetitatem Philosophia Theologia Religio Felicitatem Natura
Fides Historica Charitas.

Therefore to seek for Unity, Verity or Felicity, by the loss or destruction of
Sanctity, Religion, Charity; is really to renounce, oppose and lose them.

Satisfaction to certain CALUMNIATORS.
I Am informed from London, and several parts of the Land, that some of my
Books having lately been sold at excessive rates by the Booksellers, it is
somewhat commonly reported that it is caused by my excessive gain, which say
they, is at least three or four hundred pounds a year. I thank the Lord that
does not only employ me in his service, but also vouchsafe me the honor and
benefit of being evil-spoken of for doing him the best service that I can, Mat.
5. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. Blessed Augustine was put to vindicate
himself by an oath, from the infamy of a covetous design, which was raised by
one godly woman, upon a disorderly action of other men, and to that end he
wrote his 225. Epistle. I find no call to use his oath; but yet I judge it my
duty to imitate him in patience, and in rescuing the slanderers from their sin,
that they abuse not their souls by uncharitable surmises, nor their tongues by
false reports. To which end I give them this true information: The two first
Books I printed, I left to the Booksellers Will; for all the rest, I agreed
with them for the fifteenth Book, to give to some few of my friends, hearing
that some others agreed for the tenth. Sometime my fifteenth Book coming not to
an hundred, and sometime but to few more, when of Practical Books I needed
sometime 800. to give away. Because I was scarce rich enough to buy so many, I
agreed with the Bookseller, (my Neighbor,) to allow 18. d. a Ream (which is
not a penny a quire,) out of his own gain toward the buying of Bibles, and
some of the practical Books which he printed, for the poor: Covenanting with
him, that he should sell my Controversal Writings as cheap, and my Practical
Writings somewhat cheaper then books are ordinarily sold. To this hour I never
received for my self one penny of money from them for any of my Writings, to the
best of my remembrance: but if it fell out that my part came to more than I
gave my friends, I exchanged them for other Books: My accounts and memory tell
me not of ^^li that ever was returned for me on these accounts, which was on
literary occasions: so that my many hundreds a year is come to never a penny in
all, but as abovesaid, in some exchange of Books. And the price I set on my
Books which I exchanged for theirs at the dearest rates, is as follows,
[Treat. of Conversion, 2. s. Treat. of Crucifying the World, 2. s. Disput. of
Justificat. 2. s. 4. d. The Call to the Unconverted, 8. d. Disput. of saving
Faith, 5. d. Of the Grotian Religion, 6. d. Directions for sound Conversion, 1.
s. 8. d. Disput of Right to Sacraments, Edit. secund. 2. s. 4. d.] These are
all my bargains and my gains. And I chose the honestest Booksellers that I
could meet with, according to my small measure of wit and acquaintance; who
told me, they still made good their Promises. And now censorious Slanderer,
tell me, what thou would have had me to have done more? If I had got Food and
Raiment out of my own hard labors, had it been unlawful or dishonorable, when
Booksellers get so many hundred pounds by one Book, that never studied nor
spent their time and cost for it, as I have done? And yet do thou reproach me
that receive not a groat? But because I will not oblige my self to the same
course for the future, and that thou may know at what rates I serve thee, let
me tell thee, that in these labors early and late my body is wasted, my
precious time laid out, and somewhat of my Estate, and somewhat of the labor of
my friends. I cannot have twenty quire of my writing well transcribed, under
fifty pounds. And who shall pay for this, or maintain me in thy service? I have
troubled a Neighbour-Minister in the tedious work of transcribing my Characters
(for some books,) for which, neither he nor I had ever one penny. These
personal matters are unsavory to me, and I take it for a great injury that thou
put upon me a necessity of mentioning them. But I have yielded this once to
thy unrighteous importunity, that thou may hereafter learn what to believe
and utter, and make more conscience of thy censures and reports. And that thou
may have the utmost relief that I can procure thee for the time to come, I
shall agree with my Booksellers, to sell all that I publish at three farthings
a sheet, and to print the price of every book at the bottom of the Title page.

October 11. 1658. Farewell. Richard Baxter.


