Making Light of CHRIST AND SALVATION Too often the Issue of Gospel-Invitations.
Manifested in a SERMON Preached at Lawrence-Jury, in London. By RICH. BAXTER.

Heb. 2. 34. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? The Second
Edition.

LONDON: Printed for Nevil Simmons, and sold by most Booksellers, 1691.

To the READER.
READER,
BEing called on in London to Preach, when I had no time to study, I was fain
to preach some Sermons that I had preached in the Country a little before. This
was one, which I preached at S. Lawrence, in the Church where my Reverend and
faithful Brother in Christ, Mr. Richard Vines is Pastor: when I came home, I
was followed by such importunities by Letters to Print the Sermon, that I have
yielded thereunto; though I know not fully the ground of their desires. Seeing
it must abroad, will the Lord but bless it to the cure of thy contempt of
Christ and Grace, how comfortable may the occasion prove to thee and me! It is
the sleighting of Christ and Salvation that undoes the World. Oh happy man, if
thou escape but this sin! Thousands do split their Souls on this Rock which they
should build them on! Look into the World, among rich and poor, high and low,
young and old, and see whether it appear not by the whole scope of their
Conversations, that they set more by something else than Christ? and for all
the proclamations of his Grace in the Gospel, and our common profesing our
selves to be his Disciples, and to believe the Glorious things that he has
promised us in another World, whether it yet appear not by the deceitfulness of
our service, by our heartless endeavors to obtain his Kingdom, and by our
busy and delightful following of the World, that the most who are called
Christians do yet in their hearts make light of Christ? And if so, what wonder
if they perish by their contempt? Will thou but soberly peruse this short
Discourse, and consider well as thou read, of its truth and weight, till thy
heart be sensible what a sin it is to make light of Christ and thy own
Salvation, and till the Lord that bought thee be advanced in the estimation and
affections of thy Soul, thou shall hereby rejoice, and fulfill the desires of

Thy Servant in the Faith, RICH. BAXTER.

Matt. 22. 5. But they made light of it.
THE blessed Son of God, that thought it not enough to die for the World, but
would himself also be the Preacher of Grace and Salvation, does comprize in
this Parable the sum of his Gospel. By the King that is here said to make the
Marriage, is meant, God the Father, that sent his Son into the World to cleanse
them from their sins, and espouse them to himself. By his Son, for whom the
Marriage is made, is meant, The Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, who
took to his Godhead the nature of Man, that he might be capable of being their
Redeemer when they had lost themselves in sin. By the Marriage, is meant, The
Conjunction of Christ to the soul of Sinners, when he gives up himself to them
to be their Savior, and they give up themselves to him as his Redeemed Ones,
to be saved and ruled by him; The perfection of which Marriage will be at the
Day of Judgment, when the Conjunction between the whole Church and Christ shall
be solemnized. The word here translated Marriage, rather signifies the
Marriage Feast; and the meaning is, that the World is invited by the Gospel, to
come in and partake of Christ and Salvation, which comprehends both Pardon,
Justification, and Right to Salvation, and all other Privileges of the Members
of Christ. The Invitation, is God's offer of Christ and Salvation in the
Gospel; The Servants that invite them, are the Preachers of the Gospel who are
sent forth by God to that end; The preparation for the feast there mentioned,
is, The sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and the enacting of a Law of Grace, and
opening a way for revolting Sinners to return to God. There is mention of
sending second Messengers, because God uses not to take the first denial, but
to exercise his patience till Sinners are obstinate. The first Persons invited
are the Jews; upon their obstinate Refusal they are sentenced to punishment;
and the Gentiles are invited, and not only invited, but by powerful Preaching,
and Miracles, and effectual Grace compelled, that is, infallibly prevailed with
to come in. The number of them is so great, that the house is filled with the
Guests; Many come sincerely, not only looking at the pleasure of the Feast,
that is, at the Pardon of sin, and Deliverance from the Wrath of God, but also
at the honor of the Marriage, that is, of the Redeemer, and their profession
by giving up themselves to a holy Conversation; but some come in only for the
Feast, that is, Justification by Christ, having not the wedding Garment of
sound Resolution for Obedience in their Life, and looking only at themselves in
Believing, and not to the glory of their Redeemer; and these are sentenced to
everlasting Misery, and speed as ill as those that came not in at all; seeing a
Faith that will not work, is but like that of the Devil; and they that look to
be pardoned and saved by it, are mistaken, as James shows, 2. 24.

The words of my Text contain a Narration of the ill-entertainment that the
Gospel finds with many to whom it is sent, even after a first and second
invitation. They made light of it, and are taken up with other things. Though
it be the Jews that were first guilty, they have too many followers among us
Gentiles to this day.

Doct. For all the wonderful love and mercy that God has manifested in giving
his Son to be the Redeemer of the World, and which the Son has manifested in
Redeeming them by his Blood; for all his full preparation by being a sufficient
sacrifice for the sins of all; for all his Personal Excellencies, and that full
and glorious Salvation that he has procured, and for all his free offers of
these, and frequent and earnest Invitations of Sinners; yet many do make light
of all this, and prefer their worldly enjoyments before it. The ordinary
entertainment of all is by contempt.

Not that all do so, or that all continue to do so who were once guilty of it:
for God has his chosen, whom he will compel to come in. But till the Spirit of
Grace overpower the dead and obstinate hearts of Men, they hear the Gospel as
a common story, and the great matters contained in it go not to the heart.

The Method in which I shall handle this Doctrine, is this:

1. I shall show you what it is that Men make light of. 2. What this sin of
making light of it is. 3. The cause of the sin. 4. The use of the Doctrine.
1. The thing that carnal hearers make light of, is, 1. The Doctrine of the
Gospel it self, which they hear regardlesly.

2. The benefits offered them therein: which are, 1. Christ himself. 2. The
benefits which he gives.

Concerning Christ himself, the Gospel 1. Declares his Person and Nature, and
the great things that he has done and suffered for Man: his Redeeming him from
the wrath of God by his Blood, and procuring a grant of Salvation with himself.
Furthermore, The same Gospel makes an offer of Christ to sinners, that if they
will accept him on his easy and reasonable terms, he will be their Savior,
the Physician of their Souls, their Husband and their Head.

2. The benefits that he offers them, are these, 1. That with these blessed
Relations to him, himself and interest in him, they shall have the pardon of
all their sins past, and be saved from God's Wrath, and be set in a sure way of
obtaining a Pardon for all the sins that they shall commit hereafter, so they
do but obey sincerely, and turn not again to the Rebellion of their
Unregeneracy. 2. They shall have his Spirit to become their Guide and
Sanctifier, and to dwell in their Souls, and help them against their Enemies,
and conform them more and more to his Image, and heal their Diseases, and bring
them back to God. 3. They shall have right to everlasting Glory when this Life
is ended, and shall be raised up thereto at the last; besides many excellent
privileges in the way, in Means, Preservation and Provision, and the fore taste
of what they shall enjoy hereafter: All these benefits the Gospel offers to
them that will have Christ on his reasonable terms. The sum of all is in 1 John
5. 11, 12. This is the Record, that God has given us eternal Life, and this
Life is in his Son: He that has the Son, has Life, and he that has not the
Son, has not Life.

II. What this Sin of making light of the Gospel is? 1. To make light of the
Gospel, is, to take no great heed to what is spoken, as if it were not a
certain Truth, or else were a matter that little concerned them, or as if God
had not written these things for them. 2. When the Gospel does not affect Men,
or go to their hearts; but though they seem to attend to what is said, yet men
are not awakened by it from their security, nor does it work in any measure
such holy Passion in their Souls, as matters of such everlasting Consequence
should do; this is making light of the Gospel of Salvation. When we tell men
what Christ has done and suffered for their Souls, and it scarce moves them:
We tell them of keen and cutting Truths, but nothing will pierce them: We can
make them hear, but we cannot make them feel: Our words take up in the porch of
their Ears and Fancies, but will not enter into the inward parts; as if we
spoke to men that had no hearts or feeling; this is a making light of Christ
and Salvation, Acts 28. 26, 27. hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand, seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For the Heart of this
People is waxen gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, their Eyes are
closed, etc.

3. When Men have no high Estimation of Christ and Salvation, but whatsoever
they may say with their tongues, or dreamingly and speculatively believe, yet
in their serious and practical thoughts, they have a higher estimation of the
matters of this World, than they have of Christ, and the Salvation that he has
purchased; this is a making light of him. When Men account the Doctrine of
Christ to be but a matter of words and names, as Gallio, Acts 18. 4. or as
Festus, Acts 25. 19. a superstitious matter about one Jesus who was dead, and
Paul says is alive. Or ask the Preachers of the Gospel, as the Athenians, Acts
17. 18. What will this babbler say? This is contempt of Christ.

4. When Men are informed of the truths of the Gospel, and on what Terms Christ
and his Benefits may be had, and how it is the will of God that they should
Believe and Accept the offer; and that he commands them to do it upon pain of
damnation; and yet men will not consent, unless they could have Christ on terms
of their own: They will not part with their worldly contents, nor lay down
their Pleasures and Profits, and Honor at his Feet, as being content to take
so much of them only as he will give them back, and as is consistent with his
Will and Interest, but think its a hard saying, that they must forsake all in
Resolution for Christ; this is a making light of him and their Salvation. When
men might have part in him and all his Benefits, if they would, and they will
not, unless they may keep the World too; and are resolved to please their
flesh, whatever comes of it; this is a high contempt of Christ and everlasting
life, Mat. 13. 21, 22. Luke 18. 23. you may find examples of such as I here
describe.

5. When men will promise fair, and profess their willingness to have Christ on
his terms, and to forsake all for him; but yet do stick to the World and their
sinful Courses; and when it comes to practice, will not be removed by all that
Christ has done and said: this is making light of Christ and Salvation, Jer.
42. 5. compared with 43. 2.

III. The causes of this sin are the next thing to be enquired after. It may
seem a wonder that ever Men that have the use of their reason, should be so
sottish as to make light of matters of such consequence. But the cause is;

1. Some Men understand not the very sense of the Words of the Gospel, when
they hear it, and how can they be taken with that which they understand not?
Though we speak to them in plain English, and study to speak it as plainly as
we can; yet People have so estranged themselves from God, and the matters of
their own happiness, that they know not what we say, as if we spoke in another
language, and as if they were under that Judgment, Isa. 28. 11. with stammering
Lips, and with another Tongue will he speak to his People.

2. Some that do understand the Words that we speak, yet because they are
carnal, understand not the matter; for the natural Man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. They are earthly, and these things are heavenly, John
3. 12. The things of the Spirit are not well known by bare hearsay, but by a
spiritual taste, which none have but those that are taught by the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 2. 12, that we may know the things that are given us of God.

3. A carnal mind apprehends not a suitableness in these spiritual and
heavenly things to his mind, and therefore he sets light by them, and has no
mind of them. When you tell him of everlasting glory, he hears you as if you
were persuading him to go play with the Sun: they are matters of another World,
and out of his element; and therefore he has no more delight in them than a
Fish would have to be in the fairest Meadow, or than a Swine has in a Jewel,
or a Dog in a piece of Gold: They may be good to others, but he cannot
apprehend them as suitable to him, because he has a nature that is otherwise
inclined: he savoureth not the things of the Spirit, Rom 8. 5.

4. The main cause of the slighting of Christ and Salvation, is, a secret root
of unbelief in men's hearts. Whatsoever they may pretend, they do not soundly
and thoroughly believe the Word of God: They are taught in general to say, The
Gospel is true; but they never saw the Evidence of its truth so far, as
thoroughly to persuade them of it; nor have they got their Souls settled on the
Infallibility of God's Testimony, nor considered of the Truth of the particular
Doctrins revealed in the Scripture, so far as soundly to believe them. Oh did
you all but soundly believe the words of this Gospel, of the evil of sin, of
the need of Christ, and what he has done for you, and what you must be and do,
if ever you will be saved by him; and what will become of you for ever, if you
do it not; I dare say, it would cure the contempt of Christ, and you would not
make so light of the matters of your Salvation. But men do not believe, while
they say they do, and would face us down that they do, and verily think that
they do themselves. There is a root of bitterness, and an evil Heart of
unbelief, that makes them depart from the living God, Heb. 2. 12. and 4. 1, 2,
6. Tell any Man in this Congregation, that he shall have a gift of 10000 l. if
he will but go to London for it; if he believe you, he will go; but if he
believe not, he will not; and if he will not go, you may be sure he believes
not, supposing that he is able. I know a slight belief may stand with a wicked
life. Such as men have of the Truth of a Prognostication, it may be true, and
it may be false; but a true and sound belief is not consistent with so great
neglect of the things that are believed.

5. Christ and Salvation are made light of by the World, because of their
desperate hardness of Heart. The Heart is hard naturally, and by custom in
sinning made more hard; especially by long abuse of Mercy, and neglect of the
means of Grace, and resisting the Spirit of God. Hence it is that men are
turned into such Stones: and till God cure them of the stone of the Heart, no
wonder if they feel not what they know, or regard not what we say, but make
light of all; It Is hard preaching a stone into tears, or making a rock to
tremble. You may stand over a dead body long enough, and say to it, Oh thou
Carcass, when thou have lain roting and mouldring to dust, till the
Resurrection, God will then call thee to account for thy sin, and cast thee
into everlasting fire, before you can make it feel what you say, or fear the
misery that is never so truly threatened; when Men's Hearts are like the Highway
that is trodden to hardness by long custom in sinning, or like the clay that is
hardened to a stone, by the heat of those Mercies which should have melted them
into Repentance; when they have Consciences seared with a hot Iron, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 4. 2. no wonder then if they be past feeling, and
working all uncleanness with greediness, do make light of Christ and
Everlasting Glory. Oh that this were not the case of too many of our Hearers!
Had we but living Souls to speak to, they would hear and feel, and not make
light of what we say. I know they are naturally alive, but they are spiritually
dead, as Scripture witnesses, Ephesians. 2. 3. Oh if there were but one spark of the
life of Grace in them, the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ, would appear
to them to be the weightiest business in the World. Oh how confident should I
be, methinks, to prevail with men, and to take them off this World, and bring
them to mind the matters of another World, if I spoke but to Men that had Life,
and Sense, and Reason! But when we speak to Blocks and dead Men, how should we
be regarded? Oh how sad a case are these Souls in, that are fallen under this
fearful judgment of spiritual madness and deadness! To have a blind Mind, and a
hard Heart, to be sottish and senseless, Mar. 4. 12. John 12. 40. lest they
should be converted, and their sin should be forgiven them.

6. Christ and Salvation are made light of by the World, because they are
wholly enslaved to their sense, and taken up with lower things; the matters of
another World are out of sight, and so far from their senses, that they cannot
regard them; but present things are nearer them, in their eyes, and in their
hands: There must be a living faith to prevail over sense, before Men can be so
taken with things that are not seen, though they have the Word of God for their
security, as to neglect and let go things that are still before their eyes.
Sense works with great advantage; and therefore does much in resisting Faith
where it is. No wonder then if it carry all before it, where there is no true
and lively faith to resist, and to lead the Soul to higher things: this cause
of making light of Christ and Salvation, is expressed here in my Text: One went
to his Farm, and another to his Merohandize: Men have Houses and Lands to look
after; they have Wife and Children to mind, they have their Body and outward
Estate to regard, therefore they forget that they have a God, a Redeemer, a
Soul to mind; These matters of the World are still with them. They see these,
but they see not God, nor Christ, nor their Souls, nor everlasting Glory. These
things are near at hand, and therefore work naturally, and so more forcibly;
but the other are thought on as a great way off, and therefore too distant to
work on their affections, or to be at the present so much regarded by them.
Their Body has life and sense, and therefore if they want meats, or drink, or
clothes, will feel their want, and tell them of it, and give them no rest till
their wants be supplied; and therefore they cannot make light of their bodily
necessities; but their Souls in spiritual respects are dead, and therefore feel
not their wants, but will let them alone in their greatest necessities; and be
as quiet when they are starved and languishing to Destruction, as if all were
well, and nothing ailed them. And hereupon poor people are wholly taken up in
providing for the Body, as if they had nothing else to mind. They have their
Trades and Callings to follow, and so much to do from morning to night, that
they can find no time for matters of Salvation: Christ would teach them, but
they have no leisure to hear him: The Bible is before them, but they cannot
have while to read it: A Minister is in the Town with them, but they cannot
have while to go to enquire of him what they shall do to be saved: And when
they do hear, their Hearts are so full of the World, and carried away with
these lower matters, that they cannot mind the things which they hear. They are
so full of the thoughts and desires, and cares of this World, that there is no
room to pour into them the water of Life: The cares of the World do choke the
Word, and make it become unfruitful, Mat. 13. 22. Men cannot serve two Masters,
God and Mammon, but they will lean to the one, and despise the other, Mat. 6.
24. He that loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.
15, 16. Men cannot choose but set light by Christ and Salvation, while they set
so much by any thing on Earth; It is that which is highly esteemed among Men,
is abominable in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. Oh this is the ruin of many
thousand Souls! It would grieve the Heart of any honest Christian, to see how
eagerly this vain World is followed every where, and how little Men set by
Christ, and the World to come: to compare the care that Men have for the World,
with the care of their Souls; and the time that they lay out on the World, with
that time they lay out for their Salvation: To see how the World fills their
Mouths, their Hands, their Houses, their Hearts; and Christ has little more
than a bare Title: To come into their company, and hear no discourse but of the
World; to come into their houses, and hear and see nothing but for the World,
as if this World would last forever, or would purchase them another. When I ask
sometime the Ministers of the Gospel how their labors succeed, they tell me,
People continue still the same, and give up themselves wholly to the World, so
that they mind not what Ministers say to them, nor will give any full
entertainment to the Word, and all because of the deluding World: And, oh that
too many Ministers themselves did not make light of that Christ whom they
preach, being drawn away with the love of this World! In a word, Men of a
worldly Disposition do judge of things according to worldly advantages;
therefore Christ is slighted, Isa. 53. 3. He is despised and rejected of men,
they hide their faces from him, and esteem him not, as seeing no beauty or
comeliness in him, that they should desire him.

7. Christ and Salvation are made light of, because men do not soberly consider
of the truth and weight of these necessary things; They suffer not their minds
so long to dwell upon them, till they procure a due esteem, and deeply affect
their Heart; did they believe them, and not consider of them, how should they
work? Oh when men have reason given them to think and consider of the things
that most concern them, and yet they will not use it, this causes their
contempt.

8. Christ and Salvation are made light of, because Men were never sensible of
their sin and misery, and extreme necessity of Christ and his Salvation: their
eyes were never opened to see themselves as they are; nor their Hearts soundly
humbled in the sense of their condition: If this were done, they would soon be
brought to value a Savior: A truly broken Heart can no more make light of
Christ and Salvation, than a hungry Man of his food, or a sick man of the means
that would give him ease: but till then, our Words cannot have access to their
Hearts: while sin and misery is made light of, Christ and Salvation will be
made light of; but when these are perceived an intolerable burden, then nothing
will serve the turn but Christ. Till men be truly humbled, they can venture
Christ and Salvation for a lust, for a little worldly gain, even for less than
nothing; but when God has illuminated them, and broken their Hearts, then they
would give a World for a Christ; then they must have Christ, or they die; all
things then are loss and dung to them, in regard of the excellent knowledge of
Christ, Phil. 3. 8. When they are once pricked in their hearts for sin and
misery, then they cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Acts 2. 37. When
they are awakened by Gods Judgments, as the poor Jailer, Acts 16. 29. then they
cry out, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? This is the reason why God will
bring men so low by humiliation, before he bring them to salvation.

9. Men take occasion to make light of Christ, by the commonness of the Gospel;
because they do hear of it every day, the frequency is an occasion to dull
their affections; I say an occasion; for it is no just cause. Were it a rarity,
it might take more with them; but now, if they hear a Minister preach nothing
but these saving Truths, they say, We have these every day: They make not light
of their bread or drink, their health or life, because they possess them every
day; they make not light of the Sun, because it shines every day; at least
they should not, for the mercy is the greater; but Christ and Salvation are
made light of, because they hear of them often; This is, say they, a good plain
dry Sermon: Pearls are trod in the dirt where they are common; They loath this
dry Manna, Prove. 27. 7. The full Soul loathes the honeycomb; but to the hungry
every bitter thing is sweet.

10. Christ and Salvation are made light of because of this disjunctive
Presumption, either that he is sure enough theirs already, and God that is so
merciful, and Christ that has suffered so much for them, is surely resolved to
save them, or else it may easily be obtained at any time, if it be not yet so.
A conceited facility to have a part in Christ and Salvation at any time, does
occasion men to make light of them. It is true, that Grace is free, and the
Offer is universal, according to the extent of the preaching of the Gospel; and
it is true that men may have Christ when they will; that is, when they are
willing to have him on his terms; but he that has promised thee Christ, if
thou be willing, has not promised to make thee willing: and if thou art not
willing now, how can thou think thou shall be willing hereafter? If thou
can make thine own Heart willing, why is it not done now? Can you do it
better when sin has more hardened it, and God may have given thee over to thy
self? Oh sinners! you might do much, though you are not able of your selves to
come in, if you would now subject your selves to the working of the Spirit, and
set in while the gales of grace continue; but did you know what a hard and
impossible thing it is to be so much as willing to have Christ and Grace, when
the Heart is given over to it self, and the Spirit has withdrawn its former
invitations, you would not be so confident of your own strength to believe and
repent: nor would you make light of Christ upon such foolish confidence. If
indeed it be so easy a matter as you imagine for a sinner to believe and
repent at any time; how comes it to pass that it is done by so few, but most of
the World do perish in their impenitency, when they have all the helps and
means that we can afford them? It is true, the thing is very reasonable and
easy in it self to a pure nature; but while Man is blind and dead, these
things are in a sort impossible to him, which are never so easy to others. It
is the easiest and sweetest life in the World to a gracious soul to live in the
love of God, and the delightful thoughts of the life to come, where all their
hope and happiness lies: But to a worldly carnal Heart it is as easy to
remove a Mountain, as to bring them to this. However, these Men are their own
condemners; for if they think it so easy a matter to repent and believe, and
so have Christ and right to Salvation, then have they no excuse for neglecting
this which they thought so easy. O wretched impenitent Soul! what mean you to
say, when God shall ask you, Why did you not Repent and Love your Redeemer
above the World, when you thought it so easy that you could do it at any time?

IV. Use 1. We come now to the Application: and hence you may be informed of
the blindness and folly of all carnal men: how contemptible are their
judgments that think Christ and Salvation contemptible? and how little reason
there is why any should be moved by them, or discouraged by any of their scorns
or contradictions

How shall we sooner know a man to be a fool, than if he know no difference
between Dung and Gold! Is there such a thing as madness in the World, if that
Man be not mad, that sets light by Christ and his own Salvation, while he daily
toyls for the dung of the earth? And yet what pity is it to see, that a company
of poor ignorant Souls will be ashamed of godliness, if such Men as these do
but deride them! Or will think hardly of a holy life, if such as these do speak
against it! Hearers, if you see any set light by Christ and Salvation, do you
set light by that Man's Wit, and by his Words, and hear the reproaches of a
holy life, as you would hear the words of a mad Man; not with regard, but with
a Compassion of his misery.

Use 2. What wonder if we and our preaching be despised, and the best Ministers
complain of ill success, when the Ministry of the Apostles themselves did
succeed i no better? What wonder if for all that we can say or do, our hearers
still set light by Christ and their own Salvation; when the Apostles hearers
did the same? They that did second their Doctrine by Miracles: If any Men could
have shaken and torn in pieces the Hearts of Sinners they could have done it:
If any could have laid them at their feet, and made them all cry out as some,
What shall we do, it would have been they. You may see then that it is not
merely for want of good Preachers that men make light of Christ and Salvation:
the first News of such a thing as the Pardon of Sin, and the Hopes of Glory,
and the Danger of everlasting Misery, would turn the hearts of men within them,
if they were as tractable in spiritual matters as in temporal: But alas, it is
far otherwise. It must not seem any strange thing, nor must it too much
discourage the Preachers of the Gospel, if when they have said all that they
can devise to say to win the hearts of men to Christ, the most do still slight
him, and while they bow the Knee to him, and honor him with their Lips, do yet
set so light by him in their hearts, as to prefer every fleshly pleasure or
commodity before him. It will be thus with many: let us be glad that it is not
thus with All.

Use 3. But for closer application. Seeing this is the great condemning Sin,
before we enquire after it into the hearts of our hearers, it beseems us to
begin at home, and see that we who are Preachers of the Gospel, be not guilty
of it our selves. The Lord forbid that they that have undertaken the sacred
Office of revealing the Excellencies of Christ to the World, should make light
of him themselves, and slight that Salvation which they do daily preach. The
Lord knows we are all of us so low in our Estimation of Christ, and do this
great Work so negligently, that we have cause to be ashamed of our best
Sermons; but should this Sin prevail in us, we were the most miserable of all
men. Brethren, I love not censoriousness; yet dare not befriend so vile a Sin
in my self or others under pretense of avoiding it; especially when there is so
great necessity that it should be healed first in them that make it their work
to heal it in others. O that there were no cause to complain that Christ and
Salvation are made light of by the Preachers of it. But, 1. Do not the
negligent studies of some speak it out? 2. Does not their dead and drousie
Preaching declare it? do not they make light of the Doctrine they preach, that
do it as if they were half asleep, and feel not what they speak themselves?

3. Does not the carelessness of some men's private endeavors discover it? what
do they for Souls? how slightly do they reprove Sin? how little do they when
they are out of the Pulpit for the saving of men's Souls?

4. Does not the continued neglect of those things wherein the Interest of
Christ consists, discover it? 1. The Churches Purity and Reformation. 2. Its
Unity.

5. Does not the covetous and worldly lives of too many discover it, losing
advantages for men's souls, for a little gain to themselves? And most of this is
because men are Preachers before they are Christians, and tell men of that
which they never felt themselves. Of all men on earth, there are few that are
in so bad a condition as such Ministers: and if indeed they do believe that
Scripture which they preach, methinks it should be terrible to them in their
studying and preaching it.

Use 4. Beloved hearers; the Office that God has called us to, is, by
declaring the glory of his grace, to help under Christ, to the saving of men's
Souls. I hope you think not that I come hither to day on any other errand. The
Lord knows I had not set a foot out of doors but in hope to succeed in this
Work for your Souls. I have considered and often considered, what is the matter
that so many Thousands should perish when God has done so much for their
Salvation; and I find this that is mentioned in my Text is the cause. It is one
of the wonders of the World, that when God has so loved the World as to send
his Son, and Christ has made a satisfaction by his death sufficient for them
all, and offers the benefits of it so freely to them, even without money or
price, that yet the most of the World should perish; yea the most of those that
are thus called by his Word! Why here is the reason, when Christ has done all
this, men make light of it. God has showed that he is not unwilling; and
Christ has showed that he is not unwilling that men should be restored to
God's favor and be saved; but men are actually unwilling themselves. God takes
not pleasure in the death of sinners, but rather that they return and live,
Ezekiel. 33. 11. But men take such pleasure in sin, that they will dye before they
will return. The Lord Jesus was content to be their Physician, and has
provided them a sufficient plaster of his own blood: but if men make light of
it, and will not apply it, what wonder if they perish after all? This Scripture
gives us the reason of their perdition. This sad experience tells us the most
of the World is guilty of. It is a most lamentable thing to see how most men do
spend their care, their time, their pains for known vanities; while God and
Glory are cast aside: That he who is all should seem to them as nothing; and
that which is nothing should seem to them as good as all; that God should set
mankind in such a race where heaven or hell is their certain end, and that they
should set down, and loyter, or run after the childish Toys of the World, and
so much forget the Prize that they should run for. Were it but possible for one
of us to see the whole of this business, as the all seeing God does; to see at
one view both heaven and hell which men are so near, and see what most men in
the World are minding, and what they are doing every day, it would be the
saddest sight that could be imagined. Oh how should we marvail at their
madness, and lament their self-delusion! Oh poor distracted World! what is it
that you run after? and what is it that you neglect? If God had never told them
what they were sent into the World to do, or whether they were going, or what
was before them in another World, then they had been excusable; but he has
told them over and over, till they were weary of it. Had he left it doubtful,
there had been some excuse; but it is his sealed word, and they profess to
believe it, and would take it ill of us if we should question whether they do
believe it or not.

Beloved, I come not to accuse any of you particularly of this crime: but
seeing it is the commonest cause of men's Destruction, I suppose you will judge
it the fittest matter for our enquiry, and deserving our greatest care for the
cure. To which end I shall 1. Endeavor the Conviction of the guilty. 2. Shall
give them such considerations as may tend to humble and reform them. 3. I shall
conclude with such direction as may help them that are willing to escape the
destroying Power of Sin. And for the first* consider*

1. It is the case of most sinners to think themselves freest from those sins
that they are most enslaved to; and one reason why we cannot reform them, is,
because we cannot convince them of their guilt. It is the nature of sin so far
to blind and befool the sinner, that he knows not what he does, but thinks
he is free from it when it reigns in him, on when he is committing it: It
brings men to be so much unacquainted with themselves, that they know not
what they think, or what they mean and intend, nor what they love or hate, much
less what they are habituated and disposed to. They are alive to sin, and dead
to all the Reason, Consideration and Resolution that should recover them, as if
it were only by their sinning that we must know they are alive. May I hope that
you that hear me to day, are but willing to know the Truth of your case, and
then I shall be encouraged to proceed to an enquiry. God will judge
impartially; why should not we do so? Let me therefore by these following
Questions try whether none of you are slighters of Christ and your own
Salvation. And follow me, I beseech you, by putting them close to your own
hearts, and faithfully answering them,

1. Things that men highly value will be remembered, they will be matter of
their freest and sweetest thoughts: this is a known case.

Do not those then make light of Christ and Salvation, that think of them so
seldom and coldly in comparison of other things? Follow thy own heart man, and
observe what it daily runs out after; and then judge whether it make not
light of Christ.

We cannot persuade men to one hours sober consideration what they should do
for an interest in Christ, or in thankfulness for his love, and yet they will
not believe that they make light of him.

2. Things that we highly value will be matter of our Discourse: The judgment
and heart will command the tongue. Freely and delightfully will our speech run
after them. This also is a known case.

Do not those then make light of Christ and Salvation, that shun the mention of
his name, unless it be in a vain or sinful use? Those that love not the company
where Christ and Salvation is much talked of; but think it troublesome precise
Discourse: That had rather hear some merry Jests, or idle Tales, or talk of
their Riches or Business in the World. When you may follow them from morning to
night, and scarce have a savory word of Christ; but perhaps some slight and
weary mention of him sometimes; judge whether these make not light of Christ
and Salvation. How seriously do they talk of the World? Psalm. 144. 8, 11. and
speak vanity! but how heartlesly do they make mention of Christ and Salvation!

3. The things that we highly value, we would secure the possession of, and
therefore would take any convenient Course to have all doubts and fears about
them well resolved. Do not those men then make light of Christ and Salvation,
that have lived twenty or thirty Years in uncertainty whether they have any
part in these or not, and yet never seek out for the right resolution of their
doubts? Are all that hear me this day certain they shall be saved? Oh that they
were! Oh had you not made light of Salvation, you could not so easily bear such
doubtings of it; you could not rest till you had made it sure, or done your
best to make it sure. Have you no body to enquire of that might help you in
such a Work? Why you have Ministers that are purposely appointed to that
Office. Have you gone to them and told them the doubtfulness of your case, and
asked their help in the judging of your condition? Alas Ministers may sit in
their Studies from one year to another, before ten Persons among one Thousand,
will come to them on such an errand! Do not these make light of Christ and
Salvation? when the Gospel pierces the heart indeed, they cry out, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do to be saved! Acts 16. 30. and 9. 6. trembling and
astonished, Paul cries out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? And so did the
convinced Jews to Peter, Acts 2. 37. But when hear we such Questions?

4. The things that we value do deeply affect us, and some motions will be in
the heart according to our Estimation of them. Oh Sirs, If men made not light
of these things, what workings would there be in the hearts of all our hearers?
What strange affections would it raise in them to hear of the matters of the
World to come! How would their hearts melt before the Power of the Gospel? what
sorrow would be wrought in the discovery of their sin? what astonishment at the
consideration of their misery? what unspeakable Joy at the glad Tidings of
Salvation by the Blood of Christ? what resolution would be raised in them upon
the discovery of their duty? Oh what hearers should we have if it were not for
this sin! whereas now, we are like to weary them, or preach them asleep with
matters of unspeakable moment. We talk to them of Christ and Salvation till we
make their heads ache; Little would one think by their careless carriage, that
they heard and regarded what we said, or thought we spoke at all to them.

5. Our estimation of things will be seen in the diligence of our endeavors.
That which we highliest value, we shall think no pains too great to obtain. Do
not those men then make light of Christ and Salvation, that think all too much
that they do for them, that murmur at his Service, and think it too grievous
for them to endure? that ask of his Service as Judas of the Ointment; What need
this wast? cannot men be saved without so much ado? this is more ado than
needs. For the World they will labor all the day, and all their lives; but for
Christ and Salvation they are afraid of doing too much. Let us preach to them
as long as we will, we cannot bring them to relish or resolve upon a life of
holiness. Follow them to their houses, and you shall not hear them read a
Chapter, nor call upon God with their Families once a day; Nor will they allow
him that one day in seven which he has separated to his service. But pleasure,
or worldly business, or idleness must have a part. And many of them are so far
hardened, as to reproach them that will not be as mad as themselves. And is not
Christ worth the seeking? Is not everlasting Salvation worth more than all
this? Does not that Soul make light of all these, that thinks his ease more
worth than they? Let but common sense judge.

6. That which we most highly value, we think we cannot buy too dear: Christ
and Salvation are freely given, and yet the most of men go without them,
because they cannot enjoy the world and them together. They are called but to
part with that which would hinder them from Christ, and they will not do it.
They are called but to give God his own, and to resign all to his Will, and let
go the Profits and Pleasures of this World, when they must let go either Christ
or them, and they will not. They think this too dear a bargain, and say they
cannot spare these things: They must hold their credit with men; they must look
to their Estates: how shall they live else? They must have their pleasure,
whatsoever becomes of Christ and Salvation: As if they could live without
Christ better than without these? as if they were afraid of being losers by
Christ, or could make a saving match by losing their Souls to gain the World.
Christ has told us over and over, that if we will not forsake all for him, we
cannot be his Disciples, Mat. 10. Far are these men from for saking all, and
yet will needs think that they are his Disciples indeed.

7. That which men highly esteem, they would help their friends to as well as
themselves. Do not those men make light of Christ and Salvation, that can take
so much care to leave their Children Portions in the World, and do so little to
help them to Heaven? That provide outward necessaries so carefully for their
Families, but do so little to the saving of their Souls? Their neglected
Children and Friends will witness, that either Christ or their Childrens Souls,
or both, were made light of.

8. That which men highly esteem, they will so diligently seek after, that you
may see it in the success, if it be a matter within their reach. You may see
how many make light of Christ, by the little knowledge they have of him, and
the little communion with him, and communication from him; and the little, yea,
none of his special graces in them. Alas! how many Ministers can speak it to
the sorrow of their Hearts, that many of their People know almost nothing of
Christ, though they hear of him daily! nor know they what they must do to be
saved; if we ask them an account of these things, they answer, as if they
understood not what we say to them, and tell us they are no Scholars, and
therefore think they are excusable for their ignorance. Oh if these men had not
made light of Christ and their Salvation, but had bestowed but half so much
pains to know and enjoy him, as they have done to understand the matters of
their Trades and Callings in the World, they would not have been so ignorant as
they are: They make light of these things, and therefore will not be at the
pains to study or learn them. When Men that can learn the hardest Trade in a
few years, have not learned a Catechism, nor how to understand their Creed,
under twenty or thirty years preaching, nor cannot abide to be questioned about
such things; does not this show that they have slighted them in their Hearts?
How will these despisers of Christ and Salvation be able one day to look him in
the face, and to give an account of these neglects?

Thus much I have spoken in order to your Conviction. Do not some of your
consciences by this time smite you, and say, I am the Man that have made light
of my Salvation? If they do not, it is because you make light of it still, for
all that is said to you. But because, if it be the will of the Lord, I would
fain have this damning Distemper cured, and am loath to leave you in such a
desperate condition, if I knew how to remedy it; I will give you some
Considerations, which may move you, if you be men of reason and understanding,
to look better about you; and I beseech you weigh them, and make use of them as
ye go, and lay open your Hearts to the work of Grace, and sadly bethink you
what a case you are in, if you prove such as make light of Christ.

Consider, 1. Thou make light of him that made not light of thee who did
deserve it. Thou wast worthy of nothing but contempt. As a Man, what art thou
but a worm to God? As a Sinner, thou art far viler than a Toad: yet Christ was
so far from making light of thee and thy happiness, that he came down into the
flesh, and lived a life of suffering, and offered himself a sacrifice to the
Justice which thou had provoked, that thy miserable Soul might have a remedy.
It is no less than Miracles of love and mercy that he has showed to us; and
yet shall we slight them after all?

Angels admire them, whom they less concern, 1 Pet. 1. 12. and shall redeemed
Sinners make light of them? What barbarous, yea devilish, yea worse then
devilish Ingratitude is this? the Devils never had a Savior offered them, but
thou have, and do thou yet make light of him?

2. Consider the work of Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ, is the Masterpiece
of all the works of God, wherein he would have his love and mercy to be
magnified. As the Creation declares his Goodness and Power, so does Redemption
his Goodness and Mercy; he has contrived the very frame of his Worship so,
that it shall much consist in the magnifying of this work; and after all this,
will you make light of it? His Name is wonderful, Isa. 9. 6. He did the work
that none could do, John 15. 24. Greater love could none show than his, John
15. 13. How great was the evil and misery that he delivered us from? the good
procured for us? all are wonders, from his Birth to his Ascension; from our new
Birth to our Glorification, all are wonders of matchless Mercy. And yet do you
make light of them!

3. You make light of matters of greatest excellency and moment in the World:
you know not what it is that you slight; had you well known, you could not have
done it. As Christ said to the Woman of Samaria, John 4. 10. had thou known
who it is that speaks to thee, thou would have asked of him the waters of
Life. Had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor.
2. 8. So, had you known what Christ is, you would not have made light of him;
had you been one day in Heaven, and but seen what they possess, and seen also
what miserable Souls must endure that are shut out, you would never sure have
made so light of Christ again.

Oh Sirs, it is no trifle, or jesting matter that the Gospel speaks of. I must
needs profess to you, that when I have the most serious thoughts of these
things my self, I am ready to marvel that such amazing matters do not overwhelm
the souls of Men; that the greatness of the Subject does not so overmatch our
understandings and affections, as even to drive men besides themselves, but
that God has always somewhat allayed it by the distance; much more that Men
should be so blockish as to make light of them. Oh Lord, that Men did but know
what everlasting Glory, and everlasting Torments are. Would they then hear us
as they do? Would they read and think of these things as they do? I profess I
have been ready to wonder, when I have heard such weighty things delivered, how
People can forbear crying out in the Congregation; much more, how they can rest
till they have gone to their Ministers, and learned what they should do to be
saved, that this great business might be put out of doubt. Oh that Heaven and
Hell should work no more upon Men! Oh that Everlastingness should work no more!
Oh how can you forbear when you are alone, to think with your selves what it is
to be everlastingly in Joy or in Torment! I wonder that such thoughts do not
break your sleep; and that they come not in your mind when you are about your
labor! I wonder how you can almost do any thing else: how you can have any
quietness in your minds: how you can eat, or drink, or rest, till you have got
some ground of everlasting Consolations! Is that a Man or a Corpse that is not
affected with matters of this moment? That can be readier to sleep than to
tremble, when he hears how he must stand at the Bar of God? Is that a Man, or
a Clod of Clay, that can rise and lie down without being deeply affected with
his everlasting Estate? that can follow his worldly Business, and make nothing
of the great business of Salvation or Damnation; and that when they know it is
hard at hand? Truly Sirs, when I think of the weight of the matter, I wonder at
the very best of God's Saints upon Earth, that they are no better, and do no
more in so weighty a case. I wonder at those whom the World accounts more
holy than needs, and scorns for making too much ado; that they can put off
Christ and their Souls with so little: that they pour not out their Souls in
every Supplication; that they are not more taken up with God; that their
thoughts be not more serious in preparation for their account. I wonder that
they be not an hundred times more strict in their lives; and more laborious and
unwearied in striving for the Crown, than they are. And for my self, as I am
ashamed of my dull and careless Heart, and of my slow and unprofitable course
of Life; so, the Lord knows, I am ashamed of every Sermon that I preach, when I
think what I have been speaking of, and who sent me; and that Men's Salvation
or Damnation is so much concerned in it. I am ready to tremble, lest God should
judge me, as a slighter of his Truth, and the souls of Men, and lest in the
best Sermon I should be guilty of their blood. Methinks we should not speak a
word to men in matters of such Consequence, without Tears, or the greatest
earnestness that possibly we can; were not we too much guilty of the sin which
we reprove, it would be so. Whether, we are alone, or in company, methinks our
end, and such an end, should still be in our mind, and as before our eyes; and
we should sooner forget any thing, and set light by any thing, or by all
things, than by this.

Consider 4. Who is it that sends this weighty Message to you? Is it not God
himself? Shall the God of Heaven speak, and Men make light of it? You would not
slight the Voice of an Angel or a Prince.

5. Whose Salvation is it that you make light of? Is it not your own? Are you
no more near or dear to your selves, than to make light of your own happiness
or misery? Why Sirs, do you not care whether you be saved or damned? Is
Self-love lost? Are you turned your own Enemies? As he that slighteth his Meat,
does slight his life; so if you slight Christ, whatsoever you may think, you
will find it was your own Salvation that you slighted. Hear what he says,
Prove. 1. 36. All they that hate me, love Death.

6. Your sin is greater, in that you profess to believe the Gospel which you
make so light of. For a professed Infidel to do it, that believes not that ever
Christ died, or rose again; or does not believe that there is a Heaven or Hell,
this were no such marvel; but for you that make it your Creed, and your very
Religion, and call your selves Christians, and have been baptized into this
Faith, and seemed to stand to it: this is the wonder, and has no excuse. What!
believe that you shall live in endless Joy or Torment, and yet make no more of
it, to escape Torment, and obtain that Joy. What! believe that God will shortly
judge you, and yet make no more preparation for it? Either say plainly, I am no
Christian, I do not believe these wonderful things! I will believe nothing but
what I see; or else, let your hearts be affected with your Belief, and live as
you say you do believe. What do you think when you repeat the Creed, and
mention Christ's Judgment and everlasting Life?

7. What are these things you set so much by, as to prefer them before Christ
and the saving of your Souls? Have you found a better friend, a greater and
surer happiness than this? Good Lord! What dung is it that men make so much of,
while they set so light by everlasting Glory! What Toys are they that they are
daily taken up with, while matters of life and death are neglected! Why Sirs,
If you had every one a Kingdom in your hopes, what were it in comparison of the
everlasting Kingdom? I cannot but look upon all the Glory and Dignity of this
World, Lands and Lordships, Crowns and Kingdoms, even as on some brainsick
beggarly Fellow, that borrows fine Clothes, and plays the part of a King or a
Lord, for an hour on a stage, and then comes down, and the sport is ended, and
they are beggars again. Were it not for God's interest in the Authority of
Magistrates, or for the service they might do him, I should judge no better of
them. For as to their own Glory, it is but a smoke: what matter is it whether
you live poor or rich, unless it were a greater matter to dye rich than it is?
You know well enough that Death levels all: What matter is it at Judgment,
whether you be to answer for the life of a rich man, or a poor man? Is Dives
then any better than Lazarus? Oh that men knew what a poor deceiving shadow
they grasp at, while they let go the everlasting Substance! The strongest and
richest, and most voluptuous Sinners, do but lay in fuel for their sorrows,
while they think they are gathering together a treasure. Alas! they are asleep,
and dream that they are happy; but when they awake, what a change will they
find? Their Crown is made of Thorns! their pleasure has such a sting as will
stick in the heart through all Eternity, except unfeigned Repentance do prevent
it. Oh how sadly will these wretches be convinced ere long, what a foolish
bargain they made in selling Christ and their Salvation for these Trifles! Let
your Farms and Merchandise then save you if they can; and do that for you that
Christ would have done. Cry then to thy Baal to save thee! Oh what thoughts
have Drunkards and Adulterers, etc. of Christ, that will not part with the
basest lust for him! For a piece of bread, says Solomon, such men do
transgress, Prove. 28. 21.

8. To set so light by Christ and Salvation is a certain mark that thou have no
part in them, and if thou so continue, that Christ will set as light by thee:
Those that honor him he will honor, and those that despise him shall be
lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Thou will feel one day that thou can not live
without him. Thou will confess then thy need of him; and then thou may go
look for a Savior where thou will; for he will be no Savior for thee
hereafter, that would not value him, and submit to him here: Then who will
prove the loser by thy contempt? Oh what a thing will it be for a poor
miserable Soul to cry to Christ for help in the day of extremity, and to hear
so sad an Answer as this! Thou did set light by me and my Law in the day of
thy Prosperity, and I will now set as light by thee in thy Adversity. Read
Prove. 1. 24. to the end. Thou that as Esau did sell thy Birthright for a
Mess of Pottage, shall then find no place for repentance, though thou seek it
with tears, Heb. 12. 17. Do you think that Christ shed his blood to save them
that continue to make light of it? and to save them that value a Cup of Drink
or a Lust before his Salvation? I tell you Sirs, though you set light by Christ
and Salvation, God does not so: He will not give them on such Terms as these:
He valueth the Blood of his Son, and the everlasting Glory; and he will make
you value them, if ever you have them. Nay, this will be thy condemnation, and
leaves no remedy. All the World cannot save him that sets light by Christ,
Heb. 2. 3. Luke 14 24. None of them shall taste of his Supper, Mat. 10. 37. Nor
can you blame him to deny you what you made light of your selves. Can you find
fault if you miss of the Salvation which you slighted?

9, The time is near when Christ and Salvation will not be made light of as now
they are. When God has shaken those careless Souls out of their Bodies, and
you must answer for all your sins in your own Name; O then, what what would you
give for a Savior? when a thousand Bills shall be brought in against you, and
none to relieve you, then you will consider, Oh, Christ would now have stood
between me and the wrath of God: had I not despised him, he would have answered
all. When you see the World has left you, and your companions in sin have
deceived themselves and you, and all your merry days are gone; then what would
you give for that Christ and Salvation, that now you account not worth your
labor? Do you think when you see the Judgment set, and you are doomed to
everlasting Perdition for your Wickedness, that you should then make as light
of Christ as now? Why will you not judge now, as you know you shall judge then?
Will he then be worth ten thousand Worlds, and is he not now worth your highest
Estimation, and dearest Affection?

10. God will not only deny thee that Salvation thou made light of, but he
will take from thee all that which thou did value before it: He that most
highly esteems Christ, shall have him and the creatures so far as they are good
here, and him without the Creature hereafter, because the Creature is not
useful; and he that sets more by the Creature than by Christ, shall have some
of the Creature without Christ here, and neither Christ nor it hereafter.

So much of these considerations, which may show the true face of this heinous
sin.

What think you now friends of this business? Do you not see by this time what
a case that Soul is in that makes light of Christ and Salvation? What need
then is there that you should take heed lest this should prove your own case:
The Lord knows it is too common a case. Whoever is found guilty at the last of
this sin, it were better for that man he had never been born. It were better
for him he had been a Turk or Indian, that never had heard the Name of a
Savior, and that never had Salvation offered to him: For such men have no
Cloak for their sin, John 15. 22. Besides all the rest of their sins, they have
this killing sin to answer for, which will undo them. And this will aggravate
their misery: That Christ whom they set light by, must be their Judge, and for
this sin will he judge them. Oh that such would now consider how they will
answer that Question that Christ puts to their Predecessors, Mat. 23. 33. How
will ye escape the Damnation of Hell? or Heb. 2* 3. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation? Can you escape without a Christ? or will a despised
Christ save you then? If he be accursed that set light by Father or Mother,
Deuteronomy. 27. 16. What then is he that sets light by Christ? It was the heinous sin
of the Jews, that among them were found such as set light by Father and Mother,
Ezekiel. 22. 7. But among us men slight the Father of Spirits. In the Name of God
Brethren, I beseech you to consider how you will then bear his Anger which you
now make light of? You that cannot make light of a little sickness or want, or
of natural Death, no not of a Toothache, but groan as if you were undone, how
will you then make light of the Fury of the Lord, which will burn against the
Contemners of his Grace? Does it not behove you beforehand to think of these
things?

Hitherto I have been convincing you of the evil of the sin, and the danger
that follows: I come now to know your Resolution for the time to come. What
say you? Do you mean to set as light by Christ and Salvation as hitherto you
have done? and to be the same men after all this? I hope not. Oh let not your
Ministers that would fain save you, be brought in as Witnesses against you, to
condemn you. At least, I beseech you put not this upon me. Why Sirs. If the
Lord shall say to us at Judgment, Did you never tell these men what Christ did
for their Souls, and what need they had of him, and how nearly it did concern
them to look to their Salvation, that they made light of it? we must needs say
the Truth: Yea Lord, we told them of it as plainly as we could; we would have
gone on our knees to them, if we had thought it would have prevailed; we did
entreat them as earnestly as we could, to consider these things: They heard of
these things every day; but alas, we could never got them to their hearts;
they gave us the hearing, but they made light of all that we could say to them.
Oh sad will it prove on your side, if you sorce us to such an Answer as this.

But if the Lord do move the hearts of any of you, and you resolve to make
light of Christ no more: Or if any of you say, we do not make light of him; let
me tell you here in the conclusion what you must do, or else you shall be
judged as slighters of Christ and Salvation.

And first I will tell you what will not serve the turn.

1. You may have a notional knowledge of Christ and the necessity of his blood,
and of the excellency of Salvation, and yet perish as neglecters of him. This
is too common among professed Christians. You may say all that other men do of
him; What Gospel passages had Balaam? Jesus I know, and Paul I know, the very
Devils could say, who believe and tremble, Jam. 2.

2. You may weep at the History of his Passion, when you read how he was used
by the Jews; and yet make light of him, and perish for so doing.

3. You may come desirously to his word and ordinances. Herod heard gladly; so
do many that yet must perish as neglecters of Salvation.

4. You may in a sit of fear have strong desires after a Christ, to ease you,
and to save you from God's wrath: as Saul had of David to play before him; and
yet you may perish for making light of Christ.

5. You may obey him in many things, so far as will not ruin you in the World:
and escape much of the Pollutions of the World by his knowledge, and yet
neglect him.

6. You may suffer and lose much for him, so far as leaves you an earthly
Felicity; as Ananias; the young man. Some parcels of their pleasures and
prosits many will part with in hope of Salvation, that shall perish
everlastingly, for valuing it no more.

7. You may be esteemed by others a man zealous for Christ, and loved and
admired upon that account, and yet be one that shall perish for making light of
him.

8. You may verily think your selves, that you set more by Christ and Salvation
than any thing, and yet be mistaken, and be judged as Contemners of him: Christ
justisieth not all that justisie themselves.

9. You may be zealous Preachers of Christ and Salvation, and reprove others
for this neglect, and lament the sin of the World in like expressions as I have
done this day; and yet if you or I have no better evidence to prove our hearty
esteem of Christ and Salvation, we are undone for all this.

You hear Brethren what will not serve the turn; Will you now hear what persons
you must be if you would not be condemned as slighters of Christ? O search
whether it be thus with your Souls, or no.

1. Your esteem of Christ and Salvation, must be greater than your esteem of
all the Honors, Profits, or Pleasures of this World, or else you slight him: No
less will be accounted sincere, or accepted to your Salvation: Think not this
hard, when there is no comparison in the matters esteemed. To esteem the
greatest Glory on Earth before Christ and Everlasting Glory, is a greater
Folly, and Wrong to Christ, than to esteem a Dog before your Prince, would be
folly in you, and a wrong to him. Scripture is plain in this, Mat. 10. 37. He
that loves Father or Mother, Wife, Children, House, Land, or his own Life more
than me, is not worthy of me, and cannot be my Disciple, as Luke 14. 26.

2. You must manifest this esteem of Christ and Salvation in your daily
endeavors and seeking after him, and in parting with any thing that he shall
require of you. God is a Spirit, and will not take an hypocritical Profession
instead of the heart and spiritual Service which he commands. He will have
the heart or nothing; and the chief room in the heart too. These must be had.

If you say that you do not make light of Christ, or will not hereafter; let me
try you in these few particulars, whether indeed you mean as you say, and do
not dissemble.

1. Will you for the time to come make Christ and Salvation the chiefest matter
of your care and study? Thrust them not out of your thoughts, as a needless and
unprofitable Subject; nor allow it only some running slight thoughts, which
will not affect you. But will you make it your business once a day to bethink
you soberly when you are alone, What Christ has done for you; and what he will
do if you do not make light of it: and what it is to be everlastingly happy or
miserable? and what all things in this World are in comparison of your
Salvation? and how they will shortly leave you? and what mind you will be then
of; and how you will esteem them? will you promise me now and then to make it
your business to withdraw your selves from the World, and set your selves to
such considerations as these? If you will not, are not you slighters of Christ,
and Salvation, that will not be persuaded soberly to think on them? This is my
first Question to put you to the Trial, whether you will value Christ or not.

2. Will you for the time to come, set more by the Word of God, which contains
the discovery of these excellent things, and is your charter for Salvation, and
your guide thereunto? You cannot set by Christ, but you must set by his Word;
Therefore the Despisers of it are threatened with Destruction, Prove. 13. 13.
Will you therefore attend to the public preaching of this Word? will you read
it daily? will you resolve to obey it whatever it may cost you? If you will not
do this, but make light of the Word of God, you shall be judged as such as make
light of Christ and Salvation, whatever you may sondly promise to your selves.

3. Will you for the time to come esteem more of the Officers of Christ, whom
he he has purposely appointed to guide you to Salvation? and will you make use
of them for that end? Alas, it is not to give the Minister a good word, and
speak well of him, and pay him his Tithes duly, that will serve the turn: Is it
for the necessity of your Souls that God has set them in his Church; that they
may be as Physicians under Christ, or his Apothecaries to apply his Remedies to
your spiritual Diseases, not only in public, but also in private: That you may
have some to go to for the resolving of your doubts, and for your instruction
where you are ignorant, and for the help of their Exhortations and Prayers.
Will you use hereafter to go to your Ministers privately, and solicit them
for advice? and if you have not such of your own as are fit, get advice from
others; and ask them, What you shall do to be saved, how to prepare for Death
and Judgment? and will you obey the Word of God in their Mouths? If you will
not do this much, nor so much as enquire of those that should teach you, nor
use the means which Christ has established in his Church for your help, your
own Consciences shall one day witness, that you were such as made light of
Christ and Salvation. If any of you doubt whether it be your duty thus to ask
counsel of your Teachers, as sick men do of their Physicians, let your own
necessities resolve you; let God's express word resolve you; see what is said
of the Priests of the Lord, even before Christ's coming, when much of their
work did lie in Ceremonials! Mal. 2. 5, 6. My Covenant was with him of life and
peace: and I gave them to him (to Levi) for the fear wherewith he feared me,
and was afraid before my name. The Law of Truth was in his mouth, and Iniquity
was not found in his lips; he walked with m^ in Peace and Equity, and did turn
many away from Iniquity. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they
should seek the Law at his Mouth: For he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

Nay, you must not only enquire, and submit to their advice, but also to their
just reprehensions, and Church censures: And without proud repining, submit to
the Discipline of Christ in their Hands, if it shall be used in the
Congregations whereof you are Members.

4 Will you for the time to come, make Conscience of daily and earnest Prayer
to God, that you may have a part in Christ and Salvation? do not go out of
doors till you have breathed out these desires to God; do not lie down to rest
till you have breathed out these desires; say not, God knows my necessity
without so often praying; for though he do, yet he will have you to know them,
and feel them, and exercise your desires, and all the graces of his Spirit in
these Duties: It is he that has commanded to pray continually, though he know
your needs without, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Christ himself spent whole nights in
prayer, and encourages us to this course, Luke 18. 1. If you will not be
persuaded to this much, how can you say that you make not light of Christ and
Salvation?

5. Will you for the time to come, resolvedly cast away your known sins at the
command of Christ? If you have been proud or contentious, or malicious and
revengeful, be so no more. If you have been Adulterers, or Swearers, or
Cursers, be so no more. You cannot hold these, and yet set by Christ and
Salvation.

What say you? Are you resolved to let them go? If not, when you know it is the
will of Christ, and he has told you, such shall not enter into his Kingdom, do
not you make light of him?

6. Will you for the time to come, serve God in the dearest as well as in the
cheapest part of his service; not only with your tongues, but with your purses
and your deeds? shall the poor find that you set more by Christ than this
World? shall it appear in any good uses that God calls you to be liberal in,
according to your Abilities? Pure Religion and undefiled before God is this; To
visit the Fatherless and the Widows in their afflictions, Jam. 1. ult. Will you
resolve to stick to Christ, and make sure this work of Salvation, though it cost
you all that you have in the World? If you think these terms too dear, you make
light of Christ, and will be judged accordingly.

7. Will you for the time to come make much of all things that tend to your
Salvation; and take every help that God offers you, and gladly make use of
all his Ordinances? Attend upon his strengthening Sacraments, spend the Lord's
own day in these holy Employments. Instruct your Children and Servants in these
things, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. get into good company that set their faces Heaven ward,
and will teach you the way, and help you thither: and take heed of the wicked
Scornors, or foolish, voluptuous, fleshly men, or any that would hinder you in
this work. Will you do these things? Or will you show that you are slighters of
Christ by neglecting them?

8. Will you do all this with delight, not as your toil, but as your pleasure?
and take it for your highest Honor that you may be Christ's Disciples, and may
be admitted to serve and worship him; and rejoice with holy Confidence in the
sufficiency of that Sacrifice by which you may have pardon of all your
failings, and right to the Inheritance of the Saints in light? If you will do
these things sincerely, you will show that you set by Christ and Salvation;
else not.

Dearly Beloved in the Lord, I have now done that work which I came upon; what
effects it has, or will have upon your Hearts, I know not, nor is it any
further in my power, to accomplish that which my soul desires for you. Were it
the Lord's will that I might have my wish herein, the words that you have this
day heard, should so stick by you, that the secure should be awakended by them,
and none of you should perish by the slighting of your Salvation. I cannot now
follow you to your several Habitations, to apply this Word to your particular
necessities: but oh that I could make every Man's Conscience a Preacher to
himself, that it might do it, which is ever with you: that the next time you go
Prayerless to Bed, or about your business, Conscience might cry out, Do thou
set no more by Christ and thy Salvation? that the next time you are tempted to
think hardly of a holy and diligent life, (I will not say to deride it as more
ado than needs) Conscience might cry out, Do thou set so light by Christ and
thy Salvation? that the next time you are ready to rush upon known sin, and to
please your fleshly desires against the command of God, Conscience might cry
out, Is Christ and Salvation no more worth, than to cast them away, or venture
them for thy Lusts? that when you are following the World with your most eager
desires, forgetting the World to come, and the change that is a little before
you, Conscience might cry out to you, Is Christ and Salvation no more worth
than so? That when you are next spending the Lord's day in idleness or vain
sports, Conscience might tell you what you are doing. In a word, that in all
your neglects of duty, your sticking at the supposed labor or cost of a godly
Life; yea, in all your cold and lazy Prayers and Performances, Conscience might
tell you, how unsuitable such endeavors are to the Reward; and that Christ and
Salvation should not be so slighted. I will say no more but this at this time:
It is a thousand pities, that when God has provided a Savior for the World,
and when Christ has suffered so much for their sins, and made a full
satisfaction to Justice, and purchased so glorious a Kingdom for his Saints,
and all this is offered so freely to Sinners, to lost unworthy Sinners, even
for nothing, that yet so many millions should everlastingly perish, because
they made light of their Savior and Salvation, and prefer the vain World and
their Lusts before them. I have delivered my Message, the Lord open your Hearts
to receive it, I have persuaded you with the Word of truth and soberness; the
Lord persuade you more effectually, or else all this is lost.

FINIS.

