THE PROTESTANT Religion TRULY STATED AND JUSTIFIED: By the late Reverend Mr.
RICHARD BAXTER, Prepared for the Press some time before his Death.

Whereunto is added, By way of Preface, some Account of the Learned Author: By
Mr. Danel Williams, and Mr. Matthew Sylvester.

LONDON, Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1692.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of the following Tract is the Reverend Mr. Baxter, now enjoying
that Glory he so conversed with in his mortal state. Among his many
Excellencies, his Love to God, to Peace, and Truth, was not the least eminent.
The last rendered him averse to Logomachies and confusion; well knowing, How
vain all eristick debates be, if the Question be not truly and plainly stated.
This Book will give thee a Specimen of that peculiar accuracy in this kind, as
even determines the Controversy before an Argument be produced.

It is not to be concealed, that some complain of the multitude of his
distinctions; but such may consider, that the Comprehensiveness of his Mind
accommodated things to the most subtle, as well as the less intelligent Reader*
and provided against future Errors, as well as the mistakes he attends to in
the particular points before him.

Indeed he was a man born for more lasting service than one Age; yea, his Name
will be greatest, when impartial inquisitiveness after Truth shall render men
painful; and sad experience of the mischief of narrow and dividing Principles
has forced the confident to mutual allowances, and well studied
determinations. But how unhappy was he (or rather such as mistake him) that he
is often charged with deserting this or that Truth, because he understood it in a
consistency with it self, and such other truths wherewith it was connected. As
if Ort hodoxie must be sacrificed whenever a Doctrine is made intelligible; or
the choice of terms more apt to confute the erroneous, less obnoxious to
mistakes, and most expressive of digested thoughts, ought to alarm all such,
who seem capable to know little more of Truth than the sound of often repeated
Phrases.

Nay, as more convincing what treatment any man must expect, who sets himself
to heal a blind depraved World; The clearest representation of his mind will
not silence the ignorant from charging him with those Errors which he most
expressly disowns. Three of the most material are denied and confuted by Mr.
Baxter in this very Treatise, viz. the moral freedom of the Will of an
unregenerate man, conditional Election, and the merit of good Works as opposed
to, or coordinate with the Righteousness of Christ. Neither must it be
overlooked, that it was his Concern in this Book above any other, to speak as
near to these points as his Judgment could admit; and in other Treatises he
more largely declares against them.

1. Of Free Will, p. 87. he tells us, he denies that man's Will in his
unregenerate state is free from vicious inclination, or from the conduct of an
erring Intellect, or from the Biass of Sensuality, etc. 2. He denies that the
Will thus vitiated, will ever deliver it self without Gods Spirit and Grace, it
being rather inclined to grow worse. 3 As that degree of common Grace, which is
in the unregenerate, is but such as consists with the predominant Reign of
Sin; so the Will of every unregenerate man in that pravity, is as a Slave to
its own vicious dispositions, error, and temptations. Who can say more against
Free Will? Obj. But he affirms the natural freedom of the Will. Answ. He does
so, and explains it, p. 84, 85, 86, 91. and it is no more than that a Sinner is
a man still, though he be depraved; and he is a liberal, and not a forced Agent
in what he acts.

Obj. But he says, p. 88. That by common Grace a man may do more good and less
evil than he does. Answ. It Is true, he says so. But, p. 85. he distinguishes
between common and special Grace, and denies that we can do that by common
Grace, which is proper to special Grace: and says, men have but just so much,
and no more moral Liberty, and power, as they have of Gods Grace to relieve
their vitiated Wills. See p. 91.

2. Of Conditional Election, p. 99. He condemns the Notion called Scientia
Media: p. 100. he says, God decrees not men's Salvation, or Sanctification,
merely on Foresight of our Faith: but decrees our Faith it self. Sin he
permits, but Faith he effects, and decrees to effect: and p. 101. he
shows, how God decrees both the means and end. And though God justly denies his
Grace to many that forfeit it by wilful resistance and contempt; yet he takes
not the Forfeiture of the Elect. Yea he adds, That he is deceived, and wrongeth
God, that feigneth him to send his Son to redeem the World, and his Word to
call them, and his Spirit to renew them; and all this at random, not knowing
whether it may not all be lost; or leaving it chiefly to the Free Will of them,
whose Wills are contrarily inclined and vitiated; whether Christ and all his
preparations shall be lost: p. 102. he approves the plain Christian who holds
that our destruction is of our selves, but our help and Salvation of God; and
God is the first and chief Cause of all good, and men and Devils of all evil.

Obj. But he will not say, that God has by his Will and Decree ordained from
Eternity that men shall sin, or will and choose evil, p. 100, and 101. God does
not decree that men shall sin, that they may be damned; for sin is no work of
God, etc.

Answ. But yet he says, p. 100. that,

1. God decrees who shall de damned for sin.

2. That he foresaw men's sins, not as an idle Spectator, but a willing
Suspender of his own Acts, so far as to leave Sinners to their self-determining
Wills. Reader, if thou art a man of thought, thou see Mr. Baxter is clear for
absolute Election, though he did not think it necessary for the vindication
thereof to judge, that God absolutely decreed men to sin, that he might damn
them: it is enough, that it is from Gods Sovereign Will, that many are not
elected; it would be an ease to the damned, that they could justly say, God
decreed us to all our sins, that he might bring us under all this punishment, a
Non-election to Efficacious Grace, and a positive Decree to damn such for sin,
which themselves would choose, best suited with his Conceptions of Gods
Goodness, Truth, and Purity.

3. Of the Merit of good Works: Note, Reader, that he is not fond of the word
Merit, but his Adversary leads him to the use of it, as thou may see p. 96.
But let us hear what his sense is of this point: p. 119. All Saints are saved
by the full sufficient Merits of Christ, and have none at all of their own,
unless the amiableness of Grace freely given them, be called their Merit; and,
p. 95. we do with Paul renounce all Works of our own, that are thought to make
the reward to be of Debt, and not of Grace; and that are set in the least
opposition, or competition with Christ's Merits, or in any place, save commanded
subordination to him: nay, he says he firmly holds, That Works done with a
conceit of obliging God by Merit in commutative Justice, or as conceited
sufficient without a Savior, and the pardon of their failings, do more further
their Damnation, than Salvation. Yea, p. 97. none but Christ merited of strict
distributive Justice, according to the Law of Innocence, nor by any Works that
will save from the charge of sin, and desert of death. And that thou may
know what he ascribes to our Graces, Holiness, or Works: He tells us, p. 119.
we mean by Merit but the moral aptitude for the reward of a free Benefactor,
who also is Rector, when the ordering of a free gift suspended on official
conditions, is sapientially made a means of procuring obedience. This one
Clause, if understood (and he is a bold Traducer of so great a Man, that cannot
understand words so plain) will acquit Mr. B. and inform thee of the place of
all Gospel- Conditions. 1. All Gospel-blessings are the free gifts of Christ as
Benefactor, they have their being without any regard to what we do, therefore
nothing in man is a jot of the righteousness or merit for which they are
bestowed. 2. Christ is our Rector or Governor, he will rule us as well as be
beneficent to us. 3. As a means to incline us to comply with him as Rector, he
suspends these blessings on terms of what he makes our Duty; and wisely orders
them as Motives to our Obedience. 4. Any Act of our Obedience is no more than a
conformity to that Order of his, and does not hinder all we receive from him to
be of free gift.

Obj. But he says, that good Works are necessary to Salvation.

Answ. He does so, and how few deny it? But, 1. Not if a man dye as soon as he
be converted; but if he have time, p. 94. 2. Their rewardableness is by Gods
free Grace, and Promise, for the sake of Christ's meritorious Righteousness,
Sacrifice, and Intercession; their imperfection being pardoned, and their
holiness amiable through him: These are his words, p. 76. 3. He says; Not
without or as a supplement to the Sacrifice, Merits, and free Grace of Christ
our Savior, and Faith in him, p. 93, 75. And we give our selves to Christ, as
our Prophet, Priest, and King, to be saved by his Merits, p. 94.4. He says,
our best Works will not save a man from the charge of sin, and desert of death,
p. 97. 5. He denies that external Obedience is necessary to our admission into
a justified state, as he shows in the Thief on the Cross. And when he says, we
are justified by our Faith, Godliness, and Works; Justification is not taken by
him for the pardon of sin, which he ascribes wholly to the Merits of Christ;
but he takes Justification there for our acquittance against the accusation
that we are Infidels, Ungodly, and Hypocrites. And says, that against the
charge, that we are Sinners, deserving Hell, we are justified by Christ
believed in, p. 94. His meaning is plainly this, Christ alone by his Merits
forgives our sins, and purchased eternal Life for us. But seeing that Christ
has promised to forgive none but the penitent Believer, and declared he will
destroy all impenitent, unbelieving, ungodly sinners: Now he thinks, that we
must be truly acquitted, that we are not such, or we shall not be saved by
Christ: Yea, he thinks, that when God justifies a man for Christ's Merits, he
does also declare a man to be a true Believer; because he will justify no
other, and will justify all such; and when God admits a man into Glory, he
does even thereby adjudge him a believing, penitent, holy, and upright man; and
free from the charge of being an infidel, hypocritical, unholy Enemy; against
whom the Gospel denounces Vengeance and bars relief. Let these things be
weighed, and none will wonder that he should say on his sick bed, No works, I
will leave out works, if he grant me the other: And truly, in health none spoke
more humbly of his own Works than he used to do. But because some confident
weak persons have inferred from that passage, that he changed his Principles
when he came to dye; we shall inform thee, that after that passage was uttered
by him, even the night before his death, Mr. Baxter was asked, whether he was
of the same sentiments, as formerly, about Justification? He answered, That he
had told the World sufficiently his thoughts about it by several Writings, and
otherwise; and thither he referred them. And after a little pause, with his
Eyes lifted up to Heaven, he cried, Lord, pity, pity, pity the Ignorance of
this poor City. And in the time of his sickness he declared to us and others,
that his thoughts in these things were the same as formerly.

Our regards to Mr. B. force the Publication of what we here insert; though we
would not be judged so happy, as to arrive at his Light, to lead us to a full
Agreement with all his Sentiments. As to this Book, we wish there be not still
great need of such helps against Popery; and we are assured it will give more
light than some greater Volumes on this Subject: That God may render it useful,
shall be the Prayer of

Thy Servants in the Gospel, Daniel Williams. Matthew Sylvester.

Protestant Religion Truly Stated, and Justified, etc.
THE Deceiver calls his Book The Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel, as if he
owned a Gospel distinct from that of the Reformed Church. And he undertakes to
name fifty two points, which the Protestants affirm, but tells you not where,
nor proves his affirmation, but you must believe him as a Touchstone of Truth.

Dec. The first Protestant affirmation feigned, is, That there is not in the
Church One, and that an infallible Rule for understanding the Holy Scripture,
and conserving of Unity in matters of Faith.

Answ. A mere Lie, if he mean that this is any part of Protestant Doctrine; but
he may find as crude confused words, in some ignorant person that is called a
Protestant.

The Reformed Catholics hold, that there is in the Church one, and that an
infallible Rule for understanding the holy Scripture, and conserving of Unity
in matters of Faith.] And that Rule is, [ The Evidence of its own meaning as
inherent in its self, discernible or intelligible by men prepared and
instructed, by competent Teaching and Study, and the necessary help of Gods
Grace and Spirit.] This is that Rule.

But the Reformed believe not 1. That there is any Rule by which ignorant,
prejudiced, heretical, wilfully blind, wicked, incapable men can understand
such Scripture, as they are hereby undisposed to understand, unless by a great
change made on themselves. Nor that any Prince can make a Statute, which on Man
can misunderstand, abuse or violate.

2. Nor that Men can understand it without teaching, and that sound teaching,
nor by hearkening to Erroneous Deceivers.

3. Nor that the Slothful, that will not meditate on it, can understand it,
though they have the soundest teachers.

4. Nor that Novices can understand as much in a short time and small Study, as
aged long exercised Students.

5. Nor that wicked proud men, that forfeit Gods help, can savingly understand
it without his Grace and Spirit.

6. Nor that any man, how holy soever, perfectly understands every word in
the Scriptures.

7. Nor that a person may not be fallible, and deceived, that yet knows which
is the Infallible Rule: It makes not all Infallible that know it.

8. Nor that any Church, or any Number of Christians on Earth have such a Unity
as consists in perfect knowledge and agreement in all matters of Faith, that
is, of Scripture-record from God.

9. Nor that God has tied this Infallible Regulation to the Bishop of Rome, or
made him this Rule; seeing no such word of God is extant, and General Councils
have condemned Popes of Heresy, Infidelity, Ignorance, and most brutish lust
and wickedness.

10. Nor that the Judgment of the major part of Christians or Bishops is the
Infallible Rule; for 1. The Papal part are but a third part: And they will
hardly believe that the other two or three parts ( Abissines, Egyptians,
Syrians, Armenians, Georgians, Circassians, Greeks, Muscovites, Protestants)
are the Infallible rule. 2. And if they met in an equal Council, they that are
most out of the Council, would be the most in it. And Ephesians. 2. and many others
now condemned, have had the Major part. And Chrysostom that thought that [ few
Bishops or Priests were saved,] thought not the greater number to be the
infallible Rule.

11. And Pope and Councils agreeing are not that Infallible rule; for two
fallibles makes not one infallible, nor two Knaves one honest Man. Popes and
Councils have often condemned one another; yea, they have often agreed in evil, as
did that at Laterane the 4th. under Innocent the 3d. that decreed the
deposition of Princes, that exterminate not all that renounce not all Senses
and Humanity; for those that have led into the Churches of the West all the
horrid Errors of Rome, to pretend yet that they are the Infallible rule of
understanding Scripture, is Impudency quite beyond that of Satan himself.

12. If this Deceiver hold what is contrary to his accused Protestant Opinion,
he must condemn the Church of Rome, that agrees not of the sense of a thousand
Texts of Scripture, Horseloads of Commentators, and Cartloads of
School-contenders, contradicting one another: And he that will say that all
revealed in Scripture is not matter of Faith, reproacheth God, as revealing
that which is not to be believed. All matters of Faith are not essential to
Christianity, but some are only for the perfection of it: All is matter of
Faith that we are bound to believe as Divine Revelation. All the Scripture is
such, tho the ignorant must have time and help to understand it, and
explicitly receive it. The Popes themselves ( e. g. Sixtus Quintus, and Clem.
8.) have differed in many hundred Texts about the very Latin Translation. Many
hundred Volumes of Controversies among them, tell us how far they are from
ending Controversies, and agreeing in all matters of Faith: But in so much as
is necessary to Salvation, all serious believing Protestants, or Reformed
Catholics, are agreed.

Now, to trouble the Reader with the proof of any of these twelve particulars,
would be but to abuse Time and him; as to prove that no Man is perfect, and he
that says he has no sin, is a Liar: and to prove that the grand Deceivers of
the Church are not Infallible, and that Gods Word is not unevident and
unintelligible, and that such Villains as their own Councils and Historians say
many Popes were, speaks not more intelligibly and wisely than God; and that the
Volumes of Canons and Priests Writings are not of more evident meaning than
Gods Word; these need proof to none but those that are incapable of it.

What Rule is there for the Infallible understanding the sense of all our
Statute Laws? none but what I mentioned. The intelligible evidence in the
words, (what else are words used for) to men duly instructed and studied. The
Judges govern by deciding particular causes by the Law, but are not an
Infallible Rule for all Men to understand the true sense of the Law by, (while
Judges and Parliaments differ from each other, as Popes and Councils did.)

The Texts cited by the Deceiver, are so vilely abused, as if he purposed but
to make sport by taking Gods Word in vain.

Point 2. Accused, [That in matters of Faith we must not rely on the Judgment
of the Church, and of her Pastors, but only on the written word.

Ans. The Deceiver would Cheat the Ignorant by Confusion; and belying the
Reformed Catholics: for,

1. It Is false, that the Reformed hold any of this undistinguishing Assertion.
They distinguish between humane Faith and Divine. (And I hope, God and Man may
be distinguished.) They say that it must be a Divine Faith (that is, The Belief
of Gods word for the Infallible Veracity of God) that must save us, and not the
belief of Man alone: But that a humane Faith is needful in Subserviency to a
Divine. God has appointed humane Teachers to the Flocks, and Oportet discentem
Credere; He will never learn, that will believe nothing on his Teachers Credit.
But he must believe Man but as Man, an imperfect, fallible Creature, yet as
like to know more than he that chooses him for his Teacher; And that which Man
is to teach us, is to see the Evidence of Gods own Word, that we may believe it
for that Evidence, as our Teachers themselves must do. For if the Teachers do
but believe one another, and not God, (or God only for Man's Authority,) this
is not Religion, nor Divne Faith, but humane, such as they had that believed
Pythagoras, Plato, Mahomet, etc. If Boys learn of their Schoolmaster to
understand the Greek or Latin Testament, and believe them as to Sense, this is
not Divine Faith, but a help toward it. The word of God is Infallible: And by
the help of fallible Men, (such as disagreeing Commentators be,) we are
furthered for understanding it. But false bloody Usurpers are not the likest to
teach us the Truth, nor fittest to be trusted.

His Citations of Scriptures, (to mistated Controversies,) are so putidly
impertinent, that I am ashamed to detect them by words, which every Man may do.

The Third accused Point.
That the Scriptures are easy to be understood, and therefore none are to be
restrained from Reading them.

Ans. Mere Cheat to the Ignorant, by confusion and falsehood.

1. We and all Papists with us agree, (the more is the Guilt of the Deceivers
Fraud,) that some of the Scripture is easy to be understood, and is actually
understood by all true Christians, even all that is essentsal to Christianity,
and necessary to Salvation. Bellarmine, Castrus, and many others, tell us, that
for all that, the Scripture is plain and sufficient: Yea, so it is, in many
Thousand particular Texts: If this be not so, let this Man tell us if he can,
how it comes to pass, that Papists, Greeks, and Protestant Commentators agree
of the meaning of most of the Scripture, (perhaps of Nineteen Texts in Twenty,)
if it be not plain.

But do Protestants say, that there is nothing in the Scripture hard to be
understood? the Father of Lies will scarce affirm this of them, lest their
Commentaries and Controversies shame him.

2. But what? Must the people be forbidden to Read Gods Word, because some
passages are dark? Why not also forbidden to Read Statutes, Canons, Fathers,
Jesuits, Friars, and the Loads of Papists Controversies? Is there nothing hard
in all these Volumes? what not in all the Canons? In all Chrysostom, Austin,
Cyril, etc? In all Lombard, Aquinas, Bonaventure, Scotus, Ockam, Cajetane, and
all the Tribe? In all Suarez, Vasquez, Huctado, Albictine, etc? In all
Cajacius, and his Tribe? Why are not these forbidden? Do but rub your
Foreheads, and tell me,

1. Whether the Law was not darker than the Gospel? and yet God charged them,
Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. To teach the words to their Children, and that lying down, and
rising up, at home and abroad; and to write them on* the posts of their Houses,
and their Gates: And every blessed Man, (Psalm. 1.) was to delight in the Law of
the Lord, and meditate in it Day and Night? Read Psalm. 119.

2. Whether Christ did not Preach the words Recorded in the Gospel to the
unlearned common people; and Peter and Paul, and all the Apostles, to all the
vulgar Jews and Gentiles?

3. Whether they writ not their Recorded Epistles to the Vulgar, even to all
the Churches?

4. Whether it is not Gods Word that we must all be Ruled and Judged by, and is
the Charter of our right to Heaven? and should we be forbid to read it?

5. Whether Hierom, Chrysostom, Austin, and all the Fathers, do not press Men
and Women of all Ranks, to read or learn, and study the Scriptures?

6. Whether he be not like Antichrist, that will forbid Men to read that, which
God sent his Son from Heaven to Preach, and Christ appointed Apostles, Pastors,
and Teachers, to communicate to all the World?

7. Whether the Prince of Darkness and Pride himself, would not be ashamed
openly to say, I have so much skill to speak Intelligibly, and God so little,
that you must read my Books, and not read his? And whether Popes and Priests
Volumes are not as unskilfully written, as Gods, and as like to draw Men to
Heresy and Sin?

8. Whether he that thus Condemns God and his Law, and extolleth Man's, be
like to make good his accusation at God's Bar? Alas! must such things as these
be disputed by Men that would be our Infallible Rule?

9. Either the knowledge of God's Word is needful, or not. If not, why did God
write part of it himself? And send his Son to Preach it? And his Spirit in his
Prophets and Apostles to write and Record it? Are blind Worms fit to accuse God
of Folly, and needless Work? Can Men obey God's Law that know it not? But if
the knowledge of it be needful to our Obedience and Salvation, ask common
Reason, whether the Difficulties should not rather oblige us to read and study
it so much the more, ^till we understand it, rather than not to read it at all?
Do their ductile Followers that read it not, understand it better than those
that study it Day and Night? The less we know of needless things, the better
and quieter we are: If God's Law and Gospel be such, what a God and Governor
have we! Can Heathens and Turks Blaspheme him more, than to take him for so
foolish a Governor of the World, as to make a stir by his Son from Heaven, and
by Angels and Prophets, to give them so needless, yea, pernicious a Law and
Gospel, as that Men must be kept from reading it, lest it Poison them with
Heresy?

10. Is it not essential to him that relatively we take for our God, to be the
Governor of the World, and to be our Savior, and the Holy Ghost to deliver
and Seal the Gospel as glad Tidings to all Nations? And is it not by his Law
that God Governs, and by his Gospel that Christ Saves, and the Holy Ghost
does illuminate and Sanctify? And does not that Man or Clergy then put down
God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and set up themselves in the stead, who
forbid the reading of God's Law and Gospel, and Command the knowledge and
observance of their own, Canons and Dictates instead of them, as more
Intelligible and safe? And is not this (as Robert Grosthead told Innocent 4.)
next the Sin of Lucifer and Antichrist, or rather plain Antichristianism it
self?

11. Is the Stage manner of Massing liker to make the people understand God's
Law and Gospel, (by multitudes of Gestures, Motions, Crossings, Ceremonies,
that need long Expositions, that overwhelm the strongest Memories,) than the
reading and study of the plain and full words of God in Scripture?

12. Did this Deceiver ever hear Protestants say, that the Apocalypse, and
Daniel, and Ezekiel, and the Canticles, and the Chronologies of Scripture, are
all easy to be understood? For if he have heard such a Fool, did he ever read
this in the Confessions of any Church? Do not their Commentaries tell the
difficulty? And ask this Man or his fellow Creature, whether the Infallible
Pope, or Councils, have overcome all these difficulties to the Papists, and
made all this easy to them? Or do not their Valuminous disagreeing
Commentaries, and Controversies, show that they are still as hard to them as to
us.

13. And ask them whether Pope, or Council, have ever yet written an Infallible
Commentary on the Bible, or all such difficult Texts? If not, is it because
they cannot, or because they will not? And what the better then is their Church
for their feigned skill and power, infallibly to decide difficult Scripture
Controversies? What can be more shameless than this pretense, in Men that will
not do it, nor ever did?

14. And if still they tell you; that the people were always bound to believe
and obey the Churches Rites, without dispute or Contradiction; ask them whether
it was not the Church Rulers that killed Christ, and called him a Blasphemer
and Deceiver, and that Persecuted and accused the Apostles? And whether the
People were bound to believe them, (as Jewish Papists,) and whether all the
Apostles and Christians were Rebels and Heretics, for not believing them? And
whether it was not for the Sins of Priests and Princes, and the peoples
complying with them, that God by his Prophets reproved the Israelites, and at
last forsook them to Captivity, 2 Chronicles. last. Jer. 5 last.

15. And if they tell you of the Peoples need of Teachers, tell them that that
is none of the Controversy. But whether their Teachers must teach them to
understand God's Book, or to throw it away? May not the Teacher and the Book,
consist together? Must Schoolboys be forbid to Learn their Grammar, because
they must have a Teacher? Must he teach them the Book, or teach them without
Book? But all the Craft is, to get all the World to take only such Cheaters as
this for their Masters, and then Bible or no Bible may serve turn.

16. Is it not the Office of Teachers to Translate God's Word into known
Tongues, that the People may understand it? This is the first part of Preaching
it: If not, why do they use Translations in the Church of Rome, the Septuagint*
and the Vulgar Latin? And why did Sixtus 5th. and Clem. 8. make such a stir to
Correct the Latin? And why do so many Comment on them? And the Rhemists turn it
into English? But what is all this for, but to help Men to understand the Book?

17. Does not all the Word of God cry down Ignorance, and cry up Knowledge,
from End to End? And what Knowledge is it, but Divine, of the Word and Law of
God? What else is the scope of all the first Nine Chapters of Solomon's
Proverbs, and of Psalm. 1. 19. and 119, etc. God says, Hos. 4. 6. My People
perish for lack of knowledge: And Isa. 27. 11. It is a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them will not save them. Ignorance and
Blindness are made the common cause of Error, Sin and Misery.

But we are so far from taking all parts of Scripture to be equally necessary
to be understood, that we are more than the Papists for first and most
diligently teaching them the Essentials, the Creed, Lord's Prayer, and
Commandments, and Baptism, and Church Communion, and the Lord's Supper, and
lesser parts as they grow up; what they must learn first their Teachers must
instruct them.

18. If he say, as they still do, that the Ignorant will misunderstand the
Scripture, and every one turn it to his own Fancy, and Heresy: I answer, The
way to prevent this, is to teach it them diligently, (what else is the Ministry
for?) and not to forbid it them. Every Knave may pervert the Law of the Land to
maintain his own ill Cause; and must the Law therefore be forbidden them?
Reason is far more commonly abused than Scripture: There is no Heresy, or
Error, no Villainy, Perjury, Cruelty, Persecution, Oppression, or Injustice, but
Reason is pleaded for it: Must Reason therefore be renounced? Heresies are for
want of understanding God's word; and must be cured by understanding it.

19. And if all the World must take the Popes or Priests words, instead of
Gods, or for their Rule, how shall those in Aethiopia, Syria, America, or here,
know what the Popes Word is? That never see him, or any that has seen him? And
how shall we know, when above twenty times there have been two Popes at once,
which of them is the Right? And when they contradict and Damn each other, which
of them must we believe? And when General Councils accuse them of Error, and
Condemn them, which is to be trusted with our Souls? Or if it be Councils that
must be to us instead of Scripture, when they Damn each other, which must we
believe? (And so abundance of them have done.) When the Pope and they agreed to
depose Christian Princes, and give away their Dominions, and disoblige their
Subjects from all their Oaths of Allegiance, is it as true as the word of God,
that all Subjects must believe and obey them?

But how shall all the poor People know what the Pope and Councils say and
hold? They can neither read their Volumes, nor understand them, nor know which
are authentic and true? Must they all believe their Parish Priest? What if he
be as very a Deceiver as the writer of this Touchstone, that does but Cheat
from the beginning to the end? Yet must we take his word instead of Gods? Or
when other Priests, or Friars contradict him, which of them must we believe?
What if his Parishoners know him to be ignorant, or a common Liar? Yet must our
Salvation rest on his word* and God's word be forbidden us. What if we obey him
in Error, and Sin, will he undertake to be Damned for us? Or will his
undertaking or Damnation save those whom he mislead, etc.?

As to his Citation of Scripture against Scripture, it is so palpable a
perversion, that I will leave any Man that will but Read the Text, to his own
ability, to answer him: Rev. 5.1. No Man in Heaven or Earth, was worthy to open
the Sealed Books that John saw in his Vision: What then, must no Man therefore
open the Bible? Or because the Revelation is hard, must therefore the People be
forbidden to Read it, and the rest of God's word, which was written for them,
as sufficient to make them wise to Salvation, yea, to make the simple wise,
Psalm. 19.

And with as shameless a Face does he cite the Fathers, against the drift of
all their writings and Labors, and the Judgment of all the Churches of Christ,
for many hundred years, of its purest foundest Primitive times.

The Fourth accused Point.
That Apostolical Traditions, and ancient Customs of the Church, (not Founded
in the written word,) are not to be received, nor do oblige us.

Ans. This is but more Deceit, by confusion and false report.

The Reformed Catholics hold,

1. That Memory is not so sure a way to deliver any Laws and Doctrines to
Posterity, through many hundred years, as writing is. For it must lie on the
Memories of so many Thousands, in so many Ages, and so many parts of the World;
Of so many Languages, Kingdoms, and cross Interests and Opinions in their
quarrels; and the things to be remembered are so many, that this needs no proof,
with any but Fools or Madmen: What a Religion should we have had, if instead
of the Bible, it must have all been brought us down by the Memories of all the
Rabble of ignorant and wicked Popes? yea, or of the best? and by the Memories
of all the Prelates and Priests that have pretended to be the Church? Why do
they themselves write their pretended Traditions, if writing them were not
needful? And why have we all our Statutes, Records, and Law Books, if the
Lawyers and Peoples Memories would keep and deliver them without these? When
Men's Memories, Wits, and Honesty are so weak, that we can scarce get one Story
carried without falsifying through many Hands.

2. We hold, that God in mercy has therefore considered Man's Weakness, and
Necessity, and before the Apostles died, inspired them to Record so much of his
Law, and Gospel, and Will, as was universally necessary for all his Subjects to
know, in order to Divine belief; Obedience, and Salvation: And has left
nothing of this importance and necessity unrecorded in the Law of Nature,
(God's Visible works,) and Scripture, knowing that after Ages were not to have
new universal Legislators, to make such Laws for all the World; nor to have Men
miraculously enabled to do it, and give proof that it is Divine.

3. We hold that God's written Word and Law, is perfect in its kind, Psalm. 19.
and sufficient to its proper use and end: Which Bellarmine, Cassinus, and the
Council of Basil, and many Schoolmen, in their Prologues on the Sentences,
confess extends to all things commonly necessary to Salvation, yea, and to be
the Divine Rule of Faith.

4. Yet we deny not, that if God had seen meet to deliver any necessary part of
Law or Gospel, Faith or Practice, as his will, by bare word and Memory of Man;
we had been bound to believe and obey it, when we had sound proof that it was
indeed from God.

5. We hold, that for fullest certainty, we have possession of the Bible it
self, and of the Essentials of Christianity brought us by two Means Conjunct,
that is, The Scripture, and practical Custom of the Church. As the Scripture or
written Word shines to us by its own Light, so Tradition tells us which be the
Canonical Books, and how the Church received them as Divine, and that there are
no other such: And the practice, of Baptismal Profession and Covenanting, and
of the Church Assemblies, and reading Scripture, and Catechizing, and of
Eucharistical Communion, and Prayer, etc. tell us what in all Ages has been
taken for true Christianity. As we hold a humane Belief, needful in
Subserviency, as a means to Divine Belief, so we hold humane Tradition needful
to the conveyance of God's Word to us. But, by your leave, we will distinguish
the Messenger from the Author: If the King send me a Law or Mandate by a
Messenger, or by the Penny-Post, I will receive and obey it, and yet not take
the Post or Messenger for King, or Legislator, or Infallible.

6. And the Reformed Catholics do own all true Tradition, but are for a far
surer Tradition than the Roman Sect. Our Tradition of Scripture, and the great
points of Christianity, comes to us by Evidence Infallible, that may be called
Natural, with the greatest advantage of Moral Evidence also; and not on the
boast and bare word of one proud Sect, that pretends to Fanatic Inspiration
and Authority above all others.

I call that Natural Evidence, which arises from such necessary Causes that
cannot be otherwise, nor can deceive: And I call that the best Moral Evidence,
which comes from Men's testimony of greatest credit for skill and honesty, and
we have both these.

Man's Soul has some necessary acts that cannot but be, and cannot be
otherwise: Such is sensation of sensible objects duly presented; Intellectual
perception of things presented according to the evidence in which they appear:
The Love of our selves and our own known welfare, and any thing that is known
to be an only and necessary means thereto, and has Omnimodam ratiomem boni:
The Love of Truth as Truth, and Good as Good: The hatred of misery, etc. These
all Men have as men, and that which depends on these depends not only on
men's honesty. And our evidence of Tradition is such as this. It is from the
Common Consent of all capable Witnesses, of various Opinions, Passions and
Interests, Friends and Foes; whereas the Tradition of Sectarian Papists,
depends on the Credit of one Sect, that falsely pretend a peculiar trust with
both Scripture and Tradition, though against the greater part of Christians: And
pretend Fanatically that even ignorant Popes and Prelates in Council, have a
gift of infallible knowledge.

For Example: If there were a doubt raised, Whether there be any such City in
the World as Rome, Paris, Vienna? or whether there was ever such persons as K.
James, K. Charles, Ludovicus 14* of France, etc.? Or whether the Statutes in
our Books were really made by the Kings and Parliaments named in them, and be
the same unchanged, etc. There is Natural evidence of all this, because it
arises from necessary acts: All sorts of men of contrary interests could never
agree to lie and deceive men in such cases, no more than they could all agree
to kill themselves: And if some would be falsifyers, the rest would presently
detect and shame them: If any Lawyers would falsyfie or change the Statutes,
others would presently manifest the deceit, they being commonly known, and the
cross interests of so many depending on them; yea, I say not only that this is
Natural Infallible Evidence, but that it is more than very much other Physical
Evidence of many other things; because we have better means to know Man's
Natural necessary acts, than we have to know most other Creatures of God.

And then for Moral Evidence, we have all the Godly's attestation of all Ages,
and Nations, and Sects of Christians, and among the rest the Papists also,
agreeing that This Bible, and This Creed, and these Essentials of Christianity,
were all certainly transmitted to us from Christ and his Spirit, in his
Apostles.

And what is the Tradition of the Papal Sect to all this, who tell us falsely,
you cannot know the Scripture to be God's Word, but by taking it on the belief
of the Pope and Church of Rome, as Endowed with the Power of Judgment, and the
gift of Infallibility. Alas! what abundance of Impossibilities must be proved
true, before any Man can by this method believe God's word!

1. Before they can believe the Gospel, and that Jesus is the true Christ, they
must believe that he has a Vicar.

2. And a Church.

3. And the Pope is this Vicar, and his Sect this Church. And

4. That he has the Office, Power and Gift, of infallible Judging, which the
Major number of Christians or Churches have not.

5. And that Christ (not yet believed in,) gave him power and Infallibility.

6. And that he that now Reigns, is the true Pope by due Election,
Consecration, Qualification, etc. With many more such Impossibilities: And what
is it to give up the Cause to the Infidels, if this be not?

7. But we judge that God's Law in Scripture, secured from the charge of
pretended Rememberers and Usurpers, is so sufficient to its proper use, that
there needs no Supplemental Tradition, as if it were but half God's Law; but
only subservient historical Tradition. And we challenge the Papists to prove de
facto,

1. That any such supplemental Tradition is Existent.

2. That they possess any other, but what the other Churches know.

3. That they are more than other Churches, authorized to be the Keepers and
Judges of that Tradition. And

4. We fully prove them Innovators, and that Popery is a mere Novelty: It is
copiously proved by Peter Moulin, de novitate Papismi, David Blondel de
Ecclesia, Andrew Rivet Defense of Morney against Coffetean, and against
Silvester, and many others. Can they without the most profligate Impudence
pretend Apostolical Tradition, for denying the Laity the Cup in the Eucharist,
and for their praying in an unknown Tongue, and forbidding the Scripture, and
deposing Princes, and dissolving Oaths of Allegiance, and for tormenting and
killing all baptized persons that obey not the Pope, with many such?

8. If Tradition tell us of any Customs used in the Apostles, or Primitive
times, that be not in Scripture, and so be not made matters of Necessity to
all; yea, or of any occasion all mutable Customs that are mentioned in
Scripture, (as washing the Saints Feet, the Holy Kiss, the Woman's Vail, long or
short Hair, Collections each Lords Day, Preachers Traveling on Foot, etc.) we
quarrel not with the then use of such Traditions, when they were seasonable, no
more than with forbearing things strangled and blood: Nor quarrel we with the
Churches after, that settled Easter Day, and made the 20th. Canon of the Nicene
Council, and used diverse Ceremonies at Baptism. But Traditions of things
Indifferent and Mutable, we receive but as such, to be laid aside when the
occasion cease: And if any will turn them into a necessary common Law, we
disclaim such Usurpers; for they cross that very Tradition. It was delivered as
Indifferent, and you feign and make it a necessary Law, and so destroy it.

9. We maintain openly, that Tradition is against the Papacy and its
Corruptions. They are but a third or fourth part of Christians: The other two
or three parts of the Christian World, profess that the Tradition of their
Churches is against the Popes universal Sovereignty, and against all the
Corruptions of which they accuse him. None but the shameless will deny that the
Abassians, Armenians, Greeks, and others, plead that this is their Tradition.
And Reader, tell us, why the Tradition of two or three parts of the Church
should not rather be believed against a third part, than that which the third
part boast of against all the rest.

10. Ask them which way they know and keep their Traditions? Whether they have
any History, Records, or any other way which we may not know as well as they?
If they pretend that it is a Secret, kept by their Church, it is a strange
Secret that so many Thousands know: But if it be a thing proveable, let them
prove it.

11. Is it not unmercifulness, to tell all the Christian World, that as big and
hard as the Bible is, if they knew and obeyed it all, they cannot be saved,
unless they believe and do more, kept by the Pope, and called Tradition? When
yet these Deceivers can dispense with the knowledge and practice of God's own
word, and think the Bible a Book too big and hard, (and the Profane say, too
strict,) to be commonly understood and kept; And yet all the Bible is not
Enough, but we must be bound to as much more as they will call Tradition, yea,
Volumes also of Papal Canon Laws.

12. Did not Christ for this thing Condemn the Old Pharisees, Mat. 15?

Prove your Traditions to be Apostolical, and about things necessary, and not
your Forgeries, or about things mutable and indifferent, and we will obey all
such Apostolical Traditions. But your Novelties and Usupations shall not pass
with us for Divine Laws, because you can call them such.

The Fifth accused Point.
That a Man by his own understanding and private Spirit, may rightly judge and
interpret Scripture.

Ans. Can any Man unriddle what this Deceiver means?

1. Can a Man judge without his own understanding?

2. What means he by a private Spirit? Little know I. If he mean God's
Spirit, it is no contemptible nor private Spirit, even in a private Man: If he
mean a Man's own Spirit, Soul or Intellect, it is the same as [ his own
understanding.] If he mean any Evil Spirit, or fancy and Erroneous
self-conceit, we defy such Spirits, and Deceivers that use them.

To understand without our own understandings, is a Mystery fit for Rome; Why
may not a Dog, or a Sheep, be said so to understand the Scripture, if it may be
understood without our own understandings? What a Curse is on the ignorant
Nations, that will be led by such words as these!

But if he will say that he meant, [By his own understanding alone without a
Teacher,] why did he not say so, but say one thing and do another. But that had
been too gross a Lie, to have been believed, by them that see that we set up
Teachers in all our Congregations.

3. Therefore I can imagine nothing but absurdity in his words, unless he mean,
that we hold that a Man may rightly Interpret Scripture by his own
understanding immediately, instructed by his Teacher and God's Spirit, without
taking the Sense only at the rebound, on the belief of the Pope and his Clergy.
For we never thought that a Man's own natural Wit without a Teacher, and the
help of God's Spirit, can savingly understand and apply the Scripture.

And yet we would fain tell Papists a better way to Convert a Philosopher, or a
Turk, than to Preach to them thus: God has written his Law and Gospel to the
World, but you cannot tell what is the meaning of it, till you take that sense
on trust from our Pope and Clergy, and know that Christ authorized him to be
Judge; and that before you believe in Christ, or understand the word that so
authorizeth him. Were not corrupted Nature very blind in things Spiritual,
Plow-men, and Tinkers, and Cobblers, would be able to confute such Fopperies,
and much more Priests, and Popes, and Prelates.

4. But I pray you tell me, whether the Pope and his Prelates, do not interpret
Scripture by their own understandings? Whose understandings else do they judge
by, in Conclaves or Councils?

5. And tell me, whether he that judges that the Pope is Christ's Vice-Christ
and Ruler, at the Antipodes, and is infallible, though he be by Councils
condemned for a Simonist, and Infidel, an Atheist, a Seducer, or an ignorant
Sot? Does not this Man judge all this by his own understanding? If a Man take
an ignorant sottish Priest for the Mouth of the Catholic Church, though he know
no more what he talks against, than this Roman Deceiver, does he not judge this
by his own understanding? If a Sot will believe you, that your Sect is the
whole Church, and all are Damned, though they love God, and believe in Christ, if
they will not be ruled by the Pope and every Mass-Priest, does he not judge
thus by his own understanding? Do you Preach to Men, or Beasts, that have no
understanding of God's Law and Will? If a Man must believe all the Canons of
Popes and Councils, in Baronius, Binnius, Surius, Nicolinus, Caranza, etc. does
he not do it by his own understanding?

6. Oh! But the meaning is, You are all private ignorant Men, and we are the
Clergy; Kings choose some of us, and Popes choose others, and whether we are
Wise or Fools, Learned or Unlearned, Infidels or Christians, you are all Damned
if you will not follow us, and if we be Damned, you must be content to be
Damned with us. And is it so? Has God made Man for no safer and better a
Condition, than to be Damned when ever Sottish Drunken Priests will tell him,
[You must believe us that are the Mouth of the Pope, and the Pope, though you
think that the Word of God is against it?] Speak out Deceiver; would you have
all Men be of their Rulers Religion, or not? Should the Jews have believed the
Church, that Christ was a Blasphemer, Deceiver and Traitor, and the Apostles
Seditious Fellows? Must we be Mahometans under Turks, Persians, and Indians,
and Papists under Papists? And why not Lutherans under Lutherans also? And so
our King shall be our God, and our Religion humane. Or must Men judge what is
true or false, good or bad, by their own understandings? Do Kings and Prelates
Rule Men, or Dogs, and Brutes? If Cromwell say, He is Supreme, and King Charles
say, He is Supreme, tell us whether we must not use our own understandings, to
know which of them to believe and obey? And must we not do so, if the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, say one thing, and Christ another?

And I pray you tell us, whether that be Religion that is not Divine, and
whether it be not our own understanding, that must distinguish between God and
Man? Did not Vulgar Folly fit slothful Fools for Hell, they would easily
perceive that Popery engaging them to renounce their own understandings, makes
us all Voluntary Brutes, to gratify the ambition of Men, and puts down God from
being our Governor, and Man from being a Voluntary Subject, and turns the
Kingdom of Christ into the Kingdom of Beasts.

The Sixth Point accused.
That St. Peter's Faith has failed.

Ans. Who could more ignorantly have stated a Controversy?

1. Protestants are further from the Opinion that Peter's Faith failed, than the
greatest Papist Doctors: Some Protestants hold that no Man that has true
saving Faith, does ever totally lose it; much less Peter. Others hold, that no
Elect Person that has true Faith, does totally lose it: And so thought
Augustine: Others add, that though some, as Calvin speaks, qualecunque semen
sidei perderint, having no more immutable Grace than Adam had in Innocence, yet
all that have a Confirmed Radicated Habit, persevere. And as to Peter's Faith,
all save those called Arminians agree, (as far as I know,) that his Faith was
not totally lost, nor Peter relapsed into a State of Damnation: But will all
the Jesuits say as much?

We commonly hold that the Habit of Peter's Faith, must be distinguished from
the Acts, and the Act of Assent from the Act that exciteth Confession and
conquereth Opposition. And that Peter's Faith did not totally fail as to the
Habit, nor the Assent, that Christ was the Messiah: But that it actually failed
as to the latter Act, that should conquer Fear: Christ said to him and the rest
before that, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith: Little Faith, is Faith
failing in Degree. This is our Victory over the World, even our Faith, says
St. John. And did not Peter's Faith fail as to part of that Victory, when he
Cursed and Swore that he knew not the Man?

But by Peter's Faith, this Deceiver means the Popes Faith: And he instanceth
in the Scribes and Pharisees, that were to be heard because they Sat in Mose's
Chair, and in Cajaphas the High Priest. Reader, see what Christians these
Slaves of Christ's pretended Vicar are: Does he not plainly infer, that the
people did well that believed the Priests, and the Scribes, and Pharisees, that
Christ was a Deceiver and workt Miracles by the Devil; and was a Blasphemer and
a Traitor, and deserved Death; and that cried Away with him: Crucify him? And
what wonder if they obey their High Priest, when he Commands them to Murder
Thousands and Hundred Thousands Saints Nicknamed Heretics, when they justify
them that killed Christ and the Apostles, because the Church Commanded it,
(unless they will renounce their own plain Consequence?)

And must we indeed believe, that the Popes Faith never failed, because Peter's
did not? Then we must believe that General Councils that are their Church, have
been very false and slanderous. Reader, I will give thee but an Account of one
or two, (when their own most flattering Historians have written of many a long
time, that they were rather Apostatict, than Apostolici, and named but to keep
the Account of time.)

The great General Council at Constance, (that Burnt John Hus and Jerome of
Prague, for Truth and Honesty,) finding three Popes Heading three Churches
called Roman Catholics, had no way to return to Unity, but by putting down all
three: With much ado they got down two of them: But Pope John at Rome had the
fastest hold, and they had more ado to get him down; and had not the Emperor
resolved to back them, they had been foiled. Hereupon he is accused in the
Council, First, by Fifty Four Articles, of such Monstrous Villainies, as one
would think humane Nature were incapable of. Afterward many more are added, of
Poisoning Pope Alexander, of Incest with his Brothers Wife, and the Holy Nuns,
and Ravishing Maids, and Adultery with Men's Wives, and much more; and of
Simony, almost incredible: And amongst the rest, (which I forbear to recite,
lest I tire the Reader,) they say and prove, that he was a notorious Simoniack,
and a portinacious Heretic; That often before diverse Prelates, and other Honest
Men, by the Devils persuasion he pertinaciously said, asserted, dogmatized, and
maintained, that there is no Life Eternal, nor any after this: And he said and
pertinaciously believed, that Man's Soul dies with the Body, and is extinct,
as are the Bruits: And he said, that the Dead rise not, contrary to the
Articles of the Resurrection, etc.

These Articles being showed to the Pope, he confessed his Sin, and consented to
be Deposed, and begged Mercy, but all in Hypocrisy, while he sought to get out
of their Hands and Power.

And now Reader, do thou think that it is the mark of a Heretic, and
deserves Burning and Damnation, for a Man to think that this Popes Faith
failed? Were it not for tiring you, I would repeat such Articles against many
others of them, as would make you think, that not only the Heathen
Philosophers, but even Mahomet was a Saint in comparison of these Swinish and
Diabolical Popes.

After this, the Great Council at Basil accused Eugenius the 4th. of Heresy
and multitudes of horrid Crimes, and deposed him: But he outfaced them, and
standing it out to the last, got the better, and the Succession is ever since
continued from this Pope, that was deposed by a grand General Council.

Before these, Pope John the 12th. was deposed by a Council at Rome, called by
Otho the Emperor, for such horrid Villainies, as no Pagans that we read of ever
matched. Read them but in Baronius, and Binnius: Drinking Healths in Wine to the
Devil, and calling at Dice upon Jupiter and Venus, besides Murders, Simony,
Incest and all Wickedness, are all consistent with Papal Faith: And if this be
no failing, I shall grant that the Popes Faith (nor the Devils,) can never fail.

The Seventh accused Point.
That the Church can Err, and has Errors.

Ans. This is truly and honestly recited: All Protestants hold it, and marvel
that all the Devils in Hell can so befool any as to deny it.

1. No Body can tell what it is that they call the Church, till they tell us:
But what ever it is, except confirmed Angels and Souls in Heaven, if they
cannot Err, God and our Savior, and the Apostles have Erred. For they tell us
that, [ we know but in part,] and if any Man say that he has no Sin, he is a
Liar, 1 John 1. 1 Cor. 13.12. And in many things we offend all, Jam. 2.2. Psalm.
19.12. Who can understand his Errors, cleanse thou me from secret faults. It
was the Church of which God complains, that they always Err in their Hearts,
and have not known God's ways, Psalm. 95.10. Heb. 3.10. unless Caleb and Joshua
were all the Church, Isa. 53.6. All we like Sheep have gone astray, etc.

If by the Church they mean the Priests, how full of Complaints against their
Errors are all the Prophets, and History of the Kings and Chronicles? Isa.
3.12. O my people, they that lead thee, cause thee to Err, and destroy the way
of thy paths. Isa, 9.15, 16. For the Leaders of this people cause them to Err,
and they that are led of them are destroyed. Mal. 2. The Priests Lips should
keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his Mouth, for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts: But ye are departed out of the way, and ye have
caused many to stumble at the Law: Ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi,
says the Lord of Hosts: Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base
before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, etc. Hos. 4.6. My
people are cut off for lack of knowledge: Because thou have rejected knowledge,
I will olso reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me. Jer. 53.31. The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end hereof? 2 Chronicles.
36.14, 16, 17. All the chief of the Priests and the people Transgressed very
much after the abominations of the Heathen: But they mocked the Messengers of
the Lord, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, till the wrath of
the Lord arose against his people, and there was no healing* so Isa. 1.2, 3, 4.

Reader, is it not worse than Infidelity that these Men teach, if they say that
the Church has not Erred? Was it no Error when Aaron set them up the
Golden-Calf? nor when they went after the Idols of the Heathen, and worshipped
in the High places? Was it no Error to take Christ for a Deceiver and
Blasphemer, worthy to be Crucified? Was it no Error to reject the Gospel, and
persecute the Apostles?

And had the Apostles no Error, when they believed not that Christ must Die for
our Sins, and rise again, and ascend to Heaven, but thought he must then set up
an Earthly Kingdom? Was it no Error of Peter, Math. 16. to dissuade Christ from
Suffering, for which Christ said, Get thee behind me Satan, thou savourest not
the things that be of God, but those that be of Men? And I think he Erred, when
Paul openly rebuked his Separation, Gal. 2.

If all the Church on Earth consist only of persons that have many Errors, then
the whole Church has many Errors: But the Antecedent is so true, that I take
him that denies it, to be so far from knowing what the Church is, or what a
Christian is, that he knows not what a Man is, and a Church of such are so
unfit to be trusted as infallible, with all Men's Salvation, that they have not
the Wit of common illiterate Men, or Children: And if in all things else they
were as mad as in these two Opinions. 1. That the Church never did nor can Err.

2. And that all Men's Senses must be denied for Transubstantiation; doubtless
they should be kept in Bedlam from humane Converse.

But for my part, I do not think that any Man of them not stark mad, does
believe himself that there are any men in the World that have no Error, (that
have any use of Understanding.) He is far from knowing what Man is, that
knows not that he swarmeth with Errors: I oftener doubt whether the greater
number of most men's thoughts, are true or false.

But if by the Church they mean only the Pope, if he cannot Err, then it is no
Error to believe that there is no Life but this, and that Man's Soul dies as
the Beasts, and that it is lawful to Murder Gods Servants by Thousands, or
hundred Thousands; if all the foresaid Popes in the ages 800, 900, 1000, 1100,
Erred not, sure there is no such thing as Error in the World.

But perhaps by the Church is meant General Councils.

But 1. If they Erred not in their Decrees, does it follow that therefore they
had no Error?

2. But did not the second Council at Ephesus Err? Where they tell us that Sola
Petri Navicula, only the Popes Messengers escaped the Heresy? Did not the
Council of Calcedon Err in their Opinion, when it determined that the Reason of
Romes Primacy was because it was the Imperial Seat, etc.? Were all the Councils
free from Error that were for the Arrians? And those that were against them?
And all that were for the Monothelites? And those that were against them? And
all that were for Images, and those that were against them, etc.?

But at last they come to this, that the Pope may Err, and Councils may Err,
but when they agree, they cannot Err: A happy meeting of Erring persons, if
they are both cured by it. But sure it is not the meeting: For the Pope is at
Rome, when the Council is at Trent, Ephesus, Constantinople, etc. If a Council
may Err, and the Pope Err, what proves it impossible for them to agree in
Error? The Pope and Council at Lateran 4th. agreed for the Popes deposing
Princes that Exterminate not all out of their Dominions that deny
Transubstantiation, etc. Was this no Error?

Obj. But this was not a matter of Faith.

Ans. Is it no matter of Faith with them, Whether it be Lawful or not,
according to Gods Law, to kill men that believe their Senses, and to depose
Princes? And whether Subjects may break their Oaths of Allegiance, and forsake
their Prince if the Pope Command them, and all because their Prince will not be
a Murderer or Persecutor? These are no matters of Faith with them? But sure
they have made them Articles of their Religion. And either the Rebels, and
Murderers* and Pope and Council Err, or else Gods Law and Gospel Err.

The Judgment of the Reformed Catholics is this,

1. That there is no man living without Error.

2. That the Apostles of Christ were Commissioned to deliver his Gospel to the
World, by Word and Record, and had his promise of his Spirit to lead them into
all Truth, and keep them from doing that Work Erroneously which they were
commissioned to do: (Though not to make them absolutely free from Sin or Error
in all other things.) And therefore the Scripture written by them is free from
Error, by Virtue of the special promise and Spirit.

3. That all true Christians, (really regenerate,) are free from all Error,
inconsistent with true saving Faith, and Title to Salvation.

4. That therefore the Church as it signifies only the said regenerate true
Christians, has no Damning Error, or none but what is pardoned, as consistent
with saving Faith and Holiness.

5. That the Universal Visible Church, is the whole Company of men on Earth,
that profess true saving Faith, and are by Covenant Vow Baptized into this
Profession: And that all this true Visible Church, professes no Error,
inconsistent with their Profession of the foresaid saving Faith: Because the
profession of saving Faith is essential to visible Christianity, and to the
visible Church.

For mark, that I say not that they profess no Error inconsistent with sincere
Faith in themselves subjectively, nor yet that as to objective Faith, may not
by unseen consequence overthrow it: For there is such a concatenation of Divine
revealed Truths, that it is a doubtful case, whether any one Error (which all
men have,) do not by remote Consequence subvert the very Foundations. But no
true Visible Church or Christian, so professes any one Error, as not to
profess the essential points of Faith and Godliness, though they may think
falsely that both are true. Therefore Protestants teach, that unseen
Consequences are not to be so charged on those that see them not, and hold fast
the (injured) Truth, as if it were a known or direct denial of the Truth.

6. But every Church, and every man, being imperfect both in knowledge, Faith
and Holiness, have all some Error: For to be objectively de fide, is to be of
Divine Revelation: And all the Scripture is Divine Revelation. And if the
question be, Whether any Pope, Council or Church, understand all the Scripture
without any Error? judge by Commentators, and common Experience.

And now what says the Deceiver against all this?

1. He cites Isa. 59.21. God has promised to preserve his Word in the Church:
Ergo, the Church cannot Err? A forged Consequence, no more follows, but that
the true Church shall not lose or forsake Gods Word: For then it would cease to
be the Church:

But 1. Not that the best Churches understand all that Word without any Error.

2. Nor that any particular Church visible may not apostatize, or turn
Heretics, or corrupt Gods Word, and forbid men to use it in a known Tongue, as
the Papists do.

Next he cites Joh. 14.16. As if all the Church had the same promise of the
Spirit of Infallibility, as the Apostles had: If so, then,

1. Papists are none of the true Church, because they have many Errors.

2. And if the major part be the Church, rather than a minor Sect, then all
other Christians that are against Popery are free from Error, for they are
twice or thrice as many as the Papists.

3. And when the far greater part were Arrians, they were free from Error:
Yea, the Council of Sirmium, to which Pope Liberius professed full consent. Or
did Christ break his promise to all these?

4. If the Pope or all his Prelates, have as full a promise of the Spirit as
the Apostles, then they may write us a new Bible, and Word of God, as they did:
No wonder then if the Canons and Decretals be as much Gods Word as the Bible?
But why then do they not confirm their Canons by Miracles as the Apostles did?
And why did so many Popes contradict each other? Had both Stephanus, Formosus,
Nicholas, and the foresaid John's that denied the Life to come, etc. the same
Gift as the Apostles? Surely we may well say to them as St. James, Show me thy
Faith by thy Works? They did show it by most odious Simony, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Lying with Maids and Wives, even at the Apostolic Doors,
Murdering Christ's Members by Thousands, Silencing faithful Preachers, Deposing
Emperors, Commanding Perjury and Rebellion, even to Sons against their own
Fathers: Forbidding all Church Worship of God to whole Kingdoms for many years,
when a King will not obey the Pope: By such Works they show their Faith! O the
power of Satan, and the horrid pravity of man, when such things are not only
Justified, but trusted to for Justification, and made consistent with a Church
that never Erred.

Indeed these Errors crept in by Degrees, which makes it difficult to
Expositors of Scripture Prophecy, to know just the year when the mischief
became so ripe as to prove Rome to be Babylon Apostate to Pagano-Christianity,
and the Pope to be Antichrist. But if I see a man Raging mad in Bedlam, I will
not make it an Article of my Faith, that he is Sanae mentis, because I know not
just when his amentia and deliratio, or Melancholy became a Mania, or Furor.

The Deceiver also cites, Mat. 18.17. viz. Because men must hear the Church,
where a Sinner dwells, that calls him to Repentance after due Proof and
Admonition, therefore the Pope and his Prelates cannot Err. An Argument liker a
Derision, than a serious Proof: Did not the Pope then Err, when Bishops and
Councils have in vain called him to Repent? Does not the Church Err then most
damnably, that commands Murder, Treason, and most heinous Sin, and is the
Leader of the Impenitent? Must we take such then as Heathens and Publicans? But
as the man thinks, so the Bell tinketh. Do but Fancy that by the [ Church,]
is meant only the Pope and his Clergy; and that all is such Sin which the Pope
calls so, though God command us, and then all such Texts will seem to them to
say what they would have them say.

The man also cites, Ephesians. 5.27. viz. Christ will present his Regenerate
Church, perfect and spotless in Judgment. What then? Ergo, the Visible Church
on Earth has no Error or Spot: And Ergo, the Pope and his Clergy are this
Visible perfect Church. And why not as well Constantinople, Alexandria,
Antioch, or Jerusalem, the Mother Church? Which part is it that is the whole,
or indefectible? What is profaining Gods Word, if this be not? If any should be
forbidden the Scripture, it is these profaning Priests.

The Eighth accused Point.
That the Church has been hidden and Invisible.

Ans. We do not think that the Pope and his Clergy-Church have been hidden and
invisible. Their Wars, even in Italy and Rome, for many Ages made them Visible:
Yea, and palpable too: The Kings and Emperors that they Fought against or
Deposed knew them; above 100000 Waldenses and Albigenses felt them to the
Death: Quae Regio in terris talis non plena laboris. Whether this man knew not
the Protestants Judgment herein, or whether he would not have his Reader know
it, I cannot tell; but I shall tell you what it is.

1. Protestants commonly hold, That as the Word [ Church] signifies the
Company of sincere Christians, and Heart-consenters to the Baptismal Covenant,
so it is invisible to Man that knows not the Heart. Inward Faith and Love
which denominate them, are not seen by others, dare any deny this?

2. But as the Word [ Church] signifies the Universality of men baptized
professing Christianity in public Assemblies, so it was never invisible, since
such public profession and Assemblies first began.

3. But when the Pagan Persecutors forced their meetings into Woods and Cells,
and Pits, called Conventicles, and to Night-Meetings, they were hidden from the
Persecutors, as well as they could hide themselves: And so they were, when they
hid themselves from the Arrian Persecution of Valens, Constantius, Gensericus,
Hunnerichus, and from the Persians: And so were those of Toulouse, Piedmont,
Bohemia, and others that hid themselves, and fled from the Crusado's, under
Simon Montford, and St. Domonick, and others that Murdered them. Christ himself
fled to Egypt, and Galilee, from Persecutors. His Disciples were met secretly
for fear of the Jews, when Christ appeared to them; when Peter was in Prison,
many were assembled by Night in a Conventicle, at the House of Marks Mother, to
pray for him. The Papists themselves keep hidden Meetings, where they cannot
have more public.

4. God has not promised his Church, such constant Prosperity, as that in
every Age any Nation shall have public Liberty without all Persecution; much
less that they shall be still uppermost, and Masters of the World, and have
Kings and Emperors always for them.

5. But we cannot say, that yet the Church has been so low since the days of
Constantine, that all Princes have disowned the Essentials of Christianity, and
we hope it never will be so.

6. But all Ages and parts of the Church, have not been equally pure and sound:
In some Ages the Arrians were most: In the Reign of Theodosius Junior,
Anastasius, etc. the Eutichians prevailed: In the days of Philippicus the
Monothelites prevailed, so that at one of their Councils Binius says, There
were Innumerable Bishops: In one Emperors time those prevailed that were
against Images; in Irene's and Theodora's times, those that were for them:
Sometime the Bishop of Rome had most Power, and sometime the Bishop of
Constantinople, and Alexandria: For an Hundred years, even much of Italy
forsook him, and set up a Patriarch at Aquileia as their Head: Through many
Ages the Citizens of Rome themselves expelled him or Fought against him.

Now in all these Cases, the Church, as professing Christinanity, was still
Visible: But which of all the parts was the purest and soundest, was known to
none but the sound parts themselves. And when and where the Errors became so
great as really to nullify, or invalidate the Profession of Christianity this
was known only to those near, that had opportunity to know the mind of the
accused: For Noxa Caput sequitur: One man, though a Prince or Prelate, cannot
make all his Subjects Heretics by his Error.

So that nothing has been more Visible, than that there have still been
professed Christians, and so an Universal visible Church on Earth. But which
parts of this Church have de facto been Sound, and which Corrupt, and what
Errors have nullified their Profession, and what only blemished it, this has
never been visible to the Erroneous; (For no man knows that he Erreth;) but
it has been visible to the Sound. And so, that the Church of Rome yet
Professes Christianity, we know: But whether their Errors prove them Babylon,
or nullify their Christianity, must be known only by trying the guilty
Individuals.

Here the Cheaters say to the Ignorant, If the Church has been always Visible,
where was your Church before Luther?

Ans. 1. Wherever there were men professing Christianity and Baptized, and
not Apostatizing. Were there none such in the World, must we be put to prove
where there were any Christians before Luther? Were not the Hearers grossly
Ignorant, the Cheaters would have no Confidence in such Fopperies as these.

Obj. But the Church of Rome professed Christianity before Luther.

Ans. It did so, and as Christians we are of the same Church with them, we know
no Universal Church, but the Christian as such, that is, all Christians as only
Headed by Christ If you cannot tell whether before Luther there were any
Christians in the World, (in Abassia, Egypt, Syria, Armenia, the Greeks,
Muscovites, etc.) it is your gross ignorance of History. But whether Papists,
Arrians, Eutychians, Nestorians, Monothelites, Phantasians, Image-Worshippers,
do invalidate their profession of Christianity, by their contrary Errors and
Crimes, it much more concerns themselves, than us to enquire and judge.

But though those that nullify not their profession of Christianity, are all of
the same Church Universal that we are of, yet we profess that their New humane
Church, which is [ only the Pope as Head, and all that adhere to him as such,]
are no Church of Christ at all. All Christians as such are parts of the
Christian Church: But a Policy consisting of a Vice-Christ and his Subjects, is
a Rellellious Usurpation, and no Church, Forma denominat: As Christ is the
Head, all are of the Church that truly cleave to him as Head: As the Pope is
the pretended Head, they are all a pack of Rebels.

And now what an ignorant Cant is it to say, The Church cannot Apostatize;
Ergo, it cannot Err; Ergo, the Pope of Rome, and his hireling Clergy cannot
Apostatize; and Ergo, They cannot Err! Tell me, whether Rome be all the World?
And whether the Church of Rome, and the Christian World, be Words of the same
signification in any Dictionary? And whether an Alexandrian Catholic, or a
C.P. are Catholic, be not as good Sense, as a Roman Catholic? And whether the
Texts or Fathers, that you name profanely, will prove that the Church of C.P.
Alexandria, Antioch, or Jerusalem, can never Err, or Apostatize, or be
Invisible? And whether your own Jesuits confess not that Rome shall do so too,
in the Reign of Antichrist?

In the mean time take this answer.

1. The Church as intimately Sanctified, and sincere, was ever invisible.

2. The Church Universal, as professing Christianity, was ever Visible, though
often hid by Persecution.

3. Whether Rome, C.P. Jerusalem be a true Church or Apostate, is invisible to
those that knew them not.

4. That the Papal Church, as informed by a Universal Vice-Christ, is a false
Church, is Notorious. This is our Judgment.

The Ninth accused Point.
That the Church was not always to remain Catholic or Universal: And that the
Church of Rome is not such a Church.

Ans. The first part is a mere flat Lie: We hold that the Church is always to
remain Universal, till it be presented perfect in Glory: If it remain not
Universal, what becomes of it? Is it a part of something else, or annihilated?
If Christ have no Church, he is no Head of the Church, and so no Christ. What
Protestant Church ever said any such thing, as you falsely charge them with?

That the Church of Rome is not such a Church, that is, Is not the Universal
Church, indeed we not only say, but think the contrary, sitter for a man Drunk
than Sober? What? is Rome all the World? Is Abassia, America, Mesopotamia,
Muscovy, Asia, Thrace, England, Scotland, Sweden, Denmark, no part of the
World, yea, of the Christian World? And is not the Christian World, the Church
Universal? Reader, here is a Controversy worthy the Wits, Learning and Honesty
of all the Famous Fathers, and Doctors, and Juglers of the Roman Catholic
Church. The Question is, Which of the Rooms in the House is the whole House?
One says that the Kitchen, or the Cole-House, or the House of Office, is the
whole House. We Protestants say, that no one Room is the whole, but Hall,
Parlors, Dining Room, and all the Chambers, and Closets, and Kitchen, are the
whole; and if the Cole-House, and House of Office will needs be parts, we will
not contend with them, but we will never grant that they are either the whole,
or the best part: Though by Fire and Stink, they think to force us to it.

But the ancient Writers distinguish between the Catholic Church, and a
Catholic Church: By the first is meant the whole Church: By the second is
meant such a particular Church, as is not Schismatical, but a true and sound
part of the whole.

But what could these Self-Condemners say more against themselves, than thus
openly to confess, that their Sect claims to be the whole Church, and so
Traitorously unchurcheth two or three parts of the Church of Christ, and
Damneth most Christians, for not being Traitors to Christ, as they?

To confute his base abuse of Scripture, is needless and irksome.

The Tenth point accused.
That the Churches Unity, is not necessary in al^ p^i^ts of Faith.

Ans. This we verily hold, for all that God has revealed in Scripture to be
believed, are points of Faith, (if the Word be used intelligibly by these men:)
But all the points of Genealogies, Topography, Chronology, Prophecy in
Scripture, are revealed to be believed, therefore they are points of Faith; and
if Unity in all these is necessary to the Unity of the Church, then no Church
on Earth has Unity: Certainly Rome has not, whose Commentators and Doctors
disagree about many hundred Texts of Scripture, and Sixtus 5th. and Clemens
8th. Popes, about the very Translation of many hundred Texts.

These men must now say, that we are not bound to believe all Gods Word, or
else they must confess that their Church has not Unity.

That which Reformed Catholics hold is, 1. First points of Faith, (or revealed
to be believed,) are some of them Essential to Christianity, and of necessity
to Salvation, and some but Intergrals, if not some Accidents: The first all the
True Church agrees in: The second not: As who is Antichrist? or Babylon? or
the Ten-Horned, or Two-Horned Beast in the Revelations? What is the Time,
Times, and half a Time, with an Hundred such? But in general, all believe that
all Gods Word is true. It might convince these men, in that it was long before
all the Churches received all the Canonical Books of Scripture, and yet all
received not all their Apocryphal Books. And are these out of the Church? Or
are none of these Books to be believed?

The Eleventh Point accused.
That St. Peter was not Ordained by Christ the first Head or Chief among the
Apostles; and that among the Twelve, none was greater or lesser than other.

Ans. Mere Falsehood, as undistinguisht. The word Head is ambiguous; this
Writer has a Head, such as it is, that other Heads much differ from. Reformed
Catholics hold, that Peter is called first in numbering them: That he was by
Christ in many instances, preferred before others: That he was an Eminent
Speaker, and worker of Miracles: That all the Apostles were not Equal in parts
and worth; but some herein greater than other. What, was Judas no lesser than
the rest, that was a Thief and Traitor? John was Eminently the Disciple whom
Jesus loved.

But we hold, 1. That as John was not made Lord or Ruler of the rest, by being
Loved more, so Peter's Pre-eminence made him no Master or Ruler of the rest:
The twelve Apostles were chosen Relatively, to the twelve Tribes. Peter as
Reuben was the first, and denied Christ, and was called Satan, with a Get
behind me, (Mat. 16.) as Reuben defiled his Fathers Bed. But as Levi was the
third, so was James the first Sanctified Apostle: And as Juda the fourth, is
called the Lawgiver, from whom the Scepter should not depart, etc. so John the
fourth is the Disciple of Eminent Love; and Love is the Everlasting Grace, when
Faith and Prophecy cease. But Christ made no one of them Ruler of the rest.

Proved, 1. No Text speaks any such thing: And the Headship of Governing
Power, would have been of such grand necessity to be known, that Christ and his
Apostles must needs have plainly and often inculcated it.

2. Peter never Exercised any such Power; what mention is there of any Laws or
Mandates of his to the other Apostles?

3. The rest never sought to him for Laws or Orders.

4. The Schism and Controversies of Christians were never decided by appealing
to him as the Judge.

5. When some at Corinth would have made him their Head, and said, I am of
Cephas, Paul reproves them as carnal, saying of all, What are they but
Ministers, by whom ye believed?

6. Paul reproves him, Gal. 2.

7. The Jewish Christians contend against him, for Eating with Gentiles, Act.
11. whom he satisfies by proof from God, and not by pleading his Supremacy.

8. He never once claimed any such Power.

9. Paul, 1 Cor. 12. tells us of none in the Church greater than Apostles. But
the rest were Apostles as well as he.

10. No such Article was ever put into the Churches Creed.

We grant that Christ did in instituting the Apostles Office, institute a
disparity of Ministers in his Church, and this to be continued in the Ordinary
continued part of their Works, but not in the Extraordinary. And we grant that
in putting Peter first, Christ intimated, that among men of the same Office,
there may for Order sake be a Priority; as the President of a Synod or
College, or the Foreman of a Jury, or a Chief Justice, or the Speaker of a
Parliament: God is not the God of Confusion, but of Order, as in all the
Churches: If a Parish or an Independent Church have one grave Pastor, with
diverse young Assistants, that were but his Scholars, nature will give him some
awing Pre-eminence among them. We are not against such a Primacy among Bishops,
or Archbishops: But this is nothing to a Governing Office. And if Peter had
had such, what is that to the Pope of Rome?

The Twelfth Point accused.
That a Woman may be Head, or Supreme Governess of the Church in all Causes, as
the late Queen Elizabeth was.

Ans. A cheat by Confusion and Equivocation.

The Church has two sorts of Government: One by the Word of God, and the Keys
called Ecclesiastical. The other by the Sword, called Princely or
Magistratical: We never had King or Queen that claimed the former, and none but
Enemies of Government deny the latter: Queen Elizabeth and all our Kings since
have publicly disclaimed the Priest by Office of Words, Keys and Sacraments,
which makes the Clergy Tryers and Judges what to Preach, and whom to Baptize
and receive to Church Communion, absolve or Excommunicate. But ask this
Deceiver, Must the Church have none to Govern by the Sword? All Christians are
the Church, and so all Christian Princes are deposed, because they are
Christians. Or must the Clergy have no such Government over them? Yes, the
Pope, say the Papal Canons; he is Sword Bearer over the Clergy: So you see what
Church Power is come to. But I trow, few Papist Kings will grant that they have
no Sword-Government over the Clergy, lest every Priest be Master of their
Houses, Wives, and Lives. The King is no Physicain, or Philosopher, no
Architect, Shipwright, Pilot, etc. but may he not be King and Ruler of all
these? He is no Clergyman or Priest, but the Ruler of the Clergy.

But they say, it must not be in Causes Ecclesiastical. Ans. Causes
Ecclesiastical have two sorts of Government, in order to two Ends. As if one be
accused for Preaching against God or Christ, or the Life to come; or for
Perjury, Adultery, Murder, etc. Here the Bishops are Judges, (and the Church,)
whether this man be Guilty in order to his Communion or Excommunication, or
admonition. But the King and his Judges are to Judge, whether he be Guilty, and
so whether to be Imprisoned, Fined, Banished, etc. so far as Causes of Religion
or Church, are to be punished by the Sword, the King is Head or Governor, and
Judge: who would think that a sort of men that deny this, should have the Face
to say that they are Loyal to Kings, or any forcing Government: Must Kings Burn
or Kill, as many Thousands at the Popes command as the Pope will call
Heretics, and yet never have power to judge whether they are such, and do
deserve it? O! how much worse than Hangmen, would such men make all Kings and
Magistrates!

Was not all the Christian World in a sad case then, when the Pope was under
the Arrian Goths, and the Subject of a Foreign Arian must Rule all Kings and
Kingdoms?

No man of Brains can be ignorant that Popedom or Prelacy, do not always make
men mortified Saints, (that often have been scarce Men, much less Christians;)
nor that the Prince has a great Power, both in Choosing and Ruling the Clergy
that are his Subjects. It fell out happily, that Theodorick the Arian, (and
diverse Spanish Arian Kings,) were an honest sort of men; but sure they were
very mighty Princes at Rome, when one Subject of an Arrian Goth, was Ruler of
all the Kings and Souls on Earth, ( de jure, say our Deceivers.) And if the
Turk should possess Rome, as he does C.P. all Kings and Nations must be subject
to his Subject? And what Power he has over the four Patriarks of C.P.
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, is too well known. And when Baronius,
Binnius, etc. tell us of famous Whores, ( Marozia, and Theodora,) that made,
and Ruled and unmade Popes, how was the World Governed? As it was said by a
Lord Mayors Child, that he Ruled all London, saying, my Father Rules London,
and my Mother Rules my Father, and I Rule my Mother; so might it be said,
these Whores Ruled all the Kings and Nations of Christians on Earth; (if the
Roman claim be Current, for they made and Ruled Popes that claimed the Rule of
all the World.) O! how much greater was a Roman Whore, ( Marozia, Theodora,
etc.) than Pallas, Venus, or the great Diana of the Ephesians! But the mischief
was, that they were mutable, and could unmake a Pope, as well as make him, and
set the City and Country by the Ears: as Aequa Venus Teucris; Pallas iuiqua
fuit. And if all Kings must be Subjects to the Subject, (or Chaplains) of him
that can win Rome, let us wish that he may not be a Mohammedan, Pagan, or Arian:
And why said I an Arian, when an Anti-arian Pope, can Murder Christians by
Thousands, when a Theodorick would not have hurt them.

The Thirteenth Point accused.
That Antichrist shall not be a particular man, and the Pope is Antichrist.

Ans. This is Popish Stating Cases; Protestants find in the Creed, the Name of
Christ, but not the Name of Antichrist; and therefore while they know and trust
Christ, they think it not necessary to Salvation to know Antichrist: But they
believe Christ, who said, that many should come in his Name saying, I am Christ
and deceive many, even before the Destruction of the Jews; and rhey believe St.
John, that said, there are many Antichrists already: The Fathers and Papists
say, there is some one Great Antichrist to come toward the end of the World:
Most Protestants think it is Antichrist that is described, in 2 These. 2. and
Rev. 12.13, 17. To confute King James, Bishop George Downame, Dr. Henry More,
(above all) Mr. Mede, Cluverus, Grasserus, etc. will require more than this
Writers Impertinencies. There are many Protestants that think it a mere
mistake, that there will be any one Antichrist so Eminent as to obscure all the
rest: And they pretend not to judge, of Antichrist by the Apocalypse, but by the
Ten Commandments, and all the Gospel: And they believe, that he is Antichrist
that usurpeth Christ's Prerogative, and yet opposes his Kingdom: And such they
think the Eastern Antichrist Mahomet is the most notorious, and the Western
Antichrist, the Pope is his Second; in that he claims Christ's Prerogative of
Governing all Nations of the Earth as Vice-Christ, and yet by Lies, Malice and
Blood, suppresseth his true Gospel, Grace and Kingdom; confute this if you can;
Amending would be your best defense.

We doubt not but Antichrists past, have been Individual men, such was
Barchocheba, and some say Herod, and some Dioclesian, but undoubtedly Mahomet:
And if the Pope be the Western Antichrist, it is the Individual Popes that are
such; but many of those Individuals may make a Succession of Antichristian
Policy. Answer Dr. More, and Cluveru^ of this, if you are able.

We lay not our opposition to Popery chiefly, on the dark Revelation, Prophecy,
or on the question, Who is the Antichrist: But on the plain Word of God: If we
find a Succession of men, claiming Omnipotency and Christ's Prerogative, to
Govern all Kings and Nations on Earth, and this by bare and base Usurpation and
Novelty; and find these men set up their numerous, false treasonable, inhumane
Canons, and forbid and revile Gods Law and Word, and find them turning Gods
Worship into unintelligible Mummery and Stage-Shows, and Ceremony, and find
them living at Leeches on Blood, yea, on the Blood of Thousands of the best
Christians, and damning and separating from the far greater part of the
Christian World, because they refuse Subjection to this usurping Vice-Christ,
and judging all to Fire and Ruin that renounce not all humane Senses, and
worship not Bread pretended to be deifyed by daily numerous Miracles of the
basest Priests, and deposing Kings that will not be such Executioners, and
justifying their Subjects in Perjury and Rebellion: We will not differ with you
for the Name, whether you will call those that are such, Antichrists, or
Diabolists: Whether such a State be the Babylon, or far worse, as sinning
against more Light, and by more horrid abuse of the Name of Christ against
himself.

The Fourteenth accused Point.
That no man, nor any but God, can forgive or retain Sins.

Ans. False as undistinguished. We hold, 1. That to forgive Sin, being the
forgiving of the Punishment of Sin, and the obligation thereto, 1. Parents may
on just cause forgive Corrective punishment to their Children, and Masters to
their Servants.

2. Magistrates may on just cause, forgive Corporal punishment to Subjects.

3. Equals may forgive Injuries to Friends and Enemies.

4. Pastors may on just cause, forgive the Church penalties, of
Excommunication, which they had power to inflict: And all the Flock must
forgive and receive the penitent accordingly.

5. When a Sinner by Faith and Repentance, truly performs the Condition of
Gods pardon expressed in Scripture, the Ministers of Christ are by Office
authorized to declare and pronounce him pardoned by God, and by the Sacraments
of Baptism and the Lords Supper to Invest him in a pardoned State, by
delivering him a Sealed pardon: But only Suppositively, If his Faith and
Repentance be sincere, else he has not Gods pardon of the Divine Punishment.
This is all true and plain, and enough.

But we detest their Doctrine that say, 1. That men can pardon the Spiritual
and Eternal Punishment, any otherwise than consequently declaring and
delivering Gods pardon, which shall hold good, if the Priest refuse to declare
or deliver it.

2. Or that Popes or Priests pardon, Purgatory pains, and Masses, and Money,
and the Redundance of Saints Merits, and pleasing the Pope, conduce thereto.

But if you will Speak so absurdly, as to say, that if the King send a pardon
to a Traitor or Murderer, the Messenger pardoned him; we leave you to your
phrases.

None of the Texts or Fathers cited, speak for any more than what we hold. The
Pastors are to declare men pardoned, that God pardons: And while they so
judge according to Gods Word, it is pardoned in Heaven: But not if they pardon
the wicked and impenitent.

The Fifteenth accused Point.
That we ought not to confess our Sins to any man but to God only.

Ans. This is a mere impudent Lie.

1. We ought to confess our Sin, to the Magistrate at his Judicature, when we
are justly accused of it.

2. And to those that we have injured, when it is needful to repair the wrong,
or to procure their forgiveness.

3. And to those that we have tempted into Sin, or encouraged in it, when it is
needful to their Repentance.

4. And to some faithful bosom Friend, when it is needful that such know our
Faults, that they may watch over us, or advise us, or pray for our pardon and
deliverance.

5. And when in Sickness, danger of Death, or other Affliction, we get the
Pastors of the Church to pray for us; we should confess our Sin to them, that
they may know on what cause they speak to God for our forgiveness.

6. And in any case of Guilt, Trouble, Fear, or Difficulty, in which we need
the Pastors Counsel for our safety, ease and peace of Conscience, our selves
and other Friends being insufficient hereto, we should confess our Sins to the
Pastors, whose advice we seek: As a Patient must truly open his Case to his
Physician, and a Clyent to his Councellor, if he will not be deceived, by
deceiving them. Is all this no Confession?

But Protestants believe not, 1. That we must go to a Physician for every
Flea-biting, or Scratch, or Cut-Finger, or to a Lawyer to give him an account
of all our Actions, Money, ot Lands; nor to Priests in cases that our selves or
ordinary Friends can safely and satisfactorily resolve.

2. Nor that our Confessor must needs be a Papist Priest, or one chosen by the
Pope, or our Enemies; and not by our selves.

3. Nor that we must open all our Secrets to him; or make any Confession, which
will do more hurt than good; nor over far to trust the Fidelity of a Knave, nor
a suspected or untryed person.

4. And we have reason to suspect them that are importunate to know our Secrets.

5. And when Confession is required, as in order to obtain a false forged
pardon, and to set up the Domination of Usurpers over men's Consciences, and
over the World, it is then unlawful: If Protestants would force Papists to
confess all their secret Sins to them, would not this same Deceiver say, it
were unlawful?

The Sixteenth accused Point.
That Pardons and Indulgences were not in the Apostles time.

Ans. Another mere Lie, as undistinguished. Such Pardons as I before owned were
in the Apostles times: But the Popish feigned pardons were not.

The Seventeenth accused Point.
That the actions and passions of the Saints do serve for nothing to the
Church.

Ans. Most impudent calumny and falsehood. 1. We hold that the Prayers of all
the Saints on Earth, are of great importance for the Churches welfare.

2. And that their Doctrine, Counsel, and Reproof is so too, they being the
Lights of the World, and the Salt of the Earth.

3. And that their Example is of great benefit to the Church and World, whi^^
their Light so shines before men, that the^ may see their good works, and
glorify the^^ Father which is in Heaven.

4. And their Charitable Works of themselves, sure are beneficial to the
Church: And so is their Defense of the Truth.

5. And their Sufferings Glorify Gods Power, and his promises of reward; and
they encourage others to Victorious Constancy. Do all these serve for nothing
to the Church?

6. Yea, we are so far from holding what he feigneth, that it is not the least
cause of our hatred of Popery, that it lives by the Defamations, Slander,
Persecution, and cruel Murder of Saints.

7. Yea, as Abels Blood cried against Cain, so the Blood of Martyrs, and dead
Saints, cries for Vengeance against the Persecutors of the Church.

8. And seeing Christ says, that the Children of the Resurrection are like or
equal to the Angels, we have reason to believe that even now they are perfected
Spirits, Heb. 12.24. And knowing that Angels are very serviceable and
beneficial to the Church on Earth, we know not how far the Spirits of the just
are so too.

But we have a sufficient Mediator and Advocate with the Father, whose
Sacrifice, Merits, and Advocation are perfect, and need no supplement: And the
Spirits of the just do praise him as saved by his Merits, and never boast that
they have of their own a Redundancy to save others. But we all with
thankfulness confess, that God uses to bless the Houses of the Faithful; the
Children for the Parents sake, and has expressed this in the Decalogue, and by
many Promises: Yea, that he would have spared Sodom, had there been but Ten
Righteous persons there: And a Potiphars House, and a Prison may be blessed in
part for Joseph's sake. And when Parents are Dead, this blessing may be on their
Children, through many Generations. And God remembered Abraham, when his
Posterity provoked him. David had a special promise for his Seed. None of this
is denied by us.

But, 1. There is no Merit in any man's Works, but their Rewardableness by Gods
free Grace and promise, for the sake of Christ's meritorious Righteousness,
Sacrifice, and Intercession, their Imperfection being pardoned through him, and
their Holiness amiable to God.

2. No man shall be saved for another Merit, or Holiness, or Works, that is
not truly Regenerate and Holy himself.

The Eighteenth accused Point.
That no man can do Works of Supererrogation.

Ans. Supererrogation is a sustian word of your own, by which you may mean what
you please.

1. No man can perform to God, more Duty than he owes him: It Is a
Contradiction; Duty is quod debetur.

2. No man can profit God by any thing that he does.

3. No man, save Christ, lived wirhout all Sin: And he that sins does not
all his Duty, or keep all Gods Law perfectly. And he that does not all, does
not all and more.

4. There is no Moral good done by any man, which was not his Duty, and Gods
Law commanded not: For Gods Law is perfect, and therefore obliges to all Moral
good: And as Sin is the Transgression of the Law, so Moral good is the conform
Obedience to the Law.

5. God has not Counsels to Moral action, which are not obliging Laws, and
make not our Duty. For to keep them is Moral good, and the Law were imperfect
if it obliged not to all such good. If the Counsel oblige ut norma officii,
it is a Law: If it oblige not, it is vain.

6. But there are many actions that are neither Commanded, nor Counseled, nor
forbidden: But those are not Moral actions, as being no objects of our Choosing
or Refusing by Reasons Conduct. The nictus oculorum, our Breathing, our Pulse,
the Circulation of the Blood, etc. are no Moral acts, Commanded or forbidden,
but necessitated: Man makes it no act of deliberation and choice, which Foot
he shall set forward first, or just how many Steps he shall go in a Day; which
of two equal Eggs he shall Eat, and an hundred such. These are neither Duty nor
Sin, Commanded, nor Counseled, nor forbidden; neither virtuous or vicious.

7. And there are innumerable actions, that are not the Matter of any
Common Law or Counsel, and so as such, are neither Sin nor Duty, which yet as
Circumstantiated and Clothed with Accidents, are to this or that man either
Duty or Sin.

This not understood, makes these Ignorant Casuists abuse the words of Christ
and Paul, about Chastity, and Marriage. And because Christ says, every man
cannot receive this Saying, and Paul, she has not Sinned: He that Marries
does well, and he that does not, does better; they gather that there are Moral
actions which are not best, and yet no Sin.

The true plain solution is from the two last Considerations. 1. God has made
no Law commanding or forbidding Marriage, or Celibate as such, or in Common. To
Marry is no Sin, considered merely as Marriage. 2. But God has made Laws
against hurtful and injurious Marriages, and to guide men to know, when
Marrying is a Duty or a Sin. 3. And if any ones case were so neutral, as that
it could not be discerned, whether Marrying were a hurt or benefit, it would be
no Moral, eligible or refuseable action. 4. But to some it is a great Duty by
accidents, and to some a great Sin. Therefore Paul never meant that it was no
man's duty, and no man's sin, but only that simply as Marriage it was no man's
duty or sin, or the matter of a commanding or forbidding Law, but only by
accident, it may be such to one more than to another.

That this is Paul's meaning, the Papists must confess. For 1. Do not they say
that the Marriage of Priests, Friars and Nuns are Sin? 2. If any one Marry an
Infidel, or utterly unsuitable Person, without necessity, against Parents
wills, or one that is impotent, or has the Pox, or that he cannot maintain,
etc.? Is not this a heinous Sin? What else signify Gods Law, and man's, against
unlawful Marriages.

And if one cannot live chastely without Marriage, and Parents command it, it is
not a Sin to refuse? The Law says, Let all things be done to Edification, and
whether ye Eat or Drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And is
it only Counsel and no Command, to Marry or not Marry, as it makes to Gods
Glory or against it? There are few actions of a man's Life, that make so much to
his hurt, and utter misery, as unwise and unmeet Marrying. And is this on Sin?
May they not see Paul's meaning then, if they were but willing? It is hard to
imagine a case in which so important an action as Marriage, can be neither Sin
nor Duty.

2. But sometime men use the word [ Sin,] and [ Sinners,] for mere Wickedness,
and such Sin as is inconsistent with a state of Salvation. And we easily grant,
that all Sins are not such Sins as these; But Gods Law is perfect, though man be
imperfect, and forbids all Sin, even the least.

3. But see the Heresies of Popery? This man here says, [To do that which is
Counseled, is not necessary, because one may nevertheless be saved: But he who
omitteth what is commanded, (unless he do penance,) cannot escape Eternal
pains.]

1. See here what a frivolous Counselor they make Christ, when it is not
necessary to follow his Counsel.

2. See here how they make Necessity to be only of that which a man cannot be
saved without: When Saul a Persecutor, and Blasphemer, an Infidel, Murderer,
etc. may be saved, if he be truly Convicted: Obedience has it is Necessity,
though we knew that God would forgive Disobedience, to the Convicted.

3. See here how they damn themselves and all mankind, every man living
omitteth what is commanded many hundred times, for which he does not that which
they call Penance. He is a Liar, that says he has no Sin, specially of
Omission. Gods Law binds us all to Believe, to Hope, to desire Holiness and
Heaven, to love God and our Neighbors, and our Enemies, with a stronger degree
of Faith, Hope, Desire, and Love, than we do: Every Prayer, and Meditation is
sinfully defective: Every hour has some omission of improvement: And all this
is not remembered, nor all confessed to a Priest, nor all known or observed by any
Sinner: And some omission we are guilty of at our very Death, by gradual defect
of Faith, Hope, Patience, Love, Content, and Joy. And must all these go to Hell?

4. Seeing by Penance they mean not bare Repentance, but making God
satisfaction by a task, of Penalty laid on them by a Priest, ye see how they
damn themselves, would be the Masters of all others Salvation, by their
Pennances.

5. But it is like that Purgatory is included by them in Pennances; or else no
man should go to Purgatory, but all to Hell: For all have many omissions of
commanded Duty, which they did no Penance for in this Life.

6. But you see of how little value they judge Christ's Sacrifice and Merit,
that pardons no omission of a duty without Penance, and Satisfaction truly.

The Nineteenth accused Point.
That by the fall of Adam, we have all lest our Free Will, and that it is not
in our power to choose good, but only Evil.

Ans. Reader, I must desire thee not to judge of all the Learned Papists, by
this Deceiver: For if thou have read the loads of Voluminous Controversies
about Grace and Free Will among themselves, it will remain doubtful to thee,
whether this man's stating the Protestants Doctrine, prove him ignorant of it,
or a willing Cheater. He tells you not, that this is as much a Controversy
among themselves, as with the Prorestants. He tells you not, how Augustine and
Palagius managed it, and that their Pope Celestine took Augustines part: He
tells you not, that the Thomists, Dominicans, Oratorians, and most Nominals,
and Scotists, say as much against Free Will as we do, and we as much for it as
they. He supposes that you never read what Lombaerd, Aquinas, Bradwardine,
Cajetane, Ferrariensis, Zumel, Bannez, Alvarez, Aegedius Romi, Capreolus, and a
Multitude more, say as much, and many more, against Free Will, than the
Protestants: He tells you, not that even the Learned Jesuits, Suarez, Vasquez,
Bellarmine, with Penottus, and many such, are as much against Free Will, as
most Learned Protestants. The man takes you for a Herd of silly Animals, that
know not but that he says true, what falsehood soever he shall tell you: But
the truth of the Controversy is this:

1. The Protestants loath so silly a stating of Controversies, as this chat of
Free Will without distinction: And so of Power.

2. They know that Physical, Moral, and Political Freedom of will, are not all
one thing. Physical Freedom or Power, is that by which the natural faculty of
the will, can determine it self to act, (not without a superior Cause, but)
without any extrinsick or intrinsic Coactor, or necessitating cause of Evil.

Moral Freedom and Power, is that by which the will is from under the
overstrong Byas of a vicious Disposition, or deceitful Argument.

3. Political Freedom is, when no Law of God or Man obliges him to any Evil,
but all to good.

Prothestants hold, 1. That Physical Liberty and Power, is common to man, as
man. That is, that he wants not natural faculties to choose aright, but a right
Inclination: And that he sins not for want of such faculties, but for want
of their right disposition and action.

2. That all men have just so much, and no more Moral Liberty and power, as
they have of Gods Grace, to Relieve their vitiated wills and dispositions, and
to help them in the act. No man is freed from vicious Inclinations, further
than Gods Grace freeth him, which is much more where there is special Grace and
strong, than where there is but common Grace or weak. And that the Thraldom or
Impotency of the Vicious, is but the disease of their wills, and aggravation of
their Sin: e. g. Where the Drunkard or Fornicator says, I cannot forbear my
Sin: He is so much the worse and more unexcuseable.

3. Every man has not only Political Liberty to avoid Sin, but much more, even
Gods urgent Precepts, Promises, and Threats: God does not only give us Leave,
but commands us not to Sin.

1. It is the very Essence of the will to be a natural power of faculty of
willing good and nilling evil, as such, as so apprehended by the intellect, and
commanding the inferior faculties, some politically, and some despotically,
some difficultly, some easily, some perfectly, some imperfectly, according to
it is resolution and their receptivity.

2. Libertas hominis, when a man may have what he chooses, is more than
Libertas Voluntatis, which is but the Mode of it is self determination; as
without constraint it is a self determining principle, of its own elicite acts,
considered comparitively.

Which is, 1. Liberty of contradiction, or Exercise, viz, to will or not will,
nill or not nill. 2. Liberty of Contrariety, or Specification of the Act, viz.
To will this or nill it. 3. Liberty of Competition, to will This object or
That: To nill This or That, (of which see Robert Baronius his Metaphysics.)

The will has such various sorts of Liberty, and the word [ Free-will] is so
ambiguous, that it is a shame, and irksome to read a pretended Teacher, state a
case thus indistinctly, Whether we have Free Will or power to choose good and
refuse evil: He is no man that has no such Free Will and power. And no man
has all sorts of Free Will and power. Nay, as Liberty is opposed to Necessity*
every man is necessitated to will Good as Good, and nill Evil as Evil, and can
do no otherwise: And whenever he wills Evil, it is sub ratione bon^,
mistaking it for good: And who-ever nillleth good, does it falsely, sub ratione
malt. The will is free from Constraint to Sin: God will not so constrain it:
Men, Devils, Objects, cannot. He that had read but their Pennattus and Gibi^uf
only, would see what a shame it is thus confusedly to talk for or against
Free Will.

But that which Protestants deny, is this.

1. They deny that man's will in his unregenerate State, is free from a Vicious
Inclination, or from the Conduct of an Erring Intellect, or from the Bias and
Temptation of Sensuality, or vitiated Senses and Imagination; or from the
Temptations of Satan and the World.

2. They deny that the will thus Vitiated and Tempted, will ever deliver it
self without Gods Spirit and Grace; being rather inclined to grow worse.

3. They deny that this Grace is perfect in any in this Life, as without all
defect in degree, or totally freeth any man from all Sin: and therefore they
deny that any man's will is perfectly and inculpably free from every degree of
vice and danger.

4. And as that degree of common Grace which is in the unregenerate, is but
such as consists with the predominance or Reign of Sin, so that will of every
unregenerate man in that pravity, is as a slave to it is own, vicious
disposition, and to Error, Objects, and Temptations; being not delivered as to
the predominance.

5. Yet we believe that common Grace is such, that these men are not utterly
void of all good Inclination, and knowledge; and therefore that in Moral Sense,
every man can do more good, and less Evil than he does: And that men perish,
because not only they will not (by pravity) do what they have natural strength
to do, but also because they will not choose and do what morally they might
have chosen and done, as to the wills own power.

6. And we still say, that whenever a man sins, it was not because it was
naturally impossible to do otherwise, (as to touch the Moon, to see without
Eyes, or through the Earth, etc.) nor for want of natural faculties, nor does
God by Grace, give man other natural faculties, making him an Animal of another
Species: But men sin because they will sin, and they will because they are
tempted and now vitiously inclined; from which their wills are made free only
in that measure, that Gods Grace does sanctify them.

If our Priest would have told us, what there is in all this Doctrine of
Free Will, that he dare accuse, (and what dare he not cccuse,) we should have
seen cause to consider of his Arguments: But now he cites Scripture as in a
Dream.

The Twentieth accused Point.
That it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God, though assisted with all
his Grace and the Holy Ghost.

Ans. Still mere Confusion. Protestants distinguish, 1. Impossibility as
natural or Moral; 2. Of Grace as perfect or Imperfect, and as determitately
Operative, or only Assisting and not Determining.

And they hold, 1. That no Duty is Impossible, (or the performing of no
Commandment,) by mere Physical Impossibility: The reason is, because God
commands no Physical Impossibles: Such as before named, to speak without a
Tongue, to see without Light or Object, to know things not knowable or
revealed, to read without any Teaching or Learning, etc.

If a man indeed disable himself, as put out his Eyes that he may not read, or
cut out his Tongue that he may not Preach; the disabling act is vitiously
aggravated, from all the good to which he disabled himself, as if it still had
been his Duty: But we cannot say that God still commands him when Blind to
Read, or when Dumb to Speak, etc. Indeed God changes not his Law; but
recipitur ad modum recipientis: The man has changed his Capacity, and is now
no Subject capable of such an Obligation or Command; though he be capable of
punishment for disabling himself, and Nonperformance: Sin is no further Sin
than it is Voluntary, by the wills Omission or Act, immediately or mediately.

2. But that it is Morally by our pravity now Impossible, for any man to keep
all Gods Commandments and never Sin; what needs there more than sad experience
of the matter of Fact.

1. Did he ever know the man himself, that from his first use of reason to his
Death, did spend every minute of his time as God commanded him, and did
Believe, and Love God and Man, and all good, with as great Love as God
commanded him? And was as free from every Fault, Thought, Passion, Desire,
Fear, Care, Trouble, Pleasure, Word and Deed as God commanded? He would be no
small Sinner that were so self ignorant, proud, unhumbled, as to say that he is
no Sinner.

2. Why else do these Priests force all men to confess their Sins to them, if
men be such as never sinned?

3. Why do they compose all their Liturgies and Offices for their Churches,
with Confessions of Sin; and Prayers for Forgiveness?

4. Why do they Baptize all, if they have no Sin? And in what Sense do they
give them the Eucharist?

5. How little use do they feign such men to have of a pardoning Savior?

6. In what Sense shall such say the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our Sins or
Trespasses?

7. Does not the Text expressly call him a Liar that says he has no Sin; as
aforesaid: And Christ condemn the Pharisee that justified himself, and
justified the confessing Publican?

But it is like he will say that he did not mean, that any man does keep all the
Commands, but that he can do it, though he do not. Ans. I again say, 1. He can as
to natural strength, if he were but perfectly and constantly willing: But it
cannot be that he should be so willing without Grace, and Grace is not perfect
in this Life. 2. The more he boasts of his Power to keep all Gods Laws, the
more he condemns himself that can and will not. 3. And frustra fit potentia
quae nunquam and a nemine reducitur in actum: If he confess that no man does
it, he must confess such a Moral impossibility as the Prophet meant, that said,
Can the Leopard change his Spots, or the Blackmore his Skin? Then may they that
are accustomed to do Evil, learn to do well.

But perhaps he meant not that it is possible to keep all the Commands, for all
our Lives, but for some short time? I answer, 1. While a man has the use of
his Reason, he does not reach the commanded degree of Faith, Love, Joy,
Heavenlyness, one moment of time: But indeed, when a man is asleep, in a Swoun,
an Apoplexy, stark mad, etc. he may for that time break no Command, nor keep
any.

But perhaps he speaks but of sincere Obedience, and not of absolute sinless
perfection. Ans. If so, he is a deceiver to feign that we deny it: But their
Doctrine of Perfection and Supererogation is contrary.

Obj. But he speaks not what man can do without Grace, but by it is
assistance. Ans. Grace makes no man absolutely sinless, and perfect in this
Life.

Let him know, that Protestants do not only say that man by Gods Grace may keep
Gods Commandments sincerely, (though not sinlesly and perfectly,) but that no man
of Age and Reason shall be saved that does not so.

2. And that though all our Obedience be imperfect, the Imperfections are
pardoned, and our Obedience accepted and rewarded, for the Merits of the
perfect Obedience, Sacrifice, and Intercession of our Savior.

The One and Twentieth accused Point.
That Faith only Justifies, and that good Works are not absolutely necessary
to Salvation.

Ans. Many wordy Controversies are made about things, that in Sense men are
commonly agreed in. 1. We all believe Gods Word, that they were deceived that
thought they could be justified either by the Law of Innocence or Nature, or
the Law of Moses, or any meritorious Works of their own, without, or as a
supplement to the Sacrifice, Merits and free Grace of Christ our Savior, and
Faith in him.

2. By Faith is meant Christianity: In the Gospel it is all one to be a
Believer, a Disciple of Christ, and to be a Christian. The Christian Faith is
that which is expressed in the Baptismal Covenant, believing in and giving up our
selves to, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: To Christ as our Prophet,
Priest and King, to be saved by his Merits and free Grace: And this is put in
opposition to the Works of Adam's or Moses Law, or any other that are conceited
to suffice and merit, without the foresaid Redemption by Christ. And is not
this the true Doctrine of all true Christians?

2. These good Works that are our Obedience to the Law of Christ, are but the
performance of our Baptismal Covenant, and the Fruits of Faith, without which
it is dead Hypocrisy, and are of absolute necessity to Salvation, to all that
have time to do them.

Against the charge, That we are Sinners deserving Hell, we are justified by
Christ believed in: Against the accusation, That we are Infidels, Ungodly,
Hypocrites, we must be justified by our Faith, Godliness, and Works, or perish.

But we do also hold, 1. That if a man be convicted, as the Theif on the Cross,
and should die suddenly, no outward good which he cannot do, is absolutely
necessary to his Salvation, but only his inward Faith, Love, and Repentance,
and Confession if able.

2. We do firmly hold, that Works done with a conceit of obliging God by Merit,
in commutative Justice, or as conceited sufficient without a Savior, and the
pardon of their failings, are such as more further Damnation than Salvation, at
least in those that hear the Gospel.

3. And we are no Papists, and therefore believe not that ignorant words of
Prayer in a Tongue not understood, and wearing Relics, and going on
Pilgrimages, and needless confessing to Priests, and subjection to an universal
Vice-Christ, and living upon the Blood of Saints, Murdering the Living, and
praying to the Dead, and the Sons honoring their Days, Relics and Monuments,
whom their Fathers Burnt or Persecuted; these are not Good Works necessary to
Salvation, as is plain, Math. 23. and Revel. 14.17, 18, etc. We do, with Paul,
renounce all Works of our own, that are thought to make the Reward to be of
Debt and not of Grace, and that are set in the least opposition or competition
with Christ's Merits, or any place save commanded Subordination to him.

The Two and Twentieth accused Point.
That no Good Works are Meritorious.

Ans. The word Merit is ambiguous, and so abused by Papists, that indeed the
Protestants are shyer of it than the Fathers were, lest the use of it should
cherish the abuse.

1. There is Merit of man, and of God. 2. And this in Commutative Justice
(conceited,) or only in Governing distributive Justice. 3. And this is either
according to the Law of Innocence or Moses, or according to the Law of Christ.

Now Protestants hold, 1. As to the Name, that (...) and (...), worthy and
worthiness, are Scripture words, and may be used; and Merit is but of the same
signification, and we condemn not the Ancients that so used it: But the worst
Sense must not be cherished.

2. Do they hold, 1. That no Creature can merit of God in Commutative Justice,
that gives quid pro quo to his Benefit: God receives not from Man or Angels;
unless he will call Acceptance and Complacence Receiving.

3. None but Christ merited of strict Governing Justice, according to the Law
of Senceless Innocence, nor by any Works that will save man from the charge of
Sin and desert of Death.

3. All at Age that will be saved, must have good Works according to their
Capacity, for Christ is the Author of Salvation, to all those that obey him.
Heb. 5.9* Though they obey not an unknown Priest at Rome.

But all these Works are our Obedience to Christ's own healing Government, such
as the Laws of a Physician to the Sick. And we all agree, that he will Judge
(that is, Justify or Condemn in Judgment) all men according to their Works,
that is, according to the Law and it is promulgation, by which in their several
Ages and Nations he governed them.

4. Your own Doctors that know what they say, tell us, that by Merit, they mean
nothing but the Rewardable quality of their acts, related to Gods promise
through Christ's Merits. And does any Protestant Church deny this?

The Three and Twentieth accused Point.
That Faith once had, cannot possibly be lost.

Ans. Still confused slander and deceit.

Protestants hold, 1. That the Faith not rooted, prevalent and saving, is
frequently lost, such as you call sides informis.

2. That even sincere Faith may be lost, as to the Act for some little time,
that is, suspended in a deliquium, as Peter's and theirs, Luke 24. that said, We
trusted this had been he, etc.

3. That many lose to the Death some degree of their habitual Faith.

4. But they differ in the rest, just as you do among your selves, Dominicans
and Jesuits. 1. Some think that no one (at Age at least) in a State of such
Faith as at present would have saved him, does ever totally lose it. 2. Some
think that many have but such loseable Grace as Adam had. 1. As being not Elect
to Salvation, and therefore not in Gods decree of Preservation and
Perseverance, 2. As having a Faith not Rooted and Confirmed: And that these may
fall from a justified State: But that, 1. The Elect. 2. Nor the Confirmed,
never fall away. This was Austins Judgment, and his followers, of which see
Vossii Theses. And is that Jesuit honest that feigneth this proper to the
Protestants, where the Controversy is the same among themselves?

The Four and Twentieth accused Point.
That God by his will and inevitable decree, has ordained from all Eternity,
who shall be Damned and who Saved.

Ans. What a false Deceiver is this, that would make us believe, that this is
proper to the Protestants, when it is the Common Doctrine not only of the
Dominicans, but of the very Jesuits themselves, and all their Church.

1. None of them dare say, that men are Damned or Saved without Gods
foreknowledge, nor against his absolute will, by overcoming his Power.

2. None of them dare say, that this foreknowledge of God was not from
Eternity, but that he knew one day what he knew not before.

3. All that the Jesuits themselves say, is, that God decreed it upon this
foreknowledge, and that he has a Scientia media, what will come to pass,
positis quibusdam, if such and such things be done by man; and that this
foreknowledge in order of Nature is before the Decree, but both from Eternity.
But Cardin Cameracensis (Petrus de Aliaco,) has irrefragably confuted this
imposing Priority and Posteriority of act on God; though I think some Divine acts
as denominated only Relatively from the order of Objects, may be so
distinguished.

4. In all this, we say not, that God has by his will and decree ordained from
Eternity, (or in time) that men shall sin, or will and choose Evil, but only
who shall be Damned for sin, which God never willed or caused, but foresaw; not
as if he were an idle Spectator, but a willing suspender of his own acts, so
far as to leave Sinners to their self-determining wills.

5. But God being the cause of Good, and Men and Devils of Evil, our Salvation
is of him, and our Destruction of our selves; and therefore God decrees not
Men's Salvation or Sanctification, merely on foresight of our Faith, but
decrees our Faith it self: Sin he permits, but Faith, he effects, and
decrees to Effect.

6. As for them that feign that we say, that God decrees that some shall be
Saved and others Damned however they Live; it is but the dictates of the Father
of Lies: We say that God at once decrees the End, and the Means; as he does
not decree that men shall live though they neither Eat nor Drink, nor that they
shall have Corn, though they neither Plow nor Sow, but that they shall Eat and
Drink, and live thereby; and that they shall Plow and Sow, and mannure the
Soil, and so have Corn. So God does at once decree, [that this and that man
shall have the means of Grace, (especially a Savior and the Gospel,) and shall
faithfully use them, and be Sanctified by them, and sincerely obey God, and
overcome the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and persevere to the End, and that
for Christ's Merits he will give them the Grace of his Spirit, and pardon their
Sins, and bring them to Glory.] All this is our Decree of God.

But he does not decree that men shall sin, that they may be Damned: For sin is
no Work of God, nor a means appointed by him for Men's Damnation, no more than
a Righteous King does make men Traitors or Murderers, that he may Hang them.
But he justly denies his Grace to many that forfeit it by willful Resistance,
Disobedience, and Contempt; though he take not the forfeiture of his Elect.

He is deceived and wrongeth God that makes him the Author of Men's sin: And
so does he that feigneth God to send his Son to redeem the World, and his Word
and Ministers to call them, and his Spirit to renew them, and all this at
Random, not knowing whether it may not be all lost, or leaving it chiefly to
the Free Will of them, whose wills are contrarily inclined and vitiated?
Whether Christ and all his Preparations shall be lost?

The plain Christian that holds but to these two points, that our Destruction
is of our selves, but our help and Salvation of God, and that God is the first
and chief cause of all good, and Men and Devils of all Evil, is liker to be
wise with Sobriety and Safety, than the Ignorant Intruders into Gods Secrets,
and the prating Calumniators that speak Evil of the things which they
understand not; and reproach those that speak not as Rashly and Ignorantly as
themselves, even in some equivocal unexplained words

Methinks Papists should be so kind to God, as seeing the Pope can tell who is
a Damned Heretic, and to be killed, (even all that believe not in the Pope, or
are not his Subjects,) and who is in Purgatory, and how long he shall stay
there: Or how many years Torment the Pope can shorten: They should allow God to
know a little more, and that not as one whose Power and Grace is Conquered by
impotent Worms, against his absolute Will.

The Five and Twentieth accused Point.
That every one ought Infallibly to assure himself of his Salvation, and to
believe that he is of the number of the Predestinate.

Ans. I would fain excuse the man as far as I can, and therefore I hope, that
as the man was excusable that did eat Snakes for Snigs, (or Eels,) so he read
some Pamphlet of an Antimonian, either Crisp or Saltmarsh, or some other such,
or talked with some of their silly Novices, and thought he had Conversed with
the Reformed Catholics, or read the Confessions of the Reformed Churches.

The first Sentence is a Fundamental Truth, and a damnable Falsehood, as the
Equivocal words are variously understood. And is it not pity that the Priests
of the Infallible Church, should put things so different into the same words,
and that in an accusation of so many Churches and Nations; when yet God himself
is feigned by them to write by his Spirit so Unintelligibly, that without these
Doctors skilful Exposition, it is but like to make men Heretics, (that is,
Adversaries to the Pope and his Clergy.)

To assure our selves of our Salvation [may mean, to give all diligence to make
our Salvation infallibly sure: This every one ought to do.]

Or it may mean, that every man ought to believe it as an infallible Truth,
that he shall be saved.] The next Sentence seems to make this his meaning in
the first: Which if it be, he is a false Calumniator of the Reformed Churches.

But if the first be his meaning, and he deny it, he is an open Enemy to Man's
Salvation.

What is all the Scripture for, and all our Religion, but to make sure of our
Salvation? 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election
sure. And if no man can be sure, to what purpose has God made so many promises
of it, expressing the Conditions, (to them that believe, that love God, that
forsake all for him,) if no man can know whether he perform the Condition, and
that he is within this promise? Why does God lay down so many signs to
difference the Children of God from the Children of the Devil, if they cannot
be discerned? Sure Heaven and Hell be not like; and yet are the Heirs of Heaven
and Hell undistinguishable? Is the Image of God and the Devil so like that none
can know them asunder? No, not the man that has had them both? And why does
God so aften call on Believers to Rejoice, if they cannot know whether they
shall be in Heaven and Hell for ever? If you say, he is not sure to persevere,
many Papists grant that the Confirmed may. And why may not Bradford, Hooper,
Sanders, and Thousands else, that are Dying by the Sacred blood-thirsty Church,
be assured when they are Dying, that they have forsaken Life and all for Christ.

But oportet mendacem esse memorem still: Why do you not tell men when the Pope
is selling them Pardons, and saving them out of Purgatory, that when all is done
they can have no assurance of Salvation? yea, that they ought not to endeavor
to make it sure? And whose now is the safe Church and Religion, if a Papist can
never be sure that he shall be saved in your Church and Religion; nor sure that
he is in a State of Salvation? That is, that he is a true Christian, and has
Charity, and is an honest man?

2. A man that has got true and clear Evidence that he has a Confirmed Faith,
and Hope, and loves God, as God above all, ought consequently to take it for
an infallible Truth, that so Dying, he shall be saved: Else he must either give
God the Lie, that has promised it, or he must be supposed to be deceived when
he thinks that he believes and loves God.

But that every man must believe that he is of the Number of the Predestinate
to Salvation, is a damnable Doctrine, because it requires all the Millions of
ungodly men to believe a Lie, yea to believe it as a Divine Truth, and to make
God both the Author of the Lie, and of the deceit of our selves by this
Command. And when Millions are not of the Number of Sanctified, and therefore
not of the Predestinate, if they so continue, what can more harden them in
their Impenitence, than to tell them that they must all believe that they shall
be saved? How many hundred Protestant Books, and thousand Sermons tell the
World that it is the Preachers earnest drift, to save Wicked men from such
Presumption, which makes men call them terrible Preachers? Every man is bound
to believe Gods promise to be true, and that he himself shall be saved if he be
a true penitent sanctified Christian, and so continue, and that else he shall
be Damned; and not to distrust God as unwilling to continue the Grace he has
given him.

The Six and Twentieth accused Point.
That every man has not an Angel Guardian or Keeper.

Ans. 1. We hold that every true Christian, even the least, has his Angel who
beholds the Face of his Father in Heaven: And that Angels are Gods Ministering
Spirits, for the good of his Elect; and that they guard us and pitch their
Tents about us, and bear us up in their Hands, and keep us in and from Danger,
and rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner, and that we live in invisible
Communion with them, and shall be like them.

2. But whether every Christian have one Angel to himself alone, that guardeth
no other, or one Angel guard Hundreds or Thousands: Or whether some (as Lower
Officers are set over a few, and others as General Officers are over whole
Kingdoms,) we leave to the determination of the Infallible Pope, who is bolder
with Gods Secrets than we dare be.

3. But till now, I thought they had not been so presumptuous, as to assert
that every man has a Guardian Angel. Where is there one word of God for this?
Is every man an Heir of Salvation, or one of Christ's little ones, or under his
promise? Had Cain and Judas such Angels, and all the Sodomites?

Christ made it an argument of Terror to Persecutors, that they offend such as
had such Angels with God: And dare you paint them as Devils, and Burn them, or
Murder them by the Dragons Dragoons, if you believe that every man has such a
Guardian Angel? Surely Saints, though called Heretics, have such.

The Seven and Twentieth accused Point.
That the Holy Angels pray not for us, nor know our Thoughts and desires on
Earth.

Ans. A false accusation. We say not that they pray not for us, nor that they
know not our desires, nor any of our Thoughts. We say that Angels are no such
Strangers to Saints and sincere Godliness, as not to know that all Godly men
desire the Hallowing of Gods Name, the coming of his Kingdom, and the doing of
his Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven: They that know what Grace is, and
what our Prayers are, know much of our desires: And we do not think that Angels
know less of our Thoughts than Devils, who we feel to our Trouble are not
altogether unacquainted with them. And those Angels that rejoice at a Sinners
Conversion, are not unacquainted with it.

And as to their Praying, we know not how it is that Angels express their
desires to God; but we all agree that they desire our welfare, and therefore
may be said to pray for it, if all notified Desire be Prayer. We suppose that
they know and Love us, far better than we know and Love each other.

But we read that the Heretical Gnostics, or their like, did deceive men, [by
Voluntary Humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things
which they had not seen, vainly puffed up by a fleshly mind,] Col. 2.18, 19.
Therefore we dare not pretend to Papal Infallibility, nor boldly to conjecture,
how far it is that our Thoughts are known to Angels, nor how much they are
ignorant of them; nor when, or how often, or how far, or in what manner they pray
for us: How far particularly, and how far only generally, etc. Had this
knowledge been needful to us, God would have revealed it: Much less do we know
what Angel of what departed Soul of a Saint has the care or charge of our
Sheep, and of our Cattle, and who of our Pigs and Geese, and who of our Fruits
and Corn; abundance of these things we leave to the Infallible Church: As we do
their acquaintance in Purgatory, while our acquaintance and Conversation in
Heaven, can reach no higher than the prospect which we have in and by the Glass
of Scripture Revelation.

The Eight and Twentieth accused Point.
That we may not pray to them.

Ans. 1. We may desire Living Saints to pray for us, and this may be called
Praying to them: So a Child prays to his Father or Master. But we pray not to
dead Saints nor Angels: 1. Because we have an hundred Commands to pray to God,
and not one to pray to them, and where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression or Sin. Therefore while we are sure it is no Sin to forbear it,
and know not but it is Sin to do it, we go the safe way: If they say, it is
against the Popes Law or his Clergy's, we say with Paul, it is a small thing to
us to be judged of man, (who can but kill our Bodies,) we have one that judges
us, even the Lord. Let the Pope Damn us if he can.

2. As the first Commandment forbids us to have any God but one, so the
second forbids us to worship so as the Heathens did their Idols, because it
is Bodily interpretative Idolatry and Scandal: But the Heathens used to pray to
their under Deities, whom they judged to be much like that which the Papists
judge of Angels, and praying to Invisible Spirits is to imitate them as
scandalously as praying toward Images: No wonder therefore that you so usually
leave out the second Commandment.

3. Gods Word is the Rule of all acceptable Religious Worship, (though but a
General Rule in many Modes and Circumstances,) and therefore we fear swerving
from it.

4. Angels themselves never demanded it, nor Christ bespake it for them, yea,
they twice forbad it John: See thou do it not.

5. Angels being more holy than we, are more for the Glory of God, and the
hatred of Creature arrogance and Idolatry; and as God calls himself specially
Jealous against bodily Worship like the Idolaters, in the second Commandment,
so Angels are more jealous against it than we are.

6. As Angels said, See thou do it not, so contrarily Satan tempted Christ,
with the offer of the Kingdoms and glory of the World, to fall down and worship
him. Therefore we had rather hearken to the Angels than to Devils: And fear,
they that do otherwise, worship Devils for Angels, because only Devils have
sought such Worship. And the Devil often turns himself as into an Angel of
Light to deceive, as his Ministers do into Ministers of Righteousness.

7. We know not when Angels hear us, and when they do not: And therefore know
not when and how to pray to them.

8. As we are sure that God would have bid us do it, if he would have us do it,
so we know that he is all sufficient to tell them what and when to do for us;
and to pray to him is the way to secure their Service.

9. And we know that there is one Mediator between God and Man, whose
Intercession is sufficient.

10. And we know that Christians praying to Angels and separated Souls, greatly
hardens the Heathen World that pray to separated Souls, and Demons that are
their Sub-deities.

11. And when these men say not, we must pray to Angels, but we may do it; what
horrid Murderers are they, that will Burn, Kill, and Damn men, for not doing
all that they think they may do, without any must or Divine Obligation? Why
take they it not at best, as part of their Works of Supererrogation?

12. The Deceiver profaning the Scripture, 1. Puts Jacobs Benediction desiring
the Angels guard on his Son, to be a prayer to Angels. Yea, when the Fathers
say, that Angel was Christ himself.

2. And Jacobs words to the Angel that appeared to him, to be a reason for our
praying to unseen Spirits: If they appear to us, we shall the better know what
and when to speak to them.

The Nine and Twentieth accused Point.
That the Angels cannot help us.

Ans. This is too gross stating of Controversies for a Collier or a Cobbler,
though not for a Doctor of Infallible Church.

1. We say, that not only an Angel, but a Man, an Ass, (as Balaams,) a blast of
Wind, Flies, Frogs, Lice (as in Egypt,) can help us, when God sends them to
help us.

2. We believe that Angels are specially Empowred and willing for it. So that
they are Gods Eminent Ministering Spirits for the good of his Elect.

3. But we believe that they can do nothing for us, but what God empowreth and
Commissioneth them to do. He that Curses those that trust in man, and make
Flesh their Arm, instead of trusting God, will so Curse them that so trust in
Angels. But yet we may and must trust man and Angels, according to their
several measures of Gods authorizing and enabling them. The great Mercies of
Protection and assistance that God gives us by Angels, is the matter of much
of our daily thanks to God: And I am daily thankful to Angels themselves; and I
think I love them better than any Friends on Earth, because they are better,
and love God better: And I am the willinger to Die, because I shall go to the
World of Love, where as God and Christ is Love, so Angels love God, and we for
his sake, better than I love my self, while our Papists that pray to Angels,
devour the blood of Saints.

The Thirtieth accused Point.
That no Saint Deceased, has after appeared to any on Earth.

Ans. A mere false Calumny. What Protestant Confessions have any such Article?
How know we what has been done of that kind in all the World to this day? Read
but Dr. More, and Mr. Glanvils Books of Apparitions, and Mr. Ambrose, and Mr.
Lawrences Books of our Communion with Angels. Read Zanchius, Luther, Melaucton,
Manlius, Lavalu, etc. and you may see that this is no Protestant assertion. We
know that Christ appeared to Saul, and that many Bodies of Saints arose at
Christ's Death, and appeared to many: And what the Witch of Endor showed as
Samuel, we know not: We only say, 1. That it is much liker that Apparitions are
oftest made by Devils or bad Spirits that dwell in the lower Regions, than that
blessed Spirits come from Heaven. 2. But yet seeing Angels thence appear, we
cannot say that Holy Souls never do. 3. But that God will not have it to be any
ordinary or trusty means for Men's Salvation: For we cannot know when it is a
Holy Soul, and when a Devil: And they that will not believe Moses and the
Prophets, (and Christ,) neither will they believe though one rose from the Dead:
It Is no Article of our Faith, that they ever did appear or not. And if these
men think otherwise, why must this Opinion more than Ten thousand such, be
obtruded as necessary on all others?

The One and Thirtieth accused Point.
That the Saints Deceased, know not what passes here on Earth.

Ans. Confusion and Calumny. There is knowledge Immediate by Intention, and
Mediate by Notification from others. And there is knowledge perfect, and in
part.

1. We take not on us to know the extent of the knowledge of separated Souls.
And these proud Infallible men know no more than we, but so much less, in that
they know not their own Ignorance: Yet neither Lilly, nor any Astrologer, nor
Conjurer, that ever I heard of, that pretends the greatest acquaintance with
Spirits, did ever pretend to make their Opinions of them necessary to
Salvation; nor to kill all Dissenters as Heretics, but the Vice-Christ and his
Church, we cannot know all that they pretend to know. And why must we needs
know whether ever such Souls appeared? If they did, we will try what they are
by the word of God, which is our Rule. And why must we know how much they know?
We know that they are not Omniscient, nor Omnipresent. And how much they know
by present Intention, not one of these Pretenders know. That they know more
than we, and know much by the notices of Angels or one another, and specially
of the General State of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, we make no doubt: And what
Christ himself makes known to them, we know not. O! what sort of men are
these, that forbid us to Read the Word of God, and yet obtrude on us (on dismal
Penalties,) so many things more than all the Bible does contain!

The Two and Thirtieth accused Point.
That the Saints pray not for us.

Ans. Equivocal and false. 1. All Saints on Earth pray for us: It is part of
the Communion of Saints.

2. We say of the Prayer of departed Souls, the same that we said before of the
Prayer of Angels. Their General Requests for the Church and against Enemies,
proves not to us what extent their knowledge of particulars has, nor what
particulars they ask, nor that every Christian can say that they pray for him,
and that in his particular cases.

The Three and Thirtieth accused Point.
That we ought not to beseech God, to grant our prayers in favor of the
Saints, or their Merits: Nor do we receive any benefit thereby.

Ans. This is before answered to the 17th. Accusation. I told you that we hold,
that God blesses Children for their Holy Parents sakes, their Relation making
the welfare of the one to be the others: And God blessed others for Joseph's
sake, and sometimes preserves whole Countries for the sake of the Godly there:
And on what account, and how far, I will not again repeat.

And the Union and Communion of Saints in Heaven and Earth are so near, that I
dare not say that God does any good to any one faithful Soul, that is not in
some respect for the sake of all the rest; as the Cure of an aching Tooth is for
the sake of all the Body: That is, 1. For the good of the whole. 2. And done
out of love to the whole.

But this will not satisfy confounding Deceivers. No doubt it is dead Saints
that he means: And what he means by Merits, I suppose he knows not
himself; or else he would have told us: How far we own, or abhor the pretense
of Merits, I showed before. All Saints are saved by the full sufficient Merits
of Christ, and have none at all of their own, unless the amiableness of Grace
freely given them be called their Merits, as a thankful Child more deserves
his Fathers Love, (that is, is more Lovely) than a Rebel that scorneth him; and
a piece of Gold deserves to be esteemed above Dirt; and a Nightingale above a
Toad. Yea their own Jesuit Vasquez, not only denies all Merit of God in
Commutative Justice, (as all save Romans and a few such Sots do,) but also in
point of distributive Justice, by which he seems to deny Merit more than
Protestants do. For by Merit we mean but Moral aptitude, for the reward of a
free Benefactor who is also Rector, when the ordering of a free Gift suspended
on official Conditions, is sapientially made a means of procuring Obedience.

Whatever God has promised to give us for other Men's sake, that he will so
give. But our Faith shall not go beyond his Promise: If God have told us any
where, who Saint Nicolas, and St. Becket, and St. Christopher, and St. Joan,
and St. Jane, and St. Winifrid are, and what they were to us more than others,
and that they were real Saints, and that he has promised us Mercy for their
sakes, and bid us pray to him for their Meriting for us; let them show us this
in his Word. But if it be only the Popes Command and Promise, let his Subjects
obey and trust it.

We are certain that none but Saints are saved: And why then must I go to God,
for the Merits of St. Nicholas, or St. Bridget, any more than for the Merits of
all the rest, which are many Millions?

As God is jealous of his Honor against Idols, so is he of Christ's Honor
against Antichrists and false Mediators, and we must do nothing that seems to
ascribe any part of Christ's proper Office of Mediation to any Creature: And
does it not seem so, if we pray, Lord hear, pardon and save me for the Merits
of Becket or Bridget, etc. For what more can we say of the Merits of Christ?

But still mark, that these men say not that, we must pray thus for the Merit
of Saints, but that we may: And must all be Burnt or Damned that will not do
all that the Pope thinks they maey do?

That we receive no benefit by them, is a forged Calumny and not our Doctrine:
We believe that the Jews had benefit by Abraham, Moses, David, when they were
Dead: And that the Reformed Churches have had benefit by the Blood of the
Martyrs, shed by the Blood-thirsty Papists to this day; and that the whole
Church has benefit by the Writings of Chrysostom, Nazianzene, Augustine, etc.
Luther, Calvin, etc.

The Four and Thirtieth accused Point.
That we ought not expressly to pray them to pray or intercede to God for us.

Ans. There was enough said of this before, about praying to Angels.

When God bids us pray to dead Men's Souls, we will do it. Till then your
saying we may do it, proves neither may nor must to us. Why then cannot you
keep your [ may] to your selves? Never a Conjurer in England can tell us, how
far Souls in Heaven can hear, nor where and when they are present or within
hearing; nor which of them are so, whether all, or one, or which; No nor
whether those Saints that understood not Latin on Earth, do understand Latin
Prayers sent up from Earth, wh^^^ the Speaker himself understands them not.
Alas! Christian Reader, what a dark uncertain Worship, like Charming, would
this Infallible Church compel men to offer the most Holy God, while they
accuse his Word of ensnaring dangerous obscurity.

We will pray to those alive, that we know do hear us, to pray to God for us,
for the sake of Christ: But it is but profanation of the Scripture, to say, that
because Luke 16, a man in Hell supposed to see and hear Abraham, did pray him
to send Lazarus on Earth; therefore we that neither see nor hear the Dead,
should pray to them. But Dives prayed in vain, and so may you. And what if
those Souls should prove to be in Purgatory? Must we pray both to them that are
in Purgatory, and for them also? And is it certain that the Pope and all his
Church, are sure which Saint is not in Purgatory, when all are there or worse
(say they,) that ever sinned and did not Penance for it?

The Five and Thirtieth accused Point.
That the Bones or Relics of the Saints are not to be kept or reserved; no
Virtue proceeding from them after they be once dead.

Ans. 1. Where has God Commanded us to keep them, for the Virtue that
proceeds from them?

2. We deny not but a man may keep a Skeleton or Skull, and if it be his
Fathers, we will accuse him no higher than of Imprudence and Passion. But what
proof have you of Virtue proceeding from Bones, till you see it by experience?
Is it any appointed means for God to work Miracles by? And how know you that
all were Saints that the Pope calls so? Had all the Debauched Popes of Anno
800, 900, 1000, skill Infallible to know Saints from Hypocrites? And has God
promised Virtue to all their Bones? And are you sure that they are their Bones?
Alas! what numerous Tricks have men to trust to, to deceive themselves and
others, that yet will not obey Christ's plain Commands, and trust his promise!

The Six and Thirtieth accused Point.
That Creatures cannot be Sanctified, or made more holy than they are already
of their own Nature.

Ans. A downright slander. 1. We believe that all men that shall be saved, are
or shall be Sanctified, and made more holy than they are of their own Nature.

2. We believe that to the Pure, all things are Pure, and are Sanctified by the
Word and Prayer: And that whatever we do, we should do it to the glory of God:
And when a Christian devoteth and uses his Food, Estate, and all to Gods
Service, it is Sanctified.

3. We believe that a Temple, a Font, a Table, and Utensils, may well be
separated from common uses to Gods Worship: And that Separation is a
sanctifying of them.

To be Sanctified or Holy, is but to be separated from common use, to Gods
special Service, according to the nature of the thing used.

1. Godly men are Sanctified and Saints, because by Soul-consent and Devotion,
and Practice, they are sincerely separated to God, from the slavery of the
World, the Flesh and the Devil; being Habitually and Predominantly lovers of
God and Holiness, by the grace of Christ and the Holy Ghost.

2. Professed Christians are Sacramentally Sanctified, when by outward Baptism,
they are devoted to God in Christ.

3. Even bad Ministers are externally sanctified, as separated and consecrated
to a Holy Office.

4. Temples, and Books, and Church Utensils are sanctified, when by men they
are separated from common and unclean usage, to Gods Worship. So that though
Holiness in all be this separation to God, yet, as the Persons and things are
not the same, so neither is their Holiness in specie, but only in genere.

And there is a Superstitious and an Idolatrous Mock-Holiness, when men will
devote that to God and Holy uses which he abhors, or accepts not, nor ever
required of them: And say as the Hypocrite Pharisees, it is Corban, who
required this at their hands? The Hypocrites and Idolaters have always been
forward for this unrequired Mock-Holiness, to quiet their Consciences, instead
of real saving Holiness. It Is Cheaper and Easier to have Holy Water, Holy-Oil,
Holy-Spittle, Holy-Images, Holy-Crosses, Holy-Vestments of many sorts,
Holy-Altars, Holy-Shrines, and Pilgrimages, Holy-Bones, and Chips and Places,
than to have Holy-Hearts and Lives, which love God, and Grace, and Heaven,
above all this World and Life it self, and by the Spirit mortify all fleshly
Lusts.

The Seven and Thirtieth accused Point.
That Children may be saved by their Parents Faith, without the Sacrament of
Holy Baptism.

Ans. Can you unriddle this charge? Whether the man mean that they may be saved
by Baptism without their Parents Faith? Or that both must be conjoined as
necessary to Salvation? He will not tell us that.

1. That God has made abundance of promises to the Seed of the Faithful, and
takes them into the Covenant of Grace with their Parents, and says that they
are Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14; Protestants have copiously proved against Anabaptists
and Papists. But it is Gods Mercy, and Christ's Merit, Grace, and Covenant, that
they are saved by: The Parents Faith is but that Qualification and Relation,
which makes them receptive and capable of this saving Grace. The Parenrs Faith
saves themselves, but as the Moral*qualifying disposition and condition of
Gods saving Gift: And to Infants it is required, not that they be Believers,
but Believers Seed, devoted to God by Parents or Pro-Parents, whose they are.

2. We doubt not, but regularly, where it may be had, this Dedication should be
solemnly made by Baptismal Covenanting: Ask the Anabaptists whether we hold not
this. But we believe, that as private Marriage makes Husband and Wife before
God, but solemn Matrimony is necessary for public Order, without which they
may be punished as Fornicators: So if an Infant be the Child of one believing
Parent, dedicated to God, he is Holy and in the same Covenant with the Parent,
(and were else unclean:) But that before the Church, he is not regularly to be
judged in Covenant till it be solemnized in Christ's appointed way by Baptism.

Still excepting where Baptism cannot be had; and there even sober Papists say,
that the Votum, the Vow, or desire, will serve.

And this necessity is manifold: 1. When the Child dies, before Baptism could
be had.

2. Where there is no capable Person to do it, or that will not utterly deprave
it.

3. When the Parent is an Antipoedo-Baptist, and omitteth it, thinking it a
Sin. If they think that the Infant is not saved by the Parents Faith, why
should they think, that believing Parents Children are damned because the
Parent Erreth in such an external thing?

But Papists, that turn other parts of Holiness into Form and Ceremony, and
make a Religion of the Carcass mortifyed, would here also persuade People that
the very outward act of Washing, is of so great moment with God, that though it
were the holiest Persons or their Seed, a mistake, or a delay, or surprise of
Death, will damn them if they be not Baptized, (or Martyred.) This tends to
Subject all to the Mercy and Dominion of the Priests, that they may seem more
necessary to Salvation than they are, or at least their external Forms, by
Laymen or Women Baptizers administered.

Constantine himself, the Churches great Deliverer, was not Baptized till near
his Death: Are they sure that he was till then in a state of Damnation, and had
been Damned if he had so Died? Methinks in gratitude, the Church of Rome,
should have cast him no lower than the Torments of Purgatory.

The Eight and Thirtieth accused Point.
That the Sacrament of Confirmation is not necessary, nor to be used.

Ans. You may so mean by the Word [ Sacrament] and [ Confirmation,] as that we
do deny them. And you may so mean, as that we are more for them than you are.

1. If by a Sacrament, you mean one of Gods Institution, appointed by him to be
his Solemn Delivery and Investiture in a state of Christianity or necessary
Grace; and if by Confirmation you mean Archbishops anointing Infants, or
Ignorant Children, or Persons, with hallowed Oil, compounded once a year, and
his Ceremonious boxing them, and such other Formalities; then we deny that such
Confirmation is any such Sacrament, nor is necessary, or to be used; because
Holy things are not to be mortyfied and profaned.

2. But if by a [ Sacrament] you mean, but a Solemn renewal of our Covenant
with God in Christ; and by Confirmation you must, that those Baptized in
Infancy should at due Age, understandingly, under the Pastors hand or Care,
profess their serious personal Consent to that Covenant which by others they
imputatively made in Baptism; we are so far from denying this, that we think
till this Solemn personal Covenanting, and owning their Baptism with
understanding and seeming seriousness, be made, the Entrance into the state of
Adult Church Communion, the woeful Corruption of the Church is never to be well
healed; but while one side turn Confirmation into a dead Shadow and Mockery,
and the Anabaptists scandalized Heresy, are all for Rebaptizing instead of
Confirmation, Profanation and Schism will gratify Satan. You know, that the
English Bishops practice Confirmation, and the Liturgy describes it as I here
do: And are the Church of England no Protestants? And diverse Protestant
Non-Conformists here have about 29 and 30 years ago, written full Treatises for
Confirmation.

The Nine and Thirtieth accused Point.
That the Bread of the Supper of our Lord was but a Figure, or Remembrance of
the Body of Christ, received by Faith, and not his true and very Body.

Ans. 1. Protestants hold, that as all words are to be taken according to the
usage of the Subject or Science that they are used about, Physical Terms
Physically; Rhetorical Rhetorically, Geometrical, Astronomical, Arithemetical,
accordingly, Law Terms according to Law, and Moral and Theological Terms
Morally and Theologically; so, if as Naturalists, we ask what the matter of
that Sacrament is, we say Bread and Wine: If as Moralists and Theologues, we
say, it is the Body and Blood of Christ: As if you ask of a Gold and Silver
Coin, what it is in a Natural Sense, we say, it is Gold and Silver: But if you
ask in a Civil, Political and Law-Sence, we say, it is a 20 s. piece, a
Jacobus, a Carolus piece, or it is a Crown, or a Shilling. So we say that
Sacramentally and Morally, and Relatively, that which is naturally true Bread
and Wine, is yet also the true Body and Blood of Christ: And we say not that it
is only a Figure and Remembrance, but it is such a Figure as is
Representatively his very Flesh and Blood: And it is to Deliver to us, and
Invest us in a Spiritual Union with Christ himself, and right to his saving
Grace.

A proxy that as Representative of a Prince Marries a Foreign Lady, is more
than a Remembrance; and so is his Image, if it be used in the Marriage. A Key,
or a Twig and Turf, by which Investiture in House and Land is delivered, and a
Staff and Ring, by which Bishoprics were of old delivered by Investiture, are
all more than a bare Remembrance.

2. As to your implied Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that after the words of
Consecration, there is left no real Bread and Wine, it is Copiously and
undenyably proved a Novel Doctrine, so monstrous, as if it had been formed to
engage Mankind in a Renunciation of Christianity, Humanity, and common Senses,
and to be an obliging profession of this Renunciation. It is enough for us to
believe, that after the true Consecration, it is no more mere Bread and Wine,
(as after the Coining a 20 s. Piece, a Crown, or a Noble, or an Angel, it is
not mere Gold, but the said named Coin.) But if ever Satan showed himself a
Dragon, under the Name of an Angel of Light, it was when he made the Canons of
the 4th. Laterane General Council under Innocent the 3d. that set up
Transubstantiation, and the Murdering of all that deny it, of deposing Princes
that will not exterminate them. This adjuncts and effects will show the
difference between this Counterfeit Sacrament and Christ. Christ's Sacrament was
instituted to be a Sacrament and Covenant of dearest Love between God and Man,
and one another: But as Satan, when he Covenanteth with Witches, to sell him
their Souls, must have it sealed by his sucking their Blood, so the seal that
he set to the Monster of Transubstantiation, was that his Church and it must
live by the blood of those that own it not.

But what will convince men, that by Noise and Worldly Interest have Conquered
all that is proper to a man, yea, or a living sensible Animal.

1. They pretend Christ's Words, This is my Body, when they know that it was his
ordinary parabolical phrase, and they will take this Physically and singularly
as different from all the rest. Though he say, I am the Door, I am the Vine, and
ye are the Branches, and my Father is the Husbandman, and the Field is the
World, and the Tares are the Children of the Wicked one, and the Harvest is the
end of the World, and the Reapers are the Angels; they that received the Seed
by the Highway, are they that, etc. And so he speaks usually.

2. They know that in 1 Cor. 11. Paul calls it Bread after the Consecration,
three times in the three next Verses: And would they have Burnt Paul for a
Heretic? What can they devise against these plain words?

3. They sentence all to Death and Hell that will believe their Eyes, Taste,
Feeling or any Sense of themselves, and all others, that perceives true Bread
and Wine after Consecration.

4. Hereby they make God as Creator, the Grand Deceiver of the World, by
deluding all Men's Senses.

5. And hereby they overthrow all certainty of Faith Divine and Humane. For
Sense and Humanity are before Faith and Christianity, and their perception
presupposed: And if Sense be presupposed fallible, yea false, Faith must needs
be so: For we are not sure that ever we saw a Book, or Man, or Light, or heard
man speak, or what he says: And how can he believe Gods Word or the Popes, or
Priests, that is not sure that ever he heard or saw them?

6. They feign every sottish filthy Priest, to work more Miracles at his
pleasure, by his transubstantiating, than Christ or his Apostles did.

7. They enable a drunken Priest to undo Bakers and Vintners, by saying the
words of Consecration Intention Consecrandi over all their Bread and Wine: And
then they have none left.

8. They feign Christ to have eaten his own Body by his Body, and either that
the same Body did eat it self, or that he had two Bodies that did eat neither.

9. They feign that his whole Body did eat his broken Body, and that his
Disciples did eat it, before it was broken; and drank his shed Blood before it
was shed.

10. When two General Councils C.P. the 5th. and Nice the 2d. tell us, that
Christ's body in Heaven now is not Flesh and Blood, and Paul says 1 Cor. 15,
that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, yet they maintain that
Christ has had these 1600 years a body of Flesh and Blood.

11. They feign abundance of Accidents without subject Substances, that are the
Accidents (Quantity, Quality, etc.) of nothing.

12. They feign a sottish Priest to make his Maker day by day.

13. When Christ says, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, shall
live for ever; they feign the most wicked men to eat his Flesh and drink his
Blood.

14. They feign Mice to eat God.

15. They feign every wicked man to eat his God, and digest part of him into
his own Flesh and Blood, and cast out the other part into the Jakes.

16. They teach men to commit Idolatry, by worshipping Bread as God.

17. All this is enforced by Fire and Sword, against the Blood of Holy men.

18. All this is Novel Heresy, contrary to the Doctrine of the Universal
Church, for a Thousand years after Christ and more.

19. It Is contrary to Paul's Quere, 1 Cor. 12. Are all workers of Miracles?
understood Negatively.

20. It Is feigned a sufficient ground to depose Princes, and destroy whole
Lands.

But these things, and specially the forged Miracles of the Transubstantiation,
are more largely confuted in many Treatises.

What hope of ending any Controversies with Papists, that agree not with us in
the credit of Senses as Heathens do? Can we bring any Controversy to a plainer
issue, than to all Men's common Senses, about due Objects and due Mediums? And
is there any disputing where no principle is agreed on?

The Fortieth accused Point.
That we ought to receive under both kinds, and that one alone is not
sufficient.

Ans. It concerns them that deny this, either to keep men from Reading Gods
Word, or to tell them it is false, and the Pope's is true that contradicts
it: What is a flat defyance of God or his Word, if this be not? Christ says,
Math. 26.27, 28. Drink ye all of it: For this is my Blood of the New Testament,
which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. And St. Paul says, 1 Cor.
11.23. I have received of the Lord that which I delivered to you: That the Lord
Jesus, the Night in which he was betrayed, took Bread, etc. Verse. 25. After the
same manner also he took the Cup, when he had Supped, saying, This Cup is the
New Testament in my blood: This do ye as often as you drink it, in remembrance of
me: For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lord's Death 'till he come: Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord: But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that Cup.

These words do so plainly say, it is bread after the Consecration, and do so
plainly require all to drink of the Cup, as well as to eat of the Bread, that
the Infallible Clergy are fain to accuse the Light of Darkness, the Text of
deceitful Obscurity, till the Pope and his Prelates have expounded it, by
giving it the Lie: Just like the Knave in Ignoramus's Play, that Proclaimed the
man to be Mad, from whom he intended to extort Money, that is, for binding and
abusing him. What is it to proclaim Christ and Paul to be Fools, that could not
speak Sense, if this be not?

But the Doctors have also contradictions to charge on Christ, even that
elsewhere he says, [ He that eats his Flesh shall live for ever:] Ans. 1.
That is, He that trusts in a Sacrificed Christ as the means of his Salvation,
as bread is the means of natural Life: He that would not understand, cannot
understand the plainest Words: But does Christ say, that any man eats his
flesh, that drinks not his blood? Or that he shall have Life, that does the
one without the other?

2. And seeing they take every Rogue that eats their Wafer to eat Christ's
Flesh, do they not here falsely say that all such shall have Eternal Life: O
happy (miserable) Church, that has Eternal Life, how wicked soever, for eating
the Wafer, and calling it Christ's Flesh! And all this, that Faith may not be
thought to be meant by eating.

3. But seeing it must needs be eating by the Teeth, or by Flesh eating that is
meant, they have found out a crafty literal way: Christ says that he loves
and cherishes his Church as his own Flesh, and we are Members of his body, of
his flesh, and of his bones: And so they that Murdered a Million of the
Albigenses, etc. and Massacred 40000 in France, and 200000 in Ireland, and
Burnt them in England, Germany, the Low Countries, and Tormented and Killed
them in Bohemia, and many other Lands, did learn the literal way of eating
Christ's Flesh. And who doubts but the Devil tells them that they shall thereby
obtain everlasting Life? But why then are they against drinking his blood, when
actually they draw it out by streams? Perhaps by Burning his Bones, (as they
did Buce^s, Phagius, Wickliffes, and 1000 more;) they think that their Teeth
escape the trouble of gnawing them, and thus they feed on Christ's body, flesh
and bones: For their Masters beat Witches if they bring him not account at
every Meeting, of some mischief that they have done.

3. And what but flat opposition to Christ, should move these men to forbid one
half of his Sacrament, which he calls the New Testament in his blood? One would
wonder what should be their Motive: It is no matter of Pleasure, Profit, or
Honor: This very Deceiver had more wit than to pretend Antiquity for it, or
any one ancient Doctor of the Church. They dare not deny (save to Ignorants and
Fools,) that it is a Novelty contrary to unquestioned Consent and Practice of
all Christ's Church, for above a thousand years, or near at least. It is
undenyably against Christ's Institution and Command, against his Apostles
Doctrine, and Scripture Practice; against all the Judgment and Practice of the
ancient Church, against the Nature and Integrity of the Sacrament, against the
Concord of the Church, that will never Unite against all these, against the
Sense and Comfort of Believers. What then does overruled so many men to Tear
the Church, to Murder so many Bohemians as they did, etc. for such a thing as
this is? Reader I will tell thee all that I know: The Devil is in constant War
against Christ and his Kingdom, and the Souls of men: As he thought he could
have triumphed in making Job curse God to his Face; so he would fain show that
he can make Christ's own pretended Ministers oppose and despise the plainest of
his Commands, and defy his Word and him to his Face. To this he gets by the
baits of Worldly Wealth, Honor and Dominion, a sort of Fleshly Worldly men to
be Bishops, whose very hearts are against the Laws of Christ: And puffing up
these men by degrees, he tells them how they must be Great, and arrogate Power
equal to Christ's Apostles, and so domineer over the Souls of men; and all this
on pretense of honoring Christ: And having gotten a Generation of gross
ignorant debauched Villains, into the Papal elevated Seat, and the Ruling
Church Power, when some poor Woman once or twice shed some of the Wine, or a
Priest chanced to spill it, their profane Holiness decreed that they should
drink the Wine no more (save the Clergy,) but should eat Christ's Blood, which
they said was in his Flesh, and a while they dipped the Wafer in Wine; and then
pretended Infallibility being their vain Glory, they must not change lest they
should seem to be fallible, and should Repent; for Repenting undoes Satan's
Kingdom.

The One and Fortieth accused Point.
That there is not in the Church a true and proper Sacrifice; and that the Mass
is not a Sacrifice.

Ans. True and proper, if the words are intelligible, are put against false and
equivocal or figurative. And what man can tell us which Sense of the word [
Sacrifice] must be taken for the only proper Sense, when with Heathens and
Christians the word is used in so many Senses, and there are so many sorts of
Sacrifices? This man would not tell you whether it be the Thing or the Name
that he controverteth; that would be to come into the Light. If it be the
thing, we never doubted but diverse things are and must be in the Church, which
are called Sacrifices, some in Scripture, and some by Papists: And some things
by them called Sacrifices, are in their Church which God is against.

If it be the Name that is the question, we know that in a General Sense it may
be given to many things of different Species, and equivocally yet to more; but
which Sense to call proper among so many, let quibling Grammarians tell him: We
strive no further about Names, than tends to preserve the due Judgment of
things.

Sometime a Sacrifice signifies a second thing offered to God by way of
worship.

Sometime more strictly, somewhat supposed highly to gratify or please him,
offered to expiate some Crime that displeases him, or by pleasing to procure
some benefit from him.

Among Heathens and Jews, there were various sorts of Sacrifices: Some
Hilastical, some Eucharistical: Some of things Lifeless, and some of Living
Creatures; where strictly part was burnt and so offered to God, and part given
to the Priest, and part eaten by the Offerers.

We hold, 1. That Jesus Christ offered his Body on the Cross a Sacrifice to God
for the expiation of Sin, as a thing pleasing to God, in a sense which no other
Sacrifice ever*was or is; not that God delighted in his Blood, Pain or Death as
such; but as finis gratia, it was the most excellent means to demonstrate his
Wisdom, Love, Justice, and Mercy, and save a sinful race of men, with the
honor of his Law and Government.

2. We hold that Christ has instituted his Sacrament, to be a visible
Representation of this his Sacrifice, both for Commemoration and for actual
Investiture and Collation of Christ to be our Savior, and Head in Union, and
of his Grace and Benefits, Pardon, Reconciliation, Adoption, Justification,
Sanctification, and Title to Glory. And we know that the ancient Churches
called this often a Sacrifice: Not in the same sense as Christ was our
Sacrifice; nor as the Mosaical Types were Sacrifices; but a Representative
Sacrifice, representing Christ's own. But we are the shier to use the name
Sacrifice, where Papists apply it to Idolatry.

3. We know that all Christians are bound to dedicate themselves to God, and
even to lay down their Lives when he requires it; and bound to offer him
penitent Confession, Praise, Thanksgiving, and to give Alms to the poor, and
serve and honor him with all their Wealth and Power. And all these are called
Sacrifices in Scripture, because they are sacred oblations, acceptable to God
through the merits of Christ's Sacrifice.

Is not this man a Calumniator then, that faith we hold, [ that there is not in
the Church a true and proper Sacrifice,] unless he call none true and proper
but what no man can offer to God.

But what say we to the Sacrifice of the Mass? We say, that for the Priest to
pretend that after his words, Bread is turned into Christ's Flesh in a Physical
sense, and Wine into his Blood, and that this is our God, and that he
sacrifices this God to God, and eats and drinks him so sacrificed, and
that all that so receive him have Eternal Life: This is a profanation of Holy
things, a deceiving of Souls, a blaspheming of Christ, and Idolatry against
God. And all sacrificing in their Mass, that is more than a Representation of
Christ's own sacrificing himself, for Commemoration and Communication of the
gifts of his Testament, and the expression of our Gratitude, and Devotedness to
God by him, is their own profane invention.

How do they offer his broken body and blood shed, any otherwise than
Representatively, unless they kill him, and eat him when he is Dead? It was
only a Representation of his own sacrificed Body and Blood, which he made at
the Sacrament himself; not then broken and shed, but to be broken, slain, and
shed soon after, (unless he had two bodies, one dead and one alive.) The
Sacrament indeed was called a Sacrifice by the ancient Churches, to signify
that it is not Christ's body as now glorified in Heaven that is there
Represented, but his body as once flesh and blood sacrificed on the Cross: And
how can it be that, but by Representation, sacrificing it was killing it: Do
they kill Christ a thousand thousand times over, yea, and kill his Gloryfied
body? He has no existent Flesh and Blood in Heaven, speaking properly and
formally; but a Spiritual glorified body, that was Flesh and Blood on Earth:
And does every Priest turn Christ's Spiritual glorified body into Flesh and
Blood again? O what a Mass of profanation is their Mass.

Tho Two and Fortieth accused Point.
That Sacramental Unction, is not to be used to the Sick.

Ans. In those Hot-Countries, anointing their bodies was used as a great
refreshment for Delight and Health. And Christ and his Apostles applied it to
the Miraculous use of Healing, as Christ did Clay and Spittle to a blind Man:
And while that miraculous use continued, St. James bids those that are sick as
a punishment for some sin, to send for the Elders of the Church, that they may
pray for the pardon of his sin, and for his recovery, and anoint him with Oil,
and if he have not sinned unto Death, (that is, a Capital Crime, which God
would have Magistrates punish with Death, and will do so himself,) his Sin
shall be forgiven, and he shall be healed.

See now the Malice of the Prince of Darkness. He that tempts men to cast out
half the substance of the Lords Supper, merely to show what they can and will,
and dare do against his Word, and tempts men to forbid the very Scripture it
self, yet to undo, he will overdoe, and draw men to be wise and Righteous over
much: Who would think these men are against the sufficiency of Scripture, that
will turn its temporary occasional actions into perpetual Sacraments? They make
Conscience of washing Feet, of bearing Palms, of the Holy-Kiss (but on the Pax)
and a Sacrament of anointing the sick: And why they make not a Sacrament of
anointing the Blind with Clay and Spittle, of washing at Jordan or Siloam
Pools, and of the said Kiss, and washing of Feet, of bearing Palms, of the
Popes Riding on an Ass, etc. I know not.

But for the Name of a Sacrament, (bring first a Military, and then a Church
Term, not used in Scripture) we will not quarrel with them: They may laxly
extend it to almost any Ceremony or sign Religiously used, rightly or wrongly.
But, 1. They use that to the Dying, when they judge them past hope, which St.
James spoke of using for Recovery.

2. They use that as an ordinary thing, which was to be used only for
miraculous Cures: and yet show not that they have the Faith or gift of
Miracles, nor cure any by it.

3. They force men to that feigned Sacrament now ceased with that gift, which
was used to none but such as Voluntarily desired it. Why are they not con^^^^ed
to use it themselves, but they must force all others to it as necessary? What
Man, Woman, or Child, do you read of in all the New Testament, that was
anointed in order to Death, save a Woman that meant no such thing, that
anointed Christ in Health? Where read you that Dragoons or Inquisitors enforced
it, and draged naked the bodies through the Streets, and Buried them in
Dunghils, or where Dogs may eat them, if they refuse it? Whose Sacraments can
we think are these?

The Three and Fortieth accused Point.
That no Interior Grace is given by Imposition of hands in Holy Orders: And
that ordinary Vocation and Mission of Pastors, is not necessary in the Church.

Ans. Contrarily the Reformed Catholics hold, 1. That God often gave
miraculous interior gifts to men, by the Imposition of the Apostles hands.

2. And if he please he may now bless Ordination to the increase of men's
mental fitness for the Ministry; and when he does so, we know not.

But we hold, 1. That men should be supposed by the Ordinances to be true
Christians, and to have competent Ministerial Abilities before they Ordain them.

2. That now miraculous gifts cease, no man can tell when any other inward
Grace is given by Imposition of hands in Ordination, than Relative, which is
Obligation and Authority for the work of the Ministry. And Durandus and other
of their Schoolmen, say that their Indelible Character is no other. And the
rest know not what to make of it.

3. If we read of Multitudes of Debauched, Ignorant, Apostatical Popes and
Prelates, and many Ages of Church Barbarism, and Bruitishness, (even in
Baroni^s, Genebrard, and the fiercest Papists;) and if we see Priests after
Ordination to be Ignorant, Drunkards, Fornicators, unable and unapt to Teach,
haters of a Godly Life, we cannot tell what Grace it is that these men are said
to receive in Ordination: Whatever it is, it will not keep them out of Hell, as
it keeps them not from serving Satan.

4. We take an ordinary Calling and Mission to be ordinarily needful to the
Church Ministry. This Calling consists, 1. In necessary Abilities, without
which God sends none. 2. In willingness and Consent. 3. In the Ordination by
Senior Pastors, where it may be had. 4. And to fix them in relation to
particular Congregations, the mutual consent of themselves and the Flocks.

5. But we know Rules of mere Order are for the things ordered, and the
Edification of the Church, for which all Church Power is given, and God
Commands that all be done: And we know that God who will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice, would not have us destroy the substance by pretense of a Ceremony.
And that in several Cases, Ministers may be lawfully called without Imposition
of hands, and Canonical Ordination. As, 1. In case men be cast into Infidel
Countries, where no Bishops or Pastors can be had: As by Shipwreck, or
Merchants Factory, or Ambassadors, or when a Bishop with them dies by the way:
They must not be without all public Church Worship, for want of an Imposing
Bishop.

2. In case Persecution drive all the Bishops out of reach.

3. In case the persecuted Bishops refuse to Ordain for fear of suffering.

4. In case the Bishops be Heretics, or intolerable Usurpers and no true
Bishops, wanting the Essentials of a Qualification and a Call.

5. In case the Bishops impose any false Oath, Subscription, Covenant, or
Profession, or any other Sin, as the Condition without which they will not
Ordain, (which is the case of all the Papists Prelates;) their Ordination in
these cases is not necessary.

6. We know that in such cases the Ministry fails not, but there may be a
true succession of Pastors, though regular Canonical Ordination be interrupted.
For there is nothing necessary after Gods Law, which specifieth the Office by
stated Institution, but only the determining who the Persons are that God would
have in this Office: Which may be well known without Canonical Ordination,
where that cannot lawfully be had. There are instances in the ancient Churches,
that when some Elected to be Bishops, fled or hid themselves; the Bishops
Ordained them absent, by writing, without imposition of hands.

7. Yea, we know that if in any one Church or Nation, the succession were
totally interrupted, for many years, God has left means sufficient to restore
it. 1. His Word describes the Office, and gives the Authority and obligation
to the Person when determined of. 2. That Determination may be made, 1. By the
due Qualification of the Person: 2. The inviting Necessities of the People and
opportunity. 3. Mutual Consent; and without these the Ordination and Mission of
a Bishop is vain.

8. The Church of Rome more needs this Doctrine than the Protestants: For it
is notoriously certain, that regular Succession has failed often and long in the
Papacy, and consequently in its Clergy. 1. There is no more notorious
interruption than by the utter incapacity of the Unqualified: And such have
been those that were Children or declared Sots, Beasts, Simonists, filthy
Lechers, Heretics, Infidels, Schismatics, by General Council, and the most
Papal Historians. Their Succession now is from Eugenius the 4th. deposed as an
Heretic by a General Council.

2. When there have been two or three Popes above twenty times, no man knows
which was the right.

3. Either Election is in the power of some in special, or not; if not, the
Turks, or Heathens, or Heretics, may choose a Pope: If it be, Then who have
the Power? Its known that at first the Bishop of Rome was chosen by the People
of one Congregation: After by the Clergy and people of the Christians of the
City: After that by the Bishops of the Diocese: Sometimes by the Emperors: Or
Arrian Kings (with the Clergy and people:) Sometimes by General Councils:
Sometimes against General Councils, by an Armed Faction: And of late times by
things called a College of Cardinals. If all these were lawful, no one sort
have the Electing Power: If any was unlawful, the Succession has been
interrupted.

4. Either the Ordination of a Superior is necessary, or not: If yea, then the
Pope having no Superior, was never truly Ordained: If not, then a Presbyter may
be Ordained without a Bishop. Rome is more concerned to answer these things
than we.

The Four and Fortieth accused Point.
That Priests and other Religious persons who have Vowed their Chastity to God,
may freely Marry notwithstanding their Vow.

Ans. 1. Must none keep Vows but Priests and Religious People.

2. The known Doctrine of the Protestants about Oaths and Vows (which you may
see in Sanderson de Juramento,) is, 1. That Antecedently it is unlawful to
ensnare our selves by unneecssary Vows, of that which is out of our Power, or
so mutable, that it may hereafter be made our Duty which now is not. 2. But
having once Vowed, we must distinguish of the Imposing, the making of the Vow,
and the Matter of it. And that, 1. Though it was by Parents, or others
unlawfully imposed, 2. And by our selves, by temerity unlawfully made or sworn,
3. Yet if the Matter consideratis considerandis be necessary or lawful, the Vow
must be kept: But if it be Sin that is Vowed, it must not be done. Because
Man's Vows cannot abrogate or suspend Gods Laws. Can any of your Casuists deny
this?

Therefore, if Boys or Girls Vow Chastity, and it prove thar they cannot keep
it without sin, the Matter becomes to them unlawful, and they must break it:
As for instance: 1. If they cannot keep it without apparent hurt to their Souls
by Lust. 2. Or if the Heir of the Crown, or some great Estate, Vow it, and if
he keep it, the Kingdom or Church is like to suffer by it. 3. If Parents or
Prince countermand the Vow in Youth.

But if they can keep it, and that keeping become not Sin by consequent
accidents or changes, they ought to keep it; though they must repent of their
rash unlawful making it. Gods Law is perfect, and makes Duty enough for us,
and we should not foolishly make more as Lawgivers to our selves, when we are
conscious how far short we come of keeping Gods own Laws.

The Five and Fortieth accused Point.
That Fasting and abstinence from certain Meats, is not grounded on Holy
Scripture, nor causes any Spiritual good.

Ans. Still deceitful Confusion: Protestants hold, 1. Fasting is a needful Duty
to several Persons in several cases. As, 1. To take down the Flesh when it
grows too strong in Lust. 2. For the cure of many Diseases from fullness. 3.
To exercise our Humiliation in times of public Danger and Calamity, or of
personal repentance for some great Sin, or under some affliction that calls
for great Humiliation.

2. They hold that Abstinence is needful in it is time and place, as Fasting is
in it is: And that all Eating and Drinking is unlawful, which gratifieth the
Appetite by Quantity or Quality against Men's health, and the just Rules by
which we should judge what is healthful: Yea, that bare Eating and Drinking to
please the Appetite, which does not some way conduce to fit us for our Duty, is
Sin.

3. We know that the same Meat and Drink for Quality and Quantity which is best
for one, is hurtful and mortal to another: And we know that Fasting is as
Physic, whether for Health, or for the Soul: and if we are fallen into the
hands of such Physicians, as will tie all the Land and all the World to take
the same Physic, and on the same days, to take a Purge or a Vomit every
Wednesday, Friday, and Holy Evens, we shall obey them when we are a-weary of
our Lives. I think our London Colleges would deride such prescribers.

4. And if any will tell us that we shall merit of God, and save our selves by
forbearing the coursest sort of Flesh, and eating the more costly Fish,
Junkets, Sweetmeats, and drinking Wine and strong-Drink, we abhor such
Mock-Fasts, for God will not be mocked: But Hipocrites turn all Religion into a
Mockery. I have heard those called strict precise Protestants, accused as being
against abstinence and Fasting; and upon enquiry I found that those of my
acquaintance, eat and drink less all the year, than their accusers of my
acquaintance do on their Mock-fasting days. To such their Diet would seem a
strict Fast, even Calvin that macerated his body, with eating but a few bits
once a day, is by some Papists called a sensual Glutton, (though Massonius
says the contrary.)

The Six and Fortieth accused Point.
That Jesus Christ descended not into Hell, nor delivered thence the Souls of
the Fathers.

Ans. 1. And do not these false Accusers know that both the Creed which we all
profess, and the Articles of the Church of England, say expressly that Christ
descended into Hell? 2. And those ahat dislike the Translation of (...) into
Hell, yet grant Christ went into (...); and that is all the Scripture says: So
that all the doubt is but what (...) signifies? Whether the Hell of Torment,
or more Generally the unseen state of separate Souls! If you mean the last,
what Protestants deny it? If you mean the first, what presumptuous cruelty is
it, to believe that all the Souls of the Fathers were in Hell, till the Death
of Christ? Christ alleging, I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob,
sure meant not, that God was their God, because they were in Hell: Was Lazarus
in Hell when Abraham said, Now he is Comforted? It was a Hell of Joy and
Comfort: Were Samuel, Elisha, Job, Daniel, etc. in Hell? Was Moses in Hell,
that appeared in Glory on the Mount with Elias? But what is it that the
Infallible Church cannot make good, when they have once presumed to affirm it?

The Seven and Fortieth accused Point.
That there is no Purgatory Fire, or other Prison, wherein sin may be satisfied
for after this Life.

Ans. 1. Which way this Church came to be so much acquainted with Hell, and
Purgatory, and Prisons, and satisfying in them, in the other World, more than
is revealed in the Word of God, we know not, unless some have told them that
come thence, or from Heaven. But for our parts, we think Gods Word more trusty
than Dead men whom we know not: God sends us to the Law, and to the
Testimony: If they speak not according to these, it is because there is no
Light in them, Isa. 8.20. Abraham preferred Moses and the Prophets before one
from the Dead. The profane citation of Scripture by him for such a
Purgatory-Prison, and Satisfaction, needs no answer save the perusal of the
Texts.

What mean these men by [ satisfying for Sin?] 1. If they mean that
Satisfaction by the merits whereof God pardons sin without dishonor to his
Justice, Government, or Law:] Christ, and he only, has thus fully satisfied
for sin, already, and there remains no more Sacrifice for sin; for by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

2. But if by satisfying for sin, they mean that all must suffer all the
punishment that their sin deserves, then God forgiveth no sin at all: For to
forgive the sin, is to forgive the punishment: And then they renounce the
Office, Sacrifice and Blood of Christ, which are for the pardon of Sin: And
they renounce Baptism and the Lords Supper that give and Seal it: And they cast
away all hopes of Salvation, and damn all Mankind: For all Sin deserves some
degree of Damnation in Hell. But if the Pope can pardon, sure God does pardon
some: To deny pardon, is to deny all the Scripture, and all humane hope and
mercy.

3. But if by [ satisfying for sin,] they mean that God when he forgiveth
through Christ the destructive everlasting Punishment, will yet require some
corrective temporal punishment, with which he is said to be satisfied, in that
he requires no more, we confess de re, that such a thing there is in this
World; Death as Death, and Pain as Pain are such; and the Curse on the Earth,
and the loss of some degrees of Grace; they are all corrective Penalties: And
if any say that a lower degree of Glory for the loss of some degree of Grace is
such; or that the separation of the Soul from the Body till the Resurrection,
has some nature of Penalty; we strive with no man about such things: But de
nomine we justly here dislike the Word, [ Satisfying,] because in common Sense,
it sounds as some Compensation, and somewhat that is of the same nature with
Christ's satisfaction; and that is all that Justice requires to purchase our
pardon. And it encourages the ill use of it by Papists, that make it
meritorious.

And de re we believe no such Purgatory, (much less the Popes Power to deliver
men out of it, for Masses or the like,) because God tells us of no such thing.
And the Primitive Churches never owned it: Augustine first seemed to doubt of
it: But I find none before that ever held it, unless you will call Origens
Opinion such, that thought the Devils and Damned should have a time of
Deliverance, (now called Heresy.)

As to 1 Cor. 3.13, 15. Is there no fiery Trial of mistaken Doctrine, and of
the Erroneous in this Life?

As to Joh. 11.22. What an Expositor is this: I know (says Martha,) that
whatever thou will ask of God, he will give it thee: Ergo, Lazarus was
delivered out of Purgatory. As well he may say, All Saints shall have a
Resurrection: Therefore all are in Purgatory. Or God denies Christ nothing:
Therefore there is a Purgatory.

So Acts 2.24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of Death,
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. Here he notes two
things. 1. That where Christ was, there was pains. Ans. As if Death it self
were not a Penalty: It was Christ's pains, or penal State of Death, that Peter
mentions, and the man himself here confesses that Christ had no pain in that
place. 2. But he says that it was not Christ's, but others pain that is said to
be loosed; when the Text plainly says, 1. That it was Christ's pains of Death.
2. Loosed by his Resurrection. 3. Because it was impossible that he, (not they)
should be held of it.

So 1 Cor. 15.24. Because there is no mention of Baptizing for the Dead, he
feigneth a Purgatory meant. And Luke 16.9. That Receiving at Death into the
everlasting Habitations, proves a Purgatory: When yet they say that Purgatory
is to none an everlasting Habitation: And Luke 23.42. Because the Thief would
be remembered by Christ in his Kingdom, Souls may be helped after death out of
Purgatory: As if it was Purgatory that was the Paradise with Christ, where that
Thief was to be that day: Is it not tedious but to read such profanation of
Gods Word?

The Eight and Fortieth accused Point.
That it is not lawful to make or to have Images.

Ans. This Lie has conquered the blushing Passion. 1. Can such men believe
that there are no Protestant Painters? Are there none of their Shops in London,
or Holland? Do none but Papists make or sell Pictures? Are not the Statues of
Kings at the Exchange, the Stocks-Market, Chaering-Cross? Are there no Images
on our Coin? Nor our Banners? Nor on the Escutcheons of the Nobility and Gentry
of this and other Lands: Are there no Images at the Sign-posts in all London,
nor in all the Cities, and Market Towns in the Kingdom? Nor in any of the
Church-Windows?

But perhaps they will say, though we speak so universally (to deceive the
ignorant,) yet we meant it of Images of Religious signification and use. Ans.
And do not all the Lutherans keep them in their Churches? Are they not
continued in most Church-Windows in England?

Obj. But at least it is true of the Calvinists or Puritans? Ans. 1. And will
you therefore slander the rest? 2. But we must not hastily believe any thing
that false accusers say? Have not the Holland Calvinists multitudes of
Pictures? Did you never see Beza and others, Icones virorum illustrium, nor Mr.
Samuel Clerk's Lives with Images? Nor the Puritans English Geneva Bible, with
the Images of the Histories? Nor the Dutch Quarry-Bricks for Chimneys, on which
most of the History of the Bible is painted? O! for Truth or Modesty.

2. But we confess that there are some Images Bawdy, some Superstitious,
Idolatrous, or Blasphemous, which we leave to such as choose them, they being
not for our use, (of which after.)

The Nine and Fortieth accused Point.
That it is not lawful to reverence Images, nor to give any honor to
insensible things.

Ans. Methinks you should sometime speak truth, if it were but before you are
aware. 1. Protestants commonly hold, that they should give Honor to all
Insensible things: They are all the work of God; dishonouring or not honoring
the Creature, or Work, is dishonouring or not honoring the Creator and Maker
as such. The due praise and honor of a Building, a Book, etc. is necessary to
the due praise and honor of the Author! Do you think Protestants Condemn the
18th. Psalm, the 104th. Psalm, the 145, and all the rest that Magnify the
works of God? Is there any above a Beast, that does not honor and praise Sun,
Moon, Stars, Heaven and Earth, Sea and Land, as the works of God? Yea we honor
every Plant and Flower, every Vigetable and Mineral, knowing that God is
wonderful and unsearchable in all. What is Physic, Astronomy, Geography, but
the shell of knowing and honoring Gods Works, and God in them.

2. And the Image of Kings, of Holy Men, are purposely made and Printed by
Protestants, in Love, Honor, and Reverence to the persons Living or Dead, whom
they represent: You may see many Rooms adorned with the Images of the Fathers,
and of late Divines: For their Relation they love with some sort of honor the
Pictures of those whom you have burnt as Heretics: See whether you find them
not in John Fox his Acts and Monuments.

3. But we are warned often enough by God, and by the mischievous effects of it
in the Churches, against all Idolatrous and scandalous, and ensnaring respect
and use of Images, which are either false Representations, or are used contrary
to the second Commandment, to Corporal Idolatry though not mental, in such
likeness to the Heathen use of their Demons Images and deified Heroes and
Emperors, as seems to be but a change of the object Persons; or may tempt
others to unlawful usage of them: Especially the use being not commanded us of
God, while it is dangerous.

And we abhor the Papists Omission of the second Commandment, and turning the
Tenth into two, lest the people should perceive the evil of such Imagery. No
wonder that their Proselytes must be kept in Ignorance, and forbid the
Scriptures in a known Tongue, without a special License, when they must not
ordinarily read or hear all the Ten Commandments, even these Ten written by God
himself in Stone, are too much for them to be trusted with; and yet all the
Mass of Ceremonies, and Ocean of Canon Laws, are not too much: And he that must
be killed for not obeying these, must not know all Gods own Ten Commands; yea
many have been burnt for having his Word Translated.

4. And to pray before the Image of Saints, and then to say, we do not pray to
them, but to those that they represent, is but to do what the Heathen Idolaters
promised to do to their Demons: They usually said, We be not such Fools as to
think Wood, and Stone, and Gold, and Images, to be God. But as the first
Commandment forbids us to have any Gods but the true God; so the second forbids
us to seem to have any more, though our minds despise them, or by their way of
Image Worship, to seem to be of their mind: For as a man that uses the common
Words of an Oath, without any purpose to Swear, is a profane Swearer with the
Tongue, (which the mind should better rule,) though his mind Swear not; so he
that on his Knees in Religious Prayer, looks on Images, as the mediate Object
of his Worship, his act is bodily Idolatry, and his mind is guilty by not
better ruling it.

Where God affixeth the mention of his Jealousy, even to the Third and Fourth
Generation, calling the bowers to Images, those that hate him; it is needful to
us to be jealous of our actions: For our God is a Consuming Fire. And we are
not ignorant of the Doctrine of your St. Thomas, who says that the Image is to
be Worshipped, with the same sort of Worship as that which it represents, and
the Image of the Crucifix, with Latria, called Divine Worship.

The Fiftieth accused Point.
That no man has seen God in any Form, and that therefore his Picture or Image
cannot be made.

Ans. 1. But what if it were Lawful to Paint God? Is it Necessary? Why may you
not be contented to have a painted God your selves? Must all be burnt and
damned as Heretics that are not of your mind? Will you be jealous against
those that bow not to a painted God, as God is jealous against those that do
it? God says Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: Where says
he, Thou shall bow down to them, and worship them? Or bow toward them, and
say, It is not to them?

2. God says, Thou shall not make to thy self the likeness of any thing in
Heaven or Earth, to bow down to them and worship them. Bowing down purposely
toward them, and before them, is interpretatively bowing down to them,
worshipping them. And God would not be so worshipped: Isa. 40.16, 25. To whom
will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare unto him? To whom will ye
liken me, or shall I be equal, says the Holy one? See Lev. 26.1. Deuteronomy. 16.22.
Hab. 18.2. The Molten Image is a Teacher of Lies.

It is Blasphemy to make a Picture or Image of God, but what he makes himself;
as if we said, God is like that Image or Creature.

But this Deceiver tells us, how God appeared to Adam and others, in a humane
or some certain shape. Ans. 1. And yet he has often and earnestly forbid making
Images of him to worship.

2. Anthopomorphits, that take God to have parts like man, are Condemned as
Heretics by the Church of Rome it self. Every notifying sign of Gods
attributes, is not called his Image; and man is called his Image, for the
Divine Impressions on his Soul, which cannot it self be seen and Pictured. If
God appear by an Angel, and that Angel appear in humane shape, we are
nevertheless forbidden to worship God pictured as a man. Sun, Moon, Stars, yea,
every Creature notifieth God to us; yet may we not paint him like these, or any
other Creature. Did not Gods transcendency, and his express Word plainly and
frequently reprove this, Popery had some small excuses. If they deny Christ's
and his Apostles Words, that no man has seen God at any time, save his Son,
they reproach him: To see his Works, is only to se^ that which notifieth him,
and not himself: Else every Pagan and Brute sees God. We deny not but the Sun,
and Fire, and a man may be pictured, and that God being partly notified to us
by these, (and every Creature) may be said so far to appear in them? And when
did he appear so wonderfully as in Christ* And yet it being not his Essence in
it sell that we see in them, but his attributes is part; an Image of a man, of
the Sun, Moon, Stars, of a Horse, or a Dog, or a Toad, is not to be called an
Image of God, else God may have as many Images as Creatures.

The One and Fiftieth accused Point.
That Blessing or signing with the sign of the Cross, is not founded in Holy
Scripture.

Ans. The man would not tell you whether he mean the Lawfulness of the Cross
only, or also the necessity of using it. But what are his Proofs?

1. Rev. 7.3. Hurt not the Earth, nor the Trees, till we have sealed, (we read
signed,) the Servants of our God in their foreheads.

Is here any mention of Crossing or Blessing with the Cross? An Angel in
prophetical Vision, is bid to mark or seal the Servants of God, as those that
are not to be destroyed, when God commissioneth other Angels to destroy the
Persecutors: Therefore the Priest must sign all Christians with the Cross. And
I would they did not infer as one did from Ezekiel. 9.4, 5. [ And to the other he
said, go ye after him through the City and smite; let not your Eye spare,
neither have ye pity, stay utterly Old and Young, and little Children and
Women; but come not near any man on whom is the mark, and begin at my
Sanctuary.] And thus whatever Plague or Death God bid Angels execute on his
uncurable Enemies, Idolaters, and Persecutors, the Devil will teach men, that
Priests and their Hang-men may execute on all that are not marked in the
Forehead with a Cross? But as long as Rome is so like to Babylon, they were
better teach men a truer Exposition of the Revelations. Thus they can prove,
that the Scripture is but like a Nose of Wax, by using it as if it were so. It
was Idolatrous Persecuting Rome that was to be destroyed, and it was those that
had Gods mark, and not the Beasts that were to be secured. And who is that
Idolatrous persecuting Beast?

The next Text is Mark 10.16. Christ put his hands on Children, and blessed
them* And would he make men believe, that we deny Christ's blessing them or
others? Or that Pastors may bless the people in his Name? Is here ever a word
of signing with the Cross?

The other is Luke 24.50. He led them out as far as Bethany, and he lift up his
hands and blessed them. Therefore the Priest must Cross men in the Forehead:
Reader, this is the fashion of these Men's confuting the Reformed Catholics,
and proving Popery, and using Scripture. And have they not reason to challenge
the sole Interpreting of it? Let but the Pope and his Priests expound it, and
it shall all speak for them, and speak Blood and Fire against all that obey
them not: But till then, they are it is Enemies, because it is the greatest
Enemy to them.

2. But suppose Christ's blessing had been Crossing: With what Face do they
feign Protestants in England, to be against Crossing in the Forehead? When the
World knows that the Church of England is not only for it, but Ejecteth and
Silenceth all Ministers that will Baptize the Child of the most Godly
Christians without it. And they know that all the Churches called Lutheran use
it. Are none of these Protestants?

3. And though those called Non-Conformists, are not for the using of it as a
dedicating Symbol of Christianity in Baptismal Covenanting, to bind the
Covenanter to that Confession and holy warfare which is the promised duty of
the Covenant, nor for denying Christendom to those that refuse this use of the
Cross, (out of a fear lest this Covenanting use make it a human Sacrament added
to Baptism;) yet I meet with few of them that Condemn the ancient Christians,
that lived among Heathens, (who scorned them as worshipping a Crucified God,)
for their seasonable Crossing themselves in those Heathens sight, merely to
show that they were not ashamed of such a Crucified Savior; (not thinking what
Papists would bring it to at last.)

The Two and Fiftieth accused Point.
That the public Service of the Church, ought not to be said, but in a
Language that all the People may understand.

Ans. The Reformed Catholics indeed hold this, with these exceptions: 1. That
by All be meant the Ordinary Congregation; not meaning that if a Frenchman, or
a Dutchman, come in among them, they must needs speak to him apart in his own
Tongue.

2. That if any Rustic, Illiterate, or Novices, understand not many words in
the Translation of the Bible, or some apt words of the Minister, we must not
therefore change the Translation, nor forbear those apt words that are suited
to the more Intelligent; but help to amend the understanding of the Ignorant.

But that in Public and Private, the Congregation should understand what they
hear as the Word of God, and what is said in Confession, Prayer and Praise to
God, this we hold as a matter of grand importance.

1. Because it is purposely, plainly, and copiously decided so by the Holy
Ghost, in the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor 14. Do but read the Chapter and judge.

2. Because Christ always Preached to the people in a known Tongue.

3. He prayed, Joh 17. in a known Tongue, and taught them so to pray.

4. The Apostles where ever they came, Preached and Prayed in a known Tongue.

5. They wrote the Gospels, the Acts, and all their Epistles, to whole
Churches, in the Tongue most commonly known to the Reader, and so to be read
to, or by all.

6. It was their standing Rule; Let all be done to Edification.

7. Their Preaching and writing was all for Teaching: And it is no Teaching to
speak to men in a strange Language, (unless we be teaching them to understand
it.)

8. Praying is the expressing of known desires to God: It Is no Prayer that
expresses no Desire, and Ignoti nulla Cupido: There is no Desire, save
sensitive Appetite, that supposes not Knowledge that the thing is good and
needful. The words of a Parrot are not a Prayer. And confession of Sin is the
act of a penitent Soul, and it is no Repentance or Confession that is but words
of they know not what: It Is no penitent Confession to hear or speak words, not
understood what Sin they signify.

And to give God thanks, implies that we understand what Mercies or benefits
the words express. And to praise God is understandingly to magnify his
perfections or Works. So that words without understanding them, are no more to
be called Prayer, Praise, Confession, Thanksgiving, than the singing of a Bird
is, or the Crowing of a Cock.

9. No reasonable man would be thus served or conversed with: A Parent indeed
can understand an Abba, or a look from an Infant; but it is on supposition,
that the Infant himself perceives what he would have: And if it be not by
intellectual but sensitive perception, it is no more a Petition to his Father,
than a Dogs waiting for Food, though the person deserves more pity. So God
understands the meaning of Spiritual Groans, in one that wants words for
large expression: But that supposes that it is true inward desires after him
which those Groans signify.

But public worship requires a conjunction of Soul and Service, and therefore
a conjunct understanding: Else there is no true Union and Communion in the
worship. For one sound of words with discord of desires, is no Christian Union
and Communion. It must be supposed that either the Hearers are not praying at
all, or else that every one is secretly praying after his own thoughts for
various things, without any Concord.

What melody would it be for all the Church to sing in as many Tunes as
persons? What King or Judge will take it for a Petition, for a man to
talk-gibberish to him, or say he knows not what?

10. Even Papists deride Quakers, for meeting to say nothing: And what
difference is there, when they hear and say nothing understood, saving that the
Voice makes it a more pompous Mockery, than the Quakers Silence? O! who would
have thought that the primitive manner of public worship, should ever have
degenerated into such a profane abuse of God and man, against plain Scripture,
universal practice, and humane Reason? And this as a part of a grand design to
kill the Life of all true Religion* and delude Souls with the dead Carcass of
mortified Formalities, and Ceremonies; and that men should think that Souls are
saved as Wizards do pretend, to do Cures by Charms of words not understood;
they serve God with empty shells, when they have cast away the Kernels: Like
the silly Samaritan* Woman, that looked for a Christ to come to tell them,
whether in this Mountain or at Jerusalem men ought to worship, little knowing
what it was to worship God as a Spirit, in Spirit and Truth, when it should be
neither at that Mountain, or at Jerusalem.

But has this man no Scripture, (against Scripture?) Yes, Luke 1.8. [ The
people were praying without, while the Priest was offering Incense within.]
Therefore the public Worship may be performed, so as the people understand
not: That, 1. The Priests action only out of their sight is the public
worship, and the peoples praying is not so. 2. The offering Incense, is
Praying; or because the people are not to do the Priests Office in Incense and
Sacrificing, therefore Ministers must pray and praise God alone, without the
people, and all this public worship. 3. If the Levitical, Sacrifices were
offered by the Priest alone, Christ's Gospel worship must be performed by the
Priest alone, the people not knowing what he says: And the precepts and
examples of the New Testament, must all be reduced to the Levitical Order of
Incense and Sacrificing. 4. And is he sure that all the people in the outer
Court, prayed they knew not what, or in an unknown Tongue? What use is
Scripture of to these men?

His next is, Levit. 16.17. None was to go in with the Priest to make
atonement for the Congregation, etc. Ans. You see that these men are
Judaizers, and set up the Levitical Law for the Churches Rule of Service, as if
Christ had not changed the Law. But our Question is not now, Whether their
Priest have any solitary atonement to make for the Congregation; but whether
Christ has not instituted such public worship, in which Ministers and people
must understandingly join? Does their Priest celebrate their Mass alone, out of
the peoples sight or hearing, in a Sanctuary while they are in the outer Court?
Do not their people assemble to their Mass? Will they stand to it, that their
Church renounceth all worship of God in Holy Assemblies, save by the Priest
alone? And is this the Holy Catholic Church?

And the man here professedly calls the Priests solitary action, the public
Service, which is for the people, and not by them, and therefore they need not
understand; and all the peoples Prayers are private and should be understood;
so that (the Mystery opened,) either the Priest is all the Church, or else they
have no public Church Service, if they must meet, that every one may have a
secret Prayer of his own, and may only see the Priests Service called public.
And by this he pretends that he answers Paul, 1 Cor. 14. Adding most
shamelesly, 1. That it seems there by the Text, that the common Service of
the Church, was not then in a Tongue commonly understood. 2. Because there was
one to supply the place of the Idiots, to say Amen, where he says, that the
Genevamen, most deceitfully and maliciously Translated, [ He that is an Idiot,
how shall he say Amen?] And raileth at them for putting [ So be it.] O! what is
man, and how incredible is the pretended infallible Clergy, that can expect
that all men trust their Souls on such palpable deceit! When St. Paul spent a
great part of the Chapter to dissuade those that by Inspiration, could speak
strange Languages, that they should not use them in the Church, as being
unedifying, or at least not without an Interpreter; this man gathers, that the
common Service was in an unknown Tongue? As if this dissuaded use of some
Prophets gift, were the common Service. 2. And when he disswadeth them from
Praying in an unknown Tongue, or giving thanks in it, saying, else how can he
that occupies the Room of the unlearned say Amen, this man feigneth, that yet
they were to give thanks in an unknown Tongue, and one was to supply the place
of the Idiot or unlearned, in saying Amen, (See verse. 23.) Paul would have all
say Amen, this man says one was to do it for them: Paul argues that therefore
they must speak to the understanding of the unlearned: This man turns his own
words against him: Does his Supplier of the Idiots place himself, understand or
not? If not, Paul says, How can he say Amen? If he do, how does he supply the
place of the Idiots, that are supposed should say Amen, and cannot?

For the sake of this Chapter and Instance, I shall never think any words so
plain, that Papists cannot turn against their most evident sense.

But what is the Man's pretense for this erroneous Confidence? Why, the Vulgar
Latin Translateth it, Qui supplet locum, instead of Qui implet locum: And that
Latin Translator by supplet meant the same as implet, possidet vel tenet: (...)
is well known to signify to fill up: Their own Expositors are many of them for
the Sense which this Doctor charge as deceitfully and maliciously given:
Cornelius a Lapide says that, (...) is Denuo implere, vel simul and Communiter
omnes implere, to fill again, or all together, or in common to fill: It is not
Qui supplet vicem indocti, but Qui locum occupat inter in*doctos, or Idiotae
locum tenet.

And so it is expounded by the ancients, Chrysostom, Occumenius, Theophysact.

And are not these Roman Priests notoriously Perjured, that all Swear to
expound the Scripture, according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers, when
as (besides that the Fathers have but few of them written Commentaries on the
Scriptures, there are very few of them that unanimously agree, of the Sense of
the one half of the Scripture Texts, but either say nothing of them, or differ:
And not only in this, but in most points named by this Doctors Touchstone, he
and others go flat against them?

And what means the man to rail at them, that say So be it, instead of Amen?
Is it not a true Translation? But he will prove that it should not be
Translated, and consequently that Servict may be said in an unknown Tongue, for
Amen is not Greek but Hebrew. Ans. 1. Who can stand before these Arguments, if
they be but backed with Guns and Swords, or Smithfield Fires, which are too hot
for any Answer save Patience. He may also prove it from Christ's Words on the
Cross, Eloi Eloi Lamasabacthani: For Christ was now the most public Priest,
and was offering the most public Service by his Sacrifice: Ergo, the public
Service should be in an unknown Tongue: And it may be, they may find some other
untranslated word, that shall confute not only all the Bible, but all the
Septuagint and Vulgar Latin Translations.

But seeing these Men's Arguments are too hot for me to answer, as they might
know that the Church of England refuses not AMEN, so neither will I, (though
as I can prove, that the Corinthian Church were Hebrews and Gentiles mixed, and
that Amen was understood by both; so Protestants use it as a word understood.)

From the Serpents Seed, and his deceiving subtle Lies: From Cain and his
Successors, and the malignant and Blood-thirsty Enemies of Abels faithful
acceptable worship; from such a worldly and fleshly Sacred Generation as take
gain for Godliness, and make their worldly carnal interest the Standard of
their Religion, and their proud Domination to pass for the Kingdom of Christ:
From an Usurping Vice-Christ, whose ambition is so boundless, as to extend to
the Prophetical, Priestly and Kingly Headship, over all the Earth, even at the
Antipodes; and to that which is proper to God himself, and our Redeemer: From a
Leprous Sect, which Condemns the far greatest part of all Christ's Church on
Earth, and separateth from them, and calls it self, the whole and only
Church: From that Church that decrees Destruction, to all that renounce not
all humane Sense, by believing that Bread is not Bread, nor that Wine is Wine,
but Christ's very Flesh and Blood, who now has properly no Flesh and Blood, but
a Spiritual Body; and that decrees the Excommunication, Deposition, and
Damnation, of all Princes that will not exterminate all such; and absolveth
their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance: From that Beast whose Mark is
PER Perjury, Perfidiousness, and Persecution, and that think they do God
acceptable Service, by killing his Servants, or tormenting them; and that
Religion which feeds on Christ's Flesh, by Sacrificing those that he calls
his Flesh and Bones, Ephesians.5. From the infernal Dragon, the Father of Lies,
Malice, and Murder, and all his Ministers and Kingdom of Darkness: GOOD LORD
make haste to deliver thy Flock; and confirm their Faith, Hope, Patience, and
their Joyful desire, of the great, true, final, Glorious Deliverance, AMEN.
AMEN, AMEN.

FINIS.
This Book was delivered by Mr. Baxter himself to the Bookseller, and not being
seen by us the Authors of the Epistle to the Reader, till the Sheets were
printed, these ERRATA's must be corrected.
PAge 76. line 24. read after God through him. Page 81. l. 14. read Converted
for Convicted. Page 94. l. 24. read converted for convicted. Page 96. l. 21.
read they do hold, for do they hold. Page 97. l. 1. read sinless for senceless.
Page 116. l. 9. read intuition for intention. Page 119. l. 17. read Reneus for
Romans. Page 149. l. 4. r. Ordainers for Ordinances. Page 150. l. 15, 16. r.
preference for pretense. Page 152. l. 2^. r. Councils for Council. Page 162. l.
10. r. there is mention. Page 165. l. 3. r. Vegetable. Page 166. l. 27, 28. r.
professed for promised.
Books Printed for John Salusbury at the Sun over against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill.
AN end of Doctrinal Controversies, which have lately troubled the Churches, by
Reconciling Explication without much disputing: by Richard Baxter.

The Certainty of the World of Spirits, fully evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, proving the Immortality of Souls. By
Richard Baxter..

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. By William Bates, D.D.

The Duty and Blessing of a Tender Conscience, plainly stated, and earnestly
recommended to all that regard Acceptance with God. By T. Cruso.

Two Sermons, opening the Nature of Participation with, and demonstrating the
Necessity of Purification by Christ. By the same Author.

Five Sermons on various Occasions: by the same Author.

The Mirror of Divine Love Unvailed: In a Paraphrase of the high and mysterious
Song of Solomon.

Tho Countries Concurrence with the London United Ministers. By S. Chandler.

A Summary or Abridgement of the whole Bible, whereby Children, and the Younger
sort, may learn the Contents of it in a very short time, and give an Account of
the principal passages of it.

A New Examination of the Accidence and Grammar.

A New Discourse on the Marriage of Isaac and Rebecka. 12o.

The Suffering Christian. 12o.

Nostradamus's Prophesies.

THE CONTENTS.
1 OF the Rule of Faith p. 1 2 Of the Judge of Controversies in matters of
Faith p. 6 3 Of the Scriptures difficulty p. 8 4 Of Traditions p. 19 5 Of the
private Spirit p. ^9 6 If St. Peter's Faith failed p. ^4 7 If the Church can err
p. 39 8 Of the Churches Infallibility p. 50 9 Of her Universality p. 56 10 Of
her Unity p. 58 11 Of St. Peter's Headship p. 60 12 Of a secular Princes
Headship p. 63 13 Of Antichrist p. 67 14 Whether none but God can forgive Sin^
p. 7^ 15 Whether we ought to confess to none but to God p. 7^ 16 Of Pardons p.
7^ 17 Whether the Actions and Passions of (...) Saints are profitable to us p.
7^ 18 Of works of Supererogation p. 18 19 Of Free Will p. 82 20 Of keeping the
Commandments p. 89 21 Of Faith and good works p. 99 22 Whether good works are
meritorious p. 96 23 Whether Faith once had cannot be lost, p. 97 24 Of Gods
inevitable decree, who shall be damned and who shall be saved p. 99 25 Whether
we ought to assure our selves of our salvation. p. 103 26 Whether every one
has his Angel-keeper p. 107 27 Whether Angels pray not for us p. 108 28
Whether me may not pray to them p. 110 29 Whether they can help us or no p. 113
30 Of Saints Apparitions p. 114 31 Whether they know what passes on earth p.
117 32 Whether they pray not for us ib. 33 Whether we may allege their Merits
in favor of our selves p. 118 34 Whether we may not pray to them p. 121 35 Of
the Relicts of Saints p. 122 36 Of hallowing of Creatures p. 123 37 Of the
Necessity of Baptism p. 126 38 Of Confirmation p. 128 39 Of the last Supper p.
130 40 Of r^^^ivers under one kind p. 136 41 Of the Sacrifice of the Mass p.
14^ 42 Of Extreme Unction p. 14^ 43 Of Holy Orders p. 148 44 Of Religious Vows
p. 15^ 45 Of fasting and abstinence from meats p. 155 46 Of Limbus Patrum p.
157 47 Of Purgatory p. 158 48 Of making Images p. 162 49 Of worshipping Images
p. 164 50 Of making the Picture of God p. 168 51 Of blessing with the sign of
the Cross p. 170 52 Of service in an unknown Tongue p. 173
THere will in due time be published a large Account of Mr. Baxters Life,
mostly written by himself.


