THE Invaluable Price OF AN Immortal Soul. Showing the Vanity of most people,
in taking care for the Body, but neglect their Duty as to the preservation of
their never-dying SOULS.

By Mr. Richard Baxter.

Printed for J Clarke, in West-smithfield.

The Invaluable Price OF AN IMMORTAL SOUL. Showing the Vanity of most People,
in taking care for the Body, but neglect their Duty as to the preservation of
their never-dying Souls. With advice to secure Sinners, to examine themselves
before it be too late, that when Death shall come to separate their Souls from
their Bodies, they may be in a condition to Welcome Death for that happy Change
which all prepared Christians will for ever rejoice in. Very necessary for all
People to Read and consider, who would Willingly be accounted true Christians.
With large Admonition to Prayer, as a duty most incumbant upon all who desire
to obtain everlasting life, through Christ Jesus.

Printed for J. Clark, at the Bible and Harp, at the Hospital-gate, in
VVestsmithfield. 1681.

THE Invaluable Price OF AN Imortal Soul, SHOWING, The Vanity of most People in
taking care for the Body, but neglect their Duty as to the preservation of
their never-Dying SOULS.
THE Immortality of the Soul is a thing indisputable, and the natural proneness
of Man to sin, is a thing undeniable: But the Body which should be as a servant
to the Soul, is now (the more is the pity) taken more care for in one day,
then the soul in one year. How diligent are Men for the preservation of their
bodily health, by providing for themselves what Delicates the appetite desires:
while their poor souls are even starved for want of Heavenly Food, and ready to
faint for want of Divine Cordials: if the body be distempered, the Physician is
run for, but the poor Soul which sometimes lies in a perishing condition shall
not find one Dram of Spiritual Comfort to Refresh it self: Oh Christians,
consider how it will be with you at the last Day if you suffer your poor souls
to be thus Ship-wrackt, consider the price of your souls, which cost no less
then the precious blood of Jesus Christ to redeem them, the riches of the whole
world is not worth one soul that now is so little regarded; it had better been
for those who are so careless of their Souls never to have had any, but to have
been like a brute Beast, that when it Dies there is an end of him; but it is
not so with Man, for he shall give an Account at the great day of all his
worldly transactions, the neglecting of his Soul, the too great care of his
body, the starving of the one and the pompering of the other; which though they
know it must Dye and shall Dye, yet will they take more care for it then that
which cannot nor shall not dye, but live for ever in endless joys, or
unspeakable torments.

Besides this great neglect of most Men, there are more very great and
dangerous defects in and amongst seeming professors, who are so secure in their
sins, that they will confidently affirm, That if any go to Heaven, they shall
be of that number; for say they, We have Lived Honestly, we have done no Man
wrong, we have not Lived Debauched Lives, we are not given to any notorious
Vice, but never consider that they have brought sin enough into the world to
Damn them, without the great mercy of God, who only can preserve and keep us
from that Lake of Everlasting Torment provided for those who shall not Dye in
the Lord.

How few is there that are convinced of Original sin imputed to them? and how
many that never consider that they with Adam Transgressed by eating the
Forbidden Fruit; Nay, I fear do not so much as busy their Thoughts with any
such matter, but are satisfied with their morallity, and account themselves
upright in their dealing, and so conclude they are in a fair way for Heaven:
but alas! poor Deceived souls, this is not sufficient for you, for you will
never arrive at that desired Haven of Happiness without a better wind do fill
your sails, he will fall short of his desires who puts his trust in his own
Works or deserts, for all the Impieties of Men's wicked lives are nothing in
comparison of that venom which lodges in the heart by nature, and Man himself
hardly sensible thereof: Oh wretched state that Man knows not his own heart,
but has a Thousand times more sin in him unknown, then the greatest
self-conceited person in the world can see perfection in himself: few there are
that are not too strongly and too well opinionated of themselves, and some have
high esteem of others, and will say, that such a one is a good natured Man, he
has no deceit in him, he would not wrong a Worm: when alas, these
Excellencies are nothing in comparison of that Ocean of Sin, deformed
Corruption, which lurks in his heart, and cannot be rooted out but by that
Heavenly Antidote which alone can expel the Poison of sin out of our corrupted
Hearts, carnal Men do not consider that their wilful minds are not nor cannot
be subject to the Law of God, which is absolutely pure without spot or blemish,
whilst the best of our actions, the supreme of our thoughts, are vain, sinful
and Rebellious.

The Carnal mind thinks of nothing more then to provide for this present Life,
and has no reflection upon Eternity, nor makes any provision against that
severe VVinter which undoubtedly will follow the pleasant Summer of our
pleasure and delight, but minds only the present things of this Life, with the
neglect of seeking after eternal happiness: would not you account him silly who
would exchange Diamonds for Pebbles, Gold for Dross, or Liberty for a Goal? how
much more is he then to be accounted witless, that minds momentary pleasures
before Everlasting Happiness, takes more care for his mortal Body then his
immortal Soul, and prizes the Riches of this World, which have VVings and will
fly away, before those never-ceasing joys which attend all those who do most
faithfully and diligently seek after and earnestly desire to obtain them.
Carnal minds are slaves to the more ignoble parts of our souls, and love that
best which is least worth: we have such a simpathizing Nature toward sin and
momentary pleasure, that we do not only endeavor to extenuate the culpableness
of the Crimes, but rather justify and Plead for them, being so agreeable to
our sinful Natures. And thus do we Walk daily more and more in sin, till at
last we are brought into such a Labyrinth of sin that we cannot find the way
out, nor can our blinded Consciences tell us our errors of our lives, for we
conclude all is well with us, we do justify our selves with good opinions of
our selves, and thus we erroniously deceive our never-dying souls.

Again, Some have a kind of an unwilling willingness to sin, and could wish
that such and such things were no sins, because they are so suitable to their
sinful desires, they had rather to live a brave, jovial, merry life, like
servants to sin, then a sober, serious, and holy life like servants of God:
thus still are present enjoyments preferred before everlasting Crowns of Glory
to come, and conclude with the Old Proverb, A Bird in hand, is worth two in a
Bush: these enjoyments they are certain of, but future enjoyment, they may
miss, poor incredulous sinners, dare you not take Gods word for what he has
promised, think you that he will make any abatement of the Reward which he has
promised to bestow upon those who keep his Commandments, and walk in the paths
of Righteousness? No, it cannot be, he will rather add then diminish from your
joys, he takes as much delight in multiplying mercies, as you in multiplying
sins, and what he has promised shall be made good.

Some also are blinded in their affections, so as to love what they should have
hated, and hate what they should love, and yet are not sensible of what a sad
condition they are in, but go merrily on, and fear not but in the end they
shall be saved, concluding that there are many Thousands far worse then they
that live in open sins and abominations, which they abhor; and some of these,
if not most or all of them, will say that they hope to be saved as well as
others, and if they can hope for salvation, well may they who live much more
Civilized and strangers to these enormous Crimes and detestable practices: yet
still do they deceive themselves, and look not upon sin so as to see it in its
greatest deformity, which makes Devils of many who are still fighting and
striving against God and his most just Laws, and do not consider that the devil
is the Author of it, but still flatter up themselves, and say, That they have
nothing to do with the Devil, nor he with them, yet are never better pleased
then when they are busied about the devils work: They conclude, that they can
live in sin and defy the Devil and all his works.

How few is there that can give a true definition of sin, and what an Enemy it
is to all Mankind; for had it not been for that blessed Mediator Christ Jesus,
the whole frame of Nature had been utterly destroyed by it.

Sin is absolutely contrary to the will of God, therefore should it be
absolutely detestable to the Heart of Man, sin would pull down what Gods holy
Laws would set up, and Establish Gods prescribed Laws for the salvation of
souls, and the Devil devises sins for the Destruction of souls, yet will not
poor sinners see that impurity which in sin it is clearly contrary to the very
Nature of God. It is universally evil, there is no good in it, nor can come any
good of it, Men are not easily persuaded there is any good in Poverty,
Reproach, disgrace, Persecution, but very easily believe there is good in sin.

This jumps with their opinion, this suits with their sinful Natures, and all
things fall out according to their worldly desires: but never to take into
consideration the Evil effects and Miserable Consequences of sin, the VVriting
on the wall is not minded while they are alive.

Were it possible for Men to go to Hell-Gate, there to hear the Terrible
shrieks and cries of the Damned: Or could we persuade People to believe the
words of the Prophet, There is no peace to the Wicked; then surely Men would
not set their Delights upon sin, which is the sole Object of Gods hatred, and
nothing separates betwixt God and souls but sin; though sin fills the
Conscience with Terror, Hell with Fire, yet few are affrighted hereat, but
continue in their old Road of wickedness, till Judgment follows close and
before they are aware overtakes and destroys them in the midst of their sins.

There are also some who are clearly cast out of the favor of God, yet are not
at all sensible of their miserable conditions, but go dancing along in the
devils Chains, and mind not that the sentence is given forth, because it is not
forthwith executed, though there may be but a little breath before they for
ever perish.

How many is there that never knew what a wounded Conscience or the fear of
Judgment means, yet count themselves Noble Spirits, and promise to themselves
Peace, reckon themselves needy of nothing; when alas, poor deceived souls, they
need but all.

Though Ministers daily labor to convince them of their errors, yet they rest
confident that their Condition is good as the Precisians, nor can serious
consideration take such hold on them as to cause them to lose one Minutes rest
to lament their sad Conditions, never were they so sensible of the
insupportable Burden of sin, as to cry out What shall I do to be saved? And
the reason is, because they are dead in Sins and Trespasses. Death is a Thing
which deprives us of sense as well as of Life: the Dead fear not though
threatened with the greatest of punishments; The Dead fear not though God
pronounce woes upon woes against them: The Dead see not, though Hell be so
frightful a place: The Dead smell not, though sin stinks worse then rotten
Sepulchers: The Dead feel not, though Mountains of lead were lying on them: They
complain not as Cain did in the Bitterness of soul, by reason of Sin: Nor say
with Hannah, that they were ever of a sorrowful spirit.

And though there be an Entayl of wrath upon the very sins they live in; though
Hell be open to receive the impenitent and hard-hearted sinner; and though room
is preparing for them to entertain them with the Vegeance of a Displeased God,
yet few Work out their salvation with Fear and Trembling, but fall short of
the sense of Hypocrite. Oh I pity these secure souls, how short will they fall
of their hopes, and not only so, but how far will they fall short of Heaven.

And again, Some are not sensible that it is Satan who finds out these
stratagems to destroy their poor souls, or that he has the Possession of the
Hearts of the Unregenerate: but certain it is, that he has VValks in the
Hearts of mere Natural Men, therefore plain it is, that while thou art
Unregenerate, he is as certainly entered into thee, as ever he was into the Herd
of Swine, and will hurry thee into destruction, as them into the Sea.

Though some may be convinced of the Deformity of sin, yet they are not
convinced of the necessity of Personal and constant Obedience, which is
Required by the Covenant of works, but conclude, that if there be any failure
in the whole Law, so much as to a vain thought, that then this Covenant is
broke, and nothing but dread and fear shall seize upon such a soul.

But to prevent these sorrowful consequences of Neglect or misconstructions.
Take my advice, and apply your self wholly to God by Prayer for his assistance:
Prayer is a thing which shuts up Hell and opens Heavens Gates; yet how little
has Prayer been used as it ought to be, it is too often seen that Men under
affliction appeal to God by prayer, but afflictions being once past, he forgets
again, and prayer is neglected. It is very sad, when our affections are so
little Heavenward, as that we aim not at all at Gods Glory, but altogether our
own advantage? how can we expect that God can have any respect to our prayers,
when we have none to his Divine Majesty, and perhaps if we be not presently
answered, we fly out into extremes, and speak contemptuously of our Creator,
who can in one minute throw us all into Everlasting Misery: such is our
weakness, such is our wickedness, that upon every occasion we are apt to charge
God wrongfully, nay, speak almost blasphemously: though the cause why our
prayers are not ansuered is in our selves: To live without prayer is to be dead
while alive, for it is to live without God: what can you do less for God then
^y this hommage to own him for your Creator? or what can you do less for your
own souls, then beg for their salvation of him who alone can grant it?

Prayers may well be counted and and called sallies of the soul for more Grace,
and neglect of them can be no less than provocation, it grieves God to see that
he should be so merciful and gracious as to let his Door stand open, and that
he should assure us of a VVelcome at any time, and that we should be so unkind
as not to visit him with our prayers, which should be looked upon as Embassies
to his Divine Majesty, he cannot but take this very unkindly.

Consider the Reward which is promised to prayer, you have Christ's word for it,
for he says, When thou Prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut
thy Door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in
secret, shall Reward thee openly.

But notwithstanding this so sweet promise, how is this Duty by some omitted,
and by others quite deserted. Satan is an utter Enemy to prayer, and studies
out many ways to put by prayer, he persuades some that if they do pray, it will
be but Hypocritically: others that it is not a convenient time, for some
worldly business is to be dispatched, or any fallasie to put by this Holy Duty,
for the Devil does seek and contrive all the ways that possibly can be used by
him to entrap and ensnare Man's soul, on purpose to make it as miserable as
himself: But Man was Created for a more Nobler design then to be led Captive by
the devil, and prayer is the main instrument to avoid all his allurements.

Private Prayer is in a manner a secret talking with God, and who would not be
glad to have such blessed Communion with him, who only can make us eternally
happy, or everlasting miserable: it is somewhat Saint like to desire private
Conference betwixt God and the soul.

But let not the Devil so blind your Eyes, neither as to think that the
uttering a parcel of good and rhetorical expressions after any manner of way or
formality, will be taken for prayer with God: No, that will not do, for you
must pray ardently, affectionately, sincerely, zealously, earnestly, and also
constantly: and if you would have your prayers ansuered, you must wait with
patience, for Gods time is the best and fittest time to answer prayer in, for
he knows best when and how to answer us, and what is fittest for us to enjoy:
but many there are, who because that their prayers and petitions are not
ansuered presently according to their expectations, do presently revolt from
their custom of prayer, thinking that because God does not suddenly ansuer
them, he does not take any care of them: when alas poor souls, if they did but
remain constant and fervent in their devotions, God has promised to be heard
by them, and that he will aid and succor them according to their necessities.

We ought to submit our wills to his will, whether our prayers be ansuered or
no, and not to desist from praying because we enjoy not the thing which we do
earnestly pray for.

For to desist from good Works or Holy Duties, is some small kin to Apostasy,
and Backsliding will suddenly bring you out of acquaintance with God, and then
will this Duty (so Necessary for all Christians) be Totally extirpated, and you
become a Nebuchadnezzar, unto a Heathen will you soon turn.

If thou do love God, thou will love to be with him in private, where thou
may freely impart thine affections unto him. Let not thy Religious worship
in thy Family be used on purpose to keep up thy Credit with Men, for God who is
the searcher of all Hearts, will not be so hypocritically served, the upright
and the sincere heart the Lord loves.

Make it thy Business to wait upon God in private, for when thou art by thy
self then thou art the fittest to call upon God, as being at that present freed
from worldly encumbrances. The Heathen Scipio does much Commend these private
solitudes, for says he, Then can I freely entertain my own imaginations, and
Converse with all the learned that have been in former ages. But thy Honor is
greater to converse with God, who loves to Commune with the soul in private,
and communicates his affections to his people in secret: David praised God
seven times a Day, but his Day sacrifices yielded him not that marrow and
sweetness which he tasted in the Night, being then sequestered from all Business
which might impede or hinder his godly and pious intentions.

When we are alone, satan is most busy, and then have we the most need of
Heavens Auxiliaries. No sooner does the True Christian open his eyes from
sleep, but he opens his heart likewise to God, and posts to Heaven with secret
ejaculations and praises to Gods Holy Name, and doubts not but that God will be
as willing to receive as he to offer up his Morning sacrifice.

Besides, many Mischiefs attend by deferring Holy Duties, which God expressly in
his Word has commanded we should diligently keep: God is not willing to be
served last of all, but expects the first fruits, and reason good, because he
bestows upon us his choicest Blessings. Then let me persuade all those that
desire their souls everlasting good, not to neglect this Holy Duty, which will
be so beneficial to your souls, and so pleasing unto our Almighty God, which
that you may sincerely do, shall be the prayers of him that subscribeth himself
a hearty well-wisher to all your souls.

FINIS.
JOHN CLARKE



