THE JUDGMENT AND ADVICE OF THE ASSEMBLY OF THE Associated Ministers OF
VVORCESTER-SHIRE, Held at WORCESTER Aug. 6th 1658. Concerning the Endeavors of
Ecclesiastical Peace, and the Ways and Means of Christian Unity, which Mr
John Durey does present; sent unto him in the Name, and by the appointment of
the aforesaid Assembly. By Richard Baxter Pastor of the Church at Kederminster.

LONDON. Printed for T. Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's Churchyard,
and F. Tyton at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street, 1658.

THE JUDGMENT AND ADVICE Of the Assembly of the Associated MINISTERS of
Worcestershire.
Our Dear and Reverend BROTHER.
Upon the receipt of your Papers and Consideration of the Subject, as our
hearts were moved with thankfulness to God, that has given you so great a
desire after the peace of the Churches, and so much patience in the Labors and
Travels of so many Years, for the obtaining of it; so we must needs resent it;
as a thing that should Melt our Hearts within us, that ever there should need
so much ado, and that among Christians, yea the Leaders of Christ's Flock, to
bring them to so clear and great a Duty; Much more that after all such Labors,
there is no more done.

For our selves, as far as we can understand your desires, we conceive that it
is in three Particulars, that our return must answer theirs. First, In giving
you our thoughts of the design in general. Secondly, In telling you our
thoughts of the disease and cure more particularly. And Lastly, In offering you
our correspondence for the time to come, for the contributing our utmost
assistance to the work.

X. And for the First, There Is little needful to be said. The design does so
evidently bear the name of the Prince of Peace, and answer the Precepts of his
Gospel, and the Workings of his Spirit in all his Saints, and is so happily
suited to his interest and to the welfare of his Church, that it pleads
sufficiently for it self, and needs not the Testimony of such as we. So
blessed a thing is Peace, and a Holy Peace among the Members of the Body of
Christ, that the Enemies and Vioators of it do pretend to it, and none are
found that oppose it professedly for it self; they all flatter it while they
fight against it, and betray it with a kiss, and sm^le upon it while they are
wounding of it, and extol it with the highest praises while they destroy it;
condemning themselves by all that they say in its justification: we scarce
think that there is a man of all those, where your great unwearied Labors have
least succeeded, and that are obstinately unpeaceable after all, but will join
with you in extolling the Concord of the Churches, and profess their great
desires after it, so that they are all sain from their several pretensions to
truth to fetch their weapons for the wounding of our Peace. For Christ has
left it an undeniable principle, that all his Members are one Body, into which
by one Spirit we are all Baptized, in which even the more feeble and less
comely and less honorable parts have their place, receiving a comeliness and
honor from the whole, that there may be no Schism in the Body, but the
Members should have the same care one for another, suffering with that which
suffers, and rejoicing with that which is honored, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26. And the Holy Ghost has left it as a certain truth, that of all
these Members the most Charitable is the best, 1 Cor. 12.31. and 13.13. And
that all men must know us to be Christ's Disciples by our loving one another,
Joh. 13.35. and 15.17. That we must thus be followers of God as Dear Children,
and walk in love as Christ has loved us, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. And ^^^ainly he that
loves God, does love his Brother also, 1 John 4.21. and he is a liar if he say
he loves God, when he hates his Brother, Verse. 20. Peace must be followed
(and not only accepted of when offered) as well as holiness, Heb. 12.14. And
that with all men if it be possible, and as much as lies in us, Romans 12.18. 1
These. 5.13. The weak in Faith must be received, but not to doubtful
Disputations, Romans 14.1. And the strong must tolerate their infirmities, not
pleasing themselves, but their neighbors for their Edification, Romans 15.1, 2.
The light of a multitude of such passages of Scripture does shine so bright in
the faces of the unpeaceable, that they were not able to stand before them, if
they drew not the veyle of a zeal for some pretended truth over the face of
their most unchartiable Practices. But the self-appropiated Title of Orthodox,
and the straining of Heterodox odious consequents, from their Brethrens words,
will prove but insufficient Fig Leaves to cover the nakedness of uncharitable
dividers when the Lord of Peace shall search and judge them. Go on dear
Brother, and if Satan should have leave to hinder your success, yet live and
dye in this Blessed Work, and if you have not more comfort at last, in the
revenue of these your pacificatory labors, then self-conceited dividers shall
have in their uncharitable ways, then must we confess that we were strangers
to the will and ways of Christ. The wisdom that is from above is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated: and the fruit of Righteousness
is by Peacemakers sown in Peace: but the wisdom that cherishes envying and
strife descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, (or natural) and
devilish: For where envying and strife is, (though piety and Othodox Doctrine
may be pretended) yet there is confusion (or tumultuousness) and every evil
work; and therefore in pretending to befriend the truth, they do but glory in
vain and lie against the truth, and indeed know not what Spirit they are of,
Jam. 3.17, 18. and 16.15, 14.

XX. And for the second Point, The healing of our wounds! Oh that we could as
surely accomplish it, as we can all tell what means are necessary thereunto.
Our work is not to procure a Communion between the visible Members of Christ
and of Satan, nor a Syncretisme with any that hold not all that is essential
to Christianity, or that deny any point of absolute necessity to Salvation; nor
yet to draw any to participate with the truest Church or Saint in any of their
Sins: Nor yet is it our present business to change men's minds from Infidelity
or Heresy to the Faith, that so they may be capable of our Communion; nor to
change the differing Opinions of the Churches, which is a thing that we cannot
expect at present: But our work is in these three particulars. First, To bring
the true Churches of Christ to understand each other to be true Churches.
Secondly, To procure that internal Charity which true Christians should have
to one another. Thirdly, To procure that external manifestation of this
Charity, which is their duty, or so much at least as is necessary to our common
safety, and the Propagation of that truth which all profess. And for the first
of these (which the rest depend upon) What can we require more of one another,
then a Profession of the Christian Faith; That which we require to prove a
single person fit to be a Member of the Church, i^ it that we must require of
whole Churches, and with which we must be satisfied; which can be nothing but a
profession of Christianity, not nullified by contradictory professions or
practices. And I hope we are before this agreed what Christianity is, and what
are the Essentials of the Faith. All these Essentials we do all profess. We all
profess to believe the Articles of Faith contained in the Creeds and
Confessions of the Churches, by what Test soever a Christian or a Church was
known for man^ ^undred Years after Christ, (till Papists and Heretics enlarged
or depraved the Creeds,) by the same do we all offer our selves to be tried,
and may easily be known to be professed Christians, and (being united with our
Pastors for holy Communion,) to be true Churches of Christ. We all take the
holy Scriptures for the Rule of our Faith and Lives, and believe it to be the
infallible Word of God. In this Scripture all the Essentials of Christianity,
(and the Integrals too,) are plainly expressed. This rule is Divine, and so our
Faith is Divine. Had we but a humane Rule, we could have but a humane Faith; If
any would know our Religion, it is hither that we send them. Our Confessions
are but to satisfy men, of our understanding the sense of passages of
Scripture: And they are written according to the Occasions of their writing,
and therefore with Diversity (though not contrariety in any neccessary point,
at least) speaking most to the Points that contentions call us to speak most
to, we make none of our Confessions the Rule of our Faith. Nor do we take any
thing in them to be infallible and unalterable, further then it agrees with
the Scripture, which is our Rule. It has been the running design of the
Papists (Vt in conventu Thorumi and saepissime) to draw us to own some other
Test of our Religion: and then they think they may freely dispute against it,
and charge it with falsity, novelty, etc. which they dare not charge on the
Word of God: And they think by this to set us altogether by the Ears, while one
is for one Confession and others for another; Whereas in the Scripture we are
United.

The great cause of our uncharitable censures and divisions, has been our
departing from the Ancient simplicity of Faith, and also from the sufficiency
of the holy Scriptures to be the Rule and Test of our Faith: And till we return
to this Scripture sufficiency, and ancient simplicity, there is no hope of the
ancient Christian Unity and Charity, while proud men must thrust their own
Opinions into the Churches Creed, or un-Church all that hold not such Opinions;
our peace with them must be by calming them, and bringing them to themselves,
and bearing as far as may be with their Infirmity, but not by doing as they do,
in lacerating the Churches.

We know it is here objected by the Papists and too many more, that many
Heretics will subscribe to all that is in the Scriptures, while they
misinterpret them, and what is the consequent.

[ Therefore a plainer Confession is necessary for men to own that will be
accounted Orthodox.] We deny the consequence. The Scripture is a Rule both
plain and perfect. A Heretic may misinterpret the words of any other
Confession as well as the words of Scripture. The sense of the counsel of
Trent is not yet agreed on among the Papists. The remedy for Heresy is not to
impose another Rule of Faith then Scripture, (as if this were insufficient and
we could mend it) but to exercise Church Government carefully, and if any be
proved to teach any Doctrine contrary to the Scripture, that Magistrates and
that Pastors do their parts to correct such and restrain them. We might not
make new Confessions or Laws when ever wicked men will misinterpret or violate
the old Ones; the perfectest Law may be broken, and the perfectest confessions
misinterpreted. We conclude therefore, that all that subscribe to the holy
Scriptures, and particularly to all contained in the Ancient Creeds of the
Church, and in the Lords Prayer and Decalogue, do make so full a Profession of
Christianity, that none may reject them, till they prove by some inconsistent
contradiction that indeed they hold not what they do profess.

And yet we deny not, but to teach the People, to direct young Ministers, to
stop the mouths of slanderous adversaries, the Confessions of the Churches are
useful and to be approved. And ex abundanti to cure the jealousies of
disseased minds, we are all ready in every Protestant Church to give men a
full account of our Faith, in plain Confessions: but with this Protestation,
that only the holy Scripture is the Rule of our Faith, and the Test of our
Religion, and that all that is contained in our several Confessions is not
Essential to a Christian or a Church; nor will we justify every Term or
Method of these Confessions, as perfect and inculpable; but as we are certain
in the Essentials and other points that are plain in Scripture, so for the
lesser dark points, we are ready to alter any thing of them that can be proved
contrary to the Scripture which is our Rule.

The 39 Articles were lately the Confession of our Churches here in England,
but now because of too or three Articles for Ceremonies and Prelacy, this
Confession is laid by; and not imposed upon any. And what! have we therefore
changed our Religion, or are the Churches in England, other things and of
another Faith. No such matter. Who will affirm it, that knows what Christianity
is? We have the same Christ, and the same Rule of Faith and Test of our
Religion still, and hold the same Doctrine which those Articles express, though
we be not all of a mind in Ceremonies. A Papist, Polydore Virgill, truly says
of the Protestants, that they are therefore called, Evangelici quod haud ullam
asseverent recipiendam esse Legem, quae ad animarum salutem pertineat, nisi
quam Christus aut Apostoli dedissent. De Invent. Rer. l. 8. c. 4. p. 410. By
the great mercy of God we are all agreed in the authority and verity of the
Scriptures, and that is enough in point of Profession, to prove us to be of a
sound belief: but if we think to center in any Confessions that are not plainly
thence extracted, we attempt a difficult and needless work. Nothing thefore can
be pretended against our Faith, (the rule being so perfect and unquestioned)
unless it be that we nullisie this Profession by contradictions, and believe
not the Scripture while we think we do believe it; but they that will condemn
any Church on such an accusation, must first produce their proose, which must
not be from the words of a single person, which none are responsable for but
himself, but it must be the words of the Church it self, which they condemn,
and it must not be from forced, feigned, or undiscernd consequences, while the
Church does expressly assert those truths, which the Accusers pretend they do by
consequence subvert. Such a connection is there between^ Theological Verities,
that if no man were a true believer that holds any thing consequentially
inconsistent with an Article of Faith, it would be hard to find a believer in
the world. Secondly, They must in reason admonish the accused Church, and hear
them speak for themselves, and not reject them till after the first and second
Admonition, ordinarily; But if all the enemies of the Protestant Churches at
Rome, or Hell, should bring forth their evidence to prove them void of the
Christian Belief: (for we are loath to suppose that there are any such accusers
among themselves,) they would all shame themselves, and leave the Churches in
possession of their Faith; we can as easily prove that we are Christians, as
the Romanists can that they are Papists.

2. And for our second work (to procure mutual Charity among the Churches,)
This is the work of grace which we may and must persuade men to, and leave the
blessing to the Lord. But we must needs say, that one of the greatest causes of
our divisions, is the admitting of graceless unsanctified men into the Sacred
Ministry; who being mere Opinionists in Religion, and void of that tender love
to the Brethren, which is the Character of true Christians, are easily carried
for the sake of their Opinions, to condemn and vilify their Brethren, and tear
and tread down the Churches of Christ: Whereas if they had ever known
themselves, they would have been more compassionate to others; and would be so
jealous of their frail understandings as to be afraid least they condemn
themselves, by the terms on which they condemn their Brethren: And if ever they
had been possessed of the Spirit of Christ, they would have been taught of God
to love the Brethren: and withal they would have understood, that denying them
to be Brethren, will prove a poor excuse for their uncharitableness.

And for the third point (of External manifestation of this charity) we
conceive that in these several ways, its to be done.

First, If persons of different Judgments in lesser Controversies, do live
near together in the same Towns or Countries; that they should lovingly join
together in the same holy Assemblies for the worshipping of God.

Secondly, That if any professing the substance of Christianity; dare not join
for fear of sin, in the use of any Ceremony or Doctrine which they are against,
they should not thereupon be used uncharitably, but have such liberty as is
consistent with the Peace and Welfare of the Churches and Commonwealth where
they live.

Thirdly, That the Churches of several Nations (that have not opportunity of
local Communion) do cheerfully acknowledge one another for the true Churches of
Christ, and profess Christian love to one another, and a readiness to assist
each other to their power, in the common cause.

In some, Dear Brother, We conceive that the means most useful for the
expeditious atteynment of these ends are these two. First, That the Churches in
every Nation do in their Synods recognize their own Confessions, and also
receive the Confessions of other Churches; and having considered of both, do
send to those Churches, whose Communion and friendship they desire, a double
message: that is, both an acknowledgment of the truth of those Churches, with a
profession of our Brotherly love to them, etc. And also our desire of the like
Brotherly Charity from them to us. To which end we send them the Confession of
our Faith. In order to this it were to be desired, that our common Confessions,
be in general the holy Scriptures, and more particularly the Ancient Creeds of
the Church; (if this satisfy not) a fuller collection of all, and only the
Essentials, and near adjoining points of Christianity, and that as much as may
be, in the very words of Scripture: if this cannot be done for want of time, or
concord, then let the present Confession of such Churches be sent as it is; but
with this profession, that only the Word of God is our Rule, and if any thing
in our Confession be found disagreeable to that rule, we are ready when we
understand so much, to disown it and correct it. If you get but the Churches
thus to own each other, and profess their Brotherly love and concord, your work
is done: some such acknowledgment we should all Subscribe. E.G. [We the
Servants of Jesus Christ, representing the Churches of Christ in England, in
our Assembly at W. having considered of the Confession of the Churches of
Christ in (E.G.) Saxony, and heard of their stability in the Christian Faith,
do heartily own them as the true Churches of Christ, and love them as our dear
Brethren in the Lord, and take it for our duty to pray for them, and praise God
on their behalf, and assist them in the common cause, according to our several
capacities and opportunities; and we earnestly desire the like Brotherly love
and Communion from them, having sent them our Confession of Faith, and this
profession of Brotherly love to that end.]

This much of the work is with one side Actually, or Virtually done already.
For we perceive by the Papers you sent us, and by the frequent Professions of
many Reformed Churches, that they are generally resolved to own the Churches
called Lutherans; and for our parts we take it as a thing that Charity allows
us not to question (though in every point we be not of their minds) So that on
one part the work is done already, and nothing is wanting but a solemn
manifestation of it, and an invitation of them to the like Charity and
Communion.

Secondly, The second part of the work to be done is, that those Churches which
upon these Brotherly Invitations, shall reject any neighbor Churches, and
refuse to own them as Brethren, in Communion, may be desired (as we must do
with particular Members) to set down in terms, out of their Confessions the
Heresy or other sin that they charge them with, as the cause of their
rejection, and hear them speak for themselves, before they judge them; which if
they refuse, we can proceed no further, but commit our cause to God, as we
would do against the accusations of any unreasonable men. But if they perform
it, we shall, it is like, correct some phrases that offend them, and explain
others, and give them satisfaction; which one would think none should need:
when the question is not [ Whether we have any errors] (for so have the
accusers, and all men on earth) but, [ Whether we are true Christians, and
Churches of Christ,] which nothing but lamentable darkness, or frowardness can
cause Brethren to deny. The two chiefest expedients to satisfy, or silence all
accusations would be

First, To reduce our Confessions as aforesaid, to Scripture and the Ancient
Creeds, and to Scripture phrase.

Secondly, And to cause some judicious moderate men to draw up a discourse
containing our mutual agreements, and contracting our differences, and
explicating the mistaken points, and showing how much of the difference is but
seeming, how much but verbal, and that the real are but in lesser points,
where a difference is tolerable and consistent with Christianity and holy
Communion. Some of us think it no hard matter to manifest the disagreements
that are most odiously exagitated, to be far smaller then many on both sides
apprehend them. And much is done toward this already, by several learned
Pacificators whom, you have excited.

XXX. Having thus showed you our thoughts of our work in general, and in
particular, what remains but that we return you our hearty thanks for your
great labors and patience for the Churches sake, and for communicating your
endeavors to us; who profess that our hearts are much upon this Work; and if
at any time you can inform us which way we may be any whit serviceable to the
accomplishment of it, we shall very thankfully accept your intimations, and
devote our interests and abilities to so blessed a work. In the mean time it
shall have our hearty desires and Prayers for success; and so shall all the
friends of Peace: and You especially; whose Name is hereby made honorable in
the Churches, and very honorable to

Your Brethren in the Faith and Patience of the Gospel.
Subscribed in the Name, and by the Appointment of the Assembly of the
Associated Ministers of Worcest^r-Shire, held at Worcester, August. 6th 1658.
By us Richard Baxter, Pastor of the Church at Kederminster. John Boraston,
Pastor of the Church at Bewdly. Thomas Wright, Pastor of the Church at
Hartlebury. Giles Collyer, Pastor of the Church at Blockley. George Hopkins,
Pastor of the Church at Evesham. Joseph Trebell, Pastor of the Church at
Church-Lench.

Dear Brother.
THough our particular Associations meet once a month, yet our general meeting
being but once a quarter, I could no sooner dispatch an Answer to your Letters.
Our Brethren are thankful for your great Respect in Communicating of your
Papers concerning so sweet and desirable a thing as the Concord of the
Churches. I conceive the way that we have here expressed will be by far the
most expeditious, namely for the most peaceable Churches to begin and send to
the rest. First, A Confession of their Faith* (as much as may be in Scripture
phrase, that it may make no quarrels,) And Secondly, With it such a Profession
of Brotherhood and Communion, as in the Formula we have expressed; and if this
be accepted, that we desire a return of the like from them. When this is done,
the work is done, (save only that the Recording this by their Synods, and
Improving it by their Princes and Divines must help forth the fruits of it) If
they deny this, they must be desired to set down in their Accusation the
Reasons on which they deny us their Communion: which when we have received, its
two to one but we shall, partly by correcting our Expressions which offend, and
partly by explaining them, and partly by manifesting their Mistakes, give some
satisfaction. If this way will not do, I think no way will, but Princes
correction of Intemperate Divines. We may calmlier thus satisfy them by
Writings then by confused debates in great Assemblies, and You, or I may not
hope to live to see an Assembly of all or most of the Churches for this Work.
The Lord direct, strengthen and prosper you in this blessed Work, I rest

Your unworthy Brother RICHARD BAXTER.
August 18th 1658. INSCRIPTION.
To my Reverend and much Honored Brother Mr John Durey, Preacher of the
Gospel in LONDON, this deliver.



FINIS.

