One Sheet for the MINISTRY, Against the MALIGNANTS Of all sorts.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in
Kederminster, Anno Dom. 1657.

One Sheet for the Ministry, Against the Malignants of all sorts.
AS man's first felicity was attended with the malice of the Serpent, so is the
wonderful work of his Restoration. The promise of Reconciliation by the seed
of the woman, is joined with a proclamation of open war with the Serpent and
his seed. The enmity was hottest in the Devil and his seed against Christ
himself, who bare and overcame it, and is become the Captain of our salvation,
that his Church may overcome by his Cross, and Strength, and Conduct; The next
degree of malice is against his Officers: the most eminent, the General
Officers had the hottest assault: and his ordinary Officers bear the next: That
we shall be hated of all men for the Name of Christ, ( Mat. 10. 22.) is still
verified to our experience. Not only the openly profane ab^o^^^ for our
work-sake, but fals-hearted professors that turn from the truth, do presently
turn Malignants against the Ministry; and many weak ones that are better
minded, are dangerously seduced into a guilt of the sedition. To all these I
here proclaim in the name and word of the Lord, Numb. 16. 26. [ Depart I pray
you from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be
consumed in all their sins.] Which I shall now open to you.

1. The office of the Ministry is an undoubted Ordinance of God, to continue in
the Church to the end of the world. No man can pretend that they ceased with
the Apostles; for it is Gods will that ordinary fixed Presbyters shall be
ordained in every Church, Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 2. And
Pastors and Teachers are appointed for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, and edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come to a
perfect man, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. A Ministry authorized to Disciple the
Nations, baptize and teach them, is instituted by Christ as King and Savior,
and have his Promise to be with them always to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.
18, 19, 20. The same necessity and work continues; still souls are born and
bred in darkness; and how shall they be saved without believing, or believe
without hearing, or hear without preaching, or we preach without sending? Romans
10. 13, 14, 15. There is a clearer word in the Gospel for the Ministry then the
Magistracy; though enough for both. Our own call I shall speak of anon.

2. These Malignants set themselves against the Principal members of the Body
of Christ, that are in it as the eyes and hands to the natural body, 1. Cor.
12. 16, 19, 27, 29. Ephesians. 4. 11, 15. The Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of
the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. The Over seers of the flock that is
purchased with Christ's blood, Acts 20. 28. They are the chief members, 1. in
Office; 2. Ordinarily in gifts for edification of the body: 3. And in Grace.
Now a wound in the stomach or liver is more mortal to the body, then in the
hand: and the loss of an eye or hand is worse then the loss of an ear.

3. These Malignants are therefore principally enemies to the Church it self.
They take on them to be only against the Ministers, but it will prove most
against the people and whole Church. If they sinite the Shepherds, the sheep
will be scattered. How can they more surely ruin Christ's Family, then by
casting out the Stewards that must Rule, and give the children their meat in
due season, even milk to the babes, and stronger meat to them of full age, Heb.
5. 12, 13, 14. Luke 12. 42. Mat. 24. 45. What readier way to ruin the Schools
of Christ, then by casting out the Teachers that he has appointed under him?
Or to ruin his Kingdom, then to reject his Officers? Or to wrong the body,
then to cut off the hands, and pull out the eyes, or to destroy the principal
parts: Was it not Ministers that planted the Churches, and converted the world,
and have ever born off the assaults of enemies? where was there ever Church on
earth that continued without a Minister? The great Kingdom of Nubia fell from
Christianity for want of Preachers. The Nations that have the weakest and
fewest Ministers, have the least of Christianity: and those that have the most
and ablest Ministers, have the most flourishing state of Religion. All over the
world the Church does rise or fall with the Ministry: Cut down the Pillars, and
the building falls. He is blind that sees not what would become of the Church,
were it not for the Ministry. Who should teach the ignorant, or rebuke the
obstinate, explain the word of truth, and stop the mouths of proud
gainsayers? What work would heresies, and division, and prophanness make, if
these banks were cut down? when all that can be done is still too little. It
must needs therefore be meet enmity against the Church that makes men malignant
against the Ministry.

4. The design of the maligners of the Ministry is plainly against the Gospel
and Christianity it self. They take the readiest way in the world to bring in
Heathenism, Infidelity and Atheism, which Christianity has so far banished.
For it is the Ministry that Christ uses to bring in light, and drive and keep
out this damnable darkness, Acts 26. 17, 18. [ I send thee to open their eyes,
and turn them from darkness to light, etc.] Why are so many Nations Infidels,
Mahometans and Idolaters, but for want of Ministers to preach the Gospel to
them? These Malignants therefore would take down the Sun, and banish
Christianity out of the world.

5. And they hinder the conversion of particular souls, and so are the
cruellest wretches on earth. Though an Angel must be sent to Cornelius, it is
not to be instead of a Preacher, but to send him to a Preacher, Acts 10. Though
Christ would wonderfully appear to Saul, it is to send him to Ananias for
instruction, Acts 9. Though the Jailer must feel an Earthquake, and see
miracles, it is but to prepare him for the Ministers words, Acts 16. Philip
must be carried by an Angel to expound to an Eunuch the word that must convert
him. The Ministry is Gods instituted settled way, by which he will convert and
save the world, as truly as the light is the natural way by which he will
corporally enlighten them, Acts 2. 18. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Matthew. 5. 14. Rom 10. 14.
Do you think so many souls would be converted if the Ministry were down? Do you
not see that the very contempt of them, that the scorns of the ungodly, and
opposition of Malignant Apostates have occasioned, does hinder most of the
ignorant and profane from receiving the saving benefit of the Gospel? How many
millions of souls would these wretches sweep away to hell, if they had their
will? while thousands are in damnation for want of the light, they would take
it from you, that you might go there also. Do you not understand the meaning of
these words against Christ's Ministers? Why the meaning is this: They make a
motion to the people of the Land, to go to Hell with one consent, and to hate
those that are appointed to keep them out of it. They would take the bread of
life from your mouths. They are attempting an hundred times more cruelty on
you, then Herod on the Jews when he killed the children, or the Irish that
murdered the Protestants by thousands; as the soul is of greater worth then the
body.

6. These Malignants against the Ministry are the flat enemies of Christ
himself, and so he will take them and use them. He that would root out the
inferior Magistrates, is an enemy to the Sovereign; and he that is against the
Officers of the Army, is an enemy to the General: Christ never intended to stay
visibly on earth, and to Teach and Rule the world immediately in person; but he
that is the King will Rule by his Officers; and he that is Prophet will Teach
us by his Officers; and therefore he has plainly told us [ He that h^areth
you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16.] O fearful case of miserable
Malignants! Durst thou despise the Lord thy Maker and Redeemer, if he appeared
to thee in his glory! to whom the Sun it self is as darkness, and all the world
as dust and nothing. Remember when thou next speak against his Officers, or
hear others speak against them, that their words are spoken against the face
of Christ, and of the Father. I would not be found in the cafe of one of these
Malignants, when Christ shall come to judge his enemies, for a thousand worlds.
He that has said, [ Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; and
has rebuked Kings for their sakes, Psalm 105. 15. will deride all those that
would break his bands, and will break them as with a rod of iron, and dash them
in pieces as a potters vessel, Psalm 2. 3, 4, 9. And as he has told them
plainly, [ Who so despises the Word shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 13.] And [
He that despises, despises not man but God, 1 These. 4. 8.] So he has told us
that it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then
for such, Mat. 10. 15. Many a thousand prouder enemies then you has Christ
broken; and look to your selves, for your day is coming. If you had but
stumbled on this stone, it would have broken you in pieces; but seeing you will
strive against it, it will fall on you, and grind you to powder, Matthew. 21.
44. And then you shall see that he that made them his Ambassadors, will bear
them out, and say, [ In as much as you did it to these, you did it to me.] And
you shall then say, Blessed are they that trust in him.

7. It is apparent that these enemies of the Ministers, are playing the Papists
game. Because the just disgrace of their Ministry, was the ruin of their
Kingdom; therefore they hope to win of us at the same game. They know that if
the people were brought into a hatred or suspicion of their guides, they might
the easier be won to them. They tell us in their writings, that not one of ten
of our people but takes his faith on trust from their Teachers; and therefore
take them off from them, and they will fall: but they delude themselves in
this: For though the ungodly among us have no true faith of their own, and the
godly must lean on the hand of their supporters, yet there is in them a living
principle; and we do not as the Papist priests, teach our people to see with
our eyes, and no matter for their own: but we help to clear their own
eyesight. Doubt not but the most of the sects in the Land that rail against
the Ministry, are knowingly or ignorantly the Agents of the Papists. For the
principal work of a Papist is to cry down the Ministry, and the Scripture, and
to set all they can on the same work.

8. These sects that are against the Ministry do all the same work as the
Drunkards, Whore-mongers, Covetous, and all ungodly persons in our Parishes do:
And therefore it seems they are guided by the same spirit. It is the work of
Drunkards and all these wicked wretches to hate, and despise, and revile the
Ministers, and to teach others to say as they. And just so do Quakers, Seekers,
Papists and all other Malignants reproach the same Ministers: And yet the blind
wretches will not see that the same Spirit moves them.

9. It is apparent that it is the Devils game they play, and his interest and
Kingdom which they promote. Who fights against Christ's Officers and Army, but
the General of the contrary Army? What greater service could all the world do
for the Devil then to cast out the Ministers of Christ? and what more would the
Devil himself desire, to set up his Kingdom and suppress the Church? Wretches!
you shall shortly see your master, and he will pay you your wages contrary to
your expectation. Read Gods Word to a Malignant, Acts 13. 10.

10. These enemies do reproach as faithful a Ministry as the world enjoys,
and their malice has so little footing, as that the result must be their own
shame. Among the Papists indeed there are Mass-priests that can but read a
Mass, whose office is to turn a piece of bread into a God; And yet these the
Malignants either let alone, or liken us to them. The Greeks, and Ethiopians,
and most of the Christian world, have a Ministry that seldom or never preach to
them, but read Common Prayer and Homilies. The most of the Protestant Churches
have a learned Ministry that is so taken up with Controversies; that they are
much less in the powerful preaching and practice of godliness: Above all
Nations under heaven, the English are set upon Practical Divinity and Holiness;
and yet even they are by Malignity chosen out for reproach. Alas, scandals in
the Ministry, (as drunkenness, swearing, etc.) among other Nations are but too
common: but in England Magistrates and Ministers combine against them.
Ministers are still spurring on the Magistrates to cast out the insufficient,
negligent and scandalous; and desire and use more severity with men of their
own profession, then with Magistrates or any others in the Land. In nothing are
they more zealous then to sweep out all the remnant of the scandalous. And for
themselves, they are devoted to the work of the Lord, and think nothing too
much that they are able to perform, but preach in season and out of season,
with all long-suffering and doctrine; and yet Malignants make them their
reproach.

11. It is abundance of Pride and Impudency, that these Malignant enemies are
guilty of. They are most of them persons of lamentable ignorance; and yet they
dare revile at the Teachers, and think themselves wise enough to rebuke and
teach them: Many of them are men of wicked lives; and yet they can tell the
world how bad the Ministers are. A Railer, a Drunkard, a Covetous Worldling, an
Ignorant Sott, is the likest person to fall upon the Minister; and the Owl will
call the Lark a night-bird. Alas, when we come to try them, what dark wretches
do we find them! and should be glad if they were but teachable. And yet they
have learnt the Devils first lesson, to despise their Teachers.

12. And O what barbarous ingratitude are these Malignant enemies of the
Ministry guilty of! For whom do we watch, but for them and others? Can they be
so blind as to think a painful Minister does make it his design to seek
himself, or to look after great matters in the world? Would not the time, and
labor, and cost that they are at in the Schools and Universities have fitted
them for a more gainful trade? Do not Lawyers, Physicians, etc. live a far
easier, and in the world a more honorable plentiful life? Have not the
Ministers themselves been the principal Instruments of taking down Bishops,
Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebends, and all means of preferment? And
what have they got by it? or ever endeavored? Speak malice, and spare not. Is
it any thing but what they had before? even the maintenance due to their
particular charge. Unthankful wretches! It is for your sakes and souls that
they study, and pray, and watch, and fast, and exhort, and labor, to the
consuming of their strength; and when they have done, are made the Drunkards
song, and the scorn of all the wicked of the Country; and when they spend and
are spent, the more they love, the less they are beloved. In the times of this
greatest prosperity of the Church, they live under constant hatred and scorn,
from those that they would save, and will not let alone in sin. And what do
they endure all this for but Gods honor and your salvation? Would we be
Ministers for any lower ends? Let shame from God and man be on the face of such
a Minister! I profess, were it not for the belief of the greatness, and
necessity, and excellency of the truths that I am to preach, and for the will
of God and the good of souls, I would be a Plowman, or the meanest Trade, if
not a sweep-Chimney, rather then a Minister. Must we break our health, and lay
by all our worldly interest, for you, even for you, and think not our lives and
labors too good or too dear to further your salvation, and must we by you,
even by you, be reproached after all? God will be Judge between you and us,
whether this be not inhumane ingratitude, and whether we deserve it at your
hands.

13. Yea it is Injustice also that you are guilty of. The labourer, says
Christ, is worthy of his hire, Luke 10. 7. (Mark that, you that call them
hirelings) The Elders that Rule well are worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 1.
7. Especially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine. And will you throw
stones at their head for endeavoring to save your souls? Will you spit in
their faces for seeking with all their might to keep you from Hell? Is that
their wages that you owe them? But blessed be the Lord, with whom is our
reward; though you be not gathered, Isa. 49. 5. But as you love your selves,
take heed of that curse, Jer. 18. 20. [ Shall evil be recompensed for Good? for
they have dug a pit for my soul: Remember that I stood before thee to speak
good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them, etc.] O how many a time
have we besought the Lord for you* that he would convert you, and forgive you,
and turn away the evil that was over you: And when all these our prayers, and
groans, and tears shall be remembered against you, O miserable souls, how dear
will you pay for all?

14. And is it not a wonder that these Malignants do not see what evident light
of Scripture they contradict; and how many great express commands they violate?
They break the fifth Commandment, which requires honor as well to spiritual
Ecclesiastical parents, as to civil and natural. And he that curses Father and
Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in darkness, Prove. 20. 20. The eye that
mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the Ravens of the
Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it: Prove. 30. 17. Did
these wretches never read 1 These. 5. 12. We beseech you Brethren, to know them
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: and to
esteem them very highly in Love for their work-sake, and to be at peace among
your selves.] And Heb. 13. 17. [ Obey them that have the Rule over you, and
submit your selves; for they watch for your souls as they that must give
account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is
unprofitable for you.] And Heb. 13. 7. Remember them which have the Rule over
you, who have spoken to you the word of God.] And so ver. 24. And 1 Timothy 5. 17.
The Elders that Rule well are wor^hy of double honor, etc.] with abundance
more such passages as these? Do not you feel these fly in your faces when you
oppose the Ministers of Christ? Does a thief or murderer sin against plainer
light then you?

15. These Malignants sin against the consent and experience of the Universal
Church of Christ till this day. The whole Church has been for the Ministry,
and instructed by them: and as the child does seek the breast, so did new born
Christians in all ages seek the word from the Ministers, that they may live and
grow thereby. And all the Nations of the Christian world are for the Ministry
to this day! Or else they could not be for Christ, and for the Church and
Gospel. Is it not plain therefore that these Malignants are dead branches, cut
off from the Church, that are so set against the Spirit and interest of the
Church?

16. Moreover they sin against the experience of all, or almost all the true
Christians in the world. For they have all experience that Ministers are either
their Fathers or Nurses in the Lord. And that by their means they have had
their life, and strength, and comforts: their sins killed, their graces
quickened, their doubts resolved; the taste of the good Word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come. May we not challenge you as Paul often does his
flock, Whether you did not receive the illuminating, sanctifying Spirit by the
Ministry, if ever you received it? I tell you, it is as much against the new
and holy nature of the Saints to despise the Ministers of Christ, as it is
unnatural for a child to spit in the face of his Father or Mother. And the
experience of sound Christians will keep them closer, and help them much
against this inhumanity, what ever hypocrites may do.

17. And if these Malignants had not Pharaohs heart, they would sure have
considered, that the experience of all Ages tells them, that still the most
wicked have been the enemies of the Ministry, and the most godly have most
obeyed and honored them in the Lord; and that this enmity has been the common
brand of the rebellious, and the forerunner of the heavy wrath of God; and
that it has gone worst with the enemies, and best with the friends of a godly
Ministry. Do I need to prove this, which is so much of the substance of the old
Testament and the New? Was it the friends or enemies of all the Prophets,
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, that Scripture and all good writers do
commend? Do not the names of all Malignants against the godly Ministry stink
above ground, as the shame of mankind, except those that are buried out of
hearing, or those that were converted?

18. Nay such are noted for the highest sort of the wicked upon earth: worse
then Drunkards, Whore-mongers and such filthy beasts: The persecutors of Gods
Ministers have been ever taken as walking Devils. And the hottest of Gods wrath
has fallen upon them. Take two instances, 1. When the Jews went into Captivity,
this was the very cause, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. [ But they mocked the Messengers
of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, till the wrath of the
Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy. 2. And when the Jews
were cut quite off from the Church, and made Vagabonds on the earth, this was
the very cause, Acts 28. 28. Be it known therefore to you, that the salvation
of God is sent to the Gentiles, and that they will hear it.] 1 These. 2. 15, 16.
These Jews [ both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us: and they please not God, and are contrary to all men, forbidding
us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sin
always; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.]

19. It is the Devils own part that these Malignants act: For it is he that is
the great enemy of Christ and the Saints, and he that is the accuser of the
Brethren, which accuses them before God day and night: And is not this the
work of Quakers, Drunkards, Papists and all Malignants? But the Lord will
rebuke them, and be the glory of his servants, Zach. 3. 1, 2. [ He showed me
Joshua the high Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan
standing at his right hand to resist him. And the Lord said unto Satan: The
Lord rebuke thee O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem.]

20. These Malignants do most of them condemn themselves; for they honor the
ancient Ministers of Christ that are dead, even while they oppose and hate the
present that are living, who are the nearest imitaters of their Doctrine and
life that are on earth! The name of Peter, and Paul, and John they honor, and
some of them keep holy days for them. And at the same time hate and reproach
those that preach the same Doctrine, and that because they tread in their
steps. They honor the names of Austin, and Chrysostom, and Hierom, and other
Ancients: and hate those that preach and live as they did. They speak
honorably of the Martyrs that were burned to death for the Doctrine of Christ;
and at the same time they hate us, for doing as they did. What difference
between the calling, doctrine and lives of those martyred Ministers, and these
that are now alive? O wretched hypocrites, do you not know that these Apostles,
Fathers and other Ministers, did suffer in their time from such as you, as we
now do and more? Hear what Christ says to such as you, Matthew. 23. 29, 30, 31.
[ Woe to your Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites: because ye build the tombs of the
Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous, and say, If we had been
in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the
blood of the Prophets: Ye are witnesses to your selves that ye are the children
of them which killed the Prophets,: fill ye up then the measure of your
Fathers: Ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation
of Hell?]

21. Moreover these Malignants do harden themselves against the freshest of the
Judgments of God, which some of their own hands have executed: and justify
the persecutors, and succeed them in their fury. Have you forgotten what God
has done here against the Papal enemies of the Gospel and Ministry, in 88. and
the Powder Plot, and many other times? Have you already forgotten how the
persecutots of a godly Ministry have sped within these sixteen years in England
and Ireland? And dare you now stand up in their room and make your selves the
heirs of their sin, and punishment, and justify them in all their Malignity?
What do you but justify them, when you rave against, and revile the same sort
of Ministers, and many of the same persons, whom the former Malignants
persecuted? and oppose the same sort of Ministers that the Papists burned? And
would not you do the like by them if you had power in your hands? Can any wise
man doubt of it, Whether Papists, and Quakers, and Drunkards, that now make it
their work to make the Ministry odious, would not soon dispatch them if they
could? Blessed be the great Protector of the Church; for were it not for him,
our lives would soon be a prey to your cruelty.

22. And indeed if these Malignants had their wills, they would undo
themselves, and cut down the bough they stand upon, and destroy the little hope
and help that is yet left for their miserable souls: It is for the sake of Gods
servants among them that judgments are so long kept off them. And as long as
the Gospel and Ministry remains, salvation is offered them: the Voice of mercy
is calling after them, Repent and live. They have the light shining in their
eyes, which may at last convince them, as Paul was convinced of his
persecution: the voice which they despise may possibly awake them. Though they
have less hope then others; yet there is some. But if they had their will, and
were rid of the Ministry, alas what would the forlorn wretches do? Then they
might damn themselves without disturbance, and go quietly to hell, and no body
stop them, and say, [ Why do you so?]

23. And I pray you consider what it is that these men would have. What if the
Ministers were all cast out? would they have any to do Gods work in their
stead, or none? If none, you may see what they are doing: if any, Who and where
are they? Is it not horrible Pride if all these silly souls do think that they
can do it better themselves? And what else do Quakers and all these sectst that
are the enemies of the Ministry? Do they not go up and down the Land, and say
to the wisest holiest Teachers, as if they took them by the sleeve, [ Come down
and let me preach that can do it better: Come down thou deceiver and ignorant
man, and let me come up that am wiser, and better, and know more: Out with
these proud Lordly Preachers, and let us be your Teachers, that are more holy,
and humble, and self-denying then they.] Is not this the loud language of their
actions? And can you not hear the Devil in these words of highest Pride and
Arrogance? But really Sirs, do you think that these men would teach you better?
And is there enough that are wiser and better then we to fill up our rooms, if we
were out? Do but prove that, and you shall have my consent to banish all the
Ministers in England, to some place that has greater need of their labor,
that they may no more trouble you that have no need of them, and keep out
better.

24. Lastly, consider on what senseless pretenses all this enmity against the
Ministry does vent it self. You shall hear the worst that they have to say
against us, (though but briefly) and then judge.

1. The Quakers say, We are idle drones that labor not, and therefore should
not eat. Answ. The worst I wish you, is, that you had but my ease instead of
your labor. I have reason to take my self for the least of Saints, and yet I
fear not to tell the accuser, that I take the labor of most Tradesmen in the
Town to be a pleasure to the body in comparison of mine; (though for the ends
and the pleasure of my mind, I would not change it with the greatest Prince)
Their labor preserves health, and mine consumes it: They work in ease, and I
in continual pain: They have hours and days of recreation, I have scarce time
to eat and drink. No body molesteth them for their labor; but the more I do,
the more hatred and trouble I draw upon me. If a Quaker ask me, what all this
labor is, let him come and see, or do as I do, and he shall know.

2. They accuse us of covetousness and oppression, because we take tithes or
hire, (as they call it) Answ. 1. Is it not malice or sacrilegious covetousness
that frames this accusation? Whose are the Tithes? are they ours or theirs?
The same Law of the Land that makes the nine parts theirs, does make the tenth
ours. If we have no title to the tenth, they have none to the rest. We ask none
of our people for a farthing. They give it not to us: It was never theirs. When
they buy or take Leases of their Land, it is only the nine parts that they pay
for; and if the tenths were sold them, they should pay themselves a tenth part
more. And would these men make all the people thieves and covetous, to take or
desire that which never was their own? Nay would they have them rob God, to
whom for his service the Tithes were devoted? Read Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10. Romans 2.
22. Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 6, 9. And whether Tithe it self be of Divine
institution still, is more then they are able to disprove. Sure I am, when
Christ told them of tithing mint and cummin, he says, These ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone, Mat. 23. 23. 2. But most certain I am
that God has made it our duty to meditate on his Word, and give our selves
wholly thereto, 1 Timothy 4. 15. and that we may [ Forbear working, and not go on
warfare at our own charge; and sowing to men spiritual things, should reap
their carnal things; Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things,
live of the things of the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.] 1 Cor. 9. 6, 7, 13, 14. 3. And
know you not that the Primitive Christians gave not only the tenths, but all
that they had, and laid it at the Apostles feet, to show that the Gospel
teaches more clearly then the Law, the necessity of dedicating our selves and
all that we have to God. 4. And yet I must say, that we are content with food
and raiment. Most Ministers in England would be glad to give you all their
tithes, if you will but allow them food and raiment for themselves and
families, and such education for their children as is fittest to make them
serviceable to God. And I hope it is no sin to have mouths that must be fed, or
backs that must be clothed. What I must Gods Ministers above all others be
grudged food and raiment, and that of the Lords portion, which none of you pay
for? I fear not to imitate Paul stopping the mouths of malicious accusers, and
to tell you, that the Ministers, whose expenses I am acquainted with, do give
500. pence for 50. that they receive by gift from their people: and that they
take all that they have as Christ's* and not their own; and if they have never
so much they devote it wholly to him, and know he is not beholden to them for
it: and some of them lay out in charitable uses, much more then all the tithes
that they receive for their Ministerial maintenance. And if the Quakers that
accuse them of covetousness, would cast up accounts with them, I doubt not but
it will be found that they receive more by gift then Preachers, and give not
the fourth part so much when they have done.

3. Another accusation is, that we preach false doctrine, and deceive the
people. Answ. It Is easy to say so of any man in the world: but when they come
to prove it, you will see who are the deceivers.

4. Another is, that we are persecutors, and like the Priests of old, and so
all the reproofs of them and the Pharisees belong to us. Answ. This is soon
said too: but where is the proof? For themselves we have no mind to be troubled
with them. Let them let us alone; as long as we will let them alone. But yet
they shall be taught one day to know, that if the Magistrate stop the mouths of
such Railers and abusers of God and men, he does no more persecute them, then
he persecuteth a thief when he hangs him: or then Paul persecuted Hymenaeus
and Philetus when he delivered them up to Satan; or Elymas, Acts 13. 11. or
then Peter persecuted Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5. or then God would have had
the Churches be persecutors against the woman Jezebel that was suffered to
teach and seduce the people, or against the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans which
God hated, Rev. 2. 15, 20. If hindering sin, be persecuting, the calling of a
Magistrate is to be a persecutor, Romans 13. 4. and all parents must persecute
their own children.

5. Another accusation is, that we are against the preaching of any but our
selves. Answ. Who does not desire that all the Lords people were Prophets? But
yet we know all are not Prophets, 1 Cor. 12. 29. nor Teachers. We would have
none of Gods gifts in our people huried, but all improved to the uttermost, for
his glory. But we would not have men turn Ordinary Teachers, that are neither
sound, nor able, nor sent; nor every self-conceited ignorant man have leave to
abuse the Name and Word of God, and the sou^s of men. What would you have more
then is granted you? When any unordained man that is judged competent by the
Commissioners of Approbation, (of whom some are Soldiers) may be a constant
Preacher, and have fullest maintenance, as well as Presbyters?

6. Another charge is, that we are some weak, and some scandalous. Answ. We do
all that we are able to cast out such; and I think never more was done. The
Magistrate sets his guard at the door, and lets in none but whom he please: and
sure if he knew where to have better then those that are in, he would put them
in, or else he is too blame. If he do not know, will you blame him for using
the best that he can get? But if you will come and help us to cast out any that
are vicious and unworthy, we will give you thanks.

7. Another accusation is, that we differ among our selves, and one says one
thing, and another another thing. Answ. 1. And are all these sects that oppose
us, better agreed among themselves? Enquire and judge. 2. Do not all preach one
Gospel, and the same Essentials of the Christian Faith? And we expect not
perfect unity, till we have perfect Knowledge and Holiness; which we dare not
boast of, what ever Quakers do.

8. Another accusation is, that we are not true Ministers. And why so? Because
we have not an uninterrupted succession of lawful Ordination. Answ. This
Objection is the Papists, who have little reason to use it, while it is so
easy a matter to prove so many interruptions of their Papal succession. At
large and often have we answered them, and are still ready to deal with any of
them herein, and to prove, 1. That an uninterrupted succession of right
Ordination, is not of necessity to the being of the Ministry. 2. And if it
were, we have more to show for it then they. If others stick on this, let me
tell them, that Magistracy is as truly from God as the Ministry: And let ever a
King on earth show me an uninterrupted succession giving him title to his
Crown, and I will show him a more undoubted succession or title to my Ministry.
But here is no room to discuss this Question.

9. Object. But you are Parish Priests, and no true Ministers, because you have
not true Churches. Answ. All the Christians in our Parishes that consent are
our flock. And we undertake to prove the truth of such Churches, not only
against scorn, but against all the Arguments that can be brought.

10. Object. But you have not the Spirit, and therefore are no true Ministers.
Answ. And how prove you that we have not the Spirit? The approvers admit none
but such as they think have the Spirit. He that is sanctified has the Spirit:
Prove us unsanctified, and we will resign our Office. Object. You read your
Sermons out of a Paper; therefore you have not the Spirit. Answ. A strong
Argument! I pray you take seven years time to prove the consequence. As wisely
do the Quakers argue, that because we use spectacles, or hour-glasses and
Pulpits, we have not the Spirit. It is not want of your abilities that makes
Ministers use Notes: but it is a regard to the work and good of the hearers. I
use notes as much as any man, when I take pains: and as little as any man when
I am lazy, or busy, and have not leisure to prepare. It Is easier to us to
preach three Sermons without Notes, then one with them. He is a simple preacher
that is not able to preach all day without preparation, if his strength would
serve: especially if he preach at your rates.

11. Object. But the true Ministry is persecuted: but so are not you, but are
persecutors of others. Answ. 1. For our pesecuring others, be so merciful as to
prove it to us, that we may lament it. If punishing wicked men and seducers be
persecuting, not only Paul was such, that wished they were cut off that
troubled the Galatians: but God himself would be the greatest of all
persecutors, that will lay you in hell without repentance, and then you will
wish your old persecution again. And if we be not persecuted, What means the
reproaches of you and all the Drunkards and Malignants about us? But I pray
you, envy us not our lives and liberties, and a little breathing time. Do you
not read that [ The Churches had rest throughout all Judaea and Galilee, and
Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost were multiplied? Act. 9. 31.] Envy not a little
prosperity to the Church. Does not Paul pray that the Gospel may run and be
glorified, and that we may be delivered from unreasonable wicked men? 2 These.
3. 1. Sometimes you can say that more glorious days are promised, and that the
Saints shall Rule the world. Unmerciful men! It is but a while ago since we had
our share of sufferings! Since that the sword has hunted after us! Many of our
Brethren are yet in America, that were driven thither, at this time in Spain,
and Italy, and Germany, and Savoy: Alas, what do our Brethren suffer in the
same cause and calling that we are in! And do you reproach us with our mercies,
if we be out of the Furnace but a little while, in one corner of the world?

Object. 12. You work no miracles to confirm your Doctrine. Answ. It is true:
nor do we need: It is confirmed by miracles long ago. If we brought a new
Gospel, or as the Papists, gave you not our Doctrine on the credit of
Scripture, but Scripture and all on our own credit; then you might justly call
for miracles to prove it. But not when we have nothing to do but expound and
apply a Doctrine sealed by miracles already.

Again I say, Let any Prince on earth that questions our calling, show his
Title to his Crown, or any Judge or Magistrate to his Office; and if I show not
as good a Title to mine, let me be taken for a deceiver, and not a Minister.

Christian Reader, as ever thou would be sanctified, confirmed and saved,
hold fast to Christ, Scripture, Ministry, and Spirit, and that in the Church
and Communion of Saints, and abhor the thoughts of separating them from each
other.

August 15. 1657.
FINIS.

