RICHARD BAXTER's Penitent Confession, And His Necessary VINDICATION, In Answer
to a BOOK, called, The Second Part of the Mischiefs of Separation, Written by
an Unnamed Author. With a PREFACE to Mr. Cantianus D Minimis, in Answer to his
LETTER which extorted this Publication.

Psalm. 32. 5. I said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

Psalm. 19. 12, 13. Who can understand his Errors? Cleanse thou me from secret
faults. Keep back thy Servant also from presumptuous sins; Let them not have
dominion over me: Then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the
great transgression.

John 8. 44, 45. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father
you will do: He was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth,
because there is no truth in him: When he speaks a Lie he speaks of his
own; for he is a Liar and the Father of it. And because I tell you the truth ye
believe me not.

Isa. 5. 20. Woe to them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil: That put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter.

Prove. 24. 24. He that says to the wicked, Thou art Righteous, him shall the
People Curse, Nations shall abhor him. (Sharp words.)

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

For the very Reverend Dr. Edward Stilling fleet, Lord Bishop of the Diocese of
Worcester.
Reverend Sir,
SUpposing the Book which I answer as injurious to you, as to me, I judge it
meet to propose to you this Opportunity of your own Vindication: Or if I be
herein mistaken, to crave your help for my own Conviction. Your former
Accusation of such as I, of the heinous Sin of Schism, or Separation, I confess
I answered in a manner that required your Patience: If it was too free, and
provoking, I beg your pardon, and do not Justify it. My Reasons were, 1. That
I thought, that to take such as I for Schismatics, or Separatists, was a great
hardening and strengthening of the real Separatists, when my Character, and
such others, should seem to be theirs; and if we were falsely accused, they
should seem to be so too.

2. Because I knew how much your Authority, and just Reputation, would add, as
a Whet-stone, to the keenness of their Zeal who thought us unmeet to live out
of the common Goals.

3. Because I knew (whatever is said against it) how great a Loss it would be
to Souls, to have all silenced Ministers give over preaching to any more than
four; and what Sacrilege we should be guilty of, to give over our Ministry,
which we were vowed to, and to be banished five Miles from all Corporations, or
there to avoid all public worshipping of God.

And your Pacificatory Accommodation, so earnestly restraining Parents (without
excepting the Nobility) from choosing Schoolmasters for their own Children,
seemed to one to be an unsufferable Overthrow of that Family Government which
is of Divine Institution, antecedent to Regal, and most literally required in
the Fifth Commandment.

These Reasons carrying me to Earnestness, I perceive the Conceit or Suspicion
is too common, that your Exasperation was the Spring both of Dr. Morrice's
Defense of you, and of this Book, which is commonly famed to be written by Mr.
Long of Exeter, a Member of the Representative Church of England, (of whom I
will not say, as Bishop Morley of me, Ex uno omnes.) This Concest is increased
by the Title of his Book, the same with yours, as The Second Part; and by your
Collocutor's Title, [The Army-Chaplain;] and such other Circumstances.

For my part, I take it for my duty to believe, that you abhor such a Fardel of
malicious, impudent Lies: And that he that has written so many excellent Books
(of which, I thankfully acknowledge the Receipt of many, as your Gift) will by
no Temptation be poisoned to the Approbation of so venomous a Label.

But if I should be in any part mistaken, and while you own not the manner of
his Writing, you should own the main Cause, or Accusation, I humbly and
earnestly beg, that before I dye (if it may be) you will afford me that help of
Conviction and Repentance which may be expected from a Man of Learning, Piety
and Truth, and the now Bishop of that Diocese where the surviving part of my
only Flock (that ever I had) remain; among whom you may learn more of the
falsehood of this Man's Accusations.

And as I cannot but think, that the present Necessity (brought about by God's
Providence, without us) will engage a Man of your Knowledge and Temper to use
your Interest and Parts to the uttermost, both in Parliament and Convocation,
for the strengthening of this Nation and Church by Concord and necessary
Amendment, and unlocking the ^oors of the Parish-Churches to the Lovers of
Unity and Peace. So Acquaintance enableth me to be confident (that though such
as I are past having our part in such a Blessing on Earth, yet) a great number
of young Preachers will be ready, joyfully to accept of any lawful Terms for so
good an End, who now serve God on Terms of S^lfdenial, and are Men of greater
Orthodoxness, Piety, Learning, and skilful, powerful Preaching, than you would
have believed our Nonconformists Schools would have brought forth. And if that
blessed Day may hasten, I doubt not but those of the suffering Ministers that
have overlived their long Silencing, Imprisonments, and Distresses, will gladly
do as Joseph, forgive the Envy and Injuries of their Brethren and Afflicters;
observing how much of the Hand of God was in the Overruling of all, and making
use of that Sin which he did neither cause nor justify.

Sir, As the Importunity of Cantianus, with many others, drew me to publish
this Writing, which I once cast by, as never to have been seen; so the
opportune Occasion of my desiring your own Vindication, or your help for my
Conviction, has caused this Address to you, from

Jun. 13. 1691. A willing Learner, And Penitent, Ri. Baxter.

A LETTER to Mr. BAXTER.
Reverend SIR,
I am a stranger to your person, but not to your Excellent Writings, for which
I praise God, and give you my hearty thanks; I have many, I have read many, I
have given away, and recommended many to others to read, and I bless God have
received much light and warmth from many of them, whereby I am engaged to pray
for you, and to take all occasions to speak, write, and act, whatsoever may
tend to your good here, and hereafter. And to that end, I cannot be at peace
with my self until I have desired you to take into your serious dying thoughts
how you have walked toward the Church of England, in your Practice and your
Writings, that, before you appear at Gods Tribunal, you may foresee your
Sentence what it will be, and whether your Writings, and Practice have done, or
are likely after your death, to do more Good, or Evil to the Professors of the
Christian Religion; for this is generally said by many of your Friends
concerning your Writings, Ubi been nemo melius; ubi male nemo pejus. And for
your Enemies, they are generally so prejudiced with your Male, that they are
not able to read, or think, or speak well of your Been, but discourage many
good Souls from reading, or minding your most profitable Discourses. Now my
humble suit to you is to consider, whether, as St. Augustine that great Light,
and voluminous Writer Crowned all his Works with his Retractations of what was
amiss, Mr. Baxter might not do the same to Gods Glory, the establishing of good
Christians in the Truth, bringing the misled out of their Errors; stopping the
Mouths of your Enemies, and causing your Person and good Works to be had in
Everlasting Remembrance, and the preventing the ill consequences of what has
been acted and writ by you, which may attend the Church of God for many Ages
after your death. Sir, I doubt not but you have heard, and read the dreadful
things that you are charged withal, I have been amazed at them, and heartily
sorry for them. I beseech you consult some Religious, Wise, Faithful Person
whom you know to be a true Son of the Church of England, (as no doubt there are
some among so many learned Bishops and Pastors) and desire them freely to deal
with you in helping you to see the great Errata's of your Sarcastical Writings
against the Bishops and Clergy of the Church of England; or take but that one
Book called, The Unreasonableness of Separation, the Second Part, etc. with
special Remarks on the Life and Actions of Mr. R. Baxter, 1681. and let God and
Men see that you cannot only write well of Humility, Repentance, and
Self-denial, but you can act them also. Where a Cross in time of Plagues is
upon the Door, every Man that passes by is ready to pray, Lord have mercy on
that Family: Sir, if you with your own Hand would please to acknowledge which
of your Works is Infectious and may hurt Souls, all Men that read it, would
bless God for you, and heartily send up their Prayers to Heaven (if they be but
Persons that ever frequent the Throne of Grace) with a Domine Miserere R. B.
wherefore I beseech you think of the advice of a mean Brother of yours in the
Work of the Ministry, who in real gratitude for the benefit he has received by
your Works, and for your own Comfort, Honor, and Happiness, and Gods Glory
above all, presumes, before he goes to his Grave, to express his Love and Duty
to you before you go to yours, for he finds that you and we both entered into
the Church of Christ, March 12. 1614 and therefore cannot be long from
appearing before Almighty God to receive a Sentence to an Eternal state.

Liberavi animam meam. Deus Omnipotens dirigat Te in omnibus viis tuis. Many
years past I met with an Expression in a Preface to another Man's Writing, with
your Name to it, which much troubled me that it should fall from that Pen which
had writ such Excellent Helps to follow Christ Jesus his Rules and Example. It
was this; You was speaking of Hell, and the Government and Order among Devils,
and clapped in that common Pulpit-prayer Expression concerning the Ministry of
the Church of England, viz. By what Names or Titles soever Dignified or
Distinguished, which I thought one of the bitterest unchristian Reflections I
ever read; and I was heartily troubled to read it, because I thought it
impossible for Hell to have crowded it in where there was so much of Heaven.

Sir, You have the best Prayers I can put up to God for you, and humbly beg
your Prayers that I may follow Paul's advice to Timothy, in taking heed to my
Self and Doctrine, and continue therein, that (thorough Gods Mercy and Christ's
Merits) my own Soul may be saved and theirs that hear me.

So, I hope we shall meet in Heaven, for we have an Advocate with the Father.

Feb. 169^ Cantianus D Minimis.

THE PREFACE TO Mr. Cantianus D Minimis Salutem.
SIR,
1. I unfeignedly thank you for your Invitation to Repentance. O pray for me
that neither Ignorance, nor Prepossession and Prejudice, keep me in
Impenitency, so near my Death* I daily wait for my last day on Earth, and it is
dreadful to die in the guilt of Impenitence: But who knows all his secret
faults? I hope God will accept my willingness to know them, and openly to
confess them what Party or Person soever be displeased with it.

Upon your Letter I began to practice it, and finding the Book which you refer
me to, begin with my Childhood and Youth in his Accusations, I thought my
Answer must follow him, and begin there also. But showing it to a Friend more
prudent than my self, he disliked it, that I should tell the World of my
Childish sins, when it is Schism and Rebellion that are my Charge by the
Accuser. And I have often heard, bis pueri senes, as if such passages were the
effects of aged weakness, which better remembereth the passages of Youth, than
of later years. I suspect that this is true: And yet a dying Man is afraid of
such prudence as would stifle penitent Confession, when I am so loudly called
to it by you and the Accuser: I will therefore satisfy Him, and You, and such
other, and my Conscience, though I bear the derision of prudent dislikers: It
wrongeth no Man; and to be accounted weak and simple I can easily bear.

2. But I doubt it is confessing too little and not too much that you will
blame me for: And I cannot remedy that neither. Your Liturgy denies Christian
Burial, to all that kill themselves; and it is no Virtue to belie our selves, I
am sure it is sin to belie a Neighbor, whom I must love but as my self: Yea or
not (seasonably) to vindicate his Reputation against malignant Slanderers. I
have many years left the Book unanswered, to which you refer me for the
Confession of my sins, though many told me, it was my Duty to answer it. It is
you now that have called me to it. Would you have me confess all that he falsely
accuses me of? Then you would make your self guilty of all his Lies, by
presuming that they are true, and judging before you ever heard the defense of
the accused: You write too honestly to allow me to judge so hardly of you.

But truly I durst not put by your Call to my necessary defense. The chief
reason is, that as you doubt whether my Books will do more good or hurt, and
your Author thinks it would be good that They were all burnt, and the Papists
are of the same mind; so I am fully persuaded is the Devil: And till he can get
the Conquering Papists or Tories to do it, he will Endeavor to make them as
useless as if they were burnt, by rendering them odious for their own faults
and for mine. And you tell me that my Enemies will not read them. Now till my
Opinion of them be the same with theirs, you cannot expect that I that have
spent so great a part of above Seventy five years in writing above an hundred
and twenty Books, should be content to lose my Labor and End, and that all Men
lose the benefit of them, rather than I shall confute a most impudent Liar. If
you say, I overvalue them, why do you speak the overvaluing of many of them.
That is good that does Good: About Twelve of them are Translated into the
German Tongue; and the Lutherans say They have done good. Some are Translated
into French: One into the Language of the New England Americans by Mr. Eliots.
Multitudes say, they have been the means of their Conversion, and more of their
Information, Confirmation and Consolation. And the Chief benefit that I expect
by them to the World is when I am dead and gone. And can you expect that after
so much labor for the Church and Souls, I should so far despise both it and
them, as not to think all worthy of a just defense?

3. But you think that the way of Confessing his Accusations will better do it,
and will make Men write on the Doors, a Domine Miserere for my Soul. But have
you known me better than I have known my self? Or did he know me better, who I
suppose never spoke with me, but has lived two hundred (and lately and
hundred) Miles from me? Or is there no way to win the love of your Party, but
by my known confessing such a multitude of shameless Lies, as an Irish Tory or
a Pagan would abhor? I think it enough that I have, to satisfy my Conscience
and such as you, exposed my self to the Censure of imprudent weakness by my
Confessions.

4. But as to my Account of my Opinion about the Wars, I must entreat you to
take it as it is given you: Not as a peremptory justification of all that I
did, but as the reasons which yet I see not answered, desiring that where I
err God will better inform me; that I may neither, condemn the just, nor
justify any sin.

5. But besides your Authors Accusations, you have added two heinous ones of
your own. 1. That before some Book of another, speaking of Order among Devils
I clapped in that Expression, By what Names or Titles soever Dignified or
Distinguished: And you did not think Hell could have done the like; because it
is a common Pulpit Expression.]

I fear that you are over-tender of your Parties honor, to some degree of
melancholy suspiciousness, that could find so much of Hell in those words. I
think I have not heard those words in the Pulpit thrice (to my remembrance) in
forty years.

Our Preachers that I have heard, mention only Archbishops, Bishops, and the
Inferior Clergy. I hope you pray for more than England: But what Obligation
you have to pray for the Three Patriarchs of Antioch, the Two Patriarchs of
Alexandria, or him of Constantinople, or the Catholic of Armenia, or the Abuna
of Abassia, or him of Moscovy, or the Pope, or the Cardinals, Priests and
Deacons, or the Archbishop of Rhemes qua tales, as so Dignified and
Distinguished, I know not. Is not a General Prayer for them enough?

Did Paul speak the Language of Hell, in calling Devils Principalities and
Powers, and Spiritual Wickedness in High Places; no nor in calling Satan The
God of this World? And is any Name more tenderly to be used than Gods? Is it a
wrong to Princes that Beelzebub is called The Prince of the Devils, and the
Prince that Rules in the Air? Does Scripture use Hellish Language, in calling
wicked Rulers GODS? But I gave you not the least cause to think that I meant
that Devils were Bishops, or Bishops Devils: I I spoke not of Bishops: And do
you not know that Devils are dignified and distinguished in superiority by
Names and Titles? Why did you not name the Book which I prefaced, that I might
examine it? Do you think that I can remember all that I have written before
men's Books? Seneca says truly, that he that has a Sore or Ulcer, thinks that
you hurt him when you touch him not, if he do but think you touch him. However,
Dignities, Dominions, and Titles, being words of Political common use, if when
we talk of spiritual, heavenly or hellish Policy, we must not use the same
terms as of Humane Policy, we must devise new Languages and Lexicons, and
correct the Bible.

Your second Accusation of me being my writings against the Bishops and Church
of England, I must suppose you mean truly, not Bishops as Bishops, nor the true
Church of England as such, or as heretofore: But those Changers that since Laud
have called themselves the Church. If you speak truth this is your meaning.

6. And I cannot but think that as your honest and kind admonition obliges me
to be truly thankful to you, and to renew the trial of my ways; so I am obliged
by the same principle of Love and Fidelity, humbly to entreat you, to consider
(if possible) without partiality, 1. How you can answer the owning of such a
Volume of a Lying Slanderers Accusations, before you hear the defense of the
Accused. 2. But much more, how you can so far countenance the heinous sins of
those that you call the Church, as not at all to blame them, and to take it for
so great a crime to name them, and call men to repentance for them? Can you
find so much of Hell, in the mention of the Dignities and Distinctions of
Devils, and yet see nothing but blamelesness, in the silencings of about Two
thousand such Ministers, seizing on the goods, and books, and beds of so many
as were so used; laying many so long in common `fails with Rogues; even diverse
to their death; ruining so many hundred godly Families; shutting the Church
doors against so many Scholars that were educated and devoted to the Ministry;
causing and continuing the woeful divisions of the Land, to the great weakening
of the Church, and hindrances of Piety and Love, and the great advantage of
Popery and Foreign Enemies? O how much more of such work have some to answer
for?

Is Repentance for feeling and bewailing all this, so great a duty, as you
suppose? and is committing it and preaching it up, a virtue not to be repented
of? Does God require us to mourn and cry for the common evils, if we will
escape our selves? Ezekiel. 9. 4. and to mourn for the reproach of the solemn
Assembly, as a burden? Zeph. 3. 17. and is it now a heinous crime? Has Satan
got so much right to his possession, that if he use but the name of the Church
for it, they must repent as of hellish evil, that so much as blame it, and call
men to Repentance? O how hard is it to be impartial?

7. And when you look back on the Wars, why do you not call them to Repentance
(if living) who drew the King from his Parliament to defend Delinquents by an
Army from the due course of Legal Justice, and to be ruled by such men of guilt
before and against his Supreme Council?

8. I received once a Letter almost like yours from Serenus Cressy; if you were
of his Religion, I should less wonder at your partiality for the Church, and
its crimes, than at the like in a Protestant. O how little would it have cost
your Churchmen in 1660 and 1661, to have prevented the calamitous and
dangerous Divisions of this Land, and our common dangers thereby, and the hurt
that many hundred thousand Souls have received by it? And how little would it
cost them yet to prevent the Continuance of it?

9. But I that here obey your Call to Repentance, am past doubt that by the
true and just defense which you have forced or called me to, I shall seem to
the Guilty, and to men of your tenderness and partiality, to add yet much more
to my offense. For you have referred me to an Accuser of such a temper, style
and guilt, as can bear no true Answer adapted to the matter, but what will seem
uncivil and too sharp. It was ill Counsel that was given to one that asked, How
he should have the better of any Adversary that blamed him; viz. Speak and do
things that are most odious, as Perjury, Lying, Persecution, etc. and cover
them with sacred Pretenses, and then all that accuse thee will be taken for
uncharitable Railers.] If we will defend our selves against Slanderers and
impudent Liars, and Churchconfounders, and oppressing Persecutors, we must find
some other than the common names, for such men's sins, yea names that are not
disgraceful, and provoke them not to Repentance, especially if they are listed
in an Army of Crusado's, where those by the Honor and Power of their Company,
take themselves as fortified, that would be afraid were they assaulted in their
singular state. Every Delinquent thinks all his Crimes are secured and
garrisoned by the Honor of the Army or Body that he is Listed in. They can
bear it if we call a common Lay Drunkard, or Whoremonger by his Name; yea if
one call a Godly Man an Hypocrite, or a Peacemaker a Schismatic. But he is a
Railer that calls a Clergy Liar, or Persecutor, or Schismatic, or a Betrayer
of Souls by his proper Name. They know not how to Preach, without calling other
Men to Repentance, but to motion themselves to Repent of Sins that destroy
Souls, confound Churches, and endanger the Land, is to enrage them by
dishonouring them, and deserves the bitterest Reproaches, and Revenge.

10. I think your Author has greatly wronged Dr. Stillingfleet now Lord Bishop
of Worcester, by pretending as his Second to be the Vindicater of his Cause;
for he has thereby occasioned a common conceit, that Dr. Stillingfleet in
revenge for my Defense against his Accusations of Schism, did instigate (Mr.
Morice and) this (supposed) Mr. Long to do that which he was loath to own
himself; But I take my self bound to believe that this report is false, while
there is no proof of it (no not in his Dialogue with the Army Chaplain,) and
while his Irenicon, his Origines Sacrae, his Treatise of Satisfaction, etc. his
Church History, and other Writings deserve so well, and his known parts and
worth are an honor to the Church: Charity believes not unproved evil. Far be
it from me to think that he approves of this Man's Lies, (no nor of Mr.
Morice's mistakes, yet undefended since my Reply, though it was (by one) said
that Book deserved a Bishopric). He has truly said in a late Sermon, May 1.
Page 9. The Government of Passions is Tyrannical and Boisterous, uncertain and
troublesome, never free from doing mischief to it self or others: The greatest
pleasure of Passion is Revenge; and yet that is so unnatural, so full of
anxiety and fear of the Consequents of it; that he that can subdue this unruly
Passion has more real pleasure and satisfaction in his mind, than he who seeks
to gratify it most. And Page 5. If it be intended for an affront though never
so little, the brisker Men's Spirits are, and the higher Opinion they have of
themselves, so much deeper impression is presently made on the mind, and that
inflameth the Heart, and puts the Blood and Spirits in motion in order to the
returning the affront to him that gave it.

11. To conclude, I desire those that have censured me for leaving such a Book
as the Accusers so many years unanswered, to accept of such reasons as these of
the Drs. for my excuse: And those that are glad that I have answered it at
last, to thank Mr. Cantianus and not me; and those that are offended that I
answer it now, and in words suitable to it, to fear lest they make his sin
their own, and to consider that Truth of Words lies in their agreement to the
Matter and the Speakers Mind, and that wilful disagreement to the Matter, is a
degree of Falsehood or Deceit. And them that blame me for confessing my youthful
and private sins, I desire to allow me the excuse that they allow to a greater
Man, St. Augustine, who gave me his Example of the like, and more: And to
imitate whom you here invite me.

And I hereby according to your desire earnestly entreat the Reverend Clergy
Men who judge of my faults as you do, that in Charity they will help to
convince me of them (but not as Bishop Morley, and the Author of the Mischiefs
have done by multiplied untruths in matter of fact.) But it must be speedily,
or death will make it come too late.

12. And as to Retractations, I have here and often already searched after and
Retracted all that I can find amiss in my Writings as to the MATTER or
Doctrine: But as for the MANNER I dare not wholly justify any one leaf that
ever I wrote; nor undertake to correct all that is amiss: I never did any thing
that might not have been better done: Sometime there is disorder: And sometime
Omissions, and often uncomely Repetitions, and always too much dullness and
frigidity about high and holy things: And about lesser and personal matters, I
am conscious that I am often too sharp and provoking: But about the heinous sins
of Church Corrupters, Confounders, Dividers, Silencers, Persecutors and
Betrayers to a Foreign Jurisdiction, I fear lest I have said too little,
though the guilty hate me for saying so much.

Of my Sins known and unknown I daily and earnestly beg pardon of God, by the
Sacrifice, Merits and Intercession of my Savior. God be merciful to me a
Sinner.

RICH. BAXTERS Confession and Vindication.
Chap. I. The Reasons of the Necessity of REPENTANCE.
1. REPENTANCE is a subject so ordinarily preached or written of, that I will
presuppose the Reader acquainted with the meaning of the word: Only here
telling you, 1. That it is not mere sorrow for having sinned when the pleasure
is past, that I mean. 2. Nor a bare wish that it had not been done. 3. Nor
every slight Resolution to do so no more, which time or temptation will soon
wear off. 4. Nor the actual forsaking of this or that particular sin. 5. And
yet it is not so high a degree as a perfection in sorrowing, hating or
forsaking sin.

But it is such a self-humbling and self-loathing sense of the inward badness
of our Souls, original and further contracted, privative and postive, and of
the sinfulness of our Lives by Omissions and Actions, against God, our selves
and others, as proceeds from a rooted Belief of Gods Law, and Gospel, which
Christ by his Holy Spirit makes effectual, to turn the Soul to the Predominant
Love and Choice of God as our God, and Christ as our Savior, and the Holy
Ghost as our Sanctifier, and of Heavenly Perfection as our highest End and
Hope, and the revealed will of God as our Rule, holy Obedience as our Practice,
and the Communion of Saints as our desired Society; with so prevalent a hatred
and enmity to sin, that it reigns not in us, nor live we in any that is
inconsistent with the sald predominant Love of God and Goodness.] This is the
Repentance which I here treat of, though lower degrees that bring Men but to a
common Humiliation, Confession and Amendment be better than none, and may tend
to prevent some Judgments of God, and prepare Men for better.

2. There is great Reason that without Repentance, we should not expect
Deliverance and Salvation: For,

1. Without Repentance we continue in the sin that we should repent of: We have
the same sinning Mind, and Will, and Affections, which we had in the acting of
the sin; and therefore are under the same criminal Guilt: What should else fit
us for Deliverance and Salvation, more than any wicked Men! He that Repents
not would do the same again and a ain, if he had the same Temptations. The Man
is not changed: He may as wisely expect to be saved by the change of the
Weather, or the restraint of a Prison, or a Watchman, or by his decay of Age,
or by want of Money, or by pain and sickness, all which may restrain him from
some sins, as by an impenitent unchanged heart. And God hates all the workers
of Iniquity.

3. 2. Repentance is much of the Essential Cure of a depraved sinful Soul: And
to be saved without Repentance, is to be Cured and not Cured: To be well
without health: To be saved, and not saved.

4. 3. To be saved without Repentance, is to Reconcile the most Holy God (not
to the Sinner but) to the Sin: Light to Darkness; Christ and Belial: Contrary
to the Divine perfection; and the Glory of his Holiness.

5. 4. And it is a denying or reproach to the Wisdom and Justice of his
Government: What worse can be said of the most unrighteous Kings and Judges,
than that they equal not only the just and the unjust, the good and bad, but
even the penitent and the obstinately impenitent? And what an odious state is
such a governed Kingdom in?

6. 5. It is clean contrary to the design of Man's Redemption, and the Office,
Undertaking and Honor of our Redeemer: He came to destroy the works of the
Devil, and to save his people from their sins: And how are they saved from them
that are not Converted from them?

7. 6. How reasonable a condition is this to make a miserable sinner free from
all his guilt or danger of destructive punishment, without any purchase, price
or compensation of his own, by the mere Merits, and Love, and Bounty of a
Savior, and a merciful God; and this after long and aggravated sinning, as
soon as ever he is but converted by Faith and true Repentance. What would you
think of such terms of pardon offered by Man, in his lesser injuries? If one
abuse you, rob you, slander you, and you tell him, do but repent and give over,
and I will forgive thee, because an Intercessor has purchased thy forgiveness]
would you think him fit for pardon that refused such an offer? Can you for
shame say to God, I will not repent and amend, but yet forgive me. It is an
absurd error of the Libertines that take Repentance in order to forgiveness to
be a Legal burden, and the preaching of it to be no Gospel preaching? What Law
is it but the Gospel or Law of Grace that gives pardon on such gentle terms?
The first Law of Innocence gave no forgiveness: The Law of Moses as Political
gave temporal pardon, but only for some lesser sins, and on costly burdensome
terms: The Law of Grace made to lapsed Man ( Adam, Noe, Abraham, and fully by
Christ incarnate) is it that calls for Faith and Repentance as the condition
of Everlasting Pardon and Life: Christ is a Prince and a Savior, to give
Repentance and Remission of Sins.

8. 7. What would it do but equal Devils and Men, to save the Impenitent? And
even feign God to allow his rational Creatures to live in a professed War
against himself, his Son and Spirit, his Word and Promises, and Mercies, and
against themselves and one another. He that professes impenitency for belying
or wronging me, bids me look to my self, for he will do it again if he have
opportunity and provocation.

9. 8. How contrary is it to Thankfulness and Ingenuity, to wish to be spared
in Impenitency, after the purchase and tenders of so great Mercy? What! Dare
you ask leave to sin again and again, when the pardon of every sin, is the
pardon of the punishment in Hell Fire?

10. How unmeet then are they for Pardon and Salvation that hate Conviction and
Reproof, and Rail at him as a Railer at them, that does but call them to
Repentance? That think he heinously injureth them that shows them by the
clearest light of Evidence, that they need Repentance? What is Repentance but
the actual healing of a sinful Soul? The returning Prodigal when he repents
comes to himself, and then comes home to his Father: He that was lost is then
found; and he that was dead is made alive: And is he meet for a Physicians
help, that would not be cured, but hates health? Is this a reasonable and
thankful requital for all the wonders of Love and Mercy manifested to lost and
miserable Sinners, in the great work of Man's Redemption? Shall we put Christ to
be our Accuser, and to say, I came from Heaven, and condescended to deepest
Humiliation, to heal these Sinners, and they would not be healed? Without their
consent I was Incarnate, Obeyed, Suffered, Died, and Conquered Death by my
Resurrection: Before they desired it I gave them the Gospel, and the offers of
Free Grace, and sent them Messengers to beseech them to be reconciled to God:
But it was not meet that I should be Theirs, that would not be Mine, and save
them that would not consent to be saved: To make them willing, which is a Moral
change, I used most undeniable Reasons, and Means as Moral Causes: I set Heaven
before them in my Promises, and Hell in Threatenings: I convinced them of the
Evil of Sin, and of the Misery of unconverted Sinners, and of the Vanity of all
that can be set against the Mercies and Hopes which I set before them, and of
all other Remedies without my Grace: And yet unless I would by Omnipotency heal
them, they would not be healed. However God use the way of unresistible
Omnipotency on some* and will not be frustrate in his Design of the Saving of
his Elect, nor leave the Event of his Grace to the uncertain Determination of
the Will of Man, yet those will be found unexcuseable that wilfully go on and
perish, after all the sapiential moral Methods, Reasons, Persuasions, Mercies
and Patience, warning and Corrections, that were used as tending to their Cure.

Chap. II.
Sect. 1. The Author's Profession of his own Repentance.
1. HE is unfit to profess himself to be called of God, to call others to
Repentance, who is Impenitent himself. And what Man has a louder Call to
Repent from God and Man than I my Self? And should I not be truly willing to
know my Sin that I may Repent of it, and to confess it, bewail it, and forsake
it when I know it; Conscience would tell me that hereby I should aggravate it,
beyond all just excuse. Alas, it has not been so sweet, so profitable, or
friendly to me, that I should take its part, or be loath to leave it. It has
been worse to me every day of my Life, than all the Enemies that ever I had in
the World: And since God taught me effectually to know what Sin is, and what
God, and Christ, and Grace, and the Hope of Heaven is, and to know my Self, all
the Sufferings that ever I have had from Men, from Malice, from Envy, from
Persecutors, from Slanderers, have been next to nothing to me, in comparison of
what in Soul and Body, I suffer daily for and by my Self and Sin.

2. Therefore I humbly and earnestly beg of that God that is the Hater of Sin
and the Father of Lights, that he will not deny me that illuminating convincing
Grace, which is needful to make me know the truth of my own Condition, nor that
uprightness and tenderness of Heart, which is necessary to my true Humiliation,
and that I may not forbear any true Confession, which is necessary to my
exercise of Repentance, and to my Forgiveness.

It is no time for me to deny or extenuate my Sin, when I am waiting daily in
pain and languishing for my final Doom, at my approaching Change, when I shall
quit this transitory World, and all its Vanities for ever. If I knew nothing
(of dangerous and doubtful Consequence) by my Self, yet am I not thereby
justified: And how small a matter should it be to me, to be judged and acquit
or praised by Men; when there is one that Judges me (by the final Sentence)
even the Lord. The false applause and praise of Men (the miserable Hypocrites
reward) adds no Joy to those in Heaven, nor abateth the Misery of those in
Hell. Whether they praise or dispraise me, they are all Dying as well as I, and
in that day their thoughts perish: And who that sees a Skull cast up, does
much care what that Man thought of him while he was alive. Verily, every Man at
his best Estate is altogether Vanity: Cease therefore, O my Soul from Man. --

3. But what! Must I, or may I therefore Repent of all that men of diverse Minds
call me to Repent of? How impossible is that? How foolish, and how wicked?

There are above Sixty Books written against me, in part or in the main scope:
And I have written above a Hundred and twenty which must needs make work for
many men's censure. And are all, or most Wise and Judicious that read and
censure them?

I. The Sadduces censure me for asserting the Life to come, and the
Resurrection.

II. The Somatists censure me for the asserting of the Difference of Spirits
from Bodies.

III. The Antitrinitarians censure me for showing what Evidence of Trinity in
Unity God has imprinted on the whole frame of Nature and Morality.

IV. The Church-distracting Hereticators censure me, for taking the old
Controversies with the Nestorians, Eutychians and Monothelites, to be capable
of easier reconciliation, and gentler handling, than it has found by such
fierce Dividers.

V. The Arrians and Socinians say I judge too hardly of them that deny the
Godhead of Christ.

VI. The Arminians censure me for holding special Election and Differencing
Grace.

VII. The hot Anti-Arminians censure me for holding any such free Will and
Universal Redemption, as Usher, Davenant, Preston, and such other knowing men
have defended.

VIII. The Anabaptists call me to Repentance for Writing so much for Infants
Baptism.

IX. The Antinomians deeply censure me as being against Christ and free Grace,
and ascribing too much to Man, to Faith, to Work and our own Righteousness, and
for detecting their Errors.

X. The Separatists call me to Repentance for separating no further from the
Conformists than they force us from them, and separate themselves from
necessary Truth: And for persuading men to Communion with the Parish Assemblies.

XI. The Conforming Separatists call me to Repentance for not separating from
all save themselves, and for knowing and owning those to be true Members of the
Church of England, and faithful Servants of Christ, whom they eject.

XII. Clement Writer and the Seekers censure me, for asserting the certainty of
Scripture Verity, as sealed by the Spirit by Miracles and Sanctification; and
for maintaining that there is yet continued a true Ministry and true Churches.

XIII. Mr. Liford and some others censure me for taking the Blasphemy of the
Holy Ghost, to be fixed Infidels judging Christ's Miracles to be by the Devil.

XIV. Mr. Henry Dodwell censureth me for not taking the Office of Presbyters to
be specified or measured and varied by the Will of the Bishop or Ordainer, and
not determined by the Institution of Christ; and for not denying the Presbyters
and Bishops of all the Reformed Churches to be really Ministers, and their
Churches true Churches) who have not an uninterrupted Succession of Canonical
Ordination by Diocesans as from the days of the Apostles, and that they commit
not the Sin against the Holy Ghost by administering Sacraments as being but
Laymen; while he holds such as the French to be true Ministers.

XV. The Erastians censure me for vindicating the Power of the Keys and the
necessity of Ministerial Church Discipline.

XVI. The Independents blame me for being for a National Church; and some of
them for being against their unnecessary Covenanting terms of Communion, and
their giving too much Power to popular Votes.

XVII. The Scots Presbyterians blame me for blaming the Imposition of their
Covenant; and for being so much for a superior sort of Bishops or Archbishops.

XVIII. The English Diocesan Enemies to Episcopacy, who are for setting up but
one sole Bishop and Church, instead of a Thousand, or many Hundred or many
Score, do fiercely accuse me, as if it were not they but I that am an Enemy to
Episcopacy and the Church; for desiring that Thousands may not be ejected or
kept out, and one only undertake in each Diocese an impossible task.

XIX. The factious Sectarian part of the Conformists, most fiercely and
implacably accuse me, for telling them (after many years patient silence) what
are the Reasons that I conform not to their imposed Oaths, Covenants,
Subscriptions, Declanations and Practices: taking this for an Accusation of
those that do, what I dare not do: And because I give not over Preaching. And
some of their Writers expect that I falsely accuse my self of a multitude of
heinous Crimes, of which they by palpable lying accuse me: As if Lying against
my self were an act of Repentance, and a means of Pardon, and were not a Sin as
well as to belly another.

XX. The Magistrates and Judges who have often Imprisoned me, and seized on all
my Goods and Books, and driven me out of the County (with the Bishop that
forbad my Preaching) accuse me for not ceasing to Preach (when I have
unanswerably proved that so to do would be persidious Sacrilege against my
ordination Vow and Calling). And when I blamed the Herodians, Priests and
Pharisees for seeking to destroy Christ, and forbidding his Apostles to Preach,
they said, I meant the Bishops that Silenced such as I, and for this sent me to
Prison, with a Fine of Five hundred Marks: But from the Justices of the
Sessions I had the fairest dealing: For when they kept me under many Hundred
Pounds Bonds to the good Behavior (that I might be at their will to take me up
as soon as they could find any pretense for an Accusation) they openly
professed that they did it not as a Penalty, and had nothing against me, but
took me to be Innocent; but the Times being dangerous, they were to do it for
Prevention (that is, By the order of Judge Jeffreys and the King.)

Now if you can tell me what Confession and Repentance that must be, which must
satisfy all these Accusers, or else which of all these Parties it is that I
must satisfy, and how I shall know that I shall not be guilty of a multitude
of gross Lies, by the Confessions which they require and expect, you will
perform a work which to me seems impossible.

Therefore all that I can do is, to search my Heart and Life with a sincere
willingness to know the Truth, and to confess to God and Man, so much as I can
find to be truly sinful, as far as Men are concerned to know it.

XXI. The Italian and Spanish sort of Papists yet deeplier accuse me than most
aforesaid, for denying their pretended Vice-Christ, and confuting their
Heretical and Schismatical Errors, and proving that by their Conciliar
Religion, they profess open Hostility to Christian Kings and Magistrates. One
of them 1661. wrote me a Challenge to make this good (having said somewhat of
it in my Sermon to the Parliament) which I fully performed: But it has ever
since lain unprinted, for want of License from our Clergy, and Security from
the Court.

XXII. The English Diocesan sort who are for an Universal or Foreign
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, under the Name of General Councils, and a
Collegium Pastorum in the intervals governing per Literas format as, the Pope
being Principium Unitatis, and Patriarch of the West, are deep Accusers of me
for denying all such Universal and Foreign Jurisdiction, as that which is worse
than the Italian sort Popery, and would perjure this Land which is often Sworn
against it: And for taking the Principles urged by Grotius (after his Revolt)
to be the French sort of Popery, and for being against that Coalition with such
on these terms; which said Foreign Jurisdiction is Pleaded for, by Archbishop
Laud, Archbishop Bromhall, Bishop Peter Guning, Bishop Sparrow, Bishop Sam.
Parker, Dr. Heylin, Mr. Thorndike, Dr. Saywell, Dr. Beveridge, and worse by
some others: All which by their own express words, with a full Confutation of
their opinion, I have written ready for the Press, (and disputed it at large
three days with Bishop Guning in the presence of his chosen Witnesses Dr.
Saywell and Dr. Beveridge. But Dr. Isaac Barrow against Thorndike has
irrefragably confuted all their Pretensions, notwithstanding Bishop Parker's
vain Contradiction.

XXIII. But the great load of the most Bloody Accusations, is heapt up against
me, by the exasperated Clergy and Laity, for my calling them to Repentance for
the Sins which I shall after mention; and they fetch most of their Charges from
my Actions in the Wars, of which the multitude of Untruths in Matter of Fact
which they virulently write and report, I had rather think come from the rash
belief of one another in their exasperated Faction, than from the rupture of
tumifying knownLying Malice and Rage.

But though this vented by Dr. Stillingfleett's nameless Second, in the Book
called, The second Part of the Mischief of Separation, be that which Cantianus
makes my Charge, I think it not seasonable here to deal with it, till I have
first confessed my real Faults.

SECTION 2.
THough I have more than once Published the Confession of many of my youthful
and later Sins, the renewed loud call of Accusers and of Approaching Death,
provokes me to do it again, before I call others to Repentance.

And I will mention the Sins of my Childhood for a warning to Children to avoid
the like: And because the Seeds of following Sins are usually then sown.

I. Though from the first of my remembrance I liked Religious Goodness, and
feared sinning since my Father had talked to me of God and Sin and the World to
come, yet it was many Years before I was humbled for my Original Sin, or felt
much of the need of a Savior, or understood the Doctrine of the Scripture, but
only delighted in the Historical part: And though my Conscience troubled me for
a Lie to escape Danger, it did not always keep me from it.

II. If the most pleasing Sin be the greatest, the Delight in feigned Histories
called Romances, was my great, because my most delightful Sin.

III. Though my Appetite inclined only to the coursest and poorest Diet, yet
therein I pleased it foolishly and sinfully to the utter ruin of my Health:
which I the rather mention to bid Parents look to their Childrens Health in the
quality and quantity of their Food, as they love their Life and Comforts. My
delightful Diet was so much in Apples, and Pears, and Plumbs, and Cheese that
possessed my Stomach early with an uncurable excessive Flatulency, and my Veins
with remediless Obstructions, and bred so long and violent a Cough, as that
brought me into present danger of a Phthysis: To Cure which (after three Years)
taking excessively Garlic and flos Sulphuris, inclined me to such a great long
continued Bleeding, as exhausted my Natural Heat* and Strength.

IV. Though we had great plenty of such Fruit at Home, sometime with a grudging
Conscience, I ventured over the Hedge to a Neighbors Fruit. A Sin that Austin
himself confesses.

V. I was in a School where one or two Lads corrupted many, by obscene talk,
and immodest actions: In which I did not sufficiently disown them or rebuke
them* but often too much countenanced them in it: As also in fighting and abusing
the weaker, though I was unable thereto my self.

VI. Though I was bred under many mere Readers, and Tippling or Drunken
Schoolmasters and Curates, and scarcely heard a Sermon in a long time, till I
was about Fourteen years of Age, or then and after none that I felt any profit
by, I was not troubled at the loss, nor at my ignorance and unprofitableness.

VII When it pleased God by reading some good Books, and by my danger of
Sickness, about Fifteen years of Age to waken my Conscience, I was not so
obedient to that awakening Call as I should have been: But was often tempted to
my old sin of pleasing my Appetite, and had almost been drawn away to a
covetous love of Gaming at Cards: But God quickly checked it by an unusual
Providence.

VIII. I was strongly possessed (I think by Pride joined with a Love of Learning)
to have settled at the University till I had attained some Eminency of Learning
and Titles; but God in great Mercy by Sickness and other hindrances saved me
from that danger, and loss of time, and bred me up in a more humbling way, and
gave me some little help of safe and pious Country Tutors.

IX. Weakness keeping me in expectation of Death, and God then having given me
a greater sense of Man's Everlasting state, and of the differences between Faith
and Hypocrisy, Holiness and a worldly state, I thirsted to win others to the
same sense and state; and to that End offered my self to Ordination when I was
too low for so high a Work, both in Learning, and in a methodical knowledge of
Theology. And though I was naturally inclined to Logical and Metaphysical
Accurateness and method, I was too ignorant in Languages and Mathematics, and
diverse parts of Knowledge; had I not been a continual Learner (by Books) while
I was a Teacher, I had been a dishonor to the Sacred Office and Work, and do
repent that I made such haste.

X. I too rashly in this Ignorance took the Judgment of the Country Ministers
that had been my Helpers, and told me of the Lawfulness of Conformity, and
believed the Books for Conformity which they persuaded me to read, for the
English frame of Government and Subscriptions, before I had read impartially
what was against it, or heard any speak on the other side, or had well studied
the case: And so I subscribed sinfully because temerariously: And though I was
so rash that I cannot say, that I am sure that I took the Oath of Canonical
Obedience (it is so long since) yet I think I did, because else I had not been
Ordained. Of this I repent, and beg forgiveness for the Merits of Christ.
(Though I had never been like to have been a Minister without it, but had
turned to some other Calling.)

XI. Though I know not that ever I broke the Oath of Canonical Obedience* or
ever disobeyed my Ordinary, yet I changed my Judgment, of the Canons, of which
I cannot repent: While I lived a year as a Schoolmaster my Ordinary commanded
me nothing which I disobeyed: When I removed to a Privileged place (
Bridgnorth) I was only a Lecturer, and my Ordinary commanded me nothing which I
did not: I did read most of the Liturgy, and kneel at the Sacrament: And my
Ordinary himself Baptized without Crossing, and never commanded me to use it,
or the Surplice. When I came to Kidderminster Bishop Thornbury died, and
Bishop Prideaux never gave me any Command or Prohibition, I being a mere
Lecturer that never had Presentation, and the Vicar using the Liturgy and
Ceremonies. But yet I repent ^^at I did think worse of that sort of Diocesane
Government, which puts not down the Parochial Pastors and Churches than I now
do, and these Forty years have done: For I think that a General Episcopacy over
many Churches and Bishops, is Jure Divino an Order succeeding Apostles and
Evangelists in that part of their Office which as Ordinary must continue.

But I repent not that I renounced that sort of Diocesanes who put or keep down
all the Parochial Pastors or Bishops, and Churches, making them but as
Chapels, Parts of a Diocese as the lowest Church, and taking on them the sole
Episcopacy of many score or hundred Churches. Nor do I repent of my unanswered
Treatise of Episcopacy written against this sort.

XII. Though I ever disliked the Censorious and Separating Spirit, that run
into Extremes against Conformity, yet I Repent that I did no more sharply
reprove it: But because almost all the people where I came to preach that were
not mere Worldlings, but seemed to be seriously Religious, were either against
Conformity, or wished it removed for the Divisions which it caused, I overmuch
valued their Esteem and Love, because I loved their serious piety; and having
sometimes (but very seldom) spoken against the Corruptions of the Church
Government, specially the Silencing of Ministers* I can scarce tell to this
day, whether I did well or ill; more good by telling Men what to lament and
pray against, or more hurt by heartening those that were apt overmuch to
Censure Government and the Orders of the Church. But I beg God to forgive what
was amiss.

XIII. Though I desired such a frame of Episcopal Government as Sir Edward
Deering offered, or as since Archbishop Usher has described as Primitive, yet
out of the sense of the evil that Silencers and Persecutors had done, I too
much rejoiced when the Tidings came that the Prelacy was Voted down, not
knowing then what would be set up, nor well what to desire: For neither
Presbytery nor Independency had been then debated, or were well understood.

XIV. When I heard of the Scots Covenanting and Arming, and entering England,
though I had not so much knowledge of their Cause, as should be a just
satisfaction in so great a matter, yet I was in Heart glad of it, for the
appearance that it showed, of enabling the Lords and Commons of England, to
appear more boldly to plead for their Liberties and Laws. But I now think that
a Suspension of my thoughts, as wanting Evidence, had been better.

XV. When I heard of the tumultuous manner of the Apprentices in London,
petitioning against Bishops, I disliked it, and the means that encouraged them,
and the public reproach that was cast by the Rabble on those called
Straffordians (such learned men as the Lord Faulkland* Lord Digby, etc.) yea,
and the urging the King so much for his Execution: But I too much silenced my
dislike.

XVI. When I saw Mr. Burton's Protestation Protested, and the forwardness of
many Religious unlearned Persons, to run toward Extremes against Liturgies and
Forms, and their kindness to the Principles of Separation* I greatly disliked
it and contradicted them, and concurred in judgment with Excellent John Ball*
who foresaw the danger and betimes wrote against it. But I opposed it with far
less Zeal than I had done, if I had then foreseen what followed.

XVII. When the News came of the Irish Insurrection and Murdering 200000 it
possessed us with such a pannick fear of them and other Papists as scarce left
our Judgments free to calm deliberate determination: But we could scarce sleep
for fear of sudden assaults, when calm reason might have told us, that the
danger could not be so sudden and near.

XVIII. When there appeared a probability of a Civil War, I read the
Observator Said to be one Parker a Lawyer.
, and some such others, that made the King to be singulis Major at Universis
Minor; and I did not for some weeks at least discern the Error of that
Assertion, as I shortly after did; and when I found Ri. Hooker lib. 1. going as
far, and making Legislation to be the proper work of the whole Body, and Bishop
Bilson telling us in how many cases the King might by Arms be resisted, and
Grotius de Jure Belli, and W. Barkley enumerates many, and speaking yet higher,
I was much the more quieted in receiving some such Principles. But
consideration soon taught me to say that the people had the Meliority, but not
the Majority; that is, They were to be preferred to the King in genere Causae
finalis* but not in point of Governing Authority: And so I forsook Hooker's
Politics* but not Bilson's, Jewel's, Grotius's etc. But I repent of that
Error, though it was but short.

XIX. No Town in Worcestershire was so famous for Pageants, and pompous Shows
and Revels, and Debauchery at such times as Kidderminster: And at the times of
those Revels, the Drunkards raged in malignant fury against the Religious
party: But by Gods great Mercy the Religious party there were of so loving,
meek and harmless a Temper, inclined humbly to stoop to the meanest, and to do
good to all, that there was no one single person that the Rabble had any thing
against, but only in general, that they used to repeat Sermons, sing Psalms,
and pray, and not be Drunk nor Swear. But the Parliament (before the King
parted from them) sent an Order to be published by the Ministers for the
defacing of all Images of any of the Trinity in Church Windows, or in
Chruch-yards: And for publishing this Order the Drunken Rabble (animated by the
probability of the approaching War) rose up against me, and sought in a Tumult
with Clubs to kill the Churchwarden and me, (before the Order was Executed)
whereupon (and upon an Accusation to the Sessions, the Articles of which I
could never see or hear, or know,) I was forced for a Month to fly to
Gloucester; where I preached so much for Reformation, (in my sense of the common
malignant rage of the Rabble) as I have often since feared was too keen, and I
since wished that I had rather at such a time of dangerous Division, preached
more for peace, and to abate exasperations, than to provoke them, though by
truth.

XX. I had not been long at home after my return, but the War began in that
Country, by the Kings and Parliaments contending for the Militia; and quickly
after the first Soldiers that ever I saw raised, was a Troop from Herefordshire
raised by Sir W. Crofts, under his Brother James, Dr. Herbert Crofts the other
Brother (now Bishop of Hereford) being Chaplain, and the Dr. desiring my
Pulpit, I heard him Preach an Eloquent Sermon against the Parliament, as
Enemies to the King and Peace: And Sir William Crofts and Sir Francis
Nethersoke a little before meeting there for Consultation, Sir Francis spoke to
me to avoid all War against the King, (seeming himself to be against the War on
both sides,) telling me by his observations in the Palatinate Wars how little
they that begin foreknow of the end: I had no thoughts of meddling with War,
and so only gave him the hearing. but I have often since repented that I had not
drawn out more of his Reasons, to have helped my Judgment to a Resolution;
especially since I read (in Dr. W. Bates's Vitae virorum illustrium) his words
in his Laudatio fenebris of Prince Henry's Death, when he was Orator of
Cambridge; in which he seems to have been Prophetical, as England felt by sad
Experience: I will transcribe part of his Prophecy, Page 412.

Nec illa modo vulnera jam olim obducta, bujus letho recruduerunt, sed alia
etiam quae nec dum sentimus, and majora nobis inflicta sunt. Ah, ne hoc FUNUS
MILL PRODUCAT FUNERA! Nec sit dies ille cum intempestivum hujus Principis
fatum, acerbiore luctu quam hodierno deflebimus, caecisque in malis deprensi
Principem Henricum, magna voce Principem Henricum nequicquam clamabimus! Inanis
forte est his metus, Academici, and si meaecum vestris quid valiant preces,
inanis erit. Utinam etiam and stultus esset. Vivit quidem Priamus, and diu
vivat and diu precor. Firma siet ejus domus, nec unquam nutet: Post satum tamen
Hectoris, ejusque supremum diem cui december annos spes nostrae innixae sunt,
Trojae timere, cum nolim, reluctante licet animo, invitus cogor.] Read the
rest; who would think but that he foresaw King Charles Reign, and our
calamitous Wars in the Death of Prince Henry?

XXI. The Declarations, and Trumpets that proclaimed the Wars, so enraged the
Rabble of Drunkards and Haters of Piety, that the most peaceable Religious Men
that did but Pray and sing Psalms, and repeat the public Sermons, were forced
to fly and save their Lives and Goods from their own Neighbors, and the Kings
Militia: If a Man had short Hair, and were suspected to be a Puritan (as such
were called) the Rabble would cry, [ Down with the Roundheads,] and he was in
present danger. In this state of Affairs, I went to Worcester for safety when
the Earl of Essex's Army was there, and for curiosity, going to see those that
lay at Poike-bridge, was a witness of the flight of the Parliaments Soldiers at
Wikefield. But I repented quickly of that curiosity, and going out of my proper
way.

XXII. When the first great fight was at Edgehill, I was at Allcester, and for
curiosity went with Mr. Sam. Clerk the day after the fight, to see the place,
and the Relicts of the unburied slain. But I had no call to so sad a sight.

XXIII. To return home I could not with safety of my life: To maintain my self
one Week I had not Money enough with me, nor elsewhere. In this strait I went
to Coventree, and obtruded my self on Mr. King one of the Ministers, and my old
Acquaintance, not paying him a Groat for a Months Diet or more: And at the
Months end, the Committee of Coventree invited me to take my Diet and Lodging
at the Governors House (Col. John Barker) where I was offered to be Chaplain
to the Garrison Regiment, which I refused, but undertook to preach once a Week
to the Soldiers, but without pay. In which place God showed me for about two
years so great Mercy as I can never be sufficiently thankful for: In a quiet,
and safe Habitation in the midst of a Kingdom, torn by War, and in pious
converse with a great number of Excellent Learned Ministers, that retired
thither for safety from the rage of Soldiers; and the Company of as pious
understanding Gentlemen of the Committee as I knew living (Sir Rich.
Sheffington, Mr. George Abbot, Godfrey Bossevile, and many more) But because it
was here that I declared my self for the Parliament, I am here put to open the
Case as it stood with me, in order to my request to them that think I sinned,
yet better to help me by their Counsel and Prayers, that God would convince me
if I erred, and pardon my known and unknown Sin.

SECTION 3.
1. I Did and do believe that the Legislative Power is the chief Flower of the
summa potestas, or true Sovereignty: In this Bishop Morley himself fully
confirms me.

2. I did believe that the Legislative Power was by the Constitution of this
Kingdom, in the King and Parliament, and not in the King alone This I believed
because the words of the Laws say that they are made by the Consent and
Authority of the Parliament; And the King granted it in his Answer to the 19
Propositions (in sense.) And not only Hooker and Bilson, but all the old
Bishops and the old Parliaments, Judges and Lawyers commonly held it: And I was
not wiser in Law than all they I know few but Bishop Morley that deny that the
Parliament have part in the power of Legislation: And even he grants that
they are Authors of the matter, to which the King puts the form: And so he
makes the Controversy like that of Aristotle and Galen, about Generation,
whether the form be only a semine ma^is vel utriusque: As if the very Matter
cum dispositione receptiva were not an Essential constitutive part.

But now King and Parliament have by a Law of the Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, determined the Case.

3. I did and do believe that it is commonly agreed that Parliaments have five
Eminent Relations. 1. They are part of the I egislative power
by the Constitution of the Kingdoms. 2. They are the Kings Supreme Council. 3.
They are the Kings Supreme Court of Judicature (by the Lords.) 4. They
Represent the Nation as subject to the King. 5. They are the Nations
Representatives so far as they are Free: For had they not Liberties and
Properties they were mere Slaves.

1. As Subjects they are to obey. 2. As Supreme Council they are to be the
chief Advisers. 3. As the Supreme Court, the King is finally to exercise
Judicature by them. 4. As they represent the people as far as they are Freemen
and not Slaves, they are to secure their reserved and natural Liberties and
Properties (in their Lives, Limbs, Wives, Children and Acquisitions,) which are
not to be taken from them. but by Consent or Forseiture. 5. Their Legislative
power they have not (as Hooker and many others think by Nature, but by that
Fundamental Contract which made the form of Government: For though Government
be of God in the Genus, and as empowered and obliged primarily to promote
obedience to Gods own Laws; yet it is of Man by Contract, that the Persons or
Families, or Number and Order of Rulers be constituted, and restraint put on
the Invasion of Propriety.

4. I did and do believe Grotius, Lawson, and other Writers of Politics, who
agree, that the bare Title of Supreme given to a King, is no proof that the
whole Sovereignty ( summa potestas) or Legislation in particular, is in him
alone, and not at all in the Senate or Parliament; for it is for Unity sake,
Honourary, not excluding, but implying the Parliaments part, and also that he
is to exercise his Judicatures by the Legal way of his Courts, Judges and
Magistrates.

5. I did and do believe that the King is singulis and universis subditis major
quoad Fus regendi: and that the people qua talis have no power of public
Government, but that he is not Universis melior: And that meliority makes the
final Cause: And that salus populi, or bonum publicum is the Essentiating End
or terminus of Humane Government: And it is no Government (save equivocally)
which is destructive of this End.

6. I believe that the same God that Instituted Political Government, did also
make, 1. Self-Government. 2. Paternal Government. 3. Marital Government. 4. And
Pastoral Church Government: And that no King has any Right to null any of
these, or alter them in Essentials or Integrals; but only to over rule them.

7. I believe that all Power is of God, and no King has any but what God has
given him: And that God has given none against himself, or any of his own
Laws: And all Laws are nullities that are against them. And are not Acts of
Authority but Usurpation, (as Hooker says.)

8. But yet he that acts in one thing without and against Authority, is to be
obeyed in other things where he has Authority, and not resisted by Arms in
every Usurpation, yea the Honor of his Office and true Power is to be
preserved, while we refuse obedience to his sinful Usurpation.

9. Grotius and common reason convinced me that where the summa potestas is in
King and Senate, each part has right to defend its own true Part therein: It
can be no part in Sovereignty which is merely at the Will and Mercy of the
other part.

10. I did and do believe that the Constitution fixing the chief power in King
and Parliament united as one Politic Person; it supposes that they must not
be divided: And that neither part has power against the other as such: (The
King has power over them as Subjects, but not as Legislators or exempted
Proprietors.) So that separating them by fixed opposition is dissolving the
Constitution: As separating Soul and Body, Husband and Wife, dissolve Man and
Matrimony.

11. Therefore I did and do believe that neither King nor Parliament had any
right, to raise an Offensive War against each other! None but unavoidably
defensive could be lawful. Therefore the first assailant was the culpable
beginner.

12. I did believe that neither the King nor the Parliament as such are
questionable by Law, having no superior Judicature to try them. And that the
person of the King is inviolable, there being no Power or Law to punish him,
and therefore the Law says, The King can do no wrong, but it lays all the
blame on the Subjects, who are responsible for their actions.

13. I did and do believe that as every Man has a power of private
Self-defence against a Murderer or Thief, so every Kingdom has a power or
right of public Self-defence, against Foreign or Home bred Enemies.

14. But I believe that this power belongs not to a wronged or persecuted
party, but only to the Body of the Kingdom: Because their good is not the bonum
publicum, and a Civil War would do more hurt than their death or ruin. Nor may
a Kingdom defend all its Rights, or revenge all its injuries by a Civil War,
which will do more hurt than their wrongs: But where the destruction of the
Kingdom is apparently endeavored, or the change of their Constitution, or a
hurt greater than a Civil War, a Self-defence is lawful and necessary.

15. I believe Grotius and all Politics, that Regere and perdere rempublicam
are inconsistent, and that whoever declares his purpose to destroy the
Kingdom, can be no King of it: For the terminus is essential to his relation.
If it be Murder not to defend the Life of a Brother against the assault of a
Murdering Robber, it is far worse not to do our Duty to save a Kingdom against
public Murderers, and Destroyers.

16. If a King profess himself a Papist according to the true definition, he
takes Approved General Councils for the Rule of his Religion: And the Laterane
Council sub Innoc. 3. binds all Temporal Lords on pain of Excommunication,
and Deposition to exterminate all that deny Transubstantiation and others
called Heretics from their Dominions, if they are able; and other Counsels and
Popes have the like. And it must be supposed that he that professes himself so
bound in Conscience, is resolved as soon as he can to do it. And he that
imposes on them a false Religion, and faith, Turn or Die, professes to
destroy or damn them. Yet may he be endured if he disclaim such Councils, or
promise Liberty, till Evidence of perilous attempts nullify that promise: But
if he put the Nation under the power of Soldiers Judges, Magistrates of the
same profession, it must be supposed that he cannot save the Kingdom from them,
or that all they will be neglecters of their own Religion: Or if he put himself
into the power of an Army of that Religion, he puts the Nation into their
power, though he were a Protestant himself: For he is utterly unable to resist
their power when Religion engages their deluded Consciences to destroy us: And
though causless fears will not warrant defensive Arms, rational well-grounded
fears will: For when Men are dead it is too late.

17. But it follows not that therefore a Papist may be resisted in France,
Spain, Portugal, or any Papist Kingdom; nor yet a Heathen by persecuted
Christians, as in the Roman Empire. Because their Religion binds none of
these to exterminate or destroy their own Kingdoms, as being of the same
Religion as themselves. And the Christians then, and Protestants there now are
not the Kingdom, but a Party: Therefore King and Parliament have here newly
enacted for the settling of this Crown, that no Papist may be here King or
Regent Queen: For though (as in the Pond Judge Hale tells us) two Pikes
devoured all the other great store of Fish, and survived only themselves) God
never authorized one Man to damn or murder a whole Kingdom.

18. The Interest of the King (his Honor, Safety and Power) and the Interest
of the People (their common safety and welfare) are distinct, but must not be
opposite. The King is for the Kingdom finaliter under God's Glory, though the
People are as Subjects to obey the King, it is to that end, the common good.

19. In application, I did believe that both King and Parliament sinfully began
and managed this War. For if either or both were wronged, so much was by them
to be endured, as was not worse than a Civil War. I believe that the Parliament
did very ill, in being emboldened by the Scots Army to provoke the King beyond
the degree of mere necessity. And that it was ill done of those that secretly
or openly encouraged the Apprentices tumultuous way of Petitioning, to move any
Parliament Men from following their Judgments; and in permitting the gross
Scorns and Abuse of the Bishops and Liturgy. And I believe that after they did
yet worse, in taking and imposing the Scots Covenant to procure their help.

20. I did and do believe that yet they did but their Duty, in seeking to
redress the dangerous Abuses of Ministerial Governors, and bringing the
Instruments by Legal trial to Punishment: For what purpose else are they a
Judicature? Subjects are all under the Law. And the common Judges are Sworn to
do Justice, though the King's Seal should be sent to Prohibit them.

21. I did believe that the King did ill to forsake them, and on pretense of
the Tumults to gather an Army in Yorkshire, Nottingham and Shrewsbury, and that
whose Commissions soever were first dated, his Armed Collection of Men was
first raised: But yet that the beginning was by such degrees of mutual
Provocation, that to this day it is hard to say, who began.

22. I had read the King's Letter in Spain to the Pope, promising to venture
Crown and Life for the Union of the Christian Churches, including the Roman:
which is recorded in Mr. Chesne the King of France his Geographer, and in Prin
and Rushworth. And whether it be true or not that the Scots say in a Book
called Truths Manifest, that K. Charles then in Scotland had possession of
their Broad Seal, and put that Seal to a Commission for the Irish Insurrection,
I am past doubt that K. Chapter II. granted a Commission to Monk, Manchester and
others, to try the Marquis of Antrim's Plea, by which it was proved and
determined that he had the K. Chapter I's Commission. Though I believe that the
King that caused them to rise, allowed them not to Murder all the Protestants:
Put whom else were they to rise against but the Protestants? And must they rise
against them and not kill them? And was not the Murderous temper and use of the
Irish well known?

23. I know that the Irish a year before Edgehill Fight, on that day Oct. 23.
1641. were to have surprised Dublin: And by the full Account of Dr. Henry Jones
since Bishop, and Sir John Temple, and the Earl of Orery, Murdered Two hundred
Thousand, and boasted that they did it by the King's Commission: and that when
they had done there, they would come hither. Though I believed them not, I knew
that Two hundred Thousand men dead are past Pleading their own Cause or
defending their Country: It is easy to Plead the justness of their Cause
against dead Men that cannot contradict them. Solitudinem faciunt, and Pacem
vocant. There is no resisting Murderers in the Grave: And I thought that if the
King put in Arms and Power, the English Papists of the same Religion, bound to
destroy us, his own good meaning could not preserve himself or us. And I knew
that the King stopped the Carriage-Horses that were sent by the Parliament to
relieve Ireland, and took them for his own Service, and many ways delayed their
Relief. Though he offered to go over himself, the Parliament fearing he would
go to Head the Irish.

24. The King had before assaulted the Parliament House in Person, with Armed
Men, to have surprised Five Members and the Lord Kimbolton whom he accused: And
after frustration confessed it a Breach of their Privileges.

25. The Money sent Dolbier to buy German Horses, and other actions, and the
Confessions of Sir Jacob Astley, Sir John Conniers, Sir Fulke Hawks (my
Mother-in-laws Brother) Chidley, and the other Commanders of the English Army
that were to have been drawn up to London, together with the King's putting a
Guarding Regiment on them, did put me past all doubt that they were devoted to
violence, had they not defended themselves: And no vain Talk to the contrary
can make me doubt of it to this day. So that though I think they had done more
prudently to avoid War, had they spared Strafford and Laud to please the King,
yet I am fully satisfied that afterward they were necessitated to save
themselves from designed Force.

26. I am certain that two things filled the Parliaments Armies. And both of
grand Importance. 1. That all over the Kingdom, save here and there a sober
Gentleman, and a formal Clergyman, the Religious Party and all that loved them,
were generally for the Parliament (alienated from the Persecutors and
Silencers): And the Profane Party in all Countries (Debaucht Gentlemen,
Malignant Haters of Piety, the Rabble of Drunkards, Blasphemers) were generally
against the Parliament. And religious People were loath to herd with such: And
could hardly believe that in so great a Cause God would reveal the Truth to all
his Enemies, the sensual Rabble, and hide it from the generality of them that
fear him: And especially that in most Countries the Malignants forced away the
Religious, and either rose against them themselves, or set the King's Soldiers
to Plunder and Destroy them. My own Father living 18 Miles from me was
Plundered by the King's Soldiers, though he never scrupled Conformity, nor ever
meddled against the King, and was thrice laid in Prison, and had still lain
there, had not Sir Fulke Hawks his Brother in Law been by Prince Rupert made
Governor of Shrewsbury, and this for nothing. And after laid in again till the
Town was taken. This last was only because when they made him Collector for the
King, he refused to distrein of those that paid not (fearing lest he should be
put to repay it).

And almost all the Religious People of Kederminster were forced to fly and
leave their Houses and Trades to their undoing, to save their Lives, though
they had never meddled with Wars. And the men that had no maintenance of their
own, were forced to become Garison-Soldiers in Coventry, to avoid Famine.

The second thing, and the main that drove men to the Parliament Garrisons and
Armies, was the Irish Murders, with the Papists Power with the King: They
thought that it must be an unusual War, that should Kill Two hundred Thousand:
As dreadful as it was, I do believe that all the Wars of England Killed not
Fifty thousand, nor near it. And though Fear which is a Tyrant, overcame partly
their Discretion, yet this joined with the Experience of that which forced them
from home, was too strong a trial for most to overcome.

And it confirmed their Suspicion when the Queen brought in a Popish Army under
General King, and the Earl of Newcastle's Army had so great a number of
Papists, and after the Earl of Glamorgan was authorized to have brought over an
Army of Irish Papists, and the English Regiments that fought there against
them, had been called hither to fight against the Parliament, and were routed
at Nantwich.

No wonder if men thought that England would have been made too like to Ireland
whether the King would or not, had such Armies Conquered.

27. The Parliament Protested to be for the King, and not against his Person,
or Legal Power or Prerogative, but only against his Illegal Will, to defend
themselves and the Kingdom, from an unlawful Army, and to bring Delinquents to
Legal Trial and Punishment: And they accordingly gave out all their
Commissions; till the Cause was changed by fairfax's Commission, that left out
the King. And the Soldiers of the Garrison where I was, commonly believed this
to be their Obligation, and the true Case of the War, viz. Offensive against
armed Delinquents as the Sheriff may raise the Posse Comitatus), and Defensive
against the Kings illegal Will, and Way.

28. I did believe that if the King by such an Army as he had, should Conquer
the Parliament, the Legal and all Probable Security of the Nation, for Life
Property, Liberty and Religion, was in all likelihood gone; If it should lie on
the King's Will only, thereby it were gone: For what then were our
Constitution, or Parliaments for; and what differ we from Slaves? And were he
willing (and those with him that meant well) he would not be able to Master
such an Army.

29. I did believe that if the Parliament were certainly more faulty than they
were, the Kingdoms Security was not therefore to be forsaken by the Subjects;
nor all Parliaments and Government to be left to the Will of the King, who had
for so many years interrupted Parliaments, and dissolved them still in
Displeasure, and had raised Taxes called Ship Money by himself without them,
and on the same account might command all the rest: Therefore I owned not any
of the discerned Miscarriages of the Parliament, but only thought I was bound
to defend the common Good and Safety, as it was the End of Government. My
judgment yet is, That if the King of England wrongfully begin a War against
France, the Subjects ought by Arms to help him, not owning his wrong Cause, but
to save the Kingdom, which would be lost and enslaved if he were Conquered. So
the fault of the Parliament could not disoblige the People from laboring to
secure the Constitution of the Kingdom, and therein their Posterities,
Properties, Liberties and Safety. And the bare Promise of a King is no such
Security.

30. I did believe that if there were a Controversy in these Cases, the
Supreme Council and Judicature of the Kingdom, had the most satisfying Power of
Determination to particular Persons: As the Judgment of a General Council is
preferable to any lower Judges, and the Judgment of the College of Physicions
is more authoritative than of a single Dr. And the Judgment of the University
is more than of the ViceChancellors or one Man. And tho yet it may fall out
that the Dissenter may be in the right, the unlearned that cannot confidently
judge, are more excuseable for not resisting the higher Judges.

31. Obj. By this Rule, whatever wrong a Parliament shall do to the King, we
must all take their part against him: And if they betray their Trust, we must
bear them out in their Treachery.

Ans. 1. Distinguish between a wrong to the King, and the betraying of the
Bonum Publicum, the common Safety and the Constitution.

2. And between a Case controvertible, and a Case clear and certain. And so I
answer, 1. If a Parliament wrong the King, we must not join with them in
wronging him; nor own their wrong; nor defend the Persons from legal Justice.
He might have dissolved them and called another, had he not past a Law to the
contrary. He may Impeach any Members at their own Bar: But at what Judicature
shall he try the highest Judicature it self.

2. And if the Representative would treacherously destroy the Constitution, and
yield to enslave them, or to give up the Kingdom to the Pope or any Foreign
Power, the Case being past Controversy, the People have not thereby lost the
natural Power of Self-defence: But may as lawfully choose more trusty
Representatives, and fight for Self defense against such Traitors, as against a
Tyrant.

3. But the species of the Constitution, (in King and Parliament) must still be
maintained, and the Salus Populi without respect to which there is no
Government. And no personal Faults can forfeit that.

32. Therefore I ever thought, as it was a dissolution of the Constitution for
the King to put down Parliaments, and pretend (as Bishop Morley blindly
pleads) to the sole Power of Legislation; so it is Treason for a Parliament
to put down Monarchy, and to assume the sole Legislative Power; As the Rump did
when they pretended to settle a Government without a King or House of Lords.

If either King or Parliament personal should forfeit their Power, the Kingdom
does not thereby forfeit their right in the constituted Form of Government, by
a King and Parliament.

SECTION 4.
I Have interposed this account of the Principles on which I acted; I will next
add an account of my Actions hereupon, and then return to the Confession of my
own Sins as far as I know them.

1. Refusing a Chaplain's Commission, I continued about two Years or more in
Coventry, as a Lecturer to the Garrison and City, in quietness, save that we
daily heard of all the dismal Wars abroad. Only twice I went out with them, 1.
To take in Tamworth Castle that cost no Blood, 2. And to besiege Banbury
Castle, whose Soldiers robbed Warwickshire, and the Travelers and Carriers on
London Road. But thence we were raised and driven home with some loss.

Also for two or three Months the care of my Native Country and of my Father
drew me into Shropshire, with some that went to settle a Garrison at Wem: There
and at Longford House I staid till my Father was delivered from Imprisonment by
Exchange, for a short time.

2. All that ever I converst with, did all this while protess to own the King,
and only to separate him from an Army of Delinquents, and to reunite him and
his Parliament: And we thought all the Armies had intended no worse. But when
Naseby Fight was past, having heard that the King was left out of the New
Commissions, I went to see the Field where the Fight was, and the Army: And
there accosted me some sober honest Captains, and told me that their Army was
corrupted by the fault of the Ministers, that had all forsaken them, being
weary of the Labor, and impatient of the Sectaries in the Army, and so they
were all left to the Preaching of their own Officers and Soldiers, and a few
Chaplains of their own Mind and Choice. And that the bold Leaders began already
to say, that God has committed the safety of the Nation to their trust; And
what were the Lords and Knights in William the Conqueror's time, but his
Colonels and Captains? In a word, I understood by them that they had a purpose
to set up themselves, and to overturn the Government of Church and (...). This
so surprised me, that whereas these Captains entreated (...) among them, and
got Col. Whalley (who then seemed of their (...)) to invite me to his Regiment,
I took but one days time to answer them. And I opened the sad Case that we were
all like to be in, to an Assembly of Ministers in Coventry, whom I gathered to
counsel me, and told them what I found, and that the Land was now like to fall
into their hands: and that though I thought it was too late, I was inclined to
venture my life among them in seeking to reclaim them. The Ministers (Dr.
Bryan, Dr. Grew, Mr. King, Mr. Brumskill, Mr. Morton, and others seeing my
inclination gave their consent: But the Committee (after consent) refusing, I
was forced to tell them what I saw and heard in the Army, and what Danger the
Kingdom was in, and so to go away against their will: But Col. W. Puresoy a
Confident of Cromwell's, threatened me for such words, and I imagine sent
Cromwell word that Night: For the next Morning I was met with scorn, and I
suppose all known to Cromwell that I had said: and Cromwell would never after
allow me any opportunity, beyond the Regiment that I joined to: And there I
spent near two years in Labors and Disputings against well-meaning perverted
Sectaries, if it had been possible to have turned them from what they after
did. But my capacity was narrow (though there I prevailed with most). And I got
Mr. Cook (since of Chester, that suffered much for the King, and after by the
King) a great Enemy to Sects and Sedition, to come and help me; but they
wearied him away: And besides Mr. Bowls, I know none but perverse Sectaries,
(part Arminians, but most Antinomians or worse) left to be their Teachers.

I told the Parliament Men what the Army would do, and warned them to prepare:
But it was too late: Cromwell and his Confederates did all, and made a Stale of
Fairfax's Name; and Vane and Haslerigge and their Friends in Parliament,
disbanded all the sober Soldiers in Garrisons and Bragades that would have
resisted them; and so put the Power of King, Parliament and Kingdom into their
hands, and some of them repented when it was too late.

In Feb. 1656/7. they began their Conspiracy against the Parliament in a
Meeting at Nottingham, and that very day God separated me from them by Bleeding
120 Ounces at the Nose (at Milborne in Derbyshire) when else I had (in vain)
hazarded my life against them at Triploe Heath, by drawing from them as many as
I could. But Sir Edward Hatley and other Officers that did it, and drew off
about Five thousand did but strengthen them. For Cromwell filled up their
places with Sectaries and Soldiers that had served the King before, and was
stronger than before, as having none to distrust.

To tell what they did after against the Eleven Members, and then against the
Majority of the Parliament, and then against the King, and then against the
Rump, and then against the Ministry, and how Cromwell contrived himself into
the Supremacy, would be to write the History of that time, and to Epitomize
Whitlock.

This much I thought necessary to premise to my own review of my actions, and
for them that call me to Repentance, who while they falsely judge of the
History, can be no true Judges of the Application. I proceed therefore to the
exercise of Repentance as far as I can know.

SECTION 5.
XXIV. I Greatly repent that I at Coventry took the Scots Covenant, for the
many Reasons which I shall hereafter rehearse. And that once I gave it to one
Man, a Papist Physician who pretended to be converted, and desired me to give
it him: But suspecting his Hypocrisy, I never gave it more, but kept I think
Thousands from taking it in Worcestershire and elsewhere. I thought at first
that it was intended only as a Test to the Garrisons and Armies, and knew not
that it would after be made a dividing test for the Magistracy, and Ministry
through the Land: which yet by the tenor of it, I might have understood. But I
repent not that I neither swear nor subscribed that no man that ever took it,
is obliged by it to that part which is good and necessary: Perjury is no
jesting Matter.

XXV. I more repent that I once publicly defended it against a Writing of Sir
Francis Nethersole, which he wrote against Mr. Vines, who had Preached for it.
And that I did not more impartially consult with Sir Francis, and hear all that
he had to say against it: For he was near us, and I Preached to him once at
Kenelworth-Castle, where as a Prisoner he was liker the Master of that Pleasant
Seat (under Colonel Needham) for he seemed purposely to force the Committee to
Imprison him, by constant provoking them, who would fain have let him alone:
But by that means he saved Housekeeping, and escaped both Plundering and
Sequestring on both Sides, and secured his Estate, and his Person in a place of
freedom and delight by Water and Land.

XXVI. And though I thought that a Parliament's Judgment was above all Lawyers,
yet I repent that I had not more diligently consulted Lawyers on the other
side: Though indeed I knew not well where to find them, the Lawyers of my
Acquaintance being for the Parliament.

XXVII. And whereas I then thought that Neutrality was a heinous Sin, to stand
by in the Danger of the Land; I now repent of that Opinion; considering that in
a case of Blood, Men should very clearly be resolved before they venture on
either side.

XXVIII. And I repent that I was by Ignorance, in too much fear of Religion by
the danger of Arminianism; and thought too hardly of the Laudian party on that
account: For though I am no Arminian, I have fully proved in my Catholic
Theology, that the difference is more verbal and small, than the Zealots of
either side do imagine: which Book is yet answered by none.

XXIX. Accordingly, I at Coventry engaged in a dispute against Mr. Cradock, and
Mr. Diamond, to prove Remission of Sin (not only Conditional but Actual) to be
an Immediate effect of Christ's Death, and pleaded for it, Heb. 1. 3. and Romans
8 32. (and against Universal Redemption) which I since perceive I misunderstood
and abused.

XXX. I repent that I sooner enquired not into the danger that the Land was in
by Cromwell and his Sectaries: And I repent that when his fundamental Troop at
Cambridge (which after made Commanders headed his Army) wrote to me with
Subscribed Names to be their Pastor, I refused and rejected the offer to their
offense, telling them that I was neither for a Military Church nor an
Independent popular Church; Had I gone to them then, what might I have
prevented?

XXXI. Though I am not able to see, that I did not my Duty (my most
Self-denying and costly Duty) in taking the defense of the Nation, Religion,
King and Parliament (to be reduced to Unity) to be my necessary Employment
(while I owned not their Miscarriages) yet knowing the frailty of my
understanding, I daily beg of God, that if I was mistaken he will make me know
it (for which I have long Prayed); and that he will pardon my Sins, which I
would fain know, and fain repent of, and publicly confess if I could know
them; but dare not take the greatest Duty of my life to be my Sin.

XXXII. I am in great doubt how far I did well or ill in my opposition to
Cromwell and his Army at last. I am satisfied that it was my duty to disown,
and as I did, to oppose their Rebellion and other Sin: But there were many
honest Pious men among them: And when God chooses the Executioners of his
Justice as he pleases, I am often in doubt whether I should not have been more
Passive and Silent than I was; Though not as Jeremy to Nebuchadnezzar, to
persuade men to submit: Yet to have forborne some sharp public Preaching and
Writing against them, too late, when they set themselves to promote Piety to
ingratiate their Usurpation. To disturb Possessors needs a clear Call, when
for what end soever they do that good, which men of better title will destroy.

XXXIII. When they commanded days of Prayer and Thanksgiving for their Wars in
Scotland, etc. And when they imposed the ENGAGEMENT to be true to the
Commonwealth as it was established without a King, and House of Lords, I repent
not that I refused it, and wrote and preached against it: But I doubt whether I
did well in overdoing herein: And had not waited more silently on God's
Providence, till he had cleared my way.

XXXIV. I repented often that I wrote the Book called Aphorisms of Justification
and the Covenant: Not but that I think it sound Doctrine and useful: But it
being my first, is defective in Method and in some words which should have been
more clearly and cautelously expressed: And in my personal opposition to Dr.
Owen's Errors, I should have considered what a temptation it would prove to
the Passions of such a man (who yet grew more humble and orthodox before he
died).

XXXV. Though my Conscience tells me that the very many Books which I after
wrote, were for the propagating and defending of needful Truth, and that I
never trusted to any thing but Truth and Evidence for Victory, yet I fear lest
in many of them there be the faultiness of some imprudent provoking words, and
that I did not always sufficiently consider what mistaking men cannot bear, as
well as what is congruous to the Matter and Cause. I still found it difficult
to avoid too much Keenness, and yet not to wrong the Cause by dull pretense of
Lenity.

XXXVI. Two things concurred to cause me to write my Political Aphorisms or
Holy Commonwealth, of which I afterward repented.

1. James Harrington wrote his Oceana for a loose Popular Government, and Sir
H. Vane was contriving another for a Military and Phanatick Democracy; both
which I saw were utterly inconsistent with the Obligations, Peace and Safety of
the Land.

2. Sir Francis Nethersole sent purposely to me a Messenger to desire me to go
to London to Cromwell, and persuade him to resign the Government to King Chapter
II. I answered him that Cromwell had been tried therein by many, but would not
so easily resign what he had got. He once admitted me to his Discourse, and
before the Lord Broghil, Lambert and Thurloe, I urged him to tell us, what the
People of England had done to forfeit their right to the Enjoyment of their
ancient constituted Government, which they professed to be for and still
desired? And all the answer that I could have was, that God had changed it by
his Providence, the passages of which he talked over near two hours, till
Lambert took on him to be asleep: for we must not interrupt him. Then Sir
Francis sent me his Printed Books and some Papers, to have disputed over all
the Case of the War: And not knowing how many such I might be put to answer, I
thought best, in Print to tell him on what Grounds and Principles I had gone,
not undertaking that I had not mistaken, but to desire him if I had erred to
show it by answering my Reasons there given. But before I could have his
Answer, the distracted Armies had overturned all the present Government.

I repented Writing that Book, 1. Because it came out unseasonably too late.

2. Because in opposition to Harrington, I had pleaded for Monarchy, with some
excess, and I wished that I had not meddled with Government, but left all to the
Providence of God.

3. Because it did occasion more hurt than good: so that it became the common
Theme of ambitious young Preachers, especially at Court, before K. Chapter II. as
the way to Preferment, to talk against The Holy Commonwealth, falsely persuading
men that by a Commonwealth I meant Democracy or Popular Government, which the
Book was purposely written against. So that when the Oxford University burnt
that Book (with Dr. Whitby's excellent Reconciler, and some others) though I
expostulated with the Vice Chancellor concerning its Principles, I told them I
consented that the Book was burnt: though I told them not why, as now I do.

XXXVII. Though both Nature and Grace inclined me to hate Lying, and specially
in Writers and Preachers, and I honored Jul. Caes. Scaliger the more, because
his Son Joseph tells us how vehemently he hated a Lie, so that he could not be
reconciled to a Liar, yet I confess that my impatience herein was faulty. It
was long before I well perceived that the Father of Lies, does Govern his
Kingdom (most of the World) by mere Lying: Call it Error, or Mistake, or
Falsehood, or what you will, all signifies the same thing: It is delivering
Falsehood for Truth. Christ had told us that the Devil is the Father of Lies,
and when he speaks a Lie, he speaks his own. Deceit is by Lying, and by
this he rules his World. As God's Image consists in Life, Light and Love,
the Devil's Image is Hatred. Falsehood and Hurtfulness or Murder, Joh. 8 But
alas to take this for some strange thing, and to be overimpatient with Liars,
was my fault, when now I find it is but the very state of corrupt unreneved
Nature: And Pride the Father, and Ignorance the Mother, make Kingdoms, Cities
and Persons like a rotting Carcass that swarms with Maggots. You that read
Histories, read with Judgment and due Suspicion; for the common corrupt Nature
is a lying Nature: And it is not about Religion only; but the Fool rages and
is confident in all his Errors. O what abundance of Lying Books are Shops and
Libraries filled with, even in History and Theology! What abundance of false
Counsels do Physicians give! what abundance of false accusations does Envy and
Malice vend? What abundance of false Doctrines and Censures does ignorant
Sectarian Zeal foment? How many Lies for one Truth is carried for News, or for
Slander about the Streets? And how few scruple receiving and reporting them,
and how fewer rebuke them? It Is useful for the World to know how common this
Malady is, but it was almost in despair that I lately wrote a Book against it,
of pretended Knowledge and Love) I blame not my self for hating it, but being
too impatient with it; especially in Books and Preachers, as if it had been a
strange thing.

XXXVIII. When I wrote my five Disputations of Church Government, I too hastily
mis translated some words of Ignatius, and though I then owned Apostolic
Successors in the continued part of their Work, I did not so fully as now
understand, how Christ by Institution then founded a National Church, nor what
a National Church was; nor how that which was ultimum in executione (a
Christian Sovereignty) was primum in intention, to which bare Preaching was
preparatory.

XXXIX. When I wrote my Treatise of Episcopacy, I Calculated it to the Laudian
Faction then prevalent, that called it self, the Church of England; and though
I distinguished them that put down all the Parochial Pastors and Churches, and
turned them all into mere Curates and Chapels (or parts Ecclesiarum
infimarum) and so put down hundreds of Bishops and Churches under pretense of
magnifying One; from the old Reformed Church of England that put not down
these, but only sinfully fettered them, yet I did not so largely open the
difference as I ought, which gave Mr. Lobb occasion to write confidently for
Separation.

XL. When my Books against Conformity had irritated Dr. Stillingfleet to make
me an instance of mischievous Separation (who had constantly heard and
communicated with my Parish Churches, and for my private or occasional
Preaching had the Bishops License approved under the hands of two the greatest
Lawyers of England (the Lord Chief Justice Sanders, and the now Lord Chief
Justice Polix^en) I doubt that I too provokingly took the advantage of his
temerity, and confuted him in too provoking terms, not considering enough that
a Man of great Learning, Labor, and Merit, and Name, has a great interest of
Reputation which he would not be insensible of: And if it were true as many
without proof report, that his exasperation engaged first Mr. Morris, and
after the second Author of the Mischief of Separation (whose writing against me
is the transcript of the Character given by Christ, John 8. 44.) yet I honor
the Reading, Learning, Labor and great Worth of Dr. Stillingfleet, now Bishop
of Worcester, and what ever hand he had in it, I unfeignedly forgive him.

XLI. And in defense of the Nonconformists against the false accusation of
Shism laid on them by the Imposing Schismatics, I doubt, I was too keen in
confuting Mr. Sherlocke; I found it hard to discern whether the defense of
truth and slandered suffering Servants of Christ, or not exasperating false
Accusers should command my style.

XLII. What other Errors there are or have been in my Life or Writings, I daily
beg of God to discover to me and pardon: For I never did any thing which might
not and ought not to have been done better. Particularly I beg pardon for too
frequent hastiness and harshness of Speech, to my nearest Domestics, from whom
I never differed one moment in point of Interest or Love; but had too often
sour overhasty provoking words on trifling occasions.

XLIII. But all forementioned set together lie not half so heavy on my Soul, as
my inward Deficience and Omission; That having had so many Convictions of the
truth of Scripture, and the certainty of the Life to come, and can scarce think
of any thing but death and the future state, it is so sure and near, and have
read, and heard, and written so much of the Love of God and of Heaven as I have
done, it shameth, it grieveth me, it makes me even abhor and loath my self,
that I usually reach little higher than pacifick, quieting dull Affections, and
that Faith, and Hope, and Love, do not keep me in more delightful thoughts of
God and my Redeemer, and in a more joyful longing to be with Christ and all the
Blessed; and that ever I should have a cold and common thought of God and
things so high and holy, and that the prospect of my change, and the coming of
Christ, is not a continual Feast to my Soul, and sets me not more above the
concerns of this vile and corruptible Flesh, and above all impatience of pain,
and above the fears of Death and Corruption. O what a contradiction is there
between that Head and Tongue that professes to believe what I profess, of God,
of Christ, of Endless Glory, and that Heart that no more rejoiceth in that
Belief and Hope, but by languor and decay of Nature, (and doubtless great
imperfection of Faith) is kept from that joy that such believing in reason
should produce, and goes toward Heaven with so many pawses of fear or
dullness, and so little of that Heavenly delight, which I have long been seeking
of God, and which my low and weak condition needs.

Lord, all my sins are known to thee, let me never be unwilling to know them,
nor let them be so unknown to me as to invalidate my Repentance, or frustrate
my hope of pardon through Christ.

Chap. III. The Reasons why I cannot without known gross Lying, profess such
Repentance as Dr. Stillingfleet's Anonymus Second, and many such others call
for, or expect.
1. AS it is no less sin to Murder ones self, than to Murder another, so it is
no less to belie ones self than to belie another. Yea it is the greater in that
it is like to be more against knowledge, we being better acquainted with our
own thoughts and deeds than with other Men's: And it would be the greater sin in
me, because that the Father of Lies purposely designeth his calumnies, to cause
hatred in many, and to frustrate all my Writings both to the Church and to
particular Souls.

2. Why I cannot Repent of my Writings against the Sadduers or Brutists, the
Antitrinitarians, the Somatists, the Quakers, the Anabaptists, the
Antinominians, the Papists, the Separating Dividers, and the rest
beforementioned, the Books that I have written against them express my
Reasons. But no Men call me to it by such an agreeing number of voices as the
late Protestant Conformists of that fiercer sort who appropriate to themselves
the Name of the Episcopal Church of England, especially those that are for a
Foreign or Universal Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And no Man has done it with
such virulent malice as the Anonymus Author of the Book called, The Second part
of the Unreasonableness of Separation as seconding Dr. Stillingfleet. Whose
Libel I shall now peruse, and return the Reasons why I cannot Repent of all
that he recites by way of Accusation.

3. I. In his Preface, That my Opinions and Practices have been condemned by
the generality of Christians from the most Primitive and Purest Times of the
Church. Ans. To which I appeal, and can get no answer.

4. II. I must first tell the Reader that should I stay to confute all the
falsification of my words which he pretends to recite, it would make an
unsavory, tedious, unprofitable Volume. A word put in, or left out, or
altered, will serve our grand Accuser to do much of his Works with the Sons of
Ignorance and Malice.

He seems to expect that I should Repent of saying that our Civil War between
King and Parliament was begun in England between two Parties of Episcopal
Protestants: And must I repent that I lived in England? And that I know what it
was naturally impossible for me not to know? Why does he not also make me a
Liar for saying that I then dwelt in England; and both sides were English Men,
and spoke English? Had I been a Mushroom sprung up as lately as our fiery
Tories, (...) had Malice enough to make me mad, I might have needed none of his
imposed Repentance. I have in another writing named the Commanders of the Army,
and the Parliaments Lords Lieutenants, and all the Major Generals, besides the
Chaplains, and Challenged them to find among all these one Presbyterian or two
Independants for ten, if not twenty Episcopal Protestants. A Wise and Credible
Parliament Man yet living, has often told me that when the War begun he knew but
One Presbyterian in all the House of Commons, (which was worthy Mr. Tate of
Northampton) it being not then known among them. The Earl of Warwick who
commanded at Sea I knew to be for Communion with the Patish and Episcopal
Churches. In the Army let them enquire of the Communion and Religion of the
General and all his Commanders, and I believe they will find among all the
Colonels but two Independants (the Lord Say and the Lord Brook) and one
moderate Puritan yet living (the Lord Wharton) and that all the rest were
moderate Episcopal Conformists (what the old Scots Soldiers Brown and Urrey
that turned to the King were I know not, supposing their pay was their
Religion.) We knew this to be true of the Earl of Essex General; the Earl of
Bedford General of the Horse is yet living and well known: Sir John Merrike
Major General, Colonel Dolbiere, the Earl of Peterborough General of the
Ordnance, Lionell Copley Scout-Master, the Earl of Stampford, the Lord Roberts
lately President of the Kings Privy Council; the Lord Hollis, the Lord
Kimbolton, (after Earl of Manchester and Lord Chamberlain that chose the Kings
Preachers, and constantly heard them, the Lord Hastings (Earl of Huntington)
the Lord Rochford (after Earl of Dover) the Lord Fielding (after Earl of
Denbigh) the Lord St. John Son to the Earl of Bullingbrook killed at Edghill)
Col. Goodwin, Col. Lssex, Col. Grantham, Col. Sir Henry Cholmley, Col.
Bampfield, Sir William Constable, (after turned Independent) yea Col. Hampden
was no Separatist from the Parish Churches; but a sober Protestant. I have
named the rest elsewhere. I heard enough of Col. Sandyes before he was mortally
wounded to tell me that he was no Puritan.

And as for the Major Generals of the several Counties, the Lord Ferdinando
Fairfax, the Lord Willoughby of Parham, the Earl of Stampford, Sir John Gell,
Sir Tho. Middleton, Col. Mitton, Col. Morgan, Col. Massey, Sir William Waller,
the Earl of Denbigh, Col. Langhorne, and Col. Poyer, were all conformable to
Episcopacy and Parochial Worship; and some of them so Zealous for the Liturgy
and Diocesanes that they would not hear a Man as a Minister that had not
Episcopal Ordination. The Archbishop of York Williams was one of them, and was
not he for Episcopacy?

5. But the Accuser confuteth all this by telling us, that it began in King
James days between the Regians and the Republicans, between Prerogative and
Privilege, by a Party that would have persuaded the King, to War for the
Palatinate, etc.

And why began he it not in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, who more overtopt
Parliaments than King James did? I perceive by this Man, that none must pass
for Conformable and Episcopal, that are not of Sibthorp and Mainwaring's Mind,
and renounce not Parliamentary Privileges, and give not up Property and
Liberty to the mere will of the King called Prerogative. And so all our
Parliaments till the Dividing and Tearing Long one, were not of the Church of
England: And what then was that Church? Was it a Christian Kingdom, and yet was
the Kingdom Representative no part of it? Are none but Leeches, Sangutsugi's,
Men of Blood, (that must have all lie and die in Goals among Rogues, that will
not Swear, and Subscribe, and Declare and Covenant, and Practice, all that they
impose) of the Church of England? What a Reproach is this to such a Church?

If I must Repent that I take not all the old Parliaments, and all the Bishops
in Queen Elizabeth's days to be no Church Protestants; if I must Repent for
taking Jewel, Bishop Bilson, Ri. Hooker, and his Friend Sir Edwin Sandyes for
Church Protestants, and Repent for believing all Rushworth's Collections, all
Whitlock's Memoirs, all Sir Simon Dewes, and Dr. Fuller's Church History, and
the Volumes of M. S. Parliament Speeches, if I must take this King and
Parliament, and all the Bishops and Clergy that Conform to them, to be no
Protestants of the Church of England, because they have made a Law declaring it
to be the Rights and Liberties of the people, to be governed by Law, and not by
Arbitrary Prerogative, and have asserted what the old Parliaments claimed, I
must then heinously dishonor the Church of England, and Repent that I am a Man.

6. He falsely feigneth me to say that the Bishops began the War, because I said
it began between the two Episcopal Parties, those that were of Archbishop
Abbot's and the old Reformers way, and those that were for Land's Innovations
and Persecutions: And I should justly be noted for vain and tedious if I would
stand to answer all his talk about the Provocations: He that will read Whitlock
may have full satisfaction; and particularly find that the Parliament voted a
Diocesane in every County, when they began to reform: And were they not then
for Episcopacy?

7. Page 10. He says, [From the year 1660 it has been my chief work to pour
out the like contempt, malice, and violence, as was begun 1640.]

Ans. Not a word proved or true; till I was silenced 1662, Aug. 24. I was never
accused for any word then preached, writ and published. Which was not for want
of Enemies or Power. Of many years after I neither preached nor printed. And
what I printed since the world may be judge of.

8. Page 12. He says that the numerous fry of Sectaries agree to own me as
their Champion.]

Ans. When the Grand Accuser can hope to make such stuff as this believed, and
that in a Land, City and Time; where the clean contrary is more commonly known
than I am, what can be devised so impudently false which he may not by his
stamp make current as truth. Are not above Sixty Books of Sectaries written
(more or less) against me; an evidence to prove that they take me not for their
Champion? Are not above Sixscore Books of my own writing, (many at large, and
all in part) against Sectaries and Errors, a visible Evidence of this Man's
falsehood? Is not the common Cry of City and Country a sufficient witness that
the Sectaries take me not for their Champion, but their Adversary. Indeed they
have showed it but by words; it being but the two Master Sects, Papists and
Tory Prelatists, that show it by Fining, Silencing, Prison, and taking all for
their prey.

9. The Accuser tells me, that it is no new thing for Heretics to have many
admirers, and to pretend to purity that they may deceive.

Ans. Which is very true, and I will add, that which is far worse: It is no new
thing even for them that do not so much as seem to have either Purity,
Conscience or common Honesty, no nor to scruple the grossest Lying and Perjury,
to have more Followers than Christ himself had while he was on Earth,
notwithstanding his Purity and all his Miracles: Such Men find corrupted
nature, as disposed to believe and follow them, as a Dunghill to breed Weeds, or
a Carcass Maggots: Even those that openly militate under Satan as deadly
Enemies to serious Godliness, if they will but cloak their malignity with the
Name of a Sacred Function, and call Piety and Conscience by their own Titles
(Hypocrisy and Schism) shall convert more Souls to Diabolism in a little time,
than all the Preachers that they silence could have converted to Piety, and
serious Christianity: And the French Prelacy and Dragoon Discipline, will
cleanse a Nation quickly, from Protestant Heresy and Schism. We hope not for
the honor of having more Followers than such Men.

This Man and his Sect would comfort me if I were in fear of that threatening
of Christ, Mat. 5. Woe to you when all Men speak well of you.

10. Ibid. He says, That under a form of Godliness I would destroy the power
of it.]

Ans. Hem! What is the Power of Godliness with this Sect of Men! If it be the
Power of Silencing the most Godly, and Practical, and Blameless Preachers, and
of Beggering, and Murdering by long Imprisonment in common Goals both Preachers
and Hearers that will not give over all public Worship of God like Atheists,
till they dare venture to Lie and be Perjured, and own all that such Men bid
them say is faultless: If it be the power of Godliness to have an ignorant,
worldly, scandalous Priest, who drives Men from him by his naughtiness, to
hate, threaten and ruin them if they will hear any but him, or use any
trustier Pastor for their Souls, and that would turn Churches into Prisons, and
Sacraments into forced Drenches, to be given by him that can get a Patent for
the Trade (which some Patrons and Prelates chosen by a Papist King can easily
help him to) then I am against the power of Godliness. Where Gain is Godliness
I have long been against the power of it.

11. Page 13. He says, [ Our Nation would be less in danger of new Flames if
all (my Books Practical and Polemical) were consumed to Ashes.]

Ans. How came I to escape till now my self? Not at all by your Clemency: Your
Patron Judge Jeffreys on the Bench said, He was sorry that the Act of
Indemnity disabled him from Hanging me: And your Mouth Roger Le Strange
foretold the Reason: Never was so wicked a Book written as my Paraphrase on the
New Testament. Were I at his Ear I would whisper to him, Do you not take the
New Testament it self to be far worse? But what is the deadly evil? Why I say
with Paul, That if an Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel let him be
accursed? But did I make those words? Or find them made: The Judge by the help
of our Great Clergymen and their Curates, found out eight Paraphrases that
deserved this Death. The sum of which was that I accuse the Pharisees, and
Herodians, and Priests, for malicious hating and murdering Christ, for doing
good and working Miracles; and for urging Men to be Informers against him, and
for forbidding the Apostles to Preach: And they said that by an Innuendo I
meant all this of the Church of England. And when a Famous (but exasperated
Dr.) gathered some passages as Seditious against Government to have hanged me,
even our Judges and prosecutors searching the Books, and particularly on Romans
13. cast by those accusations, and never mentioned them. And when they burnt my
Political Aphorisms, and I wrote my Judgment thereof to the Vice Chancellor, I
had not a word of contradiction.

But there are deeper Reasons that cause both Papists and Cainites to wish that
all that I have written were burnt to Ashes. And they tell me what to expect
from them, if God restrain them not, for then I believe that it is more than my
writings, and than the Nonconformists that they will burn. They that cannot now
endure that any but they should be heard, will not endure that they be read.

12. Page 13. He adds, [ That neither Men nor Books are properly good that are
not so ex causis integris.]

Ans. So none is Good but God only, and the perfect. I confess that I am not so
good: If I say that I have no sin, or that I ever did any thing that is sinless
and omnimodo bonum and might not have been done better, I am a Liar. And is
this the Exposition of the Declaration for want of which we are (if we preach)
used like Rogues in Goals, viz. That we assent and consent to all things
contained in and prescribed by, the Book of Common Prayer, Ordination and
Articles, and that there is nothing in it contrary to the Word of God? Is it
Integrally perfect: Or must I wish it burnt else? I am not for so hard usage of
it, though I cannot justify the prescribing two Easter days in it, and far
worse matters. But what is the fault that deserves burning?

13. Ibid. [ His own Practice demonstrates that his Writings for Peace and
Unity are but so many Pleas for Schism and Division. They need an Ignis
Expurgatorius.

Ans. An easy Purgatory! Your Excommunication ipso facto, of all that affirm
any thing in your Ceremonies. Ordinations, Liturgies or Church Government to be
contrary to the Word of God, threateneth Hell which is worse than Purgatory.

But Reader, seeing all my Books must be burnt as a Sacrifice to the Accusers
of my Conversation as for Schism and Division, I owe the World a particular
account of such an accused practice.

1. When I first forbore practical Conformity it was but in a scrupled part: I
read most of the Common Prayer, and I received the Sacrament Kneeling.

2. I never disobeyed my Ordinary's command, but got me to a place where the
Ordinary thought as I did.

3. I ever dissuaded people from Separation, and reprehended those
Nonconformists that inclined toward it.

4. It was I confess a Dividing practice that I took the Scots Covenant before
I foresaw it would be used to Division. But I quickly repented, and kept my
Flock and Thousands from taking it.

5. I had not the last or least hand in suppressing the promoters of Schism
where I lived.

6. I purposely hazarded my Life, and spent Time and Labor a year and half in
Fairfax's Army, in hope (too late) to have healed and prevented the foreseen
Ecclesiastical and Civil Divisions.

7. I got the Ministers of Worcestershire and the Neighbor Counties,
Episcopal, Presbyterians and moderate Independants to subscribe an Agreement in
practice so far as they agreed in Principles: Which Dr. Warmstree and Dr. Good
consented to till Dr. Guning drew them off again. And Westmoreland, Cumberland,
Dorsetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, Essex, and Dublin all imitated us, so that
we were ready to have had a common Concord.

8. By Letters I treated for Union with Dr. Hammond, Bishop Brownrig,
Archbishop Usher, and such others, before King Charles the Second's Return.

9. I preached for peace to the Parliament and City in public Sermons.

10. I got diverse Meetings before the King came in, with many peaceable Drs.
(Dr. Gauden, Dr. Bernard, Dr. Allen, Dr. Gulston, etc.) with whom Dr. Morley
would be one that he might frustrate all) who seemed to be all for Unity.

11. I was the first (with Mr. Calamy, Dr. Reynolds, and Mr. Ash) that sought
to the King to help us to this desired Unity by his Commission; who seemed
forward to it, and promised that he would draw them to meet us half way.

12. We never offered any form of Church Government, but Archbishop Usher's
Primitive Episcopacy, and gave public thanks for a seeming Grant of much less;
never once speaking against the Bishops Parliament Powers, Baronies, Revenues
or Pomp.

13. When Chancellor Hide as from the King offered me a Bishopric I refused it
on terms (in a Letter) that pleased him, viz. That if the King continued what
he had granted in his Declaration, I should take it for my great Duty to do all
that I could by writing and preaching to persuade all to Conformity and Unity;
and therefore would not be a Bishop, lest I should frustrate that labor by
making Men think that I did it for my self. But if no such liberty was intended
to be continued (which I easily foresaw) why should I be a Bishop to be quickly
cast out?

14. Had my Life lain on it I could have done no more to have prevented our
Divisions and foreseen Confusions, that I did in the Treaties at
Worcester-House, and at the Savoy, by reason, and by earnest and humble
petition and true prediction. But all did but enrage, and instead of Abatements
according to the Kings Commission, far more was after imposed than before.

15. I went voluntarily to Bishop Sheldon for his License, when I could have
had it by the Kings Declaration without any Subscription, and I Subscribed what
might show that I was for peace, that I would not preach against the Liturgy or
Ceremonies, but live peaceably.

16. When Bishop Morley forbad me preaching in his Diocese, I asked him leave
but to preach to some small Village among the ignorant where there was no
Maintenance for a Minister: And he old me, They were better have none than me.
Mr. Baldwin yet living was present.

17. When Lying same accused me for almost every Sermon that I preached in
London after, Bishop Sheldon told me plainly that he had some to hear me, and
could they have got any thing against me I had soon heard from him.

18. When we were all silenced on Aug. 24. 1662. I forbore both preaching and
privater Meetings, till after the great Plague 1665. to see whether our
obedience would mollify Men's exasperated Minds: All that while and after
constantly I went to my Parish Church Morning and Evening, and staid from the
beginning of Common Prayer to the end, and after the Plague I only taught such
Neighbors as came into my House between the public Exercises, and led all the
people into the Church to Common Prayer. In so much that my Excellent Neighbor
Judge Hale countenanced me therein by his Carriage, and thought I did great
Service to the Church of England. I remember not two of all that heard me that
went not with me to the public Church: And that One that would not, refused,
because the Dr. ( Rieves) would Swear in his common talk: But I told her that
he did not Swear in the Pulpit.

19. When in his Sermon he told them that It was because we could not be
Bishops that we Conformed not, the people looked at me, as a confutation: But I
forbore not ever the more to hear him.

20. When he was no longer able to bear the peoples coming to my House, (though
he converst with me placidly, and never spoke to me against it) he went to the
King and got his Order to the Bishop Hinchman, and by him to Justice Rosse and
Auditor Philips for my Imprisonment. And when these Justices at Brainford
Examined me, they shut the Doors against all Witnesses, and would let none in
but their Clerk, though Alderman Ashhurst, Captain Yarrington, and many others
at the Door claimed open audience as a Legal Privilege: And after they raised
false reports of my words to them, when I was allowed no one Witness.

21. I lay quietly in New Prison, though kept waking by the constant noise of
rude Prisoners, and knocking under me at the Gate. And upon my Habeas Corpus
all the four Judges of the Common Pleas were for my Deliverance.

22. When I was delivered the Parliament making a new Act against Conventicles
added three new clauses which drove me to dwell in another County: Where also I
went constantly Morning and Evening to the public Church and Common Prayer,
and gave 2 l. per Annum to increase the Ministers Maintenance.

23. When Ministers had some time forborne public Sacraments in the Parish
Churches, I got many of the most Eminent in London together, and in writing
gave them so many reasons for such Communion as they approved. But the Oxford
Parliament having by an Act Banished us five Miles from all Corporations,
forced them from the London Churches when in Conscience they durst not leave
London Service; when 100000 had died of the Plague, and the Ministers fled and
left the dying without their help, many Nonconformists ventured their lives
among them, begged Money for them, and relieved them, and found the dying
Persons so much inclined to hear, repent and pray, that this brake the Bonds of
the Acts of Uniformity and Banishment, so that they resolved rather to die than
to cease preaching while they were out of Prison and could speak. And the City
being burnt the next year, confirmed their resolution, the Conformists ceasing
to preach long for want of Churches. But all this time, had a Nonconformist
Minister been seen in a Parish Church, he must for Six Months have lain in Goal
with Rogues: So that the sum of their imposed Obedience was, [Either inhumanely
desert the deserted City after Plagues and Flames left desolate; or go to the
Parish Ministers when they return and Communicate with them, and go Six Months
to Goal; or else be Excommunicate and lie in Goal for not Communicating with
them.] Of these three they had their choice.

But in all this time I was driven far off and kept constantly to the public
Church (at Toteridge.)

24. I never became the Pastor of any Church since I was expelled from
Kiderminster: I offered when I refused a Bishopric to preach there for nothing
under the ignorant Reader that was Vicar: But the Lord Chancellor Hyde wrote to
Sir Ralph Clare that his Majesty thought himself not well dealt with that Mr.
Baxter that had deserved so well of him had not the Vicaridge, and he promised
to pay the Vicar the worth of it by his own Steward Mr. Clutterbuke, out of his
own Rents: But durst not give a Prebend much less a Pastoral Charge to the
Vicar, lest it disgrace the Ministry: I was not so ignorant as not to know what
the King and Chancellor meant by all this (and by the Gracious Declaration.)
But he gave me unsealed the Copy of his Letter to send: And the Vicar answered
as he was taught that he would not quit his place for an uncertainty (nor would
Bishop Morley let me preach for nothing under him.)

25. When the King sent out his Declaration that gave us leave to preach, I
returned to London, and chose only St. Martins Parish to preach in, because
there were said to be above Sixty Thousand Souls more than could hear in the
Church; and hiring a room over the Market-house at St. James's (where we were
all delivered by almost a Miracle from a crack in the Floor) I published to the
Hearers (and left to them in writing) that I came not thither to gather or
preach to any new Church, or as separating from the Parish Church, but (being
Vowed to the Ministry) in necessary compassion pro tempore to help part of the
many thousands that could not come into the Parish Church: For which some
Separatists censured me: And we used the Scripture, part of the Liturgy and
more.

26. Being driven from that Room by the breach of the Main-beam, I built a Room
and Leased the Ground at too dear rates in Oxendenstreet near. But had preached
but one Sermon, but Secretary Henry Coventree with two Justices more came with
a Warrant to apprehend me, and I being twenty Miles distant, they seized on Mr.
Sedden a stranger that preached for me: And though he had by the Cromwellians
suffered Imprisonment for seeking to bring in King Charles the Second, they
sent him to the Goal, where it cost me twenty pound for his Charges, but my
Wisest and most Over-valuing Friend Judge Hale proved the Mittimus void, and
released him by the Sentence of all the Court.

27. When I could not be suffered there I hired a Room to preach in for nothing
in Swallow-street, and asked the Bishops leave, who gave some hope of his
favor: But after a few days many Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers
were set at the Door to take me had I come, and so continued about three
Months, till another came.

28. I then (that the people might not be untaught) offered Dr. William Loyd
now Bishop of St. Asaph my Chapel for the Parish use; And, I thank him he
accepted it, and it is so used by Dr. Tennison to this day.

29. In the Country I Preached in Rickaursworth, Chaferne, Amersham, Chesham,
Langley, Surra^ in the Parish Churches to show that I was not for Separation,
and went to the beginning of Common Prayer.

30. I was in Law-sence no Nonconformist I think) but only in Conscience: For I
had the Bishop of London's License and I was in no Benefice or Lecture after
May 1. 1662. And hereupon Sir Edmond Sanders Lord Chief Justice, and Sir Henry
Polixfen, now Lord Chief Justice, gave it me under their hands that my License
was still valid, and gave me Authority to Preach occasional Sermons in London
Diocese. Yet did I never use that Power in any Parish here, to avoid offense.

31. I sent my License with these Lawyers Judgment, to the present Bishop Dr.
Compton, craving his consent to use it in the Country. Of which he being
unwilling, I forbore, though the Law allowed it.

32. An Irish Informer ( Keting a Gold-worker) thought to set up that Trade for
Gain: But was crossed, and long waited at my Door to ask me forgiveness; And I
being loath to trust him, he wrote to me his Repentance, and shortly after being
Imprisoned for Debt (saying that God never after prospered him) I got him some
Money and helped him out.

33. Three or Four more Informers setting up the Trade accused me to Sir Tho
Davis Lord Mayor: I could not make him believe that he was Judge of my faults,
but that the Informers were the Judges, and that he must execute what they
swear against me: Nor could I prevail with him to let me see any one of them,
nor hear their Accusations, nor examine or consute them: And when I was fined
unheard, shortly after the chief of the Informers met me in the Street, confessed
his Fault, asked me Forgiveness, and left his Trade.

34. Dr. Manton and I were invited by the Lord Keeper Bridgman (with Dr. Bates
after) to accept the Kings offer for a Comprehension for us, and a Toleration
for others: Dr. Wilkins and Dr. Hez. Burton were appointed to treat with us of
the terms: we came to an Agreement to a word: we gave it Judge Hale to draw up
in form of an Act to be offered to the Parliament. And was that like to be so
wicked an Agreement as to be worse than all our Divisions, which such Wise and
Excellent Men as Judge Hale and Bishop Wilkins, and Dr. Burton approved: But we
refused to meddle with the Toleration, leaving his own work to the King and the
concerned: And so the Parliament was taught to reject all.

35. After this at another Session, many being set on our Concord, Dr.
Tillotson and Dr. Stillingfleet were moved by Morley and some Lords to treat
with us for Union: I got many excellent peaceable Ministers together, and we
drew in one Sheet a form of Concord: The two Drs. seemed to consent, so be it
the Bishops liked it: But Morley purposely seemed to be for the End, that he
might frustrate the means, and so we never heard more of it.

36. All this while to this day, I never gathered a Church, nor was Pastor or
Teacher of a Church, nor took any Salary, but preached without pay as an
occasional helper to another, lest I should seem to be for Separation: I thank
God that left me not to Necessities.

37. I persuaded the people to hear the Parish Ministers and Communicate with
them, and not to come to us without the want of needful helps at home; and I
gave the Sacrament to none of them, till lately to a few in my own House for a
short time, which the Liturgy allows.

38. I was suddenly assaulted by violence on my Doors, by two or three
Informers ( Hilton and Bucke) and Rutland a Vintner Constable, and other
Officers, by a Warrant from Sir James Butler sent him by Sir James Smith, to be
Executed, who had judged me to be distrained on for 90 l. (or more) for five
Sermons as preached by me against Law; and I never to this day was summoned to
answer, nor heard who were my Accusers or Witnesses, or what proof. But they
seized on all my Goods, Bed, Clothes, Library, and praised it, and sold it, (I
got a Friend to buy it and paid him.) When had I been heard I had showed them
Sir Edm. Sa^^rs Hand that they ought not to Imprison me unsummoned and unheard;
and I had showed them my valid License, and proved that I did nothing contrary
to Law. And that I was twenty Miles off at the pretended time of one of the
Sermons. But I never sought remedy nor noised any Accusation against these
Justices.

39. At the same time they brought a Warrant from Justice Parry and Lame
Philips to have sent me Six Months to Goal for dwelling in London: But as I was
going toward them, some stopped me till the King suspended it, and said, Let him
die in his Bed.

40. Upon this to avoid this Imprisonment I was forced to abscond in poor
strange Houses (in languor and constant pain) while I paid also great Rent for
my own empty House: Which I bore without complaining noise.

41. The Independants and Separatists said that I was justly used, and had
drawn more to the public Churches than all the Ministers in London: And some
of them said I had done more harm by it than ever I did good.

42. I wrote many Books against Schism and Separation (against Bagshaw,
Danvers, Mr. Lob, and many others) to prove the Lay Communion Lawful.

43. Roger Le Strange traduced me in his Observations most bitterly and
causlesly (to foretell me what was purposed against me:) Even my Book of
Patience* and my Paraphrase he virulently reviled.

44. When I was designed for the Goal (before King Charles died) the Duke of
York foretold it: And to secure me till they could find matter of Accusation,
they bound me to the good behavior under deep Bonds of me and my Sureties.
Openly declaring, That they took me for innocent, and had nothing against me,
and did it not as a penalty, but for prevention; intimating that the Court
required it (or Jefferies.)

45. When they were prepared Jefferies accused my Paraphrase as aforesaid; and
sent me to Prison. Coming out by a Habeas Corpus I was fain to abscond in the
Country (in constant pain) till the Term. Then my often waitings at the Bar
(when I could not stand) and there to be ragingly reviled by Jefferies and
Withins, and called Rogue and Knave, and not suffered to speak one word of
answer for my self, and my Council reviled that offered to speak for me, was
far harder than my Imprisonment. And when (going from the Bar) I only said,
That his Predecessor thought otherwise of me.] He said, There was not an honest
Man in England that took me not for a Knave;] not excepting the King that had
given me another testimony (in words.)

46. Thence I went quietly to a costly Prison, where I continued in pain and
languor near two years: Enjoying more quietness in that Confinement than I had
done of many years before: Because they had no further to hunt me. And God
there healed my Bloody Urine that had continued two years.

47. Being Fined 500 Marks, and to give Bond for the Behavior, when they saw
that I did neither pay the Fine nor Petition, the King and Papists, who all
this while did their work by Men called Protestants, resolved to have the
thanks for my Release; and offered me deliverance by the Marquess of Powis his
endeavor: But they would not abate my Bonds to the Behavior.

48. When I was released the Protestant Justices at the Sessions that declared
they had nothing against me, would not take up my former Bonds, but made me
long wait with Counsel at Hicks Hall, and I know not that they have given up my
Bonds to this day: But Patience is my remedy.

49. Before while I lived in St. Giles's Parish I went Morning and Evening to
the Parish Church to Common Prayer and Sermon: And I Communicated kneeling at
the Rails. But I first told Dr Sharp now Dean of Canterbury, that I am ipso
facto Excommunicate by Canon 7, 8, 9. and left it to his consideration: But
after Consultation he admitted me, because the Canon bound him not before
prosecution or declaration.

50. In Prison and since my Release I have written diverse Books for Communion
with the public Churches: And one of Government, and one against Schism, and
others pacificatory that are not printed. And I have continued to preach only
as a helper to another, not related to any gathered Church as their Teacher,
though Licensed by Law to have gathered such a Church as well as others.

51. The reason why I have not these four years gone to any Parish Church, is
because Prisons and utter disability of Body hindered me, being scarce able to
creep once a day to our Assembly but the fourth Door from my House.

52. To conclude, Whoever after reading my many great and small Writings for
Concord and Peace, and for the Church, especially my Cure of Church Divisions,
my Treatise of the way of Unity, my Catholic Theology, my Christian Directory,
my Methodus Theologiae, and the numerous Volumes of Controversy, written all
to end Controversies, and shall know that it has been my chief study and
labor these forty four years to promote Unity, Peace, and Concord, and what I
have suffered for it, and yet will accuse my Heart and Life, as quite contrary
to all this, must bring to any sober impartial Man, very clear evidence to
prove me so mad and deadly an Enemy to so long and painful Labors.

14. I am next therefore further to enquire what this Evidence is.

But his words do seem to forbid an answer, for they are capable of none but
what will sound harshly, even to name them as they are Most Impudent Lies, mere
forgeries, or the most unquestionable Duties made most odious sins; and most of
the pretense fetched from some words of my Writings and Confessions depraved and
impudently falsified.

The General Accusation is page 14. [ I dare challenge any Historian that has
observed or read the Tragedies of the late times, to show a parallel in any one
person (I say not only among the Apostate Clergy, but the Laity, and the worst
of them) that may equal Mr. B.

Accus. I. Particularly: Who is there among the Living that entertained more
early Prejudices against the Bishops?] Ans. Mendac. I. I thought them to be of
Divine Institution, till after I was Ordained. And since then I have proved it
of the Primitive Episcopacy: And opposed none but that sort of Diocesans who
put down all the Bishops and Churches that should be under them, and will be
the sole Bishops of many hundred or score Parishes, making true Episcopal
Discipline impossible, and substituting a delusion.

15. Accus. II. [ That left his Calling as a Minister of Peace, and entered with
the first into a War against the King.]

Mendac. II. I never left my Calling, nor ever took Command or Office, or so
much as a Chaplains relation to any Soldiers, nor pay for it: Save that when
Naseby Fight almost ended the War, I went a Chaplain to have tried to save the
Land from Rebellion.

I always was for King and Parliament, and never against the Kings Person,
Power or Prerogative, but only for his return to his Parliament, and against
his Will and Instruments: When Hen. VI. was carried about by his Enemies, his
Friends fought for him that fought against the Army where his Person was.

I was so far from going into a War with the first, that I only fled to
Coventry for a private Refuge, when I was forced from Home (of which enough
before.)

16. Accus. III. [ And for four years space, which was the heat of the Wars,
was an Agent as well as an Eyewitness of most of the terrible Battles that
were fought in England.]

Mendac. IV. I never so much as saw one of those terrible Battles. The first
that ever I saw was that at Langport, when the Field War ended: And there I saw
not the killing of one Man. Because I said that I saw some Fields and Dead, he
forgeth me to have seen the Fights. I never saw the Fight at Edgehill, but
being at Alcester, I went to see the Ground and some unburied Bodies the
following day. I never saw either of the two Newberry Fights, nor the Country;
I never saw the Fight at Horncastle, at Allford, or any in the East, South,
West, or North. I never saw the greatest Fight at York, nor ever was in or near
the County: I saw not that at Mongomery, nor that at Nampwich, nor any Fight in
England, save that aforesaid at Langport, and the flight of our Coventry Men
from Banbury: And I went to see the Ground at Naseby when the Armies were gone
a day or two before: And I once saw at a distance about thirty Men of a side
Fight between Linsell and Longford, where one was killed. Some Sieges I was not
far off, while I was with the Armies on the Accounts at large before recited.

17. Accus. IV. Who ever boasted of drawing thousands to that War?]

Ans. He falsely calls a Confession, a Boasting. To convince Cromwell's
Soulders that pulled down the Government, I that had drawn thousands into the
Parliaments defensive War, could not have denied the heinousness of my Crime,
if I had done as they did, or been against King and Parliament united, or for
the changing of the Government. I said by aggravation that I had drawn in
thousands, because at Coventry and Wem I had publicly preached against the
accusations of the Cause that I then thought just.

18. Accus. V. Who has said more to justify, not the War only, but the Death
of the Royal Martyr?]

Ans. Mendac. V. What can a Reader say of such Men, that shall find, 1. That I
never wrote a word to justify his Death; but only once told the Papists that
they were unmeet Accusers, as being guilty of more? 2. I preached against it.
3. I wrote against it, over and over. 4. It cost me the dear Labor and
Sufferings of almost two years in the Army, to have kept them in Loyal
Obedience. 4. I called them often and long to Repentance. Whence then did this
Man find matter or occasion for such a shameless forgery? As for the Notion of
Martyrdom, I leave Canonizing to the Righteous Judge.

19. Accus. VI. Who more opposed the Return of our present Sovereign?]

Ans. Mendac. VI. 1. Ask for his proof of this. 2. The King testified the
contrary. 3. See my Sermon before the Parliament the day before he was Voted
Home. 4. And my Sermon to the City on their Thanksgiving called, Right
Rejoicing. 5. Would the King have made such an Enemy his Chaplain and a Bishop?

The Truth is this, There were two Seasons that called to me for my Endeavors
for the King. The first was at Worcester Fight, and at Sir George Booth's
Fight: At that time I openly declared the Army to be in a state of Rebellion,
in which none should own them: But I durst not meddle on either side: Not for
the Cromwellians, their Cause being sinful: Not to restore the King, because I
foresaw all the Divisions, Silencings, Persecutions and Calamity to the Kingdom
which his Bishops and other revengeful Instruments would bring in: Nor was I
deceived in expecting most that has befallen us of twenty nine years since,
save that I thought that Popery and Cruelty would have made a speedier progress
than they did: Not knowing by what methods God would stop them. And I durst not
hasten Gods Judgments on the Land, till I knew that he required it.

2. But afterward when I saw that the Army cast all into utter confusion, and
that Gods Providence had resolved the doubt, how much I did toward a due
subjection to the King, is not a thing that wants evidence. I cannot Repent
that I was not one that brought into England that Tribe of Revengeful
destructive Prelates and their Agents, that corrupted and divided the Church of
England.

20. Accus. VII. [ Or has been as active in making the Government uneasy.]

Ans. 1. Uneasy? To whom? To the King? I have his Testimony to the contrary:
He sent D. Lauderdale to me purposely to invite me to receive the Testification
of his Favor and Acceptance? Read his Character of us in his Gracious
Declaration. Read Mr. Gaches Letter to me for the King, translated and
published by the means of Duke Lauderdale. I know nothing that I did to make
his Government uneasy, unless all my labor to have united his Subjects made
it uneasy: Or unless his Confessor Huddleston was in the right, that he was
before for the Roman Religion, and it was uneasy to him to be stopped in
promoting it: Of which confess I was often guilty.

But if he mean the Prelates Government, I believe I did much to make it
uneasy to them. I labored by such reasons to have prevented their ejecting
2000 Godly Ministers at once, and all the Cruelties and Miseries that have
followed, that it must needs be uneasy to their Consciences and Credit, while
they could make no answer to the proof of their iniquity. I gave such reasons
against their Lay Excommunicaters, and their Cursing Canons, and their causless
and obstinate dividing of the National Church by their frivolous, tearing
Impositions, as must make Cruelty the more uneasy. But (if I be not blind and
mad) the Government of Church and State had been more easy, if they would have
heard our pacificatory Requests.

21. Accus. VIII. [ Or who has or can do more than Mr. B. to renew all our
troubles and confusions?]

Ans. By what? By studying, praying, preaching, writing, and speaking, and
exemplary living for Unity and Peace; which God knows has been my chief or
second study and labor these Forty four years; valuing the supernal Wisdom,
which is first Pure and then Peaceable. But methinks I hear the Legion that are
his Army who was a Liar and Murderer from the beginning, say, What have we to
do with thee? Art thou come to torment us before the time? But they have had
leave to enter into the Swine: And O that their suffocation in the Sea of
confusion, occasion not Christ to be driven out of our Coasts, by them that
love their Swine better than Christ.

22. Accus. IX. [ So that I could not devise to give a better Epitome of the
late Rebellion and Schism, than this account of Mr. B's Actions and Writings,
which is an Abstract of the rise and progress of both in whom they yet both
live, and with whom I wish they may both die.]

Ans. To the same purpose says Morley of me, Ex uno disce omnes. And though I
unfeignedly think my self worse than the most Nonconforming Ministers that I
know, yet I entreat all Foreigners and Natives of future Ages to think no
worse of the Parliament and Nonconformists, than this Accusation allows them
to do. They were at least no worse than I; which I say because the Accusers
seem to allow you this much: And all the rest have not wrote above Sixscore
Books to make themselves known, as I have done; and so by me you may know the
worst of them ex uno omnes.

The Sum of my wickedness is the Wars. But, 1. What Is this to all the rest of
the Ejected Silenced Ministers, of whom I think there is not living one of
fifty or a hundred that ever meddled with the Wars? (though one Archbishop did,
and many that Conform.) And why would they never grant my earnest request that
they would Silence only me, and all others that had any hand in the War (except
the Conformists) and no more?

2. I thought I had been a Rebel, if I had been against the Parliament, the
Representative Kingdom, and the salus populi, or bonum publicum; and I thought
the Legislative power was the Supreme, and that this power was in King and
Parliament conjunct, and that neither of them had power against the other, but
that their Union was the constituted summa potestas, which I was bound to
endeavor, and their division was the dissolution of the Government: And I
thought that all Subjects were under the Law, and that the King might not
protect them from his Courts of Judicature.

3. I knew that Points of Humane Policy and Laws, are not in our Creed, nor
such Controversies so clearly decided in Scripture, as that Salvation should
lie on them. Though Rich. Hooker's Opinion was for more popular power than
mine, I find not that our Clergy place him in Hell for it or call him the most
Bloody Instrument of Rebellion.

4. I have elsewhere showed, that the chief stream of the Writers of Policy,
Laws, History, Heathens, and Christians, Papists and Protestants, Lawyers and
Divines, does give so much more power to the people than I do that I have been
put often to confute them. Yet how is Hooker extolled by them? while I that have
confuted his popular Principles am a Rebel: King Charles II. verbally by a
Declaration diso ned his Fathers Wars; he honored many Generals, and Colonels
of the Parliaments Army with the highest Offices; One of them General Monk by a
Parliament Presbyterian Army restored him; yet I that never was a Commander or
Soldier, nor ever stroke or hurt Man, or drew a drop of Blood in War, am the
great instance of the Rebellion: Who did what I did to avoid the guilt of
Rebellion; and to save England from being made like Ireland; where I thought it
was Rebellion that Murdered two hundred thousand: And we were then so ignorant
of War, that we commonly thought that one Battle would have ended all, and
settled peace.

As for the Charge of Schism, I verily think that the Irish may as modestly
transfer on the Protestants the charge of Rebellion, as King Charles II. his
Prelates can lay on such as I the charge of Schism, which they have so
powerfully caused, and continued: He that will read my Search for the
Schismatic, needs no further proof: And he that will not, may keep his
beloved Error.

23. Accus. X. Answered: I said that I was bred up under eight Reading School
masters, of whom diverse were beggared by drinking.

Must I repent of that? Or of disliking such Churchmen? O I should have said
nothing ill of the dead! No nor of their living Successors; for hence is the
rage: O how intolerable to these Men is reproof and repentance in comparison of
Sin!

I must repent for telling, that one of my Reading Masters, (that only
officiated in the Church) never preached but once, and that with the notorious
signs of being Drunk in Eyes and Tongue, on that terrible Text, Mat. 25. Go ye
cursed, etc. What enmity to the Church is it to complain of such Men? But we
were so often whipped when he came in Drunk, that made us as weary of him as the
Fined and Imprisoned Ministers are of the Persecuting Bishops.

24 Page 17. Accus. XI. [ At Nineteen years of Age he had a distaste against
Bishops as Persecutors.]

Ans. But not as Bishops; I cannot repent of distasting Persecutors: It was
Born in me, and New born: May not one be a Christian that loves not
Persecution?

25. Accus XII [ Whether Mr. B. made his Father a Rebel, or his Father him, he
tells us his Father was twice a Prisoner.]

Ans. By this proof all the Imprisoned Nonconformists are Rebels: How easily
can such Prelates and their Agents make thousands of Rebels: My Father lived in
the Kings Quarters, and never was Nonconformist, nor meddled with Wars: But
being plundered, was made Collector of the Kings Taxes, and brought in all that
was paid, but would not distrain, and for that was Imprisoned. And at last fled
for safety to Worcester, a Garrison of the Kings. Who can escape the charge of
Rebellion from such Accusers?

26. Accus. XIII. [ His first adventure was to Seize the Person of a Neighbor
in exchange for his Father; but Quo Warranto I find not.]

Ans. By the Law of God in Nature and the Fifth Commandment, and ^ege Talionis,
the Party being obnoxious and suffering no hurt nor loss by it.

Yet from these false Conjectures about my Father he says, [ You see how early
Mr. B's Spirit was fermented with Principles of Faction and Sedition.

Ans. Readers, you see what Faction and Sedition signify in this Man's Mouth.

27. Accus. XIV. Here accusing me for telling how Bishop Morton Confirmed me
and many more, ( saying a short Collect without a word of Examination or
Instruction) he heapeth up diverse falsehoods. 1. That my Master was a Minister
(I think) is false. 2. He querieth, Did not your Master Examine you? Ans. He
was the best of all my Masters, and heard us say the Catechism, but never told
us any thing of the sense, nor ever examined whether we understood any of it.
3. He asks, How know you but your Master certified of you? Ans. If he
certified that I understood what Baptismal Covenantings or Confirmation was, or
much of the rest, or what Consent I gave to that Covenant, I doubt he certified
too much: And I being the Head Scholar, all the rest were liker to be ignorant
than I: (Except Richard Allestree, who though two or three years younger, had
been diligently Catechized by a Nonconforming Minister.)

He says, [ This was Mr. B's fault, not the Bishops.] Ans. I confess I was
faulty in not understanding as much at Fourteen years, as I understood many
years after. I cannot say that a Child of Seven years old is sinless in not
understanding all the Articles of Faith. But though it be the fault of the
Ordained, if they seek it unqualified in gross Ignorance or Wickedness, the
Ordainers will not long believe such Deceivers, that it is not their fault to
Ordain such. He that believes Dr. Hammond and Mr. Eldersfield (two the
Learned Conformists of this Age) of the grand importance of the solemn
understanding and serious owning of the Baptismal Covenant in Confirmation,
when young Men pass into the rank of Communicants, should shed streams of
Tears, to think how contrary common practice is hereto, and how this Ordinance
is not only frustrate, but turned to a deluding Ceremony.

28. Accus. XV. [ He was a Controuler of Bishops at Fourteen.]

Ans. A mere Forgery: I liked the sport: It was too long after that I disliked
it.

29. Accus. XVI. Page 19. I am reproached that the Grave Neighbor Conforming
Ministers, that kept me from Nonconformity, were such as had rather have had
the Church rid of such dividing Things] whence he slanderously concludes that
[ they waited an opportunity to be active in Ruining the Church. Because when
Conformity was forbidden by the Parliament, they forsook not their Flock: What
can escape Satanical reproach when a great part of the County had scarce any
able and pious Ministers but four or five such as these, and they shall be
falsely branded by such as never knew them.

30. Accus. XVII. (His charge of my ignorant Subscribing at my Ordination, I
confess and lament; and beg of God to forgive.)

But the report of raining Manna at Bridgnorth, at my coming thither, is the
Forgery of his Trade: A Grain like dried Rye rained there almost a year before
my coming thither, (which I kept some of long, and the like at Shrewsbury about
two years ago.) And he forgeth that there were six Parishes at Bridgnorth,
because I said there were six under the Ordinaries Power.

31. Accus. XVIII. He accuses me for being against the Et caetera Oath, and
Canons, and yet says not a word to prove it lawful, but through me condemns
not only the Parliament that condemned it before the Division, but even the
long Parliament that made all their cruel Laws, that never would own that Oath,
or authorize those Canons; nor any Parliament to this day.

32. Accus. XIX. [ He was acquainted Forty years ago with many Aged
Nonconforming Ministers, (and probably Confederate with them, etc.]

Ans. Yes; in the Baptismal Covenant, renouncing the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil: I repent not of that: Nor take it for a sin to have known them.

33. Accus. XX. Prejudices against Conformity possessed him from his Youth.]

Ans. Not unless Cainism be Conformity, or twenty four years old be my Youth,
such as your Writings, and Doings, are an ill cure of prejudice.

34. Accus. XXI. Is, that I broke my Oaths to the King and Ecclesiastical
Superiors whom I was bound to obey]

Ans. I thought verily that I broke neither, I Swore not to obey the
Convocation, much less against the Parliament, in unlawful Canons and imposed
Oaths, never yet Authorized: I took the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
thought that defending the Land against Armed Delinquents, and Irish, and
Papists Insurrections, had been no breach of it. If I was mistaken the Lord
convince me and forgive me: But your way is unapt to it.

Let the Reader peruse but Sir Edward Deering's Speeches in Parliament, proving
that this Et caetera Oath was sinfully imposed without Authority, by them that
were neither a Convocation, a Synod or Commissioners; the same Man that spoke
so much for Liturgy and Episcopacy, against Presbytery and Independency: And I
doubt not but it was flat Perjury that by it we were required to Swear, viz.
[That the described Et caetera Government of the Church ought so to stand.]

And was I perjured for refusing Perjury?

As a summary Confutation of a multitude of his Lies, I at once tell the
Reader, that I neither was nor am for the way called Presbytery, Independency,
or the English Diocesane way: But for the mixture described excellently by
Grotius de Imper. Sum. Pot. and Bishop Usher, and Sir Edward Deering, whose
Counsel I wished that the Parliament had followed. And that I was and am far
from defending the irregular Actions of the Parliament, or any Members of it:
Though they thought that the Delinquents had put a necessity on them to overgo
their own Judgments to please the Scots, and the Indiscreet and Schismatical
part of the Nonconformists, I doubt not but they did ill herein, and should
have trusted God in the use of none but lawful means: I believe that a few Men
by Craft and unwearied Industry over-reached many that knew not what they did:
Sir Edward Deering names some of them, especially Sir H. V. Sir A. H. and O.
C. that over-reached his own upholders and all the rest: I believe they did ill
to excite and encourage disorder and tumults on pretense of Petitioning, and of
scurrilous defamations of such Men as the Lord Falkland, the Lord Digby, Sir
Edward Dering, and some other worthy Men, and so many good Bishops as they
abused. And yet that I durst not for these miscarriages, consent to give up the
Kingdoms Parliamentary Security for its present and future Safety and
Liberties, I still think is consonant to the most common Principles of Lawyers,
Politic Writers, Historians, Divines, Protestants, Papists and Heathens.

Even the late great Lord Chancellor Hide sat Chairman of the Committee of
Parliament that received the Petitions against Episcopacy, Root and Branch, and
made such Speeches against the Delinquents as I dare not justify. But he
forsook them when they quite over-went him.

If the King of England had a War with the French, and I knew that his Cause
were bad, I would not defend his bad Cause, but I would in his Army defend the
Kingdom, against those that would Captivate it by Conquest: For the Kingdom
does not forfeit its safety by the Kings misdoing: And if any say, [ Then the
King shall be defended in all his injuries how bad soever,] I would answer,
[That is by accident, it is the Kingdom that I defend, and Him as a means to
defend the Kingdom, and not to justify his sin: I leave that to God: What a
case is a Kingdom in if it must Fight against it self, and its representing
security, as often as its Representatives miscarry by any sinister means? And
that all that are to be judged by the chief Judicature, shall Fight to Conquer
them, if the King do but bid them? If the safety of this Kingdom be once put
into the Trust of the King alone, the Constitution is changed, and all Enslaved.

35. Accus. XXII. He says that [ in 1640. I entered into a War against the
King.]

Ans. Whereas the War in England began not till 1642. And I never meddled in War
but as aforementioned long after.

36. Accus. XXIII. He says by [ the Treatise of Diocesane Episcopacy meditated
1640. I broached Faction in the Church, my Pen disdaining to be less active
than my Sword.]

Ans. 1. I never struck with a Sword in War or Peace. 2. Did Meditating broach
a Book that was not published nor written till thirty years after? 3. Is it
Faction to give reasons why I Swore not to Faction, even that Antiepiscopal
sort of Diocesanes that put down many hundred Churches and Bishops to set up
the Name and Image of one? 4. Why is not that Book answered to this day, when
so many Nonconformists have Challenged, Called and Begged for an Answer to it?
Will a Lying Scorn satisfy any Conscionable Nonconformist? 5. That Book owneth
so much of Bishops, and Diocesanes, and Archbishops, (which Sir Edward Dering
condemned) that these Men now show that it is not such as I only, but such as
Grotius, Spalatensis, Usher, Hall, yea most of the great Writers for Episcopacy
(of whose Judgment I have there given a particular account) whom he condemns
for Faction and Enmity to the Church. I have written against the Pope too: And
is not that as bad? I am sure many Papists write more against Episcopacy than I.

37. Accus. XXIV. [ It Is probable his Church History had its conception at the
same time.]

Ans About Forty years after 1640. Forty years breaks no square with this sort
of Men: I would this lort of History were not too common with them.

38. Accus. XXV. Page 23 [ He feigneth me in my Church History to commend all
the Heretics, and omit what is good of the Fathers and Martyrs, and write only
their faults.]

Ans. It seems he thought that without reading the Book that disproveth him,
his Faction would take his word that he says true.

39 Accus. XXVI The like he says of my reproaching Councils, because I show
the miscarriages of many, and our Bishops that plead for a Foreign
Jurisdiction, dare yet own but six or eight General Councils.

40. Accus. XXVII Page 25. He recites my mention of the former courses, of
undoing Men for hearing a Sermon (of a Godly Conformist) at the next Parish
when they had none at home, (and for Fasting and Praying, etc.) And he takes
it for my crime, to call these ungodly Persecutions crimes: So that he that is
not for them, while they are tearing the Church, and extirpating serious Piety,
is against them. So do the Papists accuse them that blame their Murders and
Inquisitions.

41. Accus. XXVIII. Because I said, The War was begun in our Streets by the
ungodly drunken Rabble, seeking our Lives, he says, [ In plain English Mr. B.
with other Reformers put themselves into Arms, seizing on the Kings Forts, and
making them Garrisons against the King, (and this before King or Parliament had
any Armies.]

Ans. In plain English this Lie is shameless. Unless a poor hired Chamber was
the Kings Fort, I seized on none. The first time the drunken Rabble rose up
against me, was for preaching Original Sin: They said that I slandered their
Children. The next was for Reading the Parliaments Order to deface the Pictures
of the Trinity: The third was by bringing in Soldiers, that drove me away. And
it was long after this ere I had a private Lodging in Coventry.

42. Accus. XXIX. Page 26. He makes the repetition of his Forgery a proof that
I was guilty of Perjury. 1. Because I was prejudiced against the Bishops at
Nineteen, and yet at Ordination took the Oath (to obey my Ordinary in Licitis
and Honestis.) Ans. 1. I did not Swear an approbation of Persecution. I was not
then prejudiced against Episcopacy, but against the sin of Bishops. May not a
Man disown such shameless Liars as some Ministers are, without disowning the
Ministry? 2. ( I was prejudiced against Bishop Morton at Fourteen.) Ans.
Utterly false: I honored him to his death. But when I came to better
understanding I disliked turning Confirmation to a mere Ceremony. (For the
right use of which I have written a Treatise agreeing to Dr. Hammond.)

3. He names [ my omitting the Cross and Surplice.] Ans. I never Swear nor
Promised to use them; being in no station that obliged me to it: And was under
an Ordinary that required it not. And I have confessed my sin in rath subscribing
to their lawfulness.

43. Accus. XXX. Page 27. He tragically recites the reasons I alleged why I
was for the Parliament: But his confutation is only by an Exclamation how bad I
was, as worse than Cook and Bradshaw, as if I had been for the death of the
King. When he knows that the Parliament was broken up by Cromwell for being
for the Kings Restoration and their Union: And that a Faction called the Rump
did this as Cromwell's Confederates. I believe I did more against that Faction
than many such as he.

44. Accus. XXXI. Page 27, 28. [ With what Heart could he be an Eyewitness of
the Inhumane Butcheries that had been made in almost every Fight from the
beginning of the Wars?

Ans. A Lie so gross that it feigneth me to see far off where I never was. I
have answered it before: I was an Eyewitness of many of Gods provident
disposals, and an Ear-witness of more. I saw the Field where they fought near
Worcester, and Edgehill, and Nantwich, and I saw many Garrisons ( Wem,
Leicester, Shrewsbury, Exeter, Sherburne, Bristol, Winchester,) that had been
taken: But I saw not the Fights at any one of these: But that at Langport that
ended the Field War I saw afar off, but saw none killed, for they fled I think
before a Man was killed.

45. Accus. XXXII. I repent not of saying that I was rescued from many dangers:
Nor that I had many tedious Nights and Days, (in that Army which after Naseby
Fight I hazarded my Life and spent my Labor to have undeceived) [ and had many
doleful sights and tidings.] I saw the Graves and some of the Corpse in Ditches
near Edgehill, of the Parliaments Soldiers there killed, and many that lay
unburied: When after I lived in peace at Coventry, how often were Soldiers of
that Garrison brought home Mortally wounded, and many slain: Few Weeks past in
which we heard not of Fights in Fields or Garrisons: Which I thought it lawful
to call doleful tidings.

46. Accus. XXXIII. Because I named the doleful Fights at Worcester, Edgehill.
Newberry, Nantwich, Montgomery, Horncastle, Naseby, (York,) Langport, etc. he
adds, [ It seems he was present in these Fights.]

Ans. Not at any one of them* save Langport. I said, [ My Eyes shall no more
see the Earth covered with the Carcasses of the slain.] Which was at Edgehill
the next day after, where I had no more to do than any other that would see the
place.

47. Accus. XXXIV. [ He had traveled over the most of England ( to pursue the
War.] Ans. It was [ much] and not [ most] and it was to have prevented the
Change of Government, and not to pursue the War that I went

48. Accus XXXV. Page 29. He feigneth me accordingly to see many Noble Lords
and Gentry perish in their integrity, some perhaps by his own Hand.]

Ans. All mere Forgery: I never saw any such hurt, nor ever hurt any: But at
Coventrey I did encourage the Garrison, and at Wem.

49. Accus. XXXVI. His next is a common Accusation of me by his Party, that I
speak of Brook, Prin, Hambden and White as of Men in Heaven.]

Ans. I think so still: Prin and White were never Soldiers: Our Creed
contains not any Article that decideth Controversies about the various forms
of Government: Christ never told us how much of the Supremacy was in Caesar,
and how much in the Senate and People, and which of them had the Legislative
Power: Nor whether England be an Absolute or a Limited Monarchy; nor whether
the Parliament have part of the Legislative and Self-defending Power. And those
that best knew these Men (especially Hambden and White] took them for Men in
all other respects of Great Wisdom, Piety and Honesty: If among the old Romans
all the Civil Wars between the Senate and the Emperors, and one Emperor and
another, (when of Forty scarce Ten died a Natural Death, but were Murdered) had
inferred the Destruction and Damnation of all that were against the Censuring
side, how few would have escaped? When setting up Emperors and killing them was
so common, that Soldiers set the Crown to Sale. I never heard that Brutus, or
Cato, or Cicero, or Seneca, or Lucan and such others might not have their
Virtues praised, and that above their Enemies, though they died as esteemed
Rebels. I am sure these Men that reproach me for this Charity, have a Law to
turn me and all Nonconformists out of the Ministry, if we were to bury such a
Man and would not profess our Hope of his Salvation: For they bind us to do it
of every individual person buried in the Land, except the Unbaptized,
Excommunicate and Self-Murderers. And exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis.

And because the Sum of his Accusations is the War, the War, I will once more
give him a Summary Answer.

If he mean the War before the new modelled Army, and new Commission which left
out [ for the King] after Naseby Fight, I did more against that new Cause and
War than he, and perhaps many such as he: If he mean the first War stated by
the Parliament Commissions [ for the King and Parliament] I was in it and for
it: Because,

1. He that is for the Highest Power in a Civil War, is of the righter side (
caeteris paribus) than he that is against it; but they that were for King and
Parliament were for the Highest Power in our Civil War.

Proved: They that were for them that have the Legislative Power, were for them
that had the Highest Power (as Morley confesses and almost all others.) But
they that were for King and Parliament were for them that had the Legislative
Power. Ergo, etc.

Obj. What Hypocrisy is it to shoot at the King and say you fight for him?

Ans. 1. The King protested to be for the Parilament (as his Shrewsbury Half
Crowns show) while he fought against their Armies and Persons: Ergo the
Parliament might more clearly be for the King while they fought against his
Army and not his Person, though in the Field.

2. They knew that the King had discretion enough to keep his Person out of the
reach of Danger: And so he did: At Edgehill he stood on the Hill (as I heard)
and looked down on the Fight in the Field. At Naseby where he was nearest he
was safe (but that was after the first Cause and War.) I never heard else that
he came near.

3. Else any Traitor, that could possess the Kings Person, and carry him about
(as they did Henry VI.) should be for the King and all against him that would
rescue him.

Obj. He was willingly with his Army.] Ans. He may fight for the King that does
it against his Will, while he does it not to hurt his Person, Prerogative or
Rights. We Swear not to be for all the Will of the King. If in a Passion he
would kill Himself, his Son, his Lords, his Parliament, yea, or would but
Ravish a Woman, he may be held and resisted.

Arg. 2. They that were to bring King and Parliament again to Union, fought for
the King and Kingdom, and the Highest Power; (for it is the Constitution. But
the first Wars Commissions were to bring the King and Parliament to Unity.
Ergo, etc.

Arg. 3. They that were really for the Common Safety, and Salus Populi and the
very Constituted Form of Government in a case of notorious danger, and only
against an Army of Subjects that fled from the Justice of the Supreme
Judicature, were righter than those that were against their Wars. But, etc.
Ergo, etc.

Arg. 4. They that were for a Defensive War according to Law and Constitution,
were righter than they that raised War against them contrary to Law and
Constitution -- But, etc. Ergo, etc.

The Parliament to the last were against all violence to the Person of the
King, and were cast out by Cromwell for Voting to receive him.

As it was easy for Bradshaw and ^ook to Charge all the Bloodshed on the King,
so is it fo(...) (...) Accuser to Charge it according to his Judgment. But all
of us must be willing of Conviction, and deep Repentance, so far as we shall be
proved guilty.

Arg 5. The present King and Parliament have by Practice and by Law declared
the right of more than Arming and Resisting a King in several Cases.

Arg. 6. In a doubtful Case under God there is no Judge that has a deciding
power above the Supreme Judicature.

50. Accus. XXXVII. He next accuses me as falsely Charging the peaceable Reign
of King Charles the First with Persecution, wherein there was no such thing,
but Peace, save against the Seditious: And he appealeth to the Canons.

Ans. 1. See the Preface to my Book called Cain and Abel for an answer to this.
2. We appeal to the Canons too, and to the Bishops Visitation Articles, and to
the experience of all England, that delight not in the Destruction of the true
Servants of Christ. 3. But alas how far are Leeches from feeling the smart of
the Persons whose Blood they feast upon? The Papists say none were punished in
Queen Mary's days but the Heretics and Seditious. So says the King of France.
And so said the Irish when they Murdered 200000.

4. Q. 1. Was there nothing but Amiable Peace, when Laud and others wrote for a
Foreign Jurisdiction, under the Name of our obeying the Pretorian Power of
Foreign Councils?

Q. 2. Was it Sedition not to Read the Book for Sunday Sports and Dancing,
which exempted Children and Servants from the Government of their Parents, and
Masters? For which many Ministers suffered.

Q. 3. Was it Sedition for Religious people to go hear a Conformable Preacher
at the next Parish, when they had no Preaching at Home?

Q. 4. Was it Sedition for Religious people to pray with their Sick Friends,
and Fast and Humble themselves to God, without Traveling to the Bishop for a
License?

Q. 5. Was it Sedition for a Man Vowed to the Ministry by Episcopal Ordination,
to Preach or Expound any matter in the Church or elsewhere, without a new
License from the Bishop?

Q. 6. Was it Sedition for any Man, Noble or Ignoble to affirm that any thing
was repugnant to the Word of God, in the Ceremonies, Liturgy, Ordinations, or
the Et caetera Government of the Church?

Q. 7. Was it Sedition to refuse the false Et caetera Oath of 1640?

Q. 8. Was it Sedition to say that other Societies in England were true
Churches besides the Episcopal Churches? At least the French and Dutch?

Q. 9 Was it for Sedition that Men were punished for not Receiving the
Sacrament, when the Conscience of their ignorance and unfitness deterred them?

Q. 10. Were the many thousand Families that were put to fly the Land to
Holland and America punished for nothing but Sedition? Were New England and
Barmudas planted without any Persecution? Or was it no punishment to be driven
from House, Land, Goods, Kindred and Native Country into an unplanted
Wilderness among VVoods and wild Men and Beasts?

Q. 11. Was it no Persecution to be Excommunicate ipso facto by Canons 6, 7, 8,
etc. without being admonished or heard?

Q. 12. Was it nothing but Amiable Peace, that laid all the Ten sorts of the
Excommunicate named in the Statute, in the common Goal during Life, depriving
them there of their Estates, unless they Lied by a feigned Repentance?

Q. 13. Yea, was it only harmless that made Seriousness in Religion such a
common Scorn, as the word Puritan then signified, if Mr. Robert Bolton, Bishop
Abbot, Bishop Downame, and other Conformists may be believed?

But say these Accusers, All this was but justice, and was well done. But the
casting out of two hundred accused on Oath for gross scandal, and utter
insufficiency, by the Parliament, was Persecution and was not well done.

51. Accus. XXXVIII. Next I am accused because other Men exploded the Lords
Prayer.

Ans. 1. And what is that to me, that constantly used it? 2. And who may not
see that the use of it was prescribed in the Directory? 3. And the Presbyterian
(and Episcopal Nonconformists that now are) commonly used it. But he has found
out one Independent Dr. John Owen, who when he was Vice Chancellor at Oxford
was against the common use of it as necessary.

52. Accus. XXXIX. He feigneth also that the Creed and Ten Commandments were
also cast out, and scarce a Chapter read in many Churches.

Ans. 1. Was he that hated them, more often in their Churches than I? I knew not
one such Presbyterian Congregation in England. 2. Read the Directory whether it
were for them or against them, and judge of this Man's words.

53. Accus. XL. His Exclamation against the Scots Covenant and Cromwell's
doings, I before showed to be just: And I think I opposed both more than he did.

54. Accus. XLI. Page 39. Whereas I before said how I went into the Army after
Naseby Fight by the Consent of an Assembly of Loyal Ministers in Coventry, to
try whether there was any hope to save the Church and State from the Corrupted
Army: He feigneth that this was the Westminster Assembly, or some Rebellious
Branch of them: All falsely as the rest.

55. Accus. XLII. That I went to Col. Whalley.] Ans. Who then professed himself a
Lamenter of the Armies Corruption, and a Desirer of their Reformation, and so
continued while I was with him: But was after overcome by his Kinsman Cromwell
and worldly Interest, to hold on with them for his preferment.

56. Accus. XLIII. His Page 41. is made of mere forged Lies. As, 1. That I
promised my self great things, (much what as I did from King Charles the
Second, when instead of a Bishopric I craved leave (in vain) to have been for
nothing the Curate of an ignorant Reading Vicar.) 2. That I was disappointed of
my hopes. (By whom? And how? And for what?) 3. That I thought my self capable
of advancement, but They did not: As if I sought that which I refused. 4. That
I was well promised for my pains.] Who never asked them any thing, nor was
promised any thing. 5. That I was content with the pleasing work of drawing
Blood gratis.] Because I that never drew a drop of any Man's Blood, did labor
to prevent the Papists, and malignant other Leeches from bursting with the
Blood of King, Parliament and Kingdom. 6. That I hoped they would have advanced
me to some Military Preferment.] Who never was so much as a Soldier, and could
have had Military Preferment long before Thus the Man's Brain (from what cause
let others judge) breeds Lies as a Carcass breeds Maggots: They swarm by
heaps. Is this the Credit of our Church History?

57. Accus. XLIV. Page 42. [ Against his Will he is forced to leave the Army.]

Ans. Yes; just the day that they consulted at Nottingham to Rebel, and I had
else at Triploe-Heath ventured my Life against them: But it had been in vain,
as it was to those that drew off about 5000 from them; whose places they filled
up with King Charles the First's Soldiers that had come to them, and with
Fanatics that would be true to their Interest.

58. Accus. XLV. [ That ever since it has been my business to destroy the best
Established Church in the World. Ans. By desiring them not to set up a Foreign
Jurisdiction which the Kingdom is Sworn against. And by humble Petitioning them
not to silence all the Ministers of England conditionally, and two thousand of
the most Faithful actually in one day: By striving for Concord as for Life,
upon terms once granted by the King in his Gracious Declaration, and after on
lower terms consented to by Bishop Wilkins, Dr. Burton, Judge Hale, and I think
by Dr. Tillotson, and Dr. Stillingfleet: I never motioned the alienation of one
Farthing of the Revenues of the Bishops or Deans; nor spoke against their
Baronies, Parliament Place and Power, (...) nor against their vast Diocesses,
so they would not put down the Inferior Pastoral Office and Churches, and make
Lay Civilians Usurpers of the Keys: Thus I sought to destroy the best Church in
the World. Locusts are famished if they may not destroy our Trees and Fruit,
and Pikes if they may not devour all the lesser Fish: All Human's Wealth and
Honor is nothing to him if Mordecai be not hanged. This Envy consumes them,
if we lie not still with Rogues in Goals.

59. Accus. XLVI. [ He will not affirm that I was given to plunder: But it is a
suspicious sign when I would take up a Man to exchange for my Father.] Ans.
This has a little modesty; though even natural Affection be a Crime with
Tories, even when exercised without hurting any. Here also he repeateth his
Forgery of raining Manna.

60. Accus. XLVII. Page 43 [ That I sat down on the Sequestered Living of Mr.
Dance at Kiderminster.] Ans. This is cautelously said: Not that I had a hand in
Sequestring him, not that I took his living: But that I sat down on it: And
Bishop Morley says, [ That he was a Man of an unblameable life.] But, I. He
shall not hereby draw me to recite the Articles Sworn against him by as
credible Men as any of his Neighbors. 2. I think that it is not a blameless
life to undertake the Pastoral Care of Souls, and neither preach to them, nor
be able to Expound the Creed; and to keep one as ignorant but much more vicious
( Turner at Mitton) under him.

3. I yet believe that such a Man's Possession, does not oblige the people to
venture their Souls upon his Pastoral Care; and own him for their Teacher, and
seek no other: Nor make it a sin for any other to Teach them? No more than the
King's Ships or Armies must wilfully cast away Ships and Lives, for want of
Conduct, because a Man that has no tolerable skill is in Possession. How cheap
are Souls, or how contemptible is Ministerial Knowledge and Preaching with
these Men. You see here what is the best Church in the World in their account,
and what it is to destroy it.

4. Almost two years before the Wars, the Vicar conscious of his obnoxiousness,
entered into Bond with the chief Magistrates and others of the Town and Parish,
to pay 60 l. per Annum to a Lecturer of their choice, he keeping his Vicaridge
and officiating as Reader: And so he put out Mr. Jo. Did his Preaching Curate,
in whose place I came, being before in another County: Which Mr. Did though
more offensive before than the Vicar to the Religious people, being after on my
Testimony for him, received into a Benefice of his own, was so reconciled to
the people of Kiderminster that he Bequeathed much of his Estate to them.

5. In my absence some years Mr. Dance by Bond owed me about 120 l. of which I
never desired or asked for a Penny: And if Mr. Dance when forced out had right
to his Benefice I that was forced away had right to my Salary: Which yet I
think was no good Title in him or me. But he was sequestered when I was in
another Country not like to live: And the Sequestration put into the hands of
diverse of the Inhabitants to maintain one to Officiate. They offered it me, and
I refused it: And told them that I would take neither Sequestration nor
Pastoral Cure, but my former Lecture; but if they would get a competent Pastor,
let them take care to pay him: For I would have out of the Vicaridge but the 60
l. that the Vicar was bound to pay: And because I refused a Living of 400 l. or
500 l. to be with them I would try other ways to make my Stipend 100 l. by
getting for Mitton Chapel, which had but ten pound a year, an Augmentation of
forty pound from the Parliament aliunde; and in sum while I was there, the
maintenance of the Vicaridge was thus paid; viz. forty pound a year to Mr.
Dance, about twenty pound to the Crown and Poor, and Taxes; ten pound to the
old Curate of Mitton, which was all he had before: sixty pound to me, and the
rest to a truly faithful Minister that preached once a day at Kiderminster and
once at Mitton, and did the rest of the Offices. And the Augmentation added
from the Parliament made up my sixty pound to be eighty pound, and the Rent of
a few Rooms in the top of another Man's old House. And I had no more: Nor did
ever set my foot in the Vicaridge House, much less offer to put out Mr. Dance;
nor had we any disagreement. And when he was restored, he freely gave me a full
discharge for all between him and me.

But the Sequestrators had notice that another was like to be put in against
their will if I were not: And thereupon without me they got the Committee to
pass an Order as to me; and they kept this Order for their own indemnity, till
King Charles the Second's Army came to Worcester, and then they brought it me,
and desired me if I were put to it, not to disclaim it.

And to make all sure when I came to them after my return from the Army, I got
all the Magistrates and chief of the Town, to Subscribe their Names, that they
received me only as their Lecturer, that refused the Pastoral Charge and
Sequestration.

61. Accus. XLVIII. To aggravate the Rebellion of Cromwell's Army, I wrote that
[ they had pulled down the best Governors that they could name in the World,
and therefore to pretend their faults for their Rebellion, was to profess that
they would be subject to none.

Here he says I meant the Parliament.

I answer, It was both King and Parliament that they put down: And he has
nothing but my own words to accuse me of. 2. Why did he not venture to Name
better than they put down? I know not what Nation then had better;
notwithstanding all that both Cromwell and this Accuser has said against them.

62. Accus. XLIX He next accuses me for praising Richard Cromwell's
Government.] Ans. I spoke nothing but Truth. He was never in any War: The
Royalists reported that he would restore the King. He was not for Sectaries,
but for uniting pious Counsels: He presently gave up his Government, because it
should cost no Man's Blood. And this was enough to aggravate their sin that had
set him up when he sought it not, and then cast him out (to their own
destruction.)

63. Accus. L. He says, That I never so much complained of Arbitrary
Government and Persecution as since the King and Church were restored.

Ans. Notoriously false: My Political Aphorisms witness my complaints then, and
let him tell if he can, where or when I complained of Arbitrary Government
since King Charles the Second came in. I knew he did what was done against us
by Parliaments. I knew the Bishops got Laws for their purpose. But if I
complain more of Persecution, it is because I think it no sin to feel, nor a
Duty to love the Silencing of Faithful Ministers, and laying them in Goals for
nothing but preaching the Gospel, nor was I of the mind that undoing thousands
of sincere godly Christians was no Persecution, I dare not rail at Christ's
Judgment, Matthew. 25. that reckons that as done for or against him that is
done for or against the least of those whom he calls Brethren while Pharisees
call them Accursed. Till Cruel Persecution be Sanctity, it will be no sin to
hate it.

64. Accus. LI. But that which follows is a most notorious outfacing the most
public notice of the Land, Page 47. Did not the Secluded Members upon their
readmission reinforce the Engagement to be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth without a King or House or Lords.]

Ans. So far were they from this, that they were cast out immediately for
Voting the satisfactoriness of the Kings Commissions, and his return to London:
And upon their readmission they voted their own dissolution that a free
Parliament might be called, and were never for the Engagement, but abhorred it,
though the Royalists at their Compositions ordinarily took it (when I wrote
against it.)

But he asks, [ Did not some of them provide an Oath of Abjuration, etc.]
Ans. We can better tell what Parliaments do, than what [ some of them do.] How
know I what odd or secret Act of any particular Persons this Man might know of?
But I suspect this [ some] was some one or more of the excluded Rump. But had
he no pretense for this notorious Lie against the Secluded Members? None
visible but that which has filled his Book with falsehood; wrath and blind
prejudice, and inconsiderate haste: That which was done by the restored Rump he
falsely says was done by the Secluded Members, when it was done before their
restoring. But they justified their first War against the Delinquent Army You
may find him punctually confuted in Whitlock's Memorials. When things so
notoriously false are thus confidently vented, which the public notice of the
Kingdom confuteth, what credit does his Accusation deserve of me and my unknown
actions, and my thoughts, whom I suppose he never saw, if the Author be Long of
Exeter, as fame reports.

Indeed when Cromwell's proud rebellious Army came and mastered Parliament and
City, and about 150 of their Members forbore coming to the House, they past
diverse slavish Votes, among which was that of [ No more Addresses to the King,]
when he refused their four Acts: But they recalled that Vote, and were cast out
for recalling it, and Voting Consent to the Kings Concession. And when after
Richard's Government the Army had confounded themselves, they were forced to
call the Excluded Members of the Long Parliament again: But what Members were
they? Only the Rump or Party that cut off the King, and put down the House of
Lords, expressly confining it to them that staid in till April 20. 1653. the day
that Cromwell cast out the last. So that the first Excluded Members were never
restored till Monk and his Presbyterian Army restored them. They abhorred the
Commonwealth Engagement: And so did all the Ministers of my Acquaintance save
Independants

65. Accus. LII. Page 47. [Having told what a few Rumpers said to Monk he
says, [ And because they did this, and might justify it by Mr. B's Theses in
his Holy Commonwealth, they are the Supreme Power the best Governors in all
the World.

Ans. How pregnant is malice of falsehood? 1. It is false that the Parliament in
question did what he says; which was done by their Adversaries: Such as Scot,
Robinson and Haseldrigge that flattered Monk till he had them in his Net. 2. It
is false that my Th^ses justify them, which are written against them. 3 It is
false that it was for this that I call them the Supreme Power or the best
Governors: It Is King and Parliament that I call Supreme: It was King,
Parliament, the Rump and Richard that the Men whom I wrote against pulled down:
And I only tell them that if the Errors of all these Rulers will justify an
Army for Deposing them, there is no Power on Earth that might not be so
Deposed, there being none better than all these Deposed by them.

66. Once more, I tell this Accuser and the World, that I am so far from
justifying King or Parliament, from the beginning, progress, or ending of this
War, that I think both sides deeply guilty of very heinous sin: And I cannot
tell whether I know a Man living that hates War more than I hate it: While I
meddled in it, it was far a more sad and hateful Life to me, than my abode in
Prison was when the Church Defenders laid me there with an unsolvable Fine. The
truth is, both sides began they knew not what: I knew not a Man but Sir Francis
Nethersole that knew what War was, or foresaw what was like to come of it. Both
sides thought it would be prevented by the Countries forsaking the other side,
or that one Fight would end it. And no Man can tell just where, and when, and
by whom it was begun: No more than just when a Chronical Disease begins in Man.
Only I am sure that Virtually and Dispositively it began in that division of
Minds, Hearts and Lives, which is common in the World between them that Love a
Life of Serious Godliness, and cannot Love Wickedness, and them that Hate a
Godly Life because it is against their Lust and Carnal Interest. Not that every
Adversary to the Parliament was a Cainite, but that through the Land an Enmity
between the Seriously Godly, and the Profane encouraged by Pharisaical
Ceremonious Formalists, was a War in our Bowels, ready to break forth upon the
first advantages. And the Religious Party (as in all former Ages) had many
young ignorant Novices, that by Pride ran into Extremes, being self-conceited,
and unruly, and ready by Schism or petulant Censoriousness to vilify all that
be not of their Sects, and to pretend Fanatic Inspirations for their Errors.
As the contrary Party was prone to be so Jealous of their beloved Dominion,
Wealth, and Ease, and Honor, as to take such for intolerable Enemies that
flattered them not in their Worldly Pomp.

Long did heart-burnings continue between these discordant Parties, one side
blaming, and the other side ruining those that were against them: Till Laud's
attempts for Innovation, stirred up such opposition in Scotland, and distaste
in England, as I cannot justify. The Parliament encouraged by the Scots went
higher in provoking the King than they ought: And the King too much occasioned
their Jealousy that he intended to have Invaded Property and Liberty, and to
subdue them by force if they restrained or punished the Executioners of his
Illegal Will. But this brake out by such degrees, that no Man can name the
beginning. As a small breach in a Pond of Water grows wider till it let out
the whole: And as Personal Duels begin in a word, or a suspicion, and proceed
to wrath, and then to reproach, and thence to revenge. When Division was the
Death of the Constituted Form of Government, both sides should have hated and
feared it more than either did. But the Parliament thought the King would soon
return as deserted: And the Devil among us all was as if he had cast among Boys
red hot pieces of Brass or Iron, and they scrambled for it, thinking by the
Color that it was Gold, till it stuck to their Fingers and burnt them to the
Bone. And the dread of 200000 Murdered in Ireland put such a pannick fear in
the Antipapists in England, as darkened their Wits. And yet if the Captain and
Mariners fall out by folly, the Ship may be preserved by the innocent. If the
Citizens could not agree about quenching the Fire in 1666. the Inhabitants may
endeavor it, and pull down Houses to that end without the guilt of injury to
the Owners. I think that King and Parliament grievously sinned (but not
equally) in doing so much to cause and no more to prevent a Civil War: I would
they had hearkened to Whitlock's Speech, and other Men's healing motions 1641.
But who in the beginning fore-knows the end? And when once the breach is made,
usually there is no hope left of any better end than one of the two Parties
ruin. True is the old saying, He that draws his Sword against his King must
throw away the Scabbard. When all mutual Trust is gone, all hope of
Reconciliation is gone.

The present state of England is a lively Exposition of the beginning of that
miserable War. We were thus in fear of Popery and Slavery here of late. The
Murder of 200000 in Ireland, and the Papists coming in to the King in England
was as loud an Alarm, as King James his Liberty of Conscience here. The
Archbishop and Bishops, and the Lay Church Lords and Patrons here had Sworn or
Promised against taking Arms against the King on any pretense what soever. They
did not
all own King William's Title to the Crown: Yet they thought it lawful to save
the Kingdom from a misgoverning King, and the Kings own Kindred, Lords, Army
and Clergy forsook him, and joined with him that came in against him: They
meant it not as owning then the Invaders Right to the Crown, nor as disowning
King James, but to save the Kingdom; and it proved contrary to their
expectation that without Blood the turn of the Nation turned the Government.

Just so the first beginners of the resistance of King Charles the First his
Army intended no change of the Government, and they thought that the War would
have been as soon almost ended as begun, as King William's was here; but when
it was once begun reconciliation became impossible: And one or others must be
ruined: Yet we that owned not the miscarriages of either side, but thought King
and Parliament greatly sinful, thought it an absolute Duty to do our best to
save the Kingdom, from the most threatening danger. And we thought that the
Massacre of Ireland, the Papists in England, the malignity of most of the Kings
Adherents, and the prospect of such an Army of Delinquents Conquering a
Parliament, and putting all the Land into the Sole power of the King, who was
himself in the power of Papists and Delinquents, did clearly tell us where the
present danger of the Kingdom lay. But future Changes we could not foresee.

(...) part, I was a young Novice, and knew not what War was; (...)
considerable interest in any, to have prevented it: But (...) that I more
repent of than that I feared it so little, and that I did not speak more
earnestly for the preventing of it by mutual pacificatory means, and that I
said any thing toward unpeaceable irritations. Who could have forethought that
all those doleful Events would follow, which make up Whitlock's impartial
Memorials?

67. Yet I must truly say (though it displease the guilty) that the effects
were quite different on the Land, from what the Malignants commonly report:
They would falsely persuade the World, that all ancient Piety was despised, the
Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalogue, and all sober Ministers cast out, and Tub
preachers set up to vent their Nonsense. The truth is, among 10000 of the
Clergy about 300 or more were turned out as Ignorant and Scandalous, and with
them unjustly some for being for the King against the Parliament: The number I
know not, but conjecture that there might be an hundred such at least. In the
places of these the most seriously Religious young Men that the Universities
would afford, with some few old Nonconformists, and but few) such as the
Parishioners chose were set up: Most of these young Men were such as had no
hand in the Wars, but were Lads or young Students while the War continued. It
pleased God, that very many of them, became such fervent, able Preachers, that
a great change followed among their Hearers, and multitudes of the Ignorant,
Debauched and Worldlings became Serious, Godly, Christians. And the younger
sort grew up accordingly.

For instance, in the County of Worcester where I lived, where before there was
one Family that minded Piety, or the Life to come, or Prayed, or Read the
Scripture, there were many after that did it. In the Town where I lived, where
there was before one or two Houses in a Street that worshipped God by Prayer in
their Families, and avoided Profaneness, and minded the Concerns of their
Souls, at last there was scarce more than two Houses on a Street-side, that did
not learn the Catechism read the Scripture, pray and live soberly, and this in
great love and peace, and humility toward others; commonly disowning the
Cromwellians, and Sectarians Disloyalties, Rebellions and Schisins.

But indeed when the Sectaries got dominion, many Anabaptists and Self
conceited Novices set up themselves for Preachers where they could get Hearers;
but the sober godly people kept so much Concord and Integrity, that these
others were but here and there, and that as a disgraced broken Sect, as the
Quakers be among us now. But Harrison took the advantage of the ignorance and
badness of the Parish Ministers in Wales, to set up Itinerant Anabaptists and
Separatists in many places.

This is the truth of the Consequents about Religion: And it fell out that the
Cromwellians and Anabaptists professing more Zeal for Godliness than ordinary,
did much of their work by suppressing sin and profaneness, and countenancing
Godliness: Which has taught us to wish that of two Evils, rather Hypocrisy
than Malignity may be in power. It Is better Godliness be promoted for evil
Ends, than hated and persecuted.

68. Whereas therefore the Diocesane Church of England exclusive of all
Nonconformists, and such as these Men accuse, is so often called, The best Church
in the World: It must mean that it is best in Constitution and Laws, or in the
Men that are Ministers and Members. If the first be their meaning, 1. The best
Laws without the best Men never make the best Church. 2. Is one sole Bishop
over a Thousand or many Hundred Parishes without any Bishop or Pastoral Church
under him a better Form of Government, than the contrary that was continued for
many hundred years? See Mr. Clarksons proofs.
and described by Archbishop Usher and others. 2. Is a Church Governed by Lay
Civilians decretive use of the Keys so much better than that which is Governed
by the Keys in the hands of the Clergy only? 3. Is a Church Governed by Canons
that ipso facto Excommunicate all that affirm any of their Offices, Ceremonies
or Forms, to have any thing sinful, better than those that unite in things
necessary, and bear with such as these? 4. Are Bishops and Deans chosen by
Kings (perhaps Papists) and Incumbents chosen by any that can buy a
Presentation, better than those that are chosen by the Clergy and People, and
Invested by the Prince and Patron. 5. Is a Church where the ignorant, sinful
and unwilling are forced to Communicate, unless they will lie Beggared in
Goals, better than those that receive none to Communion but the Desirers?

2. But if it be the best Church in the World for Men, they should let others
praise them rather than their own Mouths. Are they so much better Men than the
Nonconformists? Do their Lives show it? Does credible fame speak it? Though Mr.
White was blamed for publishing the Names of such as by credible Oaths were
ejected for Drunkenness, or other Scandal, this was no proof that they were the
best Men in the World? Nor yet that of 10000 that Conformed 8000 of them had
Conformed before to the Directory, and Declared their Assent and Consent to the
altered Common Prayer Book before ever they saw it (as I have proved)

Whereas I remember not that ever I heard of one Nonconformist these twenty
eight years that was accused and punished for any such crime, unless preaching
Christ's Gospel be a crime, even when Power and Malice watched for advantages
against them, and crowded them into Goals for preaching and praying. Nor do I
remember more than two single instances of Im norality by credible accusations
of fame, (which was of Fornication lamented) in all these years. But alas how
different is the common fame of too many of the public Clergy! And are these
the best Men in all the World?

69. You may partly judge by their Works, their Writings and their Lives.
Compare the Writings and Ministerial Labors of the Conformists and
Nonconformists, these thirty years, or since the New Impositions. Some pious
Conformists have done extraordinarily well: Especially Dr. Barrow. Dr.
Tillotson, Dr. Patrick, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Tennison, etc. And is there not
the same Spirit of Wisdom, Piety and Peace in the Writings of Anthony Burgess,
Mr. Charnock, Dr. Manton, Dr. Bates, Mr H^w, Richard Alleine, Joseph Alleine,
Tho. Gouge, Mr. Swinnock, Dr G^lpin, many Volumes of the Morning Lectures, Mr.
Flavel's, Mr. Steel's, Mr. Ambrose's, and many more such.

This Man singleth out me for one of the worst Men living, and Bishop Morley
bid Men judge of all the rest by me; [ ab uno disce omnes.] And he was
accounted one of the most Eminent of the Clergy for Parts and Orthodoxness: One
Book against me called his Letter, is most shameless for untruths in public
matters of Fact: His last and greatest is to prove against me that the
Parliament has no part in Legislative Power, nor the whole Kingdoms any right
of self defense against any Commissioned by the King on any pretense
whatsoever. This Accuser is an Eminent Member of the best Church in the World:
Is this bundle of his gross untruths a proof that he is one of the best Men in
the World. He says that the Good that I wrote was for mischievous Ends. And
what should move a Man in pain and expectation of speedy death to write above
Sixscore Books great and small, that are contrary to the bent of his own Heart?
And for that which he mischievously would overthrow? To spend his Life against
his own Affections?

70. Accus. LIII. His next charge is that [ I was employed in assisting the
Commissioners for Sequestration.]

Ans. A downright Lie: I never had any thing to do for them or with them.
Another sort called Commissioners for Approbation that were to judge of Men for
Institution upon Presentations, would have had me to assist them, and I utterly
refused it: But at last they got a trick, that when a Man was presented that
they would not approve, and yet would not incur the blame of rejecting him,
they named three Country Ministers near him, and said, If those approved him
they would accept him: Three or four times they named me, and I refused to
meddle in it: Till three Ministers that were Episcopal and Royalists, against
the Parliament told me, They should lose their Livings if I refused them; and
only for them did I deny my self to do this Office. And now this Man makes it
my crime to help his Party to Benefices: I never put out or rejected one of his
Party. He deals with me just as Dr. Pearce did: When I desired to reconcile
the Religious sort to the Ignorant multitude whom the Conformists had made
their Church, I was still met with the objection, (that they had nothing but
the name and accidents of Christians; that they scarce ever spoke of God, or
Christ, or the Life to come, unless in jest, or at the saying of their Service;
that they never prayed in their Families; that multitudes of them were common
Swearers, Liars, Drunkards, etc. To keep them from censuring the Conformists
and their Churches overmuch, and separating groundlesly. I told them how some
foul Sins that have got advantage by Custom may stand with some degrees of
Grace. And what does this Doctor but turn this to my own reproach, as if I was
for vicious Looseness, and had described not theirs, but my own Communicants;
whenas, without this charitable Lenitive, I doubt it is above half the
Conformable Laity that we must have turned from the Sacrament, and so have
maimed the Church of England.

Just so does this Man accuse me for keeping in three Prelatists.

71. Accus. LIVE. He makes a long Accusation again, of my taking the
Sequestration; full of gross Falsehoods: Principally, That the Augmentation came
out of the Tithes of the Vicaridge. A Lie merely forged by him, without the
least appearance of Proof. It was granted aliunde, I know not whence, by the
Parliament, and paid by them.

2. That the Vicar then had little, and he talks of desolate Wives and
Children: Whereas the Vicar had no Child, and had 40 l. a Year for doing
nothing. His debauched, sottish Curate at Mitton had all his old Pay, without
any Abatement; and was connived at by us to read Common Prayer once a day, and
the other half of the day they had a worthy Preacher.

3. And as for the 60 l. before and after paid me as Lecturer, the Vicar's Bond
for it was procured by his own Friends importunity before the Wars. Oh What a
rate do these Accusers set on Souls, that would leave so many to two such Men,
whom many Plow-men and Weavers in that Congregation farther excelled in
Knowledge, and the Exercise of it, than I will now express.

72. Accus. LV. He says that I think my self wronged that I had not the fifth
part still paid me, and expected to have it offered as my due.]

Ans. A mere Lie: It Is capable of no better Name and Answer.

73. Accus. LVI. Because I said that the Papists Doctrine of deposing and
destroying Kings was worse, or had less excuse, than their act that here had
fought against him,] while I published my abhorrence of both sorts of
Regicides, he feigneth me to plead for them, and that more than others.

74. Accus. LVII. Page 57. He says It is Men of my persuasion that say, that
the Representatives of the People in Parliament have the supreme Power; and
whatever is enacted and declared for Law by the Commons in Parliament, has the
form of a Law.]

Ans. Impudently false: Whereas in my Christian Directory I have fully confuted
this, and such like, in Ri. Hooker, the Man of their persuasion that they boast
of. Had he said that I hold that they have part of the Supreme Legislative
Power, he had said true.

75. Accus. LVIII. After a deal of impertinent talk of the Army's ill usage of
the King (which it is like I did more against, than many such as he,) he says,
[ That I plead for the Obligation of the Solemn Covenant contumaciously,
against the Authority of the whole Nation.]

Ans. If the Reader will find truth in this Man's Writings, he must first
separate it from all the Chaff of Untruths that covers it. I distinguish
between 1. The Imposing of that Covenant. 2. And the Taking of it. 3. And the
Keeping of the unlawful parts of it. 4. And the Keeping of the lawful and
necessary parts. The three first I speak against; the fourth is all the matter
of our dispute. That Covenant is also a Vow to God: Therein Men vowed to be
against Popery, Profaneness, Heresy and Schism, and all that is against sound
Doctrine and Godliness; and to repent of Sin, and amend; and to defend the
Person and Rights of the King. King Charles the Second took this Covenant, and
so did his Lords and Knights, and others, at their Composition; and many that
imposed and took it were then, and some are yet alive. The Question is Whether
I. and all England, can and must be certain that this Vow binds neither King,
Parliament Men, or any one living, to renounce Popery, Schism and Profaneness,
and to repent of Sin, and to defend the King. All the Corporations of England
are constituted by a new Oath, that there is NO OBLIGATION from this Covenant,
on ME OR ANY OTHER PERSON.] I gave the Reasons why I durst not swear this,
leaving other Men's Consciences to their Judge.

Now either there is some such Obligation, or there is not. If there is, and I
should venture, by an Oath, or a Subscription, to justify King, Parliament,
and all the Corporations in England, in public, national Perjury, What greater
Wickedness could I commit? Would this be a Character of the best Church in the
World, to have such Ministers?

But if there be no Obligation from that Vow, to the things aforesaid, 1. Dr.
Sanderson, and most sober Casuists are mistaken: who say, That though a Vow be
unlawfully imposed, and unlawfully taken, and part of the Matter be unlawful to
be kept, it binds us nevertheless to keep the necessary part. And what am I,
that I should swear or say that I am wiser than all these Doctors, and sure
that they are mistaken?

2 And then I must swear or say, that neither King, nor Lords, nor any one took
it in a lawful sense; which else would oblige them. And must I become a Voucher
for Thousands whom I never knew?

3 And then I must swear or say, that the King was brought in by Error and
Deceit. Monk's Presbyterian Army, and the Presbyterian Gentry and Ministry of
England brought in the King, as bound to it by this Covenant, (as they
declared:) And must I say, it did not bind them to it?

But our Accusers are no Self-accusers; but God will difference between him
that swears, and him that fears an Oath, and dare not take God's Name in
vain.

76 Accus. LIX. He dipped his Pen, not in Gall and Vinegar, but in the very
poison of Asps, to keep open the wounds of the expiring Church: To which end,
he endeavors to draw his Neighbour-Ministers into an Association, and procures
the Worcestershire- Agreement; the design of which you may see in his Gildas
Salvianus]

Ans. I have here some help to understand Christ, [ They that kill you, shall
think they do God service.] What Duty so great, that some will not say is a
Crime that deserves death? The Agreement accused is printed in a Book called
Christian Concord: The terms of it were, that Episcopal, and Presbyterians and
Independents, should agree in the practice of so much of the Ministry and
Church Discipline as they were agreed about in their Judgments or Principles,
and be left in the rest to their several Liberties. Was this a Crime? Is an
Attempt of voluntary Concord and Peace the poison of Asps? Or is not the poison
of Asps under their lips, that are haters of it, and have not known the way of
peace? I have had thanks from Helvetia, and other parts of Germany, for that
Gildas Salvianus, and that pacificatory Attempt; which is to these Men the
poison of Asps.

77. Accus. LX. [ But there was then a Petition, that scandalous and
insufficient Ministers might not administer Sacraments; on which, the Loyal
Party were restrained.]

Ans. And is it a Crime to be against a scandalous, insufficient Ministry, and
a Duty to be for them, that we may be the best Church in the World? Reader, the
truth is this; There was a Petition by some, that those, of what side soever,
for King or Parliament, whose Insufficiency and Scandal was so great, as to
render them utterly incapable of Ministry, might not be allowed it: And I
petitioned withal, that no Man might be cast out, or restrained, for being for
the King, against the Parliament, and their Cause. Is this so poisonous?

Does not this Man more disgrace his Church than me, that takes it for the
poison of Asps to cast out only the incapable, and keep in the rest?

78. Accus. LXI. He accuses me for telling the World truly how the English
Prelates had encouraged the Enemies of serious Godliness in the Land, and at
how much cheaper a rate a Man might be a Swearer, a Drunkard, a Whoremonger, an
open Scorner of Godliness, than to fast and pray, or to hear a Conformist in
the next Parish, when there was no Sermon at home.

Ans. What does the Man mean by rendering this odious? If he mean that all this
was well done; and that, as in Armies, he has most Honor that kills most;
so in their Church, he is the best Man that does most against serious Piety;
this is to profess themselves the Devil's Militia. But if he mean that I
mis-report the matter of fact, and this was not so, he may as well persuade us
that we lived not then in England, or that we knew not our Neighbors, or that
Men spoke not English. Can we choose but know that which every Corner in all the
Land did speak? Does he say a word to confute all this? And it was a
meritorious work to silence and imprison with Rogues all that obeyed not their
ungodly Canons; but it must go for a heinous Crime to feel their Malice, or
blame their Cruelty.

79. Accus. LXII. Page 66, etc. He accuses me, as accusing King Charles the
First of too much favoring the Grotian design of Union with the Papists. But,
1. Does he say a word so much as to deny his Letter to the Pope, to venture
Crown and all for Union? 2. Or to deny his sworn Articles for Toleration,
mentioned in Rushworth's Collections, and others? 3. Or to deny the Papists
Murders in Ireland, and their power in the King's Armies in England? 4. Or that
he set up such Bishops as Laud, Bromhall, and others? But if accusing these Men
be my Crime, (when I would have saved England from them,) Reader, peruse but a
full Treatise, which I have long ago written, and hope to get speedily printed,
with the very words of Laud, Bromhall, Gunning, Saywell, Thorndike, Heylin,
Pierce, Parker, Sparrow, Beveridge, etc. for our Subjection to a Foreign
Jurisdiction, (which the Kingdom is sworn against,) and then judge whether I
accuse them wrongfully. Must we be brought under Aristocratical Popery, or
French Church Government, merely by saying It is not Popery? And must the Land
so tamely be perjured and enslaved?

80 Accus. LXIII. Page 67. [ He has been made use of as one of the most keen
and Catholic Tools, that ever the Papacy did employ.]

Ans. 1. It Is an unrighteous Honor to Popery to call it Catholic, while they
are a Sect contrary to Catholicism. But why then do not these Men love and
cherish me, while they are striving for a Foreign Jurisdiction, if I be so much
for them?

81. Accus. LXIV. Page 68. [ That I am for a mixture of Episcopal, Presbyterian
and Independent Government.]

Ans. And what harm is that? I am for that which is good in all, and for the
Faults of none: But these Men must needs be faultless, and curse all others,
that they may bless themselves. But am I Episcopal, and yet the greatest Enemy
to Episcopacy? Are they for Episcopacy that put down hundreds, to set up one in
their stead?

82. Accus. LXV. The next Accusation is, That my five Disputations of
Church Government came out to keep out Episcopacy, and justify our Ordination.]

Ans. 1. It was to bring in a threefold Episcopacy, which our Diocesans kept
out, viz. Episcopos Gregis, Episcopos Praesides, and Archbishops over these.

2. Chancellor Hide and Morley produced that Book before the King, Lords and
Bishops, at the great Meeting at Worcester-house; and Morley said, No Man has
written better than Mr. B. of these things. And now it is all intolerable.

3. That Disputation of Ordination was never yet answered, (that I could hear
of,) and yet Men were forced to be re-ordained. I never had a hand in ordaining
any one.

83. Accus. LXVI. His Accusations of my holy Commonwealth are so slippery and
trifling, that they call not for an Answer, unless it be that he takes it for
criminal, 1. That I told Cromwell's Army, that it was Treason to take Arms
against the highest Power, as they did; and that if the highest Legislative
Power was in the King alone, and not in King and Parliament conjunct, I must
confess that I was guilty of death. 2. Or that I said, I honored all the
Providence of God that made our Changes, though I abhorred the Deeds of Men
that were guilty. And is it a Crime to honor God, and his Works? 3. Or that I
desired Richard Cromwell to govern well, and called my self his Subject, though
I never owned his Right to the Government; thinking that Christ directed me so
far to submit to the Possessor, when he paid Tribute to Caesar, and sent
Lepers, and others, See Dr. Sherlock's Defense.
to the High Priests, that were Usurpers. And Has not Bishop Stillingfleet
himself taken K. William's Oath.
this very Man, and his best Church in the World (except seven or eight
Bishops) do now practice that which he so condemned me for; yea, and much more,
while they swear Obedience to the present King William, publishing that it is
as to a King de facto only.

84. Accus LXVII. is, That I say, I had been a Traitor had I taken Arms against
the Parliament.]

Ans. Yes, or the King either, if the Legislative Power be in them conjunct.
The King protested that he took not Arms against the Parliament, and the
Parliament protested that they took not Arms against the King. This Man makes
Mr. Udal guilty of Sedition against the Queen, because it was against the
Bishops, her Ministers: And is it not as criminal to be against the Parliament?
Are they so much lower than the Bishops?

Here he wonders that any Christian can still take me for a Saint, and the
Guide of the Party; and recites some applauding words of Mr. John Humfreys, (no
Sectary.) But I take my self for a very great Sinner, and know no Party that
take me for their Guide; and am so conscious of my Ignorance, that I know it to
be far greater than my Knowledge, and yet my Affections come short of what I
know.

The rest of his Invectives, to the end of his first Chapter, are nothing but a
rabble of intimated, congested Lies, upon the occasion of the Wars, and
perverted Words, unworthy of a Confutation. They are all built on the
supposition that all that they did against the Parliament and Kingdom was not
only just, but necessary; and all the Ignorance, Drunkenness, Ungodliness and
Cainism of the vicious part of their Clergy were not to be blamed; but the
reproof of them, and endeavors to reform them was heinous wickedness.

What a Charm is the name of the Diocesan Clergy, that can turn the most
scandalous Treachery into Sanctity, and make the best Church in the World of
the Haters of ferious Godliness, and make a desire of their Reformation to be
the badge of intolerable Rebels?

85. Accus. LXVIII. He begins his second Chapter with a recital of my
Profession, that it is Treason to fight against the King; and with this often
repeated Lie, that [ I had the confidence to meet the Old King and his Armies
in the Field.] This is his Diocesan History. I never met the King in the Field,
nor ever saw an Army where he was, nor ever saw one of his Armies, till that of
Goring's at Langport-Fight, where the Field War ended. Indeed, I came into the
Quarters where they had gone before me, and I was so guilty of opposing them,
as to be ashamed of the fame they left behind them. At South-^ederton the
Gentleman where I quartered told me, that in his House they pricked their
Fingers, and made the Blood run into the Cup, and drunk a Health to the Devil.
At the Catherine-Wheel in Salisbury, the Neighbors reported, that some of them
drinking a Health to the Devil, one of them was carried away, and never seen
more: I went into the Room, and saw a new Standard and Glass where the Window
was broken; but the Woman said, she was not in the Room, and knew not how it
was done, whatever the Neighbors said of it, from the Soldiers that were
frighted. But it is none of my purpose to intimate that they were all such, or
most.

86. Accus. LXIX. His next Accusation is, [ Our offering our Consent to
Archbishop Usher' s Reduction of the Primitive Episcopacy, as a means of
Concord.]

Against this he says, The Bishops knew whence it came; not from the
Archbishop, but from the Presbyterian Forge.

Ans. Still this is English Church History: The Archbishop Usher owned it to
his death, as his Chaplains. Dr. Bernard and Dr. Parre testify: He owned it to
me himself, and told me, King Charles the First refused it at first, but after
would have accepted it.

But he exclaimeth against it, as that which would have pulled down the
Bishops, or cut their Throats. So that if one Bishop may not be said to govern
many hundred Churches, when a Lay-Chancellor does it, without any subordinate
Bishop or Presbyters, their Throats are cut. And even the two Agents of our
Misery, Sheldon and Morley; (who were entrusted by the King to word this
Declaration,) are by this Man made their own Cutthroats, by granting some part
of Pastoral Power to the Rural Deans and Synods. This is the Church that must
not be amended.

He says, that by this Model [ They would have robbed the Bishops of all their
power, and taken it to themselves.] And was Archbishop Usher such a Robber of
himself, and all the Bishops? Did he motion any thing but the Primitive
Episcopacy, with the edditions of their large Diocese, Wealth and Honor? What
was the power that they would have taken to themselves? Was it to be Diocesans,
to rule a Diocese as the smallest Church that had none under it? Would each Man
have had this Diocesan Power, or only all, as one Political Body? If each Man,
sure England had not Diocesses enough for so many Thousands: If all, as an
Aristocracy, could they desire more than Convocations have? Or did they desire
so much to all the Ministers of a Diocese, in Conjunction with the Bishop, as
his Councils, as every single Lay-Chancellor has without the Bishop? This is
just like the Papists Accusation of Parish-Pastors, that every Man would be a
Pope in his own Parish: And their saying of Masters that are for governing
their Families, that every one would be a Pope to his own House: And against
Self-governing [of our Words and Actions.] that every one would be a Pope to
himself: And Idiots perceive not the Contradiction. To be a Pope is to be one
that claims the Government of all the World, (or Church.) And is governing a
Family, or my self, governing all the World? And is governing a Parish Church
under an Archbishop, the governing of many hundred Parishes that are no
Churches, but parts of a Diocesan Church?

I mentioned Mr. Stanley Gower's words to me of Archbishop Usher, that he told
him, that a Bishop and Presbyter differed not Ordine, but Gradu; and that he
took his Primacy and Lordship, not as his Church-Office, but as a Collateral
Dignity given by the King:] (and one would think no Man that believes the
Scripture should think otherwise.)

But this Accuser says, that he will not believe Mr. Stanley (as he calls him)
or me: (But must we therefore both disbelieve our own Ears?) For he thinks the
Bishop should then act against his Judgment and Conscience. (What Act may that
be?) And he cites Dr. Bernard's Testimony, as against my Report; whereas the
very cited words of Dr. Bernard say the same, that a Bishop has Superiority in
Degree above a Presbyter.] And the Accuser puts these words that are against
himself in Capital Letters, it seems, not knowing what he did, or what Ordo
and Gradus signify.

87. Accus. LXX. He says, I injuriously mention King Charles the First his
Answer to the Nineteen Propositions, because he there gave away his Right for
Peace.]

Ans. I mention only his own description of the Constitution by King, Lords and
Commons, and their several Powers: And would he persuade Men that the King
falsely described it, or that his Historical Description was his Guilt.

And he falsely says, that I am a Dissenter from Bishop Usher' s Judgment about
the King's Tribute in Ireland. His Uuntruths come so thick, that I am weary of
naming them.

As, page 88. 1. That I was for the Extirpation of Episcopacy, Root and Branch.

2. And yet, that the Archbishop's Model (which we desired) preserves that
Species of Diocesan Bishops, which Mr. B. would destroy. Would we destroy that
which we desired?

3. And [ That under which Mr. B. makes Christ's true Discipline
unpraecticable.] Ans. Palpably false: For, therefore we desired it, because it
makes that Discipline practicable by the help of Parish-Pastors, which without
them is impossible.

4. That no Government will please me, as long as the Liturgy is established:
When he should have said, that professing Assent and Consent to all in it will
not please me, till I can do it without lying.

5. He says, [ Conformity is to me impossible, as long as any of those which I
account heinous Sins, are retained.] Ans. Yes, if Lying be Conformity, to me
one Lie is unlawful.

6. That I was always opposing the Party that was uppermost. Ans. If that were
true, it seems I sought not for Preferment.

7. That I would have the new Liturgy, or nothing. Ans. And yet we offered to
use the Old, if amended, so we might not profess it less liable to Exception,
than our Translation of the Scripture it self; and left it to the Bishops to
join so much of the Additional Forms as they saw good; but the Book was never
debated by them.

88. Accus. LXXI. [ I have heard it credibly reported by some Reverend Persons
there present that that Treaty might have had the desired effect of Concord had
not Mr. B. so obstinately resisted.] Ans. That is, either those Reverend
Persons would have amended their Impositions, if I had not Petitioned them to
do it, and told them the necessity of it; or else that all the rest of the
Commissioned Nonconformists would have Conformed to all the old faults which
they protested that they judged sinful, and to all the worse that should after
be added, if I had not been against it. These Reverend Persons were as Credible
and Reverend as you are; as our present state in England tells us.

Then he tells us what the Bishop of Chester told Mr. Walton ( Morley's
Steward) what Bishop Sanderson said against me,] which is half false: Bishop
Sanderson taking the Chair. I being by a multitude of Arguments from the words
of the Text, proving against Dr. Gunning that Paul in Romans 14, and 15.
requires us to receive to Communion such as differed in as great matters as
those do that scruple kneeling at the Sacrament (which I told them I scruple
not.) I once told Dr. Gunning that he did petere principium in a case wherein
Dr. Sanderson said that word was not in the common Logical sense applicable to
his words: And the old Learned peevish Man added that I was perverse for saying
it: And this was the heavy Charge.

And he adds what Bishop Morley said of my eagerness to dispute, when my
Prethren were unwilling.] Ans. Bishop Morley's words of me were much what as
credible as yours or Roger Le Strange's. Why then did they consent if they were
unwilling? And if neither Reasoning nor Petitioning them might be used, what
were we Commissioned for? The truth is, many of our Brethren, when the Bishops
told them they would say nothing to us, till we brought in writing to them all
the faults that we found with the Liturgy, and also all the Forms in terminis,
which we desired as amendments or additions, did say, [It was not this, but an
amicable consulation that the King Commissioned us for; and seeing that this
was a mere fraudulent pretense for our frustration, they motioned our
departing, as being denied all that we were called to:] But I told them, that
the Bishops would report behind our Backs where we could not be heard, that we
had nothing to say against their Impositions, nor any other terms to offer,
(thinking we would never have agreed on any other.) Therefore I satisfied
diverse of them that though we were prejudged, it were better let the World see
our Cause stated in Writing, than leave them to accuse us so, when we should
never have leave to declare the truth, and deny their misreports.

89. Accus. LXXII. Page 91. He says [ His Petition for Peace then was like his
Pleas now, mere Threatening and Reviling: Take heed (says he) how you drive
Men by penalties on that which they judge would tend to their Damnation: The
denial of these Desires would renew all our Troubles.

Ans. And indeed is both Damnation and the renewing of our Troubles and
Divisions a matter of jest? or so indifferent, as that it is threatening and
reviling humbly to petition Drs to take heed of them? They rejected this
Reviling Petition: And has England or Hell gained more by their rejection?
Does it not tend to Men's Damnation to Swear, Subscribe, Profess or Practice all
those words and things as good and lawful, which they think sinful, and the
Imposers only call Indifferent. Have not the Divisions been these thirty years
a trouble to this Land, which these Men might have prevented and cost them
nothing?

He adds, [ They tell the Bishops of unmerciful Impositions.] Ans. And is it
Mercy to drive Men to Sin and Hell, or a crime to beg for so cheap Mercy for
the Souls of Men, even of Bishops? He that doubts is condemned if he eat,
says Paul. England yet feels such Men's Mercy. There is, I think, but one of
their Commissioners now surviving (nor on our side but few,) even Dr. Tho.
Pierce Dean of Salisbury: And he moved for leave by Disputation there to prove,
that it is a work of mercy to all that think it unlawful to receive the
Sacrament kneeling, to deny it them, and the Communion of the Church, (though
the prohibition of all kneeling in Adoration on any Lords Day, was one of the
Ancient Ceremonies of the Church, settled also at the great Council of Nice, and
continued near a Thousand years, says Dr. Heylin.) But Morley had the wit to
take him off that dispute.

90. Accus. LXXIII. Page 96. After other Harangues he alleges false Causes of
my refusing a Bishopric: I satisfied the Lord Chancellor Hide by a Letter,
with truer Reasons, too long here to repeat.

91. Accus. LXXIV. He next accuses my Moral Prognostication. Ans. Let it
answer for it self to the Impartial Reader.

92. Accus. LXXV. He threateneth me for blaming the Laws.

Ans. And do not many Bishops now blame the Laws? If Laws be made engines of
Schism and Persecution, let them justify them that can, and that love them.
David says, Shall the Throne of Iniquity have Fellowship with thee that
frames mischief by a Law? How many German Divines blamed the Interim imposed
by the Emperor as for Peace?

93. Accus. LXXVI. He next recites Bishop Morley's Accusations in his printed
Letter. Ans. Which I have proved to abound with falsehood, in a full Answer,
which for want of printing has lain by me these six and twenty years. Mr.
Baldwin is yet living who was present when he forbad me to preach. And Dr.
William Bates is yet living who joined with me in the Savoy Disputation which
he misreported.

94. Accus. LXXVII. He accuses my Book called, The Cure of Church Divisions,
and yet says, It is the only Book that Mr. B. has written that has any thing
of moderation.

Ans. Must the World have a confutation of so gross a Liar, after the
visibility of above Sixscore Books that are an evidence against him; and after
the testimony that the Lord Chancellor Hide and Morley gave of me (producing
one of these Books) before the King, Lords and Drs. at Worcester-House: If I
understand them, above a hundred Books have been written by me, with a special
design for Moderation, Unity and Concord.

95. Accus. LXXVIII. Page 101. [ He is not ashamed to be a procurer of the
Indulgence for Popery* 1. Because I said, [ I would have Papists used like Men.
2. I would have no Man put to death for being a Priest. 3. I would have no writ
de Excommunicato capiendo, or any Law to compel them to our Communion and
Sacraments.]

Ans. This Man is for Moderation: Do you think he or I is more for Popery, or
has written more against it? Would he not have them used like Men? nor
suffered to live? And must they be cast out of a Church that they were never
in: It seems he would receive them all to his Sacramental Communion, if they
will but choose his Church before the Goal.

96. Accus. LXXIX. Page 102. Because I hold that If a Bishop or their Church
Party would lay us in Goal, for our Duty to God, it is lawful to accept
deliverance from a Papist that is in Authority.] He feigneth that, If they will
not come to us, I would go to them.

And if a Protestant did Hang this Man himself, would he take it for Popery or
Sin, to consent that a Papist cut the Rope? You see what kind of crimes we
Nonconformists are guilty of: A willingness to live out of Goals, against the
Churchmens will? Nay it is yet more, our Crime is that we will not damn our
selves, by Subscribing or Swearing falsely, and breaking our Ordination Vow, by
giving over our Ministry.

The proof that these Men are against Popery is, that they would have the
Nonconformists die in Goals, and have no Papist seek to deliver them.

97. Accus. LXXX. Accusing my Book against Sacrilegious Desertion of the
Ministry, he asks me, Why I Baptize not, nor Administer the Lords Supper, and
so seem to desert Christianity?

Ans. Because I was called to preach, and not to Baptize, and Administer the
Lords Supper; by the Necessities of the people where I lived: There were in
Martins Parish about 60000 more than could come into the Church to hear: But
they had Curates enough to Baptize, and they were compelled to the Lords
Supper, or might have come, and neither Minister nor People desired my help.
And if these Men believe it not, I do, That we may and must preach to many that
yet are not capable of Sacraments: And to many whose Pastors and Judges herein
we are not. Shall every Minister that preaches occasionally for him, presume
to Congregate his Flock, and give them the Sacrament? Or is he displeased that
I gathered not a separated Church?

98. Accus. LXXXI. As to his Accusation of the Book, I leave it to the Readers
Judgment that will impartially peruse it: But I am not yet convinced by him
that it is a Crime to name the heinous sins that have torn this poor Nation,
and no Crime to commit them. Most of his Accusations are that I tell them of
their sin, and persuade them to repent.

99. Accus. LXXXII. He accuses my Plea for Peace, and my Book called, The true
and only way of the Churches Concord, as being utterly against Peace. Ans. Read
them and Judge.

100. Accus. LXXXIII. He accuses my History of turbulent Bishops and Councils
and their Anathematizing, as if it were false, and almost all was done by
Presbyters, Ans. Let him that has read it, and the proof I cite, freely judge
who is the falsifier.

As to his talk about Nestorius, had he read David Derodon and what I have said
in my Reply to the Defender of Dr. Stillingfleet (Mr. Morris) it might have
acquainted him with more than he seems to know, about the Nestorians,
Eutychians and Monothelites.

As to his talk against the Arrians, I am as much against them as he, but not
so much against Peace; Dr. Henry More a Learned Conformist, says that those
after the Council of Nice, were to be numbered with the Catholics, and not
with the Antichristians. Though a Presbyter began their Sect, it was Bishops
and Persecuting Emperors that upheld it. As to my words of many Writers
mistakes therein before the Council of Nice, he may find them with abundance
more in Petavius de Trinitate.

As to his words of the Controversies and Councils de tribus Capitulis, he that
excuses the said Councils and Bishops as faultless as to all the doleful
Divisions that followed, has not a due love to peace and prudence.

The same I say of the Monothelites.

101. Accus. LXXXIV. His great Accusation, Page 126. is that [If I had any fear
of God, or reverence of Man, I would not reproach the Government and defame
their Laws, as if they were a strange Parliament that made so many Laws, that a
Man fearing God cannot obey.]

Ans. 1. And must we go on such suppositions that our Lawmakers must not be
said to make sinful Laws? Where and in what Ages does this Principle hold? Not
in Jeroboam's days, nor in Ahab's, nor in any Age after Christ, till
Constantine, and Athanasius had exceptions then. Not in the days of Constantius
or of Valens, no nor of Theodosius the Second, Zeno, Basiliscus, Anastasius,
Philippicus, or of few Christian Emperors. Nor now in Rome, Spain, France,
Poland, Portugal, Germany, etc. The Lutherans under Calvinists believe it not,
nor the Calvinists under Lutherans; nor the Prelatists under Presbyterians: Nor
those English Bishops and Clergy that now here refuse the Oath to King William
imposed by the Parliament.

If this Man think that we have not fully shamed that worse than brutish
conceit that we must not plead Conscience against Men's Laws (though as good men
as any Rulers we know) he should have said more to confute us, than that [ we
fear not God] because we fear him more than man.

This easy Disputant confuteth my many Volumes of Reasons against obeying
their Impositions of Oaths, Subscriptions, Professions and Practices, by
telling men that [ I may be ashamed to call them Reasons.] A short and cheap
Confutation: Cannot the French say as much for Dragooning the Protestants: And
that [ the Laws were made upon deliberation, and for our peace.] That is, for
the peaceable success of Silencers, and Persecutors of Gods Faithful Servants:
And were not the Six Articles in Henry the Eighth's days made on deliberation?
And the French Edicts against the Protestants?

He refers us to a Book of Church Unity written in Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet: And I refer him to my Answer to that Book, which was never
answered, and confuteth much of this Man's charge.

As to his talk, [ That Men of Blood may be no Bishops.] I answer, 1. I never
drew a drop of Blood. 2. I refused their Bishopric. 3. I preached for the
defense of Kings and the Nation against Men of Blood, Irish, Papists and
Delinquents. 4. Were not the Military Clergy Men of Blood who complain of the
Parliament for ejecting them, for promoting the War against them? Was not Dr.
Mew now Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Crofts now Bishop of Hereford, Dr. Compton
now Bishop of London, Men of War when they went as Chaplains or Officers in the
Kings Army? and yet are Bishops.

102. Page 127. He names [ The Act for Uniformity.] As if naming it were a
Defense of it for Silencing 2000 Ministers for not Lying and Sinning.

He names [ Renouncing the Covenant.] And is that a Justification against
Perjury, to them that own not the Imposing or Taking it, nor obligation to keep
any but the Moral Necessary parts?

He names the [ Declaration that it is not lawful on any pretense whatsoever,
(to take Arms against any Commissioned by the King.) And is that a Confutation
of Bilson, and other Bishops; and does he not make his own Church and Party now
perjured, who have taken Arms against King James, or those that were
Commissioned by him; and have set up another King? If King James Commission a
French and Irish Army to Invade England, are all bound not to resist them?

103. Accus. LXXXV. He charge me with a Scandalum Magnatum, for saying, [ The
Parliament was drawn by the Clergy to make those Acts.]

Ans. And did any Man doubt of it, that then lived with his Reason awake? If it
were not good, why did they do it, and why do you justify it? If it were good,
why is it a Scandalum magnatum to say you did it? Is your Merit and Praise a
Scandal?

104. Accus. LXXXVI. Because I tell how Hypocrites tempted Christ about paying
Tribute to Caesar,] he feigneth that I make Christ [ do what he never intended,
or really approved, and complied with Hypocrites;] and says, It is near to
Blasphemy.

Ans. I find too little in this Accuser that is near to Truth. How easily* by
such Fictions, may he turn much of the Gospel into Blasphemies?

105. Accus. LXXXVII. He adds, [ And who can wonder, if he that speaks thus
of the Master, should not stick to revile his Disciples; making the Conformists
so many deliberately perjured Persons?]

Ans. 1. Must we not refuse Perjury, for fear of your supposition that we
accuse you? We professed not to accuse you, but to prove that it would be
Perjury in us.

2. But if you are guilty, is not that more to be feared by you, than our
saying why we dare not imitate you?

106. Accus. LXXXVIII. He adds, [ And which is -- Mendacium magnum, that
about Six Thousand Persons that had gone the other way, did declare their
Assent and Consent to a Book which they never saw.]

Ans. Oh, what a mortal Wound do this sort of Men give to the Credit of all
History of the proud, factious, worldly part of the Clergy! when this Man dare
call this a Lie, in the same Land and Age in which, 1. It is known that there
are near Ten Thousand Parish-Churches, besides Hundreds of Chapels and
Curacies, and Chaplains. 2. The Land knows that these were in possession,
1662. 3. The Land knows that the Generality of them that were in 1659.
conformed to the Directory; or else the Prelatists belie the Usurpers, that,
they say, turned out all that did not. 4. The Land knows (or at least it is
here commonly known) that the new altered Liturgy came not out of the Press,
till about Bartholomew* Even. 5. The Land knows that all were, by the Law, to
be turned out, that declared not Assent and Consent to all things contained in,
and prescribed by that Book, by Bartholomew* Day. 6. The World knows, that
all over England, the Books could not be sent down and seen in a Day. 7. The
Conformists confess the Matter of fact, save to a few in London, that could go
to the Press. 8. The Land knows, that it was but about Two Thousand that
conformed not: Must there not be then far more than Six Thousand that declared
Assent, etc. to the Book that they saw not?

Some of them now say, that in Universities, and the Chaplains and all set
together, there are about Thirty Thousand Ordained Ministers in England: And
what are Two Thousand to such a Clergy?

107. Accus. LXXXIX. He notes, that I say, that before I was turned out, I
could keep no Manservant, nor any but one old Woman, in a hired Room; and yet,
in St. Martin' s, I could build a Tabernacle for Worship. From whence he
gathers, 1. That I hoped to gain the Centurion's Reputation among the
Factious. 2. That I had got well by Nonconformity, that could lay out so much.]

Ans. Is there any thing pious or charitable, that these Men cannot turn into
odious Crimes, by malignant Calumny? 1. Was it Faction to offer to teach freely
in a Parish, where were Fifty Thousand that could not come within the Church?
2. Did he know my Heart, that I did it for Reputation? And may he not say the
like by any Man that does good? 3. Did I gain by Nonconformity, that from the
Day that I was silenced, had never taken a Groat for Preaching, nor ever had a
Church to maintain me, and had commonly refused even Friends Gratuities (save
10l from one Man, that I could not refuse) for many Years after this, and save
from few to this day? Who by refusing a Bishopric, and other Emoluments, have
lost, I think, above Twenty Thousand Pounds by Nonconformity? What Answer do
these Men deserve? So Dr. Ashton prosessed, as before God, that it is (...)
Covetousness that we conform not.
And I preached but one Sermon in that Chapel, When I had built it to have
preached freely. And when they persecuted me away, I resigned it to the
Parish-Minister, for their public Worship, which is used there to this Day,
(near Sixteen Years.)

But must I tell this Man, how I got the Money that did it? How much others
gave toward it, and how much I borrowed, or else be so guilty as this Spirit
makes me. If it were a Crime to be rich, Fame reports him extraordinarily
guilty: But if it be Building Chapels that is the Crime, I never heard of his
Guilt.

108. Accus. XC. He says, I am guilty of Pride, Malice and Uncharitableness,
for telling Men that the Wheel is turning, and bidding them remember which side
will be down at last; whether I mean of a Change by Providence, or of the Day
of Judgment.]

Ans. Alas, poor Men! How soon will you know, that such Counsel once signified
better than Pride, Malice and Uncharitableness, (unless all Preaching be such)

109. Accus. XCI. He accuses me for saying, in Mr. Corbet's Funeral-Sermon,
How sad a Prognostic the Death of such Men was.

Ans. Had this Man known the great Wisdom, sincere Piety, eminent Charity and
Peaceableness of that excellent Man, as well as I did, or as Gloucester,
Chichester and London did, and his Writings testify, he would not have turned
my Lamentation into a Reproach, nor seemed to intimate his contrary Disposition.

110. Accus. XCII. Because some other Men say, that the Time of the Episcopal
Persecution will be but short,] he gathers, that [ we are engaged in some Plot
against the Government.]

Ans. Who he means, I know not; but if the time of Life, and this World be
short, certainly Persecution will be short. Every one that says, Your Life is
short, is not in a Plot to murder you. All, save one Man, that were
commissioned as against us in 1661. have found already by Death, that their
time of Revenge and Wrath was short.

His talk of Dr. Owen, and his surmizing that some would have had a Toleration
for Popery, is like the rest; when our main fears have been lest this sort of
Men were studying, from the time of Laud, a Coalition with the French Papists,
and so many of them have written for a Foreign Jurisdiction: But if we would
not be ruined, silenced, and dye in Goals by them, they will say we are for
Popery.

111. Accus. XCIII. He accuses me as most unchristian, in my Answer to Mr.
Cheyny, for what I say of his Books, and accounting him melancholy.

Mr. Cheyny is a Man better known to me, than to him; and I think, much better
loved by me. He calls himself a Nonconforming Conformist, and a Conforming
Nonconformist. I have motioned him to Friends, for public Employment, for his
serious Piety: But these Men that seem now to be for him, have depressed him,
and driven him up and down, and disown his Books, I think, more than I do: But
any one that will allow them to use his Name for them, shall be so far praised,
while they cannot well endure him.

But he glories of Mr. Cheyny's Success in pleading the Direction, in some
dubious Cases to go to the Bishop for Resolution, (in the Preface to the
Liturgy.) And I wonder not at their valuing of that Clause, for it is worth to
many some Hundreds a Year; and it is hard to imagine what else could quiet many
Men's Consciences. But if I should say, This is a frivolous ^alliate, though I
prove it, he will say I am criminal, or confuted, by so denominating it. But,
1. The Words limit the Decision of the Bishop only to that which is not
contrary to any thing in the Book; and I am very tractable in such a Case: But
it is none of the Cases that I am concerned in. 2. If it were in the Bishop's
power to put what Sense he please on all the Words, he were the Law maker; for
the Sense is the Law. 3. I have gone to diverse Bishops, and asked their Sense,
and found it as unsatisfactory as the Book it self. For instance, I asked the
Bishops at the Savoy-Debate, [ If I have two in my Parish that declare they
believe not in Christ, but are Deists; and yet will send their Child to be
baptized, with Godfathers and Godmothers of their own Fraternity, who declare
that, whatever they say, they never mean to own or educate the Child,] what
Right that Child has both to Baptism, and certain Salvation? And Dr. Sanderson
(in the Chair) answered That as long as he brought such Godfathers as the
Church of England requires, I must not doubt of his Right. I long after asked
Bishop Cunning, What proof he had from God's Word, of the certain, undoubted
Salvation of all such baptized Infants, if the Parents were Heathens or Jews,
or Atheists, and resolved to educate their own Children? And he answered, that
As any one had Right to take up an exposed Child in the Street, and take him in
Charity into his House, so any one had power, as an Act of Charity, to take up
any Heathen's or Infidel's Child, and being him to Baptism; and then it was
certain (by the Word of God) that he was in a present State of Salvation. These
Bishops Judgments are not that undoubted Word of God which they boast of, but
will not show us. And other Bishops think otherwise. And so under several
Bishops, we must be of several Religions.

112. Accus. XCIV. He accuses me for speaking of the Tediousness of Mr. R.
Hooker's Argumentation, (when their Bishop Sam. Parler speaks much more) and
the Case is undeniable.) And that I say, [ If Hooker, Bilson and Usher were
alive, they would be Nonconformises.]

Ans. Have I not fully proved it? They were honest Men, and would not subscribe
and practice contrary to their own Writings; but their Writings are downright
against much of Conformity. How large is Hooker for the Popular Legislative
Power; and that the King uses not Power, but Usurpation, when he uses more
than the Law gives him? How large is bishop Bilson for Resisting the King in
diverse Cases? Does not Conformity renounce and forswear this? Mark the renowned
Bilson in this: Honest Men would not go against their Judgments.

113. Accus. XCV. Page 134, 135. He makes it my shameful heinous Sin, to beg
of the Bishops not to be guilty of one of the most heinous Sins in the World,
even the Silencing faithful Ministers causlesly, and famishing many Thousand
Souls, and laying them in Goals that have Charity to relieve them. Says he, [
Does not the Reader blush for Mr. B. to read such arrogant Censures of a dying
Man, concerning his Betters?]

Ans. Were I not a dying Man, the World might more powerfully have tempted me
to be like you; and to call Evil Good, and Good Evil; and to regard as little
the Interest of Souls, and of serious Godliness. And are my Betters better than
he that bid us pray the Lord of the Harvest to send forth more Laborers; and
that said of such as offend one of his Little Ones, it had been better for them
that a Millstone had been hanged about their Necks, and they cast into the Sea?
Were they better than he that told James and John, that they knew not what
manner of Spirit they were of, when they showed their natural Inclination to
that Prelacy which is now your Glory? 1. By desiring to be greatest, and to sit
at his Right Hand and Left. 2. By silencing a Man that used Christ's Name
against Devils, because he followed not with them. 3. By desiring a fiery
Punishment upon those that received not Christ and them.

Are my Betters better than Peter and the Apostles, that were for obeying God
before Men? Or than Paul, that charged Timothy so dreadfully, as before God and
Christ, to preach the Word, and be instant, in Season, and out of Season? etc.
Are my Betters so good at Alchimy, that they can transform the most heinous
Crimes into sacred Virtues, and the greatest Duties into odious Sins?

Reader; Oh, Who governs that part of the World, where the greater the Sin
is, the more heinous is his Crime that blames it? And where Repentance, and
Persuading Men to repent, goes for the most intolerable Evil? Were it not that
fleshly and worldly Interest were against it, I should fear that at last
Murderers, Thieves, Traitors, Adulterers, Perjured, and all such, should accuse
all those that either accuse them, or dissent from them; and demand against
them the same Punishment for calling them faulty, that their own Crimes
deserve? But though those that have died in Goals for Preaching (nothing but
the Gospel) are out of the reach of these that would kill them again, if they
did but say, You killed us; yet One that is better than these persecuting
Betters, will say, In as much as you did it to one of these, you did it to me.
And to accuse us as the Priests and Sadduces did the Apostles, [ You would
bring this Man's Blood in us,] will not transferr the Guilt or Punishment, from
the Blood-guilty, to the Reprover.

114. Accus. XCVI. Because I say that ancient Christians disobeyed lawful
Magistrates, in Preaching and Worship, he says, [ As if Christian Magistrates
were to be reputed as Heathen Persecuters.]

Ans. I. And indeed, Were (not only Constantius and Valens, but also)
Theodosius II. Arcadius, Zeno, Basiliscus, Anastasius, and many such, Heathen
Persecutors? And did not the Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Rome,
Constantinople, and many hundred other Bishops, disobey them, and many by Arms
resist them? And is it not as bad to resist Christian Emperors, as Heathens? I
think it was not well done.

What Historical Proof can convince this sort of Men?

2. But see what their Obedience amounts to. Who is to be Judge whether their
Rulers be so bad, as that the Bishops and People may disobey them? Must the
Rulers themselves be Judges, or every Subject for himself? They dare not answer
it without Fraud and Confusion.

But he says, [ If one read the Preamble to the late Acts, you may see that
the Cause of making them, was not only the late dreadful Experience that the
Nation had of the Confusions caused by the preaching of such Men, but their
present Endeavors to reduce us to the like again]

Ans. 1. He does not tell you how fully I have answered this, in the Apology
which he accuses. And every Boy and Woman cannot disprove him.

2. Who is to be Judge who the Preachers were that caused our Confusions? The
old Parliament said, it was such as Laud, Sibth^rp, Mainwaring, and those that
drew the King from his Parliament. If I knew this Man to be wiser or greater
than the Parliament, I might prefer his Judgment, and prefer the Hundreds cast
out for Scandal, before those that are imprisoned for preaching.

3. Why would they never grant our frequent Petitions, to silence only those
that never meddled with War, or had no Accusation against them for any such
Confusions, and spare not those that had been guilty? Were all the Thousands
guilty of the Wars, that were Children or Schoolboys?

4. Why were not the Eight Thousand that after conformed, guilty of those
Confusions as much as the rest? Yea, many of them had been in Arms against the
King's Army.

5. Was Declaring Assent and Consent to all things contained and prescribed in
your Books a Means to prevent Wars or Confusions, when such Impositions caused
them? Is silencing, ruining, and keeping in Goals all that own not so much of
your Infallibility, the Means to avoid Confusions?

6. What were the present Endeavors to reduce you to the like? Was it the
Presbyterians bringing home the King, who they doubted not would set up the
revengeful Clergy? Why were they not accused for false or seditious Doctrine,
if they were guilty, or forbidden only to preach such, but forbidden to preach
at all, and accused merely for preaching?

His long Invective, to page 148. is partly a false Report of my Words, and
partly a Justification of all their Persecutions, and an Outcry against a
Persuasive to Repentance. Let the Reader but peruse the Books accused, and I
desire him but to judge as he sees cause.

115. Accus. XCVII. If the Reader will himself read my Treatise of Episcopacy,
which he accuses, I will make no other Defense of it than what it makes for
it self. But his Words convince me not, that Reproving Persecutors is worse
than Persecuting.

116. Accus XCVIII. He makes it my Pride to print Mr. Glanvile' s Letter to
me, though I disowned harshly his excessive Praise,) while Dr. Stillingfleet
had called me to it, by printing Foreigners Letters against us. And I must be
yet more proud, for telling Bishop Morley and Gunning, that I offered them a
Way if Christian Concord, more sure and harmless than that which they had
tried, because it was more divine, being only to unite in what Christ has
instituted.]

Ans. 1. It is no pride to say, that Christ is greater and wiser than those
Bishops; and that to unite in his own instituted Terms of Union, issurer than
the Terms of their Canons, or Act of Uniformity. Is it pride in all the
Protestants, that to the Papists prefer Scripture-sufficiency to their Canons.

117. Accus. XCIX. He falsely alleges the reason of my unsatisfiedness with
Dr. Stillingfleet' s Concessions. One of the chief was, that he would have
Parents disabled to choose Schools and Tutors for their own Children. But
whether such Men as this were not far more against Dr. Stillingfleet's
Concessions than I was, let my old Friend, Mr. Samuel Thomas, now of Chard, his
Invective against Dr. Whitby and Dr. Stillingfleet, be Judge; and Dr.
Stillingfleet himself, who seemed once to yield to Terms of Concord, which many
of us offered to him and others. And judge of the peaceableness of that Tribe
of Clergymen, by the University of Oxford's burning Dr. Whitby, a Conformist's
excellent Book, called The Reconciler, and his being forced to seem to retract
it.

118. Accus. C. His Intimations, page 156. of my desiring to be a Parish
Bishop, and also motioned with Dr. Owen to be an Archbishop, are merely
impudent: When I never was either Parish-Bishop, or sought it at least, since
cast out of the Ministry, 1662. nor so much as the Pastor of any Church, and
have refused a Diocesan Bishopric many Years before any one now in England was
a Bishop. How can a Man be n nocent before such impudent Accusers and Judges?

119. Accus. CI. As to his Accusation of my Self-Contradictions, and
L'Estrange' s Proof, I think no distinguishing Reader will need a Confutation
of so false a Charge, which confused Heads do feign, that understand not things
that differ.

And for his Charge against my Third Plea for Peace, about the Principles of
Government, I only refer the Reader to the Book.

120. I have not thought his mere general Clamours worthy of a particular
Answer, lest I tire the Reader, as I have tired my self with so unsavory an
Employment. But I will here tell the Reader, how I that these eight Years have
never thought this Accuser worthy of an Answer, have been brought to change my
Judgment and to be at this unpleasing Labor, when other Thoughts are more
suitable to my Condition.

I. A Letter from some ancient Conformist, that calls himself Cantianus De
Minimis, (of my Age, Seventy five,) so earnestly calls me to Repentance and
Retractation before I dye, referring me to this Book for the notice of my Sins,
that I thought not meet to resist his Importunity.

II. I read so much of the horrid Reports of many Papists, of the Crimes and
Deaths of Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Bucer, Phagius, Beza, and
many such, and how confidently they are commonly believed in the Roman Church,
and how greatly it hardens many against the Reformation, that I was loath to
contribute to their Deceit.

And I find that the same Sect accuses the Generality of Dissenters, that do
but affirm that there is AND THING in their Books of Liturgy or Articles, or in
their Ceremonies or Ordination, or in their Government by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, AND THE REST that bear Office therein, unlawful or
repugnant to the Word of God,) who are my Accusers, and cry, as Morley, Ex uno
disce omnes; and when they have rendered me as one of the worst on Earth, they
make the rest as bad; when I take them to be (for the most) the best Ministry
that I ever knew. And no wonder that their Writers and Preachers thus report
them, when their Canons ipso facto excommunicate them (unheard,) not excepting
Lords, Knights, Ministers, or any. And Lying is now grown so common a Sin in
England, (confessed by all,) that few know what Reports to believe, or to
reject: So that to betray my own Cause to these Accusers and Canoneers, is to
betray the Innocence of many Thousands.

III. I have long thought it my duty to call this sinful, divided, selftearing,
bleeding Nation to Repentance, in a Treatise called, REPENT O ENGLAND, (
Bradford's dying Words,) though Experience tells me, that such Men as this
will take the Motion for a greater Crime, than all the Sins that I call them to
repent of; so odious a thing is Repentance and Confession to the Proud and
Impenitent. And before I call others to Repentance, (several sorts,) I take it
for my first Duty to exercise my own: To which end, I unfeignedly resolved to
confess what I could by any means find to be my Sin; and being referred to this
Accuser for my Conviction, I found the Falsehoods and Calumnies so many, and so
gross, that I took it for my Duty not to seem by Silence to give Credit to
them; but having confessed what Sins I found, to do my part to save others from
the Temptations to Hatred, and Lying, and Persecution, which such Men lay
before them.

IV. And having labored most of Forty two Years, by Writing to profit
Posterity, as well as the present Age; and written above a hundred and twenty
Books to that End, and God having prospered them far beyond my expectation, (in
Germany, and other Foreign Lands, as well as in Britain,) I thought it
Treachery to suffer the Devil and his Agents to blast them all, (with those
that know me not,) without any Contradiction and Confutation of the Slanderers.
Sure if they were worth so many Years Labor, it is worth a little to take them
out of the Fire or Water where Diabolism casts them: Which I am the more
moved to, because while I have the Thanks of Thousands that have read them,
common Fame, and Mr. Cantianus, that called me to this Work* and others, do
tell me, that the Generality now known by the Name of Tories (or malignant
Haters of serious Piety) in England, especially among the Universities and
Clergy, do so much hate my Name, that they will read no Book which they see my
Name prefixed to, (unless as the Adversary against whom it is written.) And as
I have small hope of curing that malignant Prejudice, (which is more the hurt
of the Envious than of me,) so I must not by Sloth or Silence contribute to its
Increse, and Men's Guilt.

121. I will conclude with these three farther Notices to all Readers, for the
true understanding of all these Controversies with the Men who so implacably
hate and accuse me.

I. That they grossly cheat their sequacious Believers with this great Lie, that
I am against Bishops; whereas I am for a Divine Right of three sorts of
Bishops, (two by direct Institution, and the other by Consequence,) viz. I.
General Bishops, (call them Archbishops, or Diocesans, or Apostolicks, or
Evangelists,) that in every Nation are over many Churches.

II. Episcopi Gregis, or Ruling Pastors of single Churches, which are all true
Presbyters.

III. Episcopi Praesides, or Pro-estotes, which are the Presidents of the
Presbyters in particular Churches. And that I am of the Judgment of Grotius, De
Imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra, and highly value Bishop Overall's
Convocation-Book in the main, but abhor all Foreign Jurisdiction, yet desiring
the most extensive Foreign Communion.

122. II. That they grossly cheat their Believers, in telling them that I am
against Forms and Liturgies, when they know that we offered to use theirs, upon
the Amendment of some Faults, and severe cruel Impositions; and by their Demand
were put to draw up Additional Forms, which we did in the very Words of
Scripture: And though some called it The Reformed Liturgy, because it seems
an entire Frame, yet it is falsely said, that we would have that or none;] for
we only offered it to the Bishop's Examination, which they would never do: And
even this Accuser has nothing that I find against it, but that I confess it
was hastily drawn up in eight Days, and therefore must needs be imperfect, and
deserve a Review. And so it is our Crime, that we take not their three Books to
be all such Effects of Infallibility, as to have no one Fault contrary to God's
Word; and yet to confess our own (though in the Words of Scripture) to be the
Work of defectible, imperfect Men, and therefore needing a perfecting Review.
Humility, and not Subscribing to an Arrogant Claim of their Indefectibility, is
our great Crime.

123. III. They yet more dangerously deceive their Believers, persuading them,
That we appropriate Godliness and serious Religion to our Extemporate Praying,
and to the Opposition to Bishops, Liturgy, and Conformity; and that we falsely
dishonor their Church, by representing their Candidates and Clergy to be more
unable Preachers, or more ungodly Livers, than the Nonconforming Ministers and
Candidates; and their Parish-Flocks to be more unqualified for
Church Communion, and a more irregular Church, than such as we have desired in
our Motions for Reforming-Concord: Whereas (say they) we have the best Clergy
and Church in all the World.

To which I say, 1. That we have largely enough, in Folio, often told the World
what it is we account and call Godliness, even the making and keeping the
Baptismal Covenant; Believing, willing and living according to the Creed,
Lord's Prayer, and Law of Christ. We offered them a Liturgy; we owned all that
was good in theirs: We know that Prayers from a Book, as from a Habit, are
accepted, if they come from a penitent, believing and obedient Soul; and that
the Prayers of ungodly Hypocrites are unacceptable to God, whether with a Book,
or without.

2. And we love and honor Conformable Ministers and People that are Christians
indeed, and show it by serious practice of Christianity: And we are very
thankful to God, that England has had so many such, that were conformable long
ago; and we doubt not, has many such yet, even under the new (and much worse)
Conformity. We know not that Nation that has more excellent Men than many of
the Bishops were in Queen Elizabeth's Time, and than many Divines since have
been; such as Robert Bolton, Dr. Presion, Dr. Sibs, Mr. Scudder, Mr. Wheatley,
Mr. Dyke, Dr. Tailor, Mr. Downham, Dr. Stoughton, Dr. Gouge, Mr. Gataker, Dr
Willet, Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Field, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Downam, Bishop
Beadle, etc. Oh, how many of such excellent Men has this Land been blessed
with! (And the pious Nonconformists were of the same Spirit, though not in all
things of the same Opinions.

I have lately told you in a small Book, called CAN and ABEL, what are the
things that make the difference, which has my chief Regard. But such
Conformists as I have named have, since Laud's ^ays, with many gone under the
name of Conformable Puritans, and by this Accuser are reproached by the Name of
[ Passive Conformists,] because they had rather the Ceremonies and needless
Subscriptions were forborne, than able, faithful Preachers silenced.

The Prejudice that he says I had from my Youth against the Bishops and
Clergy, was only against Ungodliness and Malignity. Is it like that I was
against the pious Conformists, when I was tutored by them, heard them, and was
of their Judgment?

But can we not, even among Conformists, distinguish the Malicious, Ungodly,
Worldly, from holy Men of Love and Peace?

124. If Posterity and Strangers must be deluded by such false Historians as
this, that tell them the serious Godly Ministers and People were Schismatics
and Rogues, and the Haters of serious Religion were the most Religious, who can
help it? They talk so now to those that live among both Parties. And the
debauched, sensual Youth, and the covetous and ambitious Worldlings, seem
(partly) to believe them: But so do not the sober Sort, that daily see the
Confutation of their Malice.

125. For my own part, I will conclude, That if I had not known that sort of
serious Godly Men, whom the present Malignants now render odious by their
Calumnies, I fear I should not have sincerely believed in Jesus Christ, and
that his Gospel is true.

For the rest, both Ministers and Laity, whom I ever knew, showed no serious
^elief of that Christian Faith which they professed. Here and there there was a
civil Person by Temper and Education; but commonly, not a serious Word could I
hear from their Mouths about God, or our Redeemer, and the Spirit's sanctifying
Works; or of Death and Judgment, and the Life to come, (save in the Pulpit;)
nor did they love to hear any such from others, but their Talk and whole
Conversation was about the World, or common worldly Things, and (as Mr. Bolton
largely describes them) any Godly serious Discourse did but disgust them, and
mar their Mirth, and make them revile the Speakers as Puritaus, Hypocrites, or
some such Names. Few did I know of them that excelled Cicero, Sencca; or
equalled Ant^nine, Epictetus, Plutarch. And if Christ made Christians no better
than the Philosophers, how could I think better of him, than of them? Or trust
that Physician that cures none? I thank God that I have found more of the
Effects of his Saving Grace than the ordinary sort, and Members of the
described Church-Party, which these Men extol, did ever show me.

Note, The Words in the Epistle, and page 84. about School. Masters, are thse,
and no otherwise to be understood; [ That no indulged Persons, under severe
Penalties, to breed up Scholars, or to teach Gentlemen's Sons
University-Learning; because this may be justly looked on as a Design to
propagate Schism to Posterity, and to lay a Foundation for the Disturbance of
future Generations.] Dr. Stillingfleet' s Unreasonableness of Separation,
Preface, page 88.

How many excellent Preachers has God raised by this Way, which he would have
hindered by severe Penalties? And how many Souls converted and confirmed by
them?

A Catalogue of Mr. Richard Baxter's Books, sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the
Bible and Three Crowns, near Mercers Chapel, at the Lower End of Cheapside.
Folio.
1. Mr. Baxter's CHRISTIAN DIRECTORY: Or, Cases of Conscience. 2. -- Catholic
Theology. 3. -- Methodus Theologiae.
Quarto.
4. -- Saints Everlasting Rest. 5. -- -- Church History. 6. -- -- History of
Councils, Second Part. 7. -- His Treatise of Episcopacy. 8. -- -- Annotations
on the New Testament. 9. -- -- Life of Faith. 10. -- Naked Popery. 11. --
Apology for Nonconformists. 12. -- Answer to Dodwell, and Dr. Sherlock. 13. --
Second Defense of Nonconformists, against Dr. Stillingfleet. 14. -- Catholic
Communion: In Six several Controversies. 15. -- Which is the True Church. 16.
-- Moral Prognostication. 17. -- Search for English Schismatics. 18. --
Farewell-Sermon. 19. -- Alderman Ashurst's Funeral-Sermon. 20. -- Mr. John
Corbet's Funeral-Sermon.
Octavo.
21. -- Treatise of Self-denial. 22. -- His Catechism for Families: Or, Teacher
of Householders. 23. -- Spiritual Comfort. In Thirty two Directions. 24. --
Directions for Weak, Distempered Christians. 25. Mr. Baxter's Treatise of
Justification, Imputation of Righteousness, and Imputation of our Parents Sins;
against the Accusations of Dr. Tully. 26. -- A full and easy Satisfaction,
which is the true and safe Religion. 27. -- -- The Cure of Church-Divisions.
28. -- -- The Certainty of Christianity, without Popery. 29. -- A Key for
Catholics, to open the Juggling of the Jesuit. 30, 31. -- Two Treatises of
Death and Judgment. 32. -- The Defense of the Nonconformists Plea for Peace:
Or, An Account of the Matter of their Nonconformity. Against Mr. J. Cheyny's
Answer. 33. -- A Defense of the Principles of Love. 34. -- More Reasons for
Infants Church Membership. In Answer to Mr. Tombs. 35. -- Immortality of the
Soul. 36. -- More Reasons for the Christian Religion. 37, 38. -- Two
Disputations of Original Sin. 39. -- Mr. Stubbs his Funeral-Sermon.
These Underwritten are lately Printed.
Quarto.
1. Mr. Baxter's ENglish Nonconformity sa under King Charles II. and King James
II. truly Stated and Argued. 2. -- A Treatise of Knowledge and Love compared.
In two Parts. I. Of falsely pretended Knowledge. II. Of true saving Knowledge
and Love. 3. -- The Glorious Kingdom of Christ described, and clearly
vindicated. 4. -- A Reply to Mr. Thomas Beverly's Answer to my Reasons against
his Doctrine of the Thousand Years Middle Kingdom, and Conversion of the Jews.
5. -- Of National Churches, their Description, Institution, Use, Preservation,
Danger, Maladies, and Cure, partly applied to England. 6. -- Church-Concord:
Containing, I. A Dissuasive from unnecessary Divisions and Separation; and the
real Concord of the moderate Independents with the Presbyterians, instanced in
Ten seeming Differences. II. The Terms necessary for Concord amongst all true
Churches and Christians.

