Mr. RICHARD BAXTER's LAST LEGACY IN SELECT ADMONITIONS AND DIRECTIONS TO ALL
Sober Dissenters.

To whom -- Being dead, he yet speaks.

LONDON: Printed and are to be Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationer's- Hall.
1697.

THE PREFACE TO DISSENTERS.
THE Instructions here recommended as Mr. Baxter's Legacy, were collected out
of his own genuine Writings, and perused by him in his Lifetime, and being
much for his Reputation with all sober Persons; he seemed well pleased with
them, notwithstanding much obloquy and reproach from diverse Dissenters; for in
the Preface to his Christian Directory, he says, It was objected, that his
Writings differing from the common Judgment, had already caused offense to the
Godly; to which he answers, If God bless me with opportunity and help, I will
offend such Men much more, by endeavoring farther than ever I have done, the
quenching of that Fire which they are still blowing up, and detecting the Folly
and Mischief of those Logomachies by which they militate against Love and
Concord, and inflame and tear the Church of God. And in his Second Admonition
to Bagshaw, he styles himself a Long-maligned and resisted endeavourer of the
Churches Unity and Peace; and in p. 11. of that Book, he thus declares his
Christian temper and resolution. If Injuries or Interest would excuse any Sin,
I think their are few Ministers in England who have more inducement to the
angry separating way than I have; But shall I therefore wrong the Truth? God
forbid! and p. 52. He further tells Bagshaw, I repent that I no more
discouraged the Spirit of peevish quarrelling with Superiors and Church
Orders, and though I ever disliked it and opposed it, yet that I sometimes did
too much encourage such as were of their temper, by speaking too sharply
against those things which I thought to be Church Corruptions, and was too loath
to displease the Contentious, for fear of being incapable to do them good,
meeting with too few Religious Persons that were not too much pleased with such
invectives; and when Mr. Bagshaw objected, that he chose to communicate on
Easter Day in a very populous Church, purposely that it might be known; he
answered, p. 76. If a Man by many years forbearing all public Prayers, and
Sacraments should tempt others to think that he is against them or counts them
needless, How should he cure that Scandal, but by doing that openly and
pleading for it which he is supposed to be against? Ministers being bound to
teach the People by Example as well as Doctrine. The Question which he
maintained against Mr. Bagshaw was, Is it lawful to hold communion with such
Christian Churches as have worthy or tolerable Pastors, notwithstanding the
Parochial order of the Ministers Conformity and use of the Common Prayer Book?
And concludes, p. 89. That we ought to do so when some special Reasons as from
Authority, Scandal, etc. do require it.

He says, In the 3d. Part of his Life. p. 169.
I wrote a Book at the end of my Cain and Abel on purpose to show the
lawfulness of communicating with the Church of England; but before it was
printed, Dr. Owen (having heard of it) sent me 12 Arguments against joining
with the Church of England, which I answered; whereupon a swarm of Revilers
poured out their keenest Censures upon me; one said I was an Apostate; another
said that my Treatise of Episcopacy fully proved the duty of Separation, and I
were reported to be a pleader for Baal and Antichrist; in Answer to all which,
I published a Treatise in defense of Catholic Communion, to which I refer you.

I will tell the World a certain Truth, I Preach, I Write, I frequently and
openly talk against Separation, and for the lawfulness of joining with the
Church in the use of the Liturgy, and to rebuke Men's extremes and censures of
the Episcopal Clergy, and for an impartial Love of all true Christians. I
sharply reprove the weak Reasonings of those that are otherwise minded, and by
this I occasion the true Sectarians every where to speak against me, Apol. p.
62. I take it for a duty to Preach against Schism, Sedition, and Rebellion and
all Principles that tend to breed or feed them, and to use all Opportunities
and Interest in the People to promote their Loyalty and Public Peace, p. 18,
19.

I did not vary from my most early Opinion concerning these things, for in my
Epistle to the Saints Rest, I gave the same Admonition to my Flock at
Kidderminister in these words. I charge you in Christ's name, as you will
answer it when we shall meet at Judgment, that you faithfully and constantly
practice these Directions -- Above all, see that ye be followers of Peace and
Unity in the Church, and among your selves. I differ from many in several
things of considerable moment, yet if I should zealously press my judgment on
others so as to disturb the Peace of the Church, and separate from my Brethren,
I should fear least I should prove a Firebrand in Hell, for being a Firebrand
in the Church: And for all the interest I have in your Judgments and
Affections, I charge you, that if God should give me up to any Factious
Church-rendring course, that you forsake me, and follow me not a step, believe
not those to be Friends of the Church, who would cure her by cutting her Throat.

Upon writing my Cure of Church Divisions, Mr. Bagshaw, p. 152. Published other
Invectives against me, as that one worthy of credit told him, that the Learned
and Judicious Mr. Herle, having read that Book, said, That it had been better
for the Church of God, if Mr. Baxter's Friends had never sent him to School,
and that Mr. Cawdry had a like opinion of that Book, and that another Person as
knowing in the Mystery of Godliness, as either of them, told a Friend of his,
that notwithstanding the noise about Mr. Baxter, he would end in Flesh and
Blood. But Mr. Baxter was well fortified against these obloquies, having been
surfeited, as he says, with humane Applause.

But notwithstanding all these Clamours and vexatious Troubles, Mr. Baxter kept
a constant course, pleading for Concord and Unity almost in every Book which he
set forth, and that with such cogent Arguments, as the like are scarce to be
found on any other Subject which he has written upon, as from the following
Admonitions collected out of a few of his many Treatises will appear to the
Judicious Reader; and many more may be observed in those that are conversant in
his Writings, wherein although some things accidentally written, may seem to be
contradictory, yet as he told Mr. L'Estrange he was well able to reconcile
them. And by his distinctions he has reconciled many seeming Contradictions,
by help whereof, as Mr. Silvester observed in the Preface to his Life, as he
could speak what he would, so he could prove what he spoke. I am well
persuaded, that by the following Collections, any impartial Separatist may find
sufficient Arguments to resolve all his Scruples and Objections against
Conformity to the Established Worship, for which end they are now Published by
the Collector. But I foresee it will be necessary to obviate two Objections
that will be made against these Admonitions: First, That Mr. Baxter has
written plain Contradictions to them, and the Separating Brethren will adhere
to his First Sentiments which lead them to their Nonconformity; to which I
Answer, That Mr. Baxter gave them this Precaution in one of his first and best
Treatises, charging them strictly, that if God should give him over to any
Church-rendring course, that they would forsake him, and not follow him a step.
Secondly, That what they interpret as Contradictions, were in Truth no other
then Confessions of his former mis-apprehensions and passionate heats of his
intemperate Zeal; but these are the Results of his sedate and rational
Deliberation. The great Apostle St. Paul, was not ashamed to record in Holy
Writ, what enormities a misgrounded Zeal had hurried him into, while he was in
an estate of Ignorance and Unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13. and this doubtless was Mr.
Baxter's practice for reflecting upon what he had said, or done, to countenance
the Separating way; he saw it had done more hurt than good, for which reason he
recanted them. But these instructions of his are like the Celestial Bodies,
which carry light and benign influences with them; they are self-evident, and
speak home to the Judgment and Consciences of all unprejudiced Men, who cannot
resist the force of that Reason and Demonstration, which inspires every part of
them with so much Life and Power, Beauty and Ornament, Consistency and
Symmetry, as will render them highly Acceptable, Amiable, and Beneficial to
such as shall embrace and practice them. As for such Dissenters as have
conceived any hard thoughts of Mr. Baxter, or these his Admonitions, I entreat
them to consider, whether they can answer or confute them to the satisfaction
of their own Consciences, and if they cannot, then whether it be not rational
and pious to walk by these directions which tend so much to the establishment
of the public Peace of this divided Church and Nation, and to their own
present and eternal welfare.

2. Objection. It may be said that these Amonitions are now become
unseasonable, there being a Toleration granted to Men of all Persuasions to
Worship God after their several modes.

Answ. To this I say, that Schism is a Sin antecedent to all Humane
Constitutions, as being directly forbid in the Holy Gospel, and consequently
will continue to be sinful, though all the Kings and Rulers of the Earth should
indulge, and tolerate them; for the Laws of Men cannot make void the Law of
God, nor alter the nature of things, and justify or make that to be good which
the only Lawgiver of Christians has condemned as unlawful; and as it is said
of Poligamy among the Jews, that the Law of Moses connived at it, for the
hardness of their hearts, so it is for the hardness and uncharitableness of
Men's Spirits, that Rulers are constrained for a time to tolerate and bear with
many things that are Offensive and Prejudicial to the prosperity of their
Government. For Toleration far differs from the approbation of a thing, and
implies the unlawfulness thereof, rather than the Justification of it.
Besides, the present Toleration is far from intending or making an
establishment of the Practices which are tolerated to the prejudice of the
Church, which has for many Ages, and now does continue in actual possession of
all its Powers and Privileges as in time past. So that as the present Schism
and Separations is possitively condemned by the Laws of the Gospel, so they
have not any approbation from the Laws of Men, but what the corruptions of Men,
and their ungovernable Tempers make tolerable on some pressing occasions, and
unhappy juncture of Affairs.

I beseech you therefore read the following Admonitions without Prejudice, and
judge of them by the end for which they were first written by Mr. Baxter, and
are now published by, etc.

Mr. RICHARD

Mr. RICHARD BAXTER's LAST LEGACY TO ALL Sober Dissenters.
Of the Church.
IN a Petition drawn by Mr. B. to be presented to the King, He makes this a
part of the Profession of his Religion. I do willingly profess my consent to
all the Holy Canonical Scriptures, as the Word of God; And to the Doctrine of
the Church of England professed in the 39 Articles of Religion, as in sense
agreeable to the Word of God. And I renounce all Errors or Heresies contrary to
any of these. And I do hold, that the Book of Common Prayer, and of Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, contains in it nothing so disagreeable to the Word of
God, as makes it unlawful to live in the peaceable Communion of the Church
that uses it. Mr. Baxters Life Part 3. p. 161.

Mr. Baxter in his Reasons for the Christian Religion, p. 464.
Sect. 2. The Church of Christ being his Body is but one, and has many parts,
but should have no Parties, but Unity and Concord without Division.

3. Therefore no Christian must be of a Party or Sect as such, that is, as
dividing it self from the rest, causing Schism or Contention in the Body, or
making a rent unnecessarily in any particular Church which is a part.

8. Nothing will warrant us to separate from a Church as no Church, but the
want of something essential to a Church.

11. It is essential to particular Political Churches, that they be constituted
of true Bishops or Pastors and of Flocks of baptized or professed Christians,
united for holy Communion in the Worshipping of God, and the promoting of the
Salvation of the Several Members.

12. It is essential to a true Bishop or Pastor of the Church to be in Office
(that is in authority and obligation) appointed by Christ in Subordination to
him in the three parts of his Offices, Prophetical, Priestly and Kingly. That
is, to teach the People, to stand between them and God in Worship, and to guide
or govern them by the Paternal exercise of the Keys of his Church.

15. If a Church which in all other respects is purest and best, will impose
any sin upon all that will have any local Communion with it, though we must not
separate from that Church as no Church, yet must we not commit that sin, but
patiently suffer them to exclude us from their Communion.

1. We do not say you are no true Ministers nor Churches, nor that it is
unlawful to communicate with you. Apology, p. 82. See also p. 87. 89.

2. Where Parish Bounds are judged necessary, all Persons living in the Parish
may be constrained to hear Public Teaching, and to Worship God either in that,
or in some other approved or tolerated Church within their convenient reach, or
Neighborhood. Way of Concord. Part 3. p. 139.

3. The People are no Judges who is fit to be, and shall be a Minister of
Christ, the Supreme Civil Magistrate is Judge whom he must countenance,
maintain and tolerate -- The disposal of the Tithes and Temples is in the Power
of the Prince and Patron by his grant -- Who but Physicians are fit to judge,
who is meet to be a Licensed Physician. p. 127. Of the 2d. Defense.

4. In case of mere different Modes, Circumstances, and Order of Worship, see
that you give Authority, and the Consent of the Church where you are, their
due: Christian Directory, Part. 3. p. 13.

5. Conform your selves to all the Lawful Customs and Gestures of the Church
with which you join; You come not thither proudly to show your selves wiser
than they in the Circumstances of Worship, nor needlessly to differ from them,
much less to harden Men into a Scorn of strictness, by seeing you to place
Religion in singularities in lawful and indifferent things, but you come to
Exercise Peace, Love, and Concord, and with one Mind and Mouth to glorify God;
stand when the Church stands; sit when the Church sits, and kneel when the
Church kneeleth, in cases where God does not forbid it. Christian Directory, p.
71. Part 3.

6. Temples Utensels, Lands devoted and lawfully separated by Man for holy uses
are holy, as justly related to God by that Separation. Every thing should be
reverenced according to the measure of its Holiness, and this expressed by such
Signs and Gestures as are fit to honor God, to whom they are related. And so
to be uncovered in a Church, and use reverent Carriage and Gestures there, does
tend to preserve due reverence to God and to his Worship, 1 Cor. 16. 20.
Christian Directory, Part 3. p. 167.

7. Plain intelligible Church Music which occasioneth not Divisions, but the
Church agrees in, for my part, I never doubted but to be lawful. For 1. God
set it up long after Moses's Ceremonial Law by David, Solomon, etc. 2. It is
not merely an Instituted Ceremony, but a Natural help to the Minds alacrity;
and it is a Duty, not a Sin to use the helps of Nature and lawful Art. As it is
Lawful to use the help of Spectacles in reading the Bible, so is it of Music
to exhilerate the Soul to God. 3. Jesus Christ joined with the Jews that used
it, and spoke not against it. 4. No Scripture forbids it. 5. Nothing can be
said against it, but what may be said against Tunes and melody of Voices; yea
it is not a humane Invention, as the last Psalm and many others show, which
call us to praise the Lord with Instruments of Music.

8. Let not prejudice against Melody or Church-Musick possess you with a
splenatick disgust of that which should be your most joyful work, if you know
how much the Incorporate Soul must make use of the Body in harmony, and the
joyful praises of Jehovah. Do not then Quarrel with lawful helps, because they
are sensible and corporal, Christian Direct. p. 72. Part. 3. p. 167. Harmony
and Melody are so high a Pleasure of the Sense, that they are nearest to
rational delight, if not participating of them, and exceedingly fitted to
elevate the Mind and Affections unto God. We the Ministers who drew up the
Worcester Agreement, required our People to declare in these Words: IAB do
consent to be a Member of the particular Church of Christ in D. whereof, OF is
Teacher and Overseer, and to submit to his Teaching and Ministerial guidance
and oversight, according to God's Word.

Of the Doctrine of the Church of England.
As for the Doctrine of the Church of England, Preface to 5. Disput. p. 6.
the Bishops and their Followers from the first Reformation begun by King
Edward the Sixth, were sound in Doctrine, adhearing to the Augustine method
expressed now in the Articles and Homilies; they differed not in any
considerable point from those whom they called Puritans, but it was in the form
of Government, Liturgy and Ceremonies, that the difference lay.

The Independents as well as the Presbyterians offer to Subscribe the XXXIX
Articles as distinct from Prelacy and Ceremony. And when I was in the Country,
I knew not of one Minister to ten that are now silenced, that was not in the
main of the same Principles with my self.

Mr. Baxter's Reasons for Obedience in Lawful things, Page 483. of his Five
Disputations.
Sect. 1. Lest Men that are apt to run from one extreme into another, Defense
of Principles of Love, p. 64.
should make an ill use of that which I have before written, I shall here annex
some Reasons to persuade Men to just Obedience, and preserve them from any
sinful Nonconformity to the commands of their Governors, and the evil effects
that are like to follow thereupon.

2. But First I will lay together some Propositions for decision of the
Controversy; How far we are bound to obey Men's Precepts about Religion?
Especially in case we doubt of the lawfulness of obeying them? And so cannot
obey them in Faith?

3. Briefly: 1. We must obey both Magistrates and Pastors in all things lawful
which belong to their Offices to command. 2. It belongs not to their Office to
make God a new Worship; But to command the Mode and Circumstances of Worship
belongs to their Office: for guiding them wherein God has given them general
Rules. 3. We must not take the lawful Commands of our Governors to be
unlawful. 4. If we do through weakness or perverseness take Lawful things to be
unlawful, that will not excuse us in our disobedience. Our error is our Sin,
and one sin will not excuse another Sin. Even as on the other side, if we judge
things unlawful to be lawful, that will not excuse us for our disobedience to
God in obeying Men. 5. As I have before showed, many things that are
miscommanded, must be obeyed. 6. As an erroneous judgment will not excuse us
from Obedience to our Governors, so much less will a doubtfulness excuse us.
7. As such a doubting, erring judgment cannot obey in (plenary) Faith, so much
less can he disobey in Faith. For it is a known Command of God, that we obey
them that have the Rule over us: but they have no Word of God against the act
of Obedience now in quection. It is their own erring judgment that intangleth
them in a necessity of sinning (till it be changed.) 7. In doubtful Cases, it
is our duty to use God's means for our Information: and one means is to consult
with our Teachers, and hear their words with teachableness and meekness, 8. If
upon advising with them we remain in doubt about the lawfulness of some
Circumstance of order, if it be such as may be dispensed with, they should
dispense with us: if it may not be dispensed without a greater injury to the
Church or Cause of God, than our dispensation will countervail, then is it our
duty to obey our Teachers, notwithstanding such doubts: For it being their
Office to Teach us, it must be our duty to believe them with a Humane Faith, in
cases where we have no Evidences to the contrary: And the Duty of Obeying them
being certain, and the sinfulness of the thing commanded being uncertain and
unknown, and only suspected, we must go on the surer side. 9. Yet must we in
great and doubtful cases, not take up with the suspected judgment of a single
Pastor, but apply our selves to the unanimous Pastors of other Churches. 10.
Christians should not be over busy in prying into the work of their
Governors, nor too forward to suspect their determinations: But when they know
that it is their Rulers work to guide them by determining of due Circumstances
of Worship, they should without causeless scruples readily obey, till they see
just reason to stop them in their obedience; They must not go out of their own
places to search into the Actions of another Man's Office, to trouble
themselves without any cause. No reason can be given, why a lawful thing should
become unlawful? Because a lawful Superior does command it, else Superiors may
take away all our Christian Liberty, and make all things unlawful by commanding
them; you would take it ill from a Child or Servant when you bid them learn a
Form of Prayer or Catechism, if they should say it was lawful for us till you
commanded it, but because you bid us it is unlawful.

4. And now I entreat all humble Christians readily to obey both Magistrates
and Pastors in all lawful things; and to consider, to that end, of these
Reasons following. Reas. 1. If you will not obey in Lawful things, you deny
Authority, or overthrow Government it self, which is a great Ordinance of God,
established in the fifth Commandment with promise: And as that Commandment
respecting Societies and common good, is greater than the following commands,
as they respect the private good of our Neighbors, or are but particular means
to that Public good, whose Foundation is laid in the Fifth Commandment; so
accordingly the sin against this Fifth Commandment must be greater than that
against the rest.

5. Reas. 2. In disobeying the lawful commands of our Superiors, we disobey
Christ, who rules by them as his Officers. Even as the disobeying a Justice of
Peace or Judge is a disobeying of the Sovereign Power; yea in some cases when
their Sentence is unjust. Some of the Ancient Doctors thought that the Fifth
Commandment was the last of the First Table of the Decalogue; and that the
Honoring of Governors is part of our Honor to God, they being mentioned there
as his Officers, with whom he himself is honored or dishonored, obeyed or
disobeyed: For it is God's Authority that the Magistrate, Parent, and Pastor is
endued with, and empowred by to rule those that are put under them.

6. Reas. 3. What confusion will be brought into the Church if Pastors be not
obeyed in things lawful? For instance: If the Pastors appoint the Congregation
to Assemble at one hour, and the People will scruple the time, and say, it is
unlawful, and so will choose some of them one time, and some another, what
disorder will here be? and worse, if the Pastors appoint a Place of Worship,
and any of the People scruple obeying them, and will come to another place,
what confusion will here be? People are many, and the Pastors are few: And
therefore there may be some Unity if the People be ruled by the Pastors; but
there can be none, if the Pastors must be ruled by the People, for the People
will not agree among themselves: And therefore if we obey one part of them, we
must disobey and displease the rest. And their ignorance makes them unfit to
rule.

7. Reas. 4. Moreover, Disobedience in matters of Circumstance, will exclude
and overthrow the Substance of the Worship it self. God commands us to pray:
If one part of the Church will not join with a stinted form of Prayer, and the
other part will not join without it, but both Parties cannot be pleased, and so
one part must cast off Prayer it self, or separate from the rest. God
commands the Reading, and Preaching, and Hearing of the Scripture, and the
Singing of Psalms: But he has left it to Man to make or choose the best
Translation of Scripture, or Version of the Psalms. Now if the Pastor appoint
one Version and Translation, and the Church join in the use of it, if any
Members will scruple joining in this Translation or Version, they must needs
forbear the whole duty of Hearing the Scripture, and Singing Psalms in that
Congregation. If they pretend a scruple against the appointed time or place of
Worship, they will thereby cast off the Worship it self. For if they avoid our
Time or Place, they cannot meet with us, nor Worship with us.

8. Reas. 5. And when they are thus carried to separate from the Congregation,
upon such grounds as these, they will be no where fixed, but may be still
subdividing, and separating from one another, till they are resolved into
individuals, and have left no such thing as a Church among them. For they can
have no assurance or probability, that some of themselves will not dissent from
the rest in one Circumstance or other, as they did from their Pastors and the
Church that they were of before.

6. Reas. 9. By this means the Wicked that are Disobedient to their Teachers,
and reject the Worship of God it self, will be hardened in their Sin, and
taught by Professors to defend their Ungodliness: For the very same course that
you take will serve their turns. They need not deny any Duty in the Substance,
but deny the Circumstance, and so put off the Substance of the Duty. If a
Wicked Man will not hear the Word Preached, he may say [I am not against
Preaching; but I am unsatisfied of the lawfulness of your Time or Place, I am
in judgment against coming to your Steeple-house, or against the Lord's Day.]
And so he shall never hear, though he say he is for Heating. If a Wicked Man
will not be personally instructed, or admonished, or be accountable to the
Church or Pastors for any scandals of his life, nor submit to any Discipline,
he may say [I am for Discipline, I know it is my duty to be instructed: but I
am not satisfied that I am bound to come to you when you send for me, or to
appear at such a place as you appoint: the Word of God names no time or place,
and you shall not deprive me of my Liberty.] If a Wicked Man would not hear or
read the Scripture, or sing Psalms, he may say, that he is for the Duty, but he
is only against this and that Translation and Version: And so while every
Version is excepted against the Duty is as much evaded, as if it were denied it
self. By this device it is that the Rebellion of unruly People is defended:
They run to the Circumstances of the Duty, and ask [Where are they bound to
come to a Minister? or to be examined by him, in order to a Baptism or Lord's
Supper? or to speak their consent to be Church Members, or to subscribe to a
Profession, or to read an English Bible, or to hear in a Steeple-house, with
many such like.] Thus also it is that they put off Family Prayer, and ask,
[Where are they bound to pray in their Family Morning and Evening?] and so keep
no constancy in Family Prayer at all, under pretense of denying only the
Circumstances.

10. Reas. 7. By this Disobedience in things lawful, the Members of the Church
will be involved in contentions, and so engaged in bitter Uncharitableness, and
Censures, and Persecutions, and Reproaches of one another: which scandalous
courses will nourish Vice, dishonor God, rejoice the Enemies, grieve the Godly
that are Peaceable and Judicious, and wound the Consciences of the contenders.
We see the beginning of such Fires are small, but whither they tend, and what
will be the end of them, we see not.

11. Reas. 8. By these means also Magistrates will be provoked to take Men of
tender Consciences for factious, unruly, and unreasonable Men, and to turn
their Enemies, and use violence against them, to the great injury of the
Church: when they see them so self-conceited, and refusing Obedience in lawful
Circumstances.

12. Reas. 9. By this means also the Conversion and Establishment of Souls will
be much hindered, and People possessed with Prejudice against the Church and
Ordinances, when they take us to be but humorous People, and see us in such
Contentions among our selves. To my knowledge, our late difference about some
such lesser things, has turned off, or hindered abundance of People from
liking the holy Doctrine and Life which we profess.

13. Reas. 10. It will seem to the wisest, to savor of no small measure of
Pride, when People on the account of lawful Circumstances, dare set themselves
against their Governors and Teachers, and quarrel with the Ordinances of God,
and with the Churches: Humble Men would sooner suspect themselves, and quarrel
with their own Distempers, and submit to those that are wiser than themselves,
and that are set over them for their Guidance by the Lord. There may more
dangerous Pride be manifested in these matters, than in Apparel, and such lower
Trifles.

14. Reas. 11. Consider also what yielding in things lawful the Scripture
recommendeth to us? How far yielded Paul when he Circumcised Timothy? Acts 16.
3. And when he [took the men, and purified himself with them in the Temple, to
signify the accomplishment of the days of Purification until that an Offering
should be offered for every one of them] and this for almost seven days, Acts
21. 26, 27. with the foregoing Verses.

15. So 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20. [For though I be free from all Men, yet have I made
my self Servant unto all, that I might gain the more: And unto the Jews I
became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as
under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law: To them that are
without Law, as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak I became as
weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all Men, that I
might, by all means save some, and this I do for the Gospels sake, etc.] Study
this Example.

16. Read also Romans 14. and 15. Chapters, how much Condescension the Apostle
requires even among Equals, about Meats and Days. And 1 Cor. 8. 13. the
Apostle would tie up himself from eating any flesh while the World stands,
rather than make a weak Brother to offend. Many other Passages of Scripture
require a Condescension in things of this indifferent nature, and show that the
Kingdom of God does not consist in them.

17. And Matthew 12. 1, 2, to 9. you find that Hunger justified the Disciples
of Christ for plucking and rubbing the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath days. And
Hunger justified David, and those that were with him, for entering into the
House of God, and eating the Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat,
nor for them which were with him, but only for the Priests: And the Priests in
the Temple were blameless for profaning the Sabbath Day.] Now if things before
accidentally evil, may by this much Necessity become lawful and a duty, then
may the Commands of Magistrates or Pastors, and the Unity of the Church, and
the avoiding of Contention, and Offense, and other Evils, be also sufficient to
warrant us in obeying, even in convenient Circumstantials of the Worship of
God, that otherwise could not be justified.

18. Reas. 12. Lastly consider, how much God has expressed himself in his Word
to be pleased in the Obedience of Believers. Not only in their Obedience to
Christ immediately, but also to him in his Officers, 1 Samuel 15. 22. [Behold to
obey is better than Sacrifice, etc.] Col. 3. 20, 22. [Children obey your
Parents in all things, (that is, all lawful things) for this is well-pleasing
to the Lord.] [Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh,
etc.] And Obedience to Pastors is as much commanded, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. [We
beseech you Brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them very highly, etc.] Heb. 13. 17.
[Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your Souls, as they must give account, etc.] So Verse 7. and 24. 1 Timothy 5.
17, etc.

19. As the general Commission to a Parent, or Master, or Magistrate to govern
their inferior Relations, does authorize them to many particular Acts
belonging to their Office, that were never named in their Commission: so your
general Command to obey them, obliges you to obey them in the said
particulars. And so it is also betwixt the Pastors and the Flock, in Matters
belonging to the Office of a Pastor.

20. If a Child shall ask a Parent, [Where does God's Word allow you to command
me to learn this Catechism, or read this Divine's Writings, or repeat this
Sermon, or write it? etc.] does not the question deserve to be answered with
the Rod? The general Commission for Parents to govern their Children is
sufficient. So if a Schoolmaster command his Scholars to come to such a place
to School, and to take their places in such an order, and to learn such Books,
and do such Exercises, etc. the general Commission that he has to Teach and
Govern them, will allow him to do all this. (Though it will not allow him to
set his Scholars to any Artifice or Manual Operation alien to his Profession.)
So if a Minister determine of the variable Circumstances of Worship, as what
Place and People shall come to, and at what time, to be Catechized, Examined,
Instructed, etc. what Translation or Version of Psalms to use, what Utensils to
make use of about God's Service, or such like, he is warranted for this by his
General Commission. And if he miss it in the Manner, by choosing inconvenient
Circumstances, or by unnecessary Determination of Points that should rather be
left undetermined to Liberty, thought this be his own Sin, it will not excuse
the People from Obedience; unless the Error of his Directions be so great as
would frustrate the Ordinance it self, or do more harm than our Disobedience
would do; which in Circumstantials is rarely found.

By long Experience I am assured, Preface to Christian Direct. ad finem.
that Practical Religion will afford both to Church, State, and Conscience more
certain, and more solid Peace, than contending Disputers, with all their
pretenses of Orthodoxness, and Zeal against Errors for the Truth, will ever
bring, or did ever attain to.

Holy Commonwealth, p. 352. God never instituted Churches to be kept up in
Disobedience to those Christian Magistrates which he Commands us to obey upon
pain of Damnation. Disobedience to our Rulers is in Ministers double Treason
and Wickedness.

Page 30. of the 1st Plea. Princes and Rulers may forbid all that preach
Rebellion and Sedition, and may punish them if they do it: and may hinder the
Incorrigible, whose preaching may do more hurt than good, from exercising their
Ministry, or preaching within their Dominions.

Page 32. They should see that their Kingdoms be well provided of Public
Preachers and Catechists: And may by due means compel the Ignorant to hear and
learn what Christianity is.

And Sect. 37. They ought to be Preservers of Peace and Charity among Churches,
and to hinder Preachers from uncharitable and unrighteous Reviling each other,
and their unpeaceable Controversies and Contentions.

Page 35. Sect. 40. They may make their own Officers circa Sacra, to execute
their Magistratical Power: And if they authorize any particular Bishops or
Pastors to exercise any such Power as belongs to the Prince to give, not
contrary to Christ's Laws -- we judge that the Subjects ought to obey for
Conscience sake.

Christian Direct. He that is silenced by a just Power, though unjustly, in a
Country that needs not his preaching, must forbear therefore.

Let none persuade you (i. e.) the Magistrates, that you are such Terrestrial
Animals that have nothing to do with the Heavenly Concernment of your Subjects;
Bodily things (Rewards and Punishments) are the Means whereby you may promote
it; you are Custodes utriusque tabulae, and must bend the force of all your
Government to the Saving of the Peoples Souls.

The Mischief of Separation.
The Mischief of Separation lies not in the bare Error of Judgment, Epistle
Dedicatory to Saints Rest.
but in the Unchristian and Church-dissolving Division and Alienation, which
thence follows; contrary to that Humility and Love, which is the visible
Character of Christians, and to that Oneness, which is still in Scripture
ascribed to the visible Church. Alas, that Pride and Ignorance should have such
power among Believers, that Men cannot be of several Judgments in lesser
Points, but they must needs be of several Churches. God will make us value
Peace and Union a little more, before we shall taste of the perfect everlasting
Peace and Union; yea, before we shall see the Blessing of Union in the Church.
Wounding is a dividing, healing is a re-uniting; a Building is of many Stones
or Pieces orderly conjoined; a Church is an Aggregation of Individuals, an
Association of Believers: What then is it to demolish, but to separate and
disjoyn? and what is it to dissolve Churches, but to break their Association,
to reduce them to the Individuals, to cut them into shreds?

As for the Differences in way of Government, between the moderate
Presbyterians, Independants, Episcopal, and Erastian, I make no doubt, but if
Men's Spirits stood not at a greater distance than their Principles, they would
quickly be united. But of all the four sorts, there are some that run so high
in their Principles, that they run out of the hearing of Peace or Truth. -- For
Anabaptism and Antinomianism God spoke effectually against them, by those
wondrous Monsters in New England; but Wonders are over-lookt, where the heart
is hardened, and God intends to get his Justice a Name. The fearful Delusions,
that God has formerly given them over to, and the horrid Confusion which they
have introduced where they have sprung, has spoken fully against both these
later Sects. The weeping Eyes, the bleeding Sides, the lacerated Members of
these Churches, the reproach of the Gospel, the disappointed Reformation, the
hideous Doctrines, and unheard of Wickedness that has followed them, the
contemned Ordinances, the reproached, slandered, and ejected Ministers, the
Weak that are scandalized, the Professors are apostalized, the Wicked hardened,
and the open Enemies of the Gospel, that now insult; all these do describe them
more plainly to England, than words can do, and cry loud in the Ears of God and
Man. What will be the Answer, time will show; but from Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16, etc.
we may probably conjecture.

He that is not a Son of Peace, is not a Son of God. All other Sins destroy the
Church consequently, but Division and Separation demolish it directly. Building
the Church is but an orderly joining of the Materials, and what then is
disjoyning but pulling down? Many Doctrinal differences must be tolerated in a
Church, and why, but for Unity and Peace? therefore Disunion and Separation is
utterly intolerable. Believe not those to be the Churches Friends, that would
cure and reform her by cutting her throat. Those that say, no truth must be
concealed for Peace, have usually as little of the one as the other. Study Gal.
2. 22. Romans 14. 1. Acts 21. 24, 26. 1 Timothy 1. 4. and 6. 4. Titus 3. 8, 9. I
hope, sad experience speaks this lesson to your very hearts, if I should say
nothing. Do not your hearts bleed to look upon the State of England, and to
think how few Towns, or Cities there be (where is any forwardness in Religion)
that are not cut into shreds and crumbled as to dust, by Separations and
Divisions? To think what a wound we have hereby given to the very Christian
Name, how we have hardened the Ignorant, confirmed the Papists, and are our
selves become the scorn of our Enemies, and the grief of our Friends, and how
many of our dearest best esteemed Friends, have fallen to notorious Pride or
Impiety, yea, some, to be worse than open Infidels? These are Pillars of Salt,
see that you remember them. Though of your own selves, Men should arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them, Acts 20. 30. Yea though
an Angel from Heaven should draw you to Divisions, see that you follow him not.
If there be erroneous practices in the Church, keep your selves innocent, with
Moderation and Peace. It must be no small Error, that must force a Separation.
Justin Martyr professed, that if a Jew should keep the Ceremonial Law, so he
did not persuade the Gentiles to it, as necessary, yet if he acknowledged
Christ, he judges that he might be saved, and he would embrace him, and have
communion with him. Paul would have him received, that is weak in the Faith,
and not Un-church whole Parishes of those that we know not, nor were ever
brought to a just trial. I ever loved a godly peaceable Conformist, better than
a turbulent Nonconformist. I differ from many, in several things of
considerable moment, yet if I should zealously press my judgment on others, so
as to disturb the Peace of the Church, and separate from my Brethren that are
contrary minded, I should fear, lest I should prove a Firebrand in Hell, for
being a Fire brand in the Church. And for all the interest I have in your
Judgments and Affections, I here charge you, that if God should give me up, to
any Factions, Church rending Course, (against which I daily pray) that you
forsake me, and follow me not a step. And for peace with one another, follow it
with all your might, If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably
with all men, Romans 12. 18. (mark this.) When you feel any sparks of discontent
in your Breasts, take them as kindled by the Devil from Hell, and take heed you
cherish them not. If the flames begin to break forth, in Censoriousness,
Reproaches, and hard Speeches of others, be as speedy and busy in quenching
it, as if it were Fire in the Thatch of your Houses. For why should your Houses
be dearer to you than the Church, which is the House of God? Or your Souls,
which are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? Has God spoke more against any Sin
than Unpeaceableness? If ye forgive not Men their trespasses, neither will your
Heavenly Father forgive you: which Lodovicus Crocius says, is the measure, and
essential property of the least degree of true Faith; if you love not one
another, you are not Disciples of Christ.

Public Wars and Private Quarrels usually pretend the Reformation of the
Church, Saints Rest, p. 551.
the vindicating of the Truth, and the welfare of Souls; but they as usually
prove in the issue, the greatest means to the overthrow of all. It is as
natural for both Wars and private Contentions to produce Errors, Schisms,
contempt of Magistracy, Ministry, and Ordinances, as it is for a dead Carrion
to breed Worms and Vermin. Believe it from one, that has too many years
experience of it; it is as hard a thing to maintain even in your People, a
sound understanding, a tender Conscience, a Lively, gracious, Heavenly frame of
Spirit, and an upright Life in a way of War and Contention, as to keep your
Candle lighted in the greatest Storms, or under the Waters. The like I may say
of perverse and fierce Disputings about the Circumstantials of Discipline, or
other Questions, that are far from the Foundation; they oftener lose the truth
than find it. Woe to those Ministers, that make unnecessarry Divisions, and
Parties among the People, that so they may get themselves a name, and be cried
up by many Followers. The way to prosper your labors is to quench all flames
of Contention, to your power. Study the Peace and Unity of your Congregations,
keep out all occasions of Divisions, especially the Doctrine of Separation, and
popular Church Government, the apparent Seminary of Faction, and perpetual
Contentions. If once the People be taught, that it belongs to them to govern
themselves, and those the Scripture calls their Guides and Rulers, we shall
have mad work. They that would pluck up the Headge of Government, as if the
Vineyard could not be fruitful, except it lay waste, to the pleasure of all the
Beasts of the Forest, are like the pond, that grudged at the Banks and Damm,
and thought it injurious to be restrained of its liberty, and therefore
combined with the Winds, to raise a Tempest, and so assault and beat down the
Banks in their rage; And now where is that peaceable Association of Waters? We
feel now, how those are mistaken that thought the way for the Churches Unity,
was to dig up the Banks and let all loose, that every Man in Religion might do
what he list.

Woe to those Ministers, that make unnecessary Divisions, and Parties among the
People, that so they may get themselves a name, and be cried up by many
Followers. The way to prosper your labors, is to quench all Flames of
Contention. Study the Peace of your Congregations; keep out all occasions of
Divisions, especially the Doctrine of Separation, and popular Government, the
apparent Seminarys of Faction, and perpetual Contentions. Every tender
Conscience should be as tender of Church Divisions, and real Schism, as of
Drunkenness, Whoredom, and other such enormous Sins, James 3. 14, 15, 16.
Reasons for Christ. Relig. p. 485. Sect. 34.

If it be objected that I preached to separate Congregations; my Answer is,
That I preached only to some of many Thousands that cannot come into the
Temples, many of which never heard a Sermon of many years. And what I did, was
only to preach to such as could not come to our Churches. Answ. to Letter, p.
24. quasi dicerit that where Parish Churches are large enough, there Separate
Congregations are unlawful.

They are, usually, Men least acquainted with a Heavenly Life, p. 666.
who are the violent disputers about the Circumstantials of Religion. As the
body does languish in consuming Fevers, when the native heat abates within, and
unnatural heat inflaming the external parts succeeds: so when the Zeal of a
Christian does leave the Internals of Religion, and fly to Ceremonials,
Externals, or Inferior things, the Soul must needs consume and languish.

Of Conformity.
For Conformity, P. 55.
though to Ministers it be another thing, by reason of the new impositions,
than it was to our Predecessors; yet to the People, Conformity is the same, if
not easier, (especially to them that I now speak to:) for it is the Liturgy,
Ceremonies, and Ministry, that most alienate them. And the Liturgy is a little
amended, as to them, by the change of the Translation, and some little words,
and by longer Prayers; and the Ceremonies are the same; and Thirty Years ago,
there were many bare reading, not preaching Ministers, for one that is now.
Therefore our case of Separation being the same as of old, I take it to be
fully confuted, by the ancient Non-conformists: and I have so great a
Veneration for the worthy Names, much more an Estimation of the Reasonings, of
Mr. Cartwright, Egerton, Hildersham, Dod, Amesius, Parker, Baines, Brightman,
Ball, Bradshaw, Paget, Langley, Nicols, Herring, etc. that I shall not think,
they knew not why they chose this Subject, and wrote more against Separation,
than the Conformists did. I am very glad that the pious Lectures of Mr.
Hildersham, Mr. R. Rogers, and such old Non-conformists, are in so good esteem
among good People, where they will read them, urging the People, not only
against Separation, but to come to the very beginning of the Public Worship,
and preferring it before their Private Duties.

When I think what holy Learned Men the old Conformists were, P. 57.
my heart rises against the thoughts of separating from them. If I had come to
their Churches, when they used the Common Prayer, and Administered the
Sacrament, could I have departed and said, It is not lawful for any Christian
here to communicate with you? What! to such Men as Mr. Bolton, Whateley,
Fenner, Dent, Crook, Dike, Stock, Smith, Dr. Preston, Sibbs, Stoughton, Tailor,
and abundance other such? yea, such as Bishop Jewel, Grindal, Hall, Potter,
Davenant, Carleton, etc. Dr. Field, Smith, Jo. White, Willet, etc. yea, and the
Martyrs too? as Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper himself, Farrar, Bradford, Fillpot,
Sanders, etc. Could I separate from all these on the Reasons now in question?
Yea Calvin himself, and the Churches of his way were all separated from by the
Separatists of their times.

And though Ministerial Conformity is now much altered, P. 12, 13.
(as to Engagements) many (of the Assembly of Divines) that are yet living, do
Conform again; nor would I shun Communion with the Reverend Members of that
Assembly, Twiss, Gataker, Whitaker, and the rest, if again they used the
Liturgy among us. And if the old Conformists, such as Bolton, etc. were alive,
and used now the same Liturgy and Ceremonies as they did then, (which was worse
than now) I could not think their Communion in Prayer and Sacraments, unlawful,
nor Censure that Man as injurious to the Church, who should write to persuade
others not to separate from them.

Read over some of the old Non-conformists Books against Separation, Defense,
p. 89.
as Mr. Jacob's the Independent, against Johnson, and Mr. Bradshaw, and Mr.
Gataker's Defense against Cann, Mr. Gifford, Darrell, Paget, etc. and fullest
of all (at the beginning of our Troubles) Mr. John Ball in Three Books: In
these you will find the same Objections answered, or more and greater. And I
profess my Judgment, That our ordinary Boasters, that think they know more in
this Controversy than the old Non-conformists did, as far as I am able to
discern, are as far below them almost as they are below either Chamier, Sadeel,
Whitaker, or such other in dealing with a Papist.

Objections answered.
But what if there be gross and scandalous Sinners are Members of the Church?
Christian Directory, p. 747.
Answ. If you be wanting in your Duty to reform it, it is your sin; but if bare
Presence made their sin to be ours, it would also make all the sins of the
Assembly ours.

But what if they are sins committed in the open Assembly, even by the Minister
himself in his Praying, Preaching, and other Administrations? Answ. 1. A
Ministers personal Faults may damn himself, and must be matter of lamentation
to the Church, who ought to do their best to reform them, or get better, by any
lawful means: But in case they cannot, his sin is none of theirs, nor does it
make his Administration null, or ineffectual, nor will it allow you to separate
from the Worship which he administreth. -- You may not separate from him,
unless you can prove him, or his Ministry, utterly intolerable, by such Faults
as these: 1. An utter insufficiency in Knowledge, or Utterance, for the
necessary parts of the Ministerial Work: as if he be not able to Teach the
necessary Points of Christian Religion, nor to Administer the Sacraments, and
other parts of Public Worship. 2. If he set himself to oppose the ends of his
Ministry, and preach down Godliness, or any part of it, that is necessary to
Salvation: Or be a Preacher of Heresy, preaching up any damning Error, or
preaching down any necessary saving Truth. 3. If he so deprave the Public
Worship, as to destroy the Substance of it, as in putting up Blasphemy for
Prayer or Praise, or commit Idolatry, or set up new Sacraments, or impose any
Actual Sin on the People.

But there are other Ministerial Faults which warrant not our Separation; See
Christ. Direct. p. 606.
as, 1. Some tolerable Errors of Judgment, or Envy, and pettish Opposition to
others, Phil. 1. 15. 2. It is not unlawful to join with a Minister, that has
many Defects in his Ministration, or manner of Worship; as if he preach with
some Ignorance, Disorder, unfit Expressions or Gestures, and the like in Prayer
and Sacraments. 3. It is not unlawful to join with a Minister, that has some
material Error or Untruth in Preaching or Praying, sobeit we be not called to
approve it, and so it be not pernicious and destructive to the ends of his
Ministry. If we run away from all that vent any Untruth or Mistake in Public
or private Worship, we shall scarce know, what Church or Person we may hold
Communion with. For 1. a small Sin may no more be done or owned, than a
greater. 2. And then another Man's Weakness may disoblige me, and discharge me
from my Duty.

Of Subscription with Assent and Consent, particularly concerning Infants
baptized.
Q. 152. Is it lawful to subscribe or profess full assent and consent to any
religious Books, Christ. Direct. p. 902
beside the Bible, seeing all are fallible. Answ. 3. It is lawful to Profess or
Subscribe our Assent and Consent to any Humane Writing, which we judge to be
true and good, according to the Measure of its Truth and Goodness. As if
Church-Confessions, that are sound, be offered us for our Consent, we may say,
or subscribe, I hold all the Doctrine in this Book to be true and good. And by
so doing I do not assert the infallibility of the Author, but only the verity
of the Writing. I do not say that he cannot err, but that he erreth not in
this, as far as I am able to discern.

Q. 35. Is it certain by the word of God, P. 807.
that all Infants baptized, and dying before actual sin, are undoutedly saved?
Answ. I think that all the Children of true Christians do by Baptism receive a
public investiture, P. 810.
by God's appointment, into a state of Remission, Adoption, and right to
Salvation, at present; though I dare not say, I am undoubtedly certain of it.
-- But I say, as the Synod of Dort, Art. 1. That believing Parents have no
cause to doubt of the Salvation of their Children, that die in Infancy, before
they commit actual sin; that is, not to trouble themselves with fears about it.
For if such Infants were admitted to outward Privileges only, then (which is
my second Reason) we have no Promise, Ibid.
or Certainty, or Ground of Faith for the Pardon and Salvation of any
individual Infants in the World: and if there be no Promise, there is no Faith
of it, nor no Baptism to Seal it, and so we make Anti-paedobaptism unavoidable.

Whereas some mis-interpret the words of the old Rubric of Confirmation in the
English Liturgy, P. 812.
as if it spoke of all that are baptized, whether they have right or not, the
words themselves may serve to rectify that mistake: [And that no Man shall
think any detriment shall come to Children by deferring of their Confirmation,
he shall know for truth, that it is certain by God's Word, that Children being
baptized have all things necessary for their Salvation, and be undoubtedly
saved.] where it is plain, they mean, they have all things necessary ex part
Ecclesiae, or all God's applying Ordinances necessary, though they should die
unconfirmed, supposing they have all things necessary to just Baptism on their
own part: which is but what the Ancients were wont to say of the baptized
Adult: but they never meant, that the Infidel and Impenitent were in a state of
Life, because he was baptized, but that all that truly consent to the Covenant*
and signify this by being baptized are saved. So the Church of England says,
that they receive no detriment by delaying Confirmation; but it never said,
that they received no detriment by their Parents or Responses Infidelity or
Hypocrisy, or by their want of true Right, coram Deo, to be baptized.

Q. 39. What is the true meaning of Sponsors or Godfathers, P. 814. 1st Edit.
and is it lawful to make use of them? Answ. My Opinion is, that they did both
witness the probability of the Parents fidelity; P. 815.
and also promised, that if they should either apostaize, or die, they would
see that the Children were piously educated. If you take them, but as the
ancient Churches did, for such as do attest the Parents fidelity, (in their
persuasion) and do promise, first, to mind you of your Duty, and next to take
care of their pious Education, if you die; I know no reason you have to scruple
this much; yea more, it is in your power to agree with the Godfathers, that
they shall represent your own Persons, and speak and promise what they do, as
your Deputies, only in your Names: and what have you against this?

Object. When the Churchmen mean another thing, this is but to juggle with the
World? Answ. How can you prove, that the Authority that made, or imposed the
Liturgy, meant any other thing? 2. If the Imposers had meant ill, in a thing
that may be done well, you may discharge your Conscience, by doing it well, and
making a sufficient Profession of your better Sense.

As for the Antiquity of Godfathers, the current consent of Historians assures
us that Hyginus Bishop of Rome, did first ordain Godfathers at the Baptism of
Infants. He lived but forty years after St John. Preface to Infant Baptism.

Christ. Direct. p. 116. Part 3. Q. 41. Whether they are really baptized, who
are baptized according to the English Liturgy and Canons, where the Parents
seem excluded, and those to consent for the Infant, who have no power to do it?

Answ. p. 117. That the Parents Consent is supposed, though he be absent. 2.
The Parent is not required to be absent. 3. The Reason of that Canon seems to
be their jealousy lest any would exclude Godfathers. 4. While the Church has
not declared what Person the Sponsors bear, nor any farther what they are to
do, than to speak the Covenanting words, and promise to see the pious Education
of the Child, the Parents may agree that the Godfathers shall do all this as
their Deputies primarily and in their steads, and secondly as Friends that
promise their Assistance. 5. While Parents really consent, it is not their
Silence that nullifieth the Covenant. 6. All Parents are supposed and required
to be themselves the Choosers of the Sponsors and Sureties, and also to give
notice to the Ministers before hand, by which it appears their Consent is
presupposed: And though my own Judgment be that they should be the principal
Covenanters for the Child expressly, yet the want of that expresness will not
make the Persons to be unbaptized.

Q. 42. How is the Holy Ghost given to Infants in Baptism? whether all the
Children of true Christians have inward sanctifying Grace? etc. Answ. My
judgment agrees more in this with Davenant's, than any others; saving that he
does not appropriate the Benefits of Baptism to the Children of true Believers,
so much as I do. And though, by a Letter impleading Davenant's Cause, I was the
occasion of printing good Mr. Gataker's Answer to him; yet I am still most
inclined to his judgment, Not, that all the baptized, but that all the baptized
Seed of true Christians are pardoned, justified, adopted, and have a title to
the Spirit, and Salvation. And we must choose great Inconveniences, if this
Opinion be forsaken, viz. That all Infants must be taken to be out of Covenant
with God, and to have no promise of Salvation; whereas, surely the Law of
Grace, as well as the Covenant of Works, included all the Seed in their
Capacity.

Of the Responses.
Q. 83. May the People bare a Vocal part in Worship, P. 856.
and do any more than say Amen? Answ. The People bare an equal part in singing
the Psalms, which are Prayer, and Praise, and Instruction: if they may do so in
the Psalms in Meter, there can be no reason given, but they may lawfully do so
in Psalms in Prose; for saying them, and singing them, are but modes of
Utterance, and the ancient Singing was liker our Saying, than our Tunes. The
Primitive Christians were so full of zeal and love to Christ, that they would
have taken it for an Injury, and a quenching of the Spirit, to have been wholly
restrained from bearing their part in the Praises of the Church. The use of the
Tongue keeps awake the Mind, and stirs up God's Graces in his Servants. It
was the decay of Zeal in the People, that first shut out the Responses: while
they kept up the Ancient Zeal, they were inclined to take their part vocally in
the Worship. And this was seconded by the Pride and Usurpation of the Priests
thereupon; who thought the People of God too profane to speak in the
Assemblies, and meddle so much with Holy things. Yet the very remembrance of
former zeal caused most Churches to retain many of the words of their
predecessors, even when they lost the Life and Spirit which should animate
them; and so the same words came into the Liturgies, and were used by too many,
customarily, and in formality, which their Ancestors had used in the servour of
their Souls. And if it were not, that a dead-hearted, formal People, by
speaking the Responses carelessly and hypocritically, do bring them into
disgrace with many, that see the necessity of Seriousness, I think, few good
People would be against them now. -- It is here the duty of every Christian, to
labor to restore the life and spirit to the Words, that they may again be used
in a serious and holy manner, as heretofore, Exodus 19. 8. In as solemn an
Assembly as any of ours, when God gave Moses a form of words to preach to the
People, all the People answered together, and said, All that the Lord has
spoken, we will do. So Exodus 24. 3. and Deuter. 5. 27. which God approved of,
v. 28, 29. See Levit. 9. 24. 2 Kings 23. 2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 1. 35, 36. It is a
command, P. 857.
Psalm. 67. 3, 5. Let all the People praise thee, O God, etc. And he that will
limit this to single Persons, or say that it must not be, vocally, in the
Church, or, it must be in meter only, and never in prose, must prove it lest he
be proved one, that adds to God's Word.

Q. 84. Is it not a Sin for our Clerks, to make themselves the mouth of the
People? P. 857
Answ. The Clerks are not appointed to be the Mouth of the People, but each
Clerk is one of the People, commanded to do that which all should do, lest it
should be wholly left undone. If all the Congregation will speak all that the
Clerk does, it will answer the primary desire of the Church Governors who bid
the People do it

Of Bowing at the Name Jesus -- And of Priests, Altars, etc.
Q. 86. Is it lawful to bow at the name of Jesus? Answ. That we may lawfully
express our reverence, P. (...)
when the names (God, Jehovah, Jesus, Christ, etc.) are uttered, I have met
with few Christians who deny; nor know I any reason to deny it. If I live and
join in a Church where it is commanded, and peremptorily urged, to bow at the
Name of Jesus, and where my not doing it, would be divisive, Scandalous, or
offensive; I will bow at the Name of God, Jehovah, Jesus, Christ, Lord, etc. My
judgment of standing at the Gospel, and kneeling at the Decalogue, (when it is
commanded) is the same. P. 859.


Q. 122. May the name, Priests, Sacrifice and Altars, be lawfully used? P. 882.
Answ. The New Testament uses all the Greek names, which we Translate Priests,
Sacrifice and Altars; and our Translation is not intolerable, if Priest come
from Presbyter (I need not prove that) if it do not, yet all Ministers are
Subordinate to Christ in his Priestly Office. And the word Sacrifice is used of
us, and our offered Worship, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13. 15, 16. Phil. 4. 18. Ephesians. 5.
2. Romans 12. 1. and Heb. 13. 10. says we have an Altar, which word is
frequently used in the Revelations, in relation to Gospel times. We must not
therefore be quarrelsome against the bare names, unless they be abused to some
ill use. The Ancient Fathers and Churches did ever use all these words so
familiarly, without any Question oa Scruple raised by the Orthodox, or
Heretics about them, that we should be wary, how we condemn these words, lest
we give advantage to the Papists to tell their Followers, that all Antiquity is
on their side. The Lord's Supper is by Protestants truly called a Commemorative
Sacrifice.

Of the Communion Table, etc.
Q. 123. May the Communion Tables be turned Altarwise? and railed in? P. 882.
and is it lawful to come up to the Rails to Communicate? Answ. 1. God has not
given a particular command, or prohibition about these Circumstances, but only
general rules for Edification, Unity, Decency and Order. 2. They that do it out
of a design to draw Men to Popery, or to encourage Men in it, do sin. 3. So do
they, that rail in the Table, to signify, that Lay-Christians must not come to
it, but be kept at a distance. 4. But where there are no such ends, but only to
imitate the Ancients, that did thus, and to show reverence to the Table on the
account of the Sacrament, by keeping away Dogs, keeping Boys from sitting on
it; and the professed Doctrine of the Church condemns Transubstantiation, the
real Corporal-presence, etc. in this case Christians should take these, for
such as they are, indifferent things, and not censure or condemn each other for
them. 5. And to communicate, is not only lawful in this case, where we cannot
prove, that the Minister sins, but even, when we suspect an ill design in
him, which we cannot prove, yea, or when we can prove that his personal
interpretation of the Place, Name, Situation, and Rail, is unsound; for we
Assemble there to Communicate in, and according to the professed Doctrine of
Christianity, and the Churches, and our own open profession, and not after
every private Opinion, and Error of the Minister. Whether we shall receive the
Lord's Supper at a Table, or in our Seats? Whether the Table shall be of Wood
or Stone, Round or Long, or Square? Whether it shall stand on the East or West
side of the Temple, or in the middle? Whether it shall have Rails, or no Rails?
All these are left to Humane Prudence. As for standing at the reading of the
Gospel, Page 148. he says, If I live where Rulers peremtorily command it, as a
signified consent to the Gospel, I would obey them rather than give offense.
And for kneeling when the Decalogue is read: That the thing it self is lawful,
is past doubt; and if it be commanded, and the omission would be offensive, I
would use it, though mistaken Persons were present, because I cannot disobey
nor differ from the whole Assembly without a greater hurt and scandal, than
seeming to harden the mistaking Person, and because I could and would by other
means remove that Persons danger as from me, by making him know that it is no
Prayer; And the rather because in our times the Minister may in the Pulpit tell
the People the contrary. We must not lightly differ from the Churches where we
live in such things. I like best to kneel in Prayer and Confession of Sins. To
stand up in Praises to God; at Singing and Reading Psalms of Praise and other
Hymns; to set at Hearing the Word, because the body has necessity of some rest.

Of the Creed.
Q. 139. What is the Use and Authority of the Creed? Is it of the Apostle
framing or not? P. 896.
Answ. Its use is, to be a plain explication of the Faith professed in the
Baptismal Covenant; And for the satisfation of the Church, that Men indeed
understand what they did in Baptism, and professed to believe. 2. It is the
Word of God, as to the matter of it, whatever it be as to the order, or
Composition of the Words. 3. It is not to be doubted, but the Apostles did use
a Creed commonly in their days, which was the same with that, now called the
Apostles, and the Nicene, in the main. 4. And it is easily probable, that
Christ composed a Creed, when he made his Covenant, and instituted Baptism,
Matthew. 28. 19. 5. That the Apostles did cause the baptizable, to understand the
Three Articles of Christ's own Creed and Covenant, and used many explicatory
words to make them understand it. 6. It is more than probable, that the matter
opened by them, was still the same when the words were not the same. 7. And it
is also more than probable, that they did not needlessly vary the words, lest it
should teach Men to vary the matter. And Lastly, No doubt but this practice of
the Apostles was imitated by the Churches, and that thus the Essentials of
Religion were by the Tradition of the Creed, and Baptism, delivered by
themselves, as far as Christianity went, long before any Book of the New
Testament was written. And the following Churches, using the same Creed, might
so far well call it the Apostles Creed.

Of the Apocrypha.
Q. 150. Is it lawful to read the Apocrypha, P. 901. Christian Directory, P.
179. 2d Edit.
or Homilies? Answ. It is lawful, so be it they be sound Doctrine, and fitted
to the Peoples Edification. 2. So be it they be not read scandalously, without
sufficient differencing them from God's Book. 3. So they be not read to
exclude, or hinder the reading of the Scripture, or other necessary Church
duty. 4. So they be not read read to keep up an ignorant lazy Ministry, that
can, or will do no better. 5. And especially if Authority command it, and the
Churches agreement require it.

Of the Oath of Canonical Obedience.
Q. 153. May we lawfully swear obedience, P. 902.
in all things lawful and honest, either to Usurpers, or to our lawful Pastors?
Answ. If the King shall command us, it is lawful. So the old Non-conformists,
who thought the English Prelacy an unlawful Office, yet maintained that it is
lawful to take the Oath of Canonical Obedience, because they thought it was
imposed by the King, and Laws, and that we swear them to them, not as Officers
claming a Divine Right in the Spiritual Government, but as Ordinaries or
Officers, made by the King, according to the Oath of Supremacy, And if Prelacy
were proved never so unlawful, no doubt but by the Kings Command, we may swear
or perform formal Obedience to a Prelate. Read Bradshaw against Can concerning
this, Page 181. Christ. Direct. 2d. Edit.

Of the Holiness of Churches.
Q. 170. Are Temples, Fonts, Utensils, Church Lands, much more Ministers Holy!
P. 915.
And what reverence is due to them, as Holy? Answ. Temples, Utensils, Lands,
etc. devoted, and lawfully separated by Man, for Holy uses, are Holy, as justly
related to God by that lawful separation. Ministers are more Holy than Temples,
Lands, or Utensils, as being nearlier related to holy things; and things
separated by God, are more Holy than those justly separated by Man. And so of
Days, every thing should be reverenced according to the measure of its
Holiness: And this expressed by such Signs, Gestures, Actions, as are fittest
to Honor God, to whom they are related. And so to be uncovered in the Church,
and use reverent Carriage and Gestures there, does tend to preserve due
Reverence to God, and to his Worship, 1 Cor. 16. 20.

Of the Power of the Magistrate in Circumstantials.
We flatly affirm, that the Kings Laws do bind the Mind, Soul, or Conscience to
a conscionable performance of all his lawful commands, Apol 4. We are so tender
of obeying our Rulers, that we will do any thing to obey and please them,
except disobeying God, Page 111.

We doubt not but Magistrates may restrain false Teachers from seducing others,
and drawing them to Sin. Of Episcopacy, Page 193.

Princes and Rulers may for Orders sake, distribute their Christian Kingdoms
into Parishes, which shall be the Ordinary Bounds of particular Churches. And
such distribution is very Congruous to the ends of the Ministry and Churches,
and conduces to Order and Peace. Non-confor. Plea, Page 31.

When Pastors by Concord, or Magistrates by Laws, have settled lawful
Circumstances, or Accidents of Church Order, or Worship, or Discipline, though
they be in particular but Humane Institutions, it is sinful Disobedience to
violate them without necessity, as Parochial Order, Associations, Times,
Places, Ministers, Scripture Translations, etc. Page 49.

God's Laws bind us to keep Love and Concord, and the Agreement of Councils may
determine of the matter in alterable Points, and so absent and present. Bishops
may for Concord sake be obliged by God's Law to keep such Canons* and they are
matter of Duty, Page. 266.

The true interest of a mere Nonconformist, requires him to live in Loyalty,
Peace, and Patience, and in Love and Communion with the Parochial Churches,
Page 251. N. 11. I deny not but Magistrates may moderately drive Men to hear
God's Word, and to do the immediate Duties of their Places. Of Episcopacy, Page
144.

Those Modes or Circumstances of Worship, Five Disp. P. 361.
which are necessary in genere, but left undetermined by God, in specie, are
left by God to humane, prudential determination, (else an impossibility should
be necessary.) P. 401.
It is left to humane determination what Place the Public Assemblies shall be
held in. And to determine of the time, except where God has determined
already, and what Utensils to employ about the Public Worship.

Of the Surplice.
Some decent Habit is necessary; P. 409.
either the Magistrate, or the Minister, or associated Pastors must determine
what. I think neither Magistrate, nor Synod, should do more than hinder
indecency; if they do, and tie all to one habit (and suppose it were an
indecent habit) yet this is but an imprudent use of power, it is a thing within
the Magistrates reach, he does not aliene work, but his own work amiss, and
therefore the thing in it self being lawful, I would obey him, and use that
garment, if I could not be dispensed with. Yea though, secondarily, the
whiteness be to signify purity, and so it be made a teaching sign, yet would I
obey. And see no reason to scruple the lawfulness of the Ring in Marriage; P.
411.
for, though the Papists make a Sacrament of Marriage, yet we have no reason to
take it for any Ordinance of Divine Worship, more than the solemnizing a
Contract between a Prince and People. All things are sanctified and pure to the
Pure. And, for Organs or other Instruments of Music in God's Worship, P. 412.
they being a help, partly naturally and partly artificial to the exhilarating
the Spirits, for the praise of God, I know no argument to prove them simply
unlawful, Christ. Direct. p. 884
but what would prove a Cup of Wine unlawful, or the Tune and Meter, and Melody
of Singing unlawful.

Here therefore we thus conclude Page 423. That every misordering of such great
Affairs, is the Sin of them that do it, yet the Subject is not exempted from
Obedience by every such mistake of the Governor. And. 67. If the Mischoosing
of such Circumstances by the Governors, be but an inconvenience, and destroy
not the Ordinance it self or frustrate the ends of it, we are to obey, for he
the judge of his own Works, and not we: The thing is not sinful, though
inconvenient.

Page 398. Of Five Disputations. 25. Prop. 12. It may be very Sinful to command
some Ceremonies which may lawfully, yea must in duty be used when they are
commanded. And Prop. 14. Certain things, commonly called Ceremonies, may
lawfully be used in the Church upon humane imposition, and when it is not
against the Law of God, no Person should disobey the command of their Lawful
Governors in such things.

If the Prince command one thing, not contrary to God's Law, and the Pastors
command the contrary, we must obey the Prince before the Pastor; We must obey
the Magistrate; We know not that their Commands are lawful, as long as we have
no sufficient Reason to believe them unlawful. Page 356. of Holy Commonwealth.
and Page 357.

Of Holy Days.
The Holy Doctrine, Lives and Sufferings of the Martyrs, and other Holy Men,
has been so great a Mercy to the Church, that for any thing I know, it is
lawful to keep Anniversary Thanksgiving in remembrance of them, and to
encourage the weak, and provoke them to constancy and imitation -- No Christian
should refuse that which is lawful, nor to join with the Church in Holy
Exercises, on the days of thankful Commemoration of the Apostles and Martyrs,
and Excellent Instruments of the Church, much less pertulently to work, and set
open their Shops to the offense of others, but rather to persuade others to
imitate their Holy Lives, to whom they give such honors. Chr. Direct. p. 167.
Part. 3.

Nor do I scruple to keep a day in remembrance of any eminent Servant of
Christ, Five Disp.
or Martyr, P. 412.
to praise God for their Doctrine, or Example, and honor their Memorial. I am
resolved, P. 416.
if I live where such Holy Days, (Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Fasting,
Transfiguration, Ascension, and such like) are observed, P. 117.
to censure no Man for observing them. But, if I lived under a Government, that
peremprorily commanded it, I would observe the outward rest of such a Holy Day,
See Christ. Direct.
and I would Preach on it, P. 885.
and join with the Assemblies in God's Worship, yea I would thus observe the
day, rather than offend a weak Brother, or hinder any Man's Salvation; much
more rather than I would make any division in the Church.

Of the Cross in Baptism.
Of all our Ceremonies, P. 418.
there is none that I have more suspected to be simply unlawful than the Cross
in Baptism, yet I dare not peremptorily say, that the Cross in Baptism is
unlawful; nor will I condemn Ancients or Moderns that use it; nor will I make
any disturbance in the Church about it, more than my own forbearance will make.
I presume not to censure them that judge it lawful, but only give the Reasons
that make me doubt, and rather think it to be unlawful, though still with a
suspicion of my own Understanding.

P. 123. of Christ. Direct. Q. 49. May one offer his Child to be baptized with
the sign of the Cross, the use of Crisme, and the white Garment, Milk and
Honey, or Exorcism, as in the Lutheran Churches.

Answ. 4. When he cannot lawfully have better, he may and must offer his Child
to them that will so baptize him, rather than not at all, because Baptism is
God's Ordinance, and the Sin is the Ministers, and not his. Another Man's
sinful mode will not justify the neglect of our Duty, else we might not join
in Prayer or Sacrament in which the Minister modally sins (i. e.) in none.

Mr. B. grants p. 161. of Christ. Direct. Edit. 2. That it is not unlawful to
make an Image to be objectum vel medium excitans ad Cultum Dei, an object of
our Consideration, exciting our Minds to worship God as a Death's Head or
Crucifix, to stir up in us a worshipping Affection; and that it is lawful by
the sight of a Crucifix to be provoked to worship God.

I durst not to have reproved any of the ancient Christians that used the Sign
of the Cross merely as a Professing Sign, to show the Heathen and Jews that
they believed in a Crucified Christ, and were not ashamed of his Cross. Of
Church Government, p. 404.

Mr. Baxter's Judgment concerning Confirmation agreeable to the practice of the
Church of England, Confirmation, p. 207, 220, 230.
may be seen in a particular Treatise on that Subject.

Of Conventicles.
Q. 172. Are all religious and private Meetings forbidden by Rulers, Christ.
Direct. p. 916.
unlawful Conventicles? Answ. 1. It is more to the Honor of the Church, and of
Religion, and of God, and more to our Safety and Edification, to have God's
Worship performed solemnly, publicly, and in great Assemblies, than in a
corner, secretly and with few. 2. It is a great mercy, where Rulers allow the
Church such Public Worship. 3. Caeteris paribus, all Christians. should prefer
such Public Worship before Private, and no private Meetings should be kept up,
which are opposite, or prejudicial to such public Meetings. And therefore if
such Meetings, (or any that are unnecessary, to the ends of the Ministry, the
Service of God, and good of Souls) be forbidden by lawful Rulers, they must be
forborne. And it must be remembered, that Rulers, that are Infidels, Papists,
Heretics, or Persecutors, that restrain Church-Meetings, to the injury of
Men's Souls, must be distinguished from pious Princes, that only restrain
Heretics, and real Schismatics, for the Churches good. 2. And that times of
Heresy and Schism may make private Meetings more dangerous, than quiet times.
And so even the Scottish Church forbad private Meetings, in the Separatists
days of late. And when they do more hurt than good, and are justly forbidden,
no doubt, in that case, it is a duty to obey, and to forbear them.

P. 117. of the first Plea. If the generality of the Ministry obtain their
Liberty by some small tolerable Sin or Error, and the sounder part be few and
unnecessary in that Country, Prudence binds them to go to some other place
that needs them, and never to exercise their Ministry in that place, where in
true Reason it is like to do more hurt than good.

Holy Commonwealth, Thesis 240. It is necessary to the Churches Peace, that no
private Congregations may be gathered, or Anti-Churches erected, without
approbation or Toleration from the Magistrate. If private Assemblies be
permitted promiscuously and unlimitedly, it will then be impossible to restrain
Heresy and Impiety; yea, they may meet to plot against the Magistrate. And no
Assemblies whatsoever, besides the Parish Churches, are to be allowed by the
Magistrate.

It is a dangerous thing, Christ. Direct. p. 49.
to be ensnared in a Sect; it will, before you are aware, possess you with a
feverish, sinful Zeal for the Opinions and Interest of that Sect; it will make
you bold, in bitter Invectives and Censures, against those that differ from
you; it will corrupt your Church Communion, and fill your very Prayers with
Partiality, and Human Passions; it will secretly bring Malice, under the name
of Zeal, into your minds and words. In a word, it is a secret, but deadly Enemy
to Christian Love and Peace. Let them that are wiser, and more Orthodox, and
godly than others, show (as the Holy Ghost directs them, James 3. 13, 14,
etc.) out of a good conversation their works with meekness of wisdom: But if ye
have bitter envying (or zeal) and strife in your hearts, Glory not, and lie not
against the truth. This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, devilish.

P. 36. of the Defense. The interest of the Protestant Religion must be much
kept up, by keeping up as much of Truth, Piety, and Reputation, as is possible,
in the Parish Churches.

Sacril. Desertion, p. 92. In Parish-Churches, where all may hear the Parish
Minister, I would not have you, without necessity, to preach the same hour of
the day, but at some middle time, that you may not seem to vye with him for
Auditors, nor to draw the People from him; but let them go with you to hear
him, and after come to hear you.

Saints Rest, p. 518. Do not meet together in opposition to the Public
Meeting, nor yet to make a groundless Schism, or to separate from the Church
whereof you are a Member; nor to destroy the old, that you may gather a new
Church out of its ruins, as long as it has the Essentials, and there is hope
of reforming it. The great advantages that Satan has got upon the Church,
through the Sin of the Pastors in these days, is by Division; by this he has
promoted all the rest of his Designs. Our Divisions gratify the Papists
greatly, hazard the Protestant Religion more than most of you seem to regard or
believe; it advantageth Profaneness, and greatly hinders the Success of the
Ministers; it pleases Satan, and builds up his Kingdom.

Preface to Confession. The hand of God is apparently gone out against the
Separatists, you see you do but prepare for a further progress: Seekers,
Ranters, Quakers, and too many professed Infidels, do spring up from among you,
as if this were the Journeys end, and perfection of your Revolt. By such
fearful Dissertions did God formerly witness his detestation of those that
withdrew from the Unity of the Church. Parties will arise in the Separate
Churches, and separate again from them, till they are dissolved. I beseech you
(my Brethren) to open their Eyes so far as to regard Experience; How few
separated Churches do now Exist that were in being 100 years ago? Can you name
any? and would you have all the Churches of Christ dissolved?

Of Communion in the Lord's Supper.
Q. 2. May we communicate with unworthy persons? Christian Directory, p. 616.
1st Edit.
Answ. It is your duty to communicate with that Church which has a true
Pastor, and where the denominating part of the Members are capable of
Church Communion, though there may some Infidels, or Heathen, or incapable
Persons violently intrude, or scandalous Persons are admitted, through the
neglect of Discipline, in case you have not your choice to hold personal
communion with a better Church, and in case also you be not guilty of the
Corruption, but by seasonable and modest professing your dissent, do clear your
self of the guilt of such intrusion and corruption.

If we Sin not by omitting our own Duty, Christ. Direct. p. 137. 2d Edit.
it will be no Sin of ours to communicate with the Church where Scandalous
Sinners or Heretics are permitted, the Pastors and Delinquents Sins are not
ours.

Q. 3. But what if I cannot communicate, unless I conform to an imposed
gesture, as kneeling? Answ. I never yet heard any thing to prove kneeling
unlawful; there is no Word of God, for, or against, any gesture. Christ's
example cannot be proved to oblige us in this, and his gesture was not such a
sitting as ours. The nature of the Ordinance is mixed. And if it be lawful to
take a Pardon from the King upon our Knees, I know not what can make it
unlawful to take a Sealed Pardon from Christ, Five Disp. P. 411.
by his Ambassador, upon our Knees. As for this Ceremony of kneeling at the
Sacrament especially, since the Rubric is inserted, which disclaimeth, both
all Bread-worship, and the bodily Real-presence, my judgment was ever for it.
God having made some gesture necessary, and confined us to none, but left it to
humane determination, I shall submit to Magistrates in their proper Work. I am
not sure, that Christ intended the example of himself in this as oligatory; but
I am sure, Defense, P. 177.
he has commanded me obedience, and peace. Mr. Perkins was for kneeling, and
Mr. Baines in his Letters writes for it, and answers objections against it.

Page 133. of Mr. B' s Life. I cannot be so narrow in my Principles of Church
Communion, as many are, who are so much for a Liturgy, or so much against it;
so much for Ceremonies, or so much against them, that they can hold Communion
with no Church that is not of their mind or way. If I were among the Greeks,
the Lutherans, the Independants, yea the Anabaptists, I would hold sometime
Communion with them as Christians -- I cannot be of their Opinion, that think
God will not accept him that prays by the Common Prayer Book, and that such
Forms are a Self-invented Worship which God rejects.

Q. 4. But what if I cannot Communicate, Christ. Direct. p. 607.
but according to the Administration of the Common Prayer Book? Answ. 1. That
it is not unlawful to receive according to the Administration of the
Common Prayer Book, because it is a Form, needs no proof to any, that is
Judicious. 2. Nor yet, for any evil in this particular Form, for in this part
the Common Prayer is generally approved. 3. Nor yet, because it is imposed; for
a Command makes not that unlawful to us, which is lawful before, but it makes
many things lawful, and duties, that else would have been unlawful
accidentally. 4. And the intentions of the Commanders we have little to do
with. And for the consequents, they must be weighed on both sides, and the
consequents of our refusal will not be found light. In general, I must here
tell the People of God, in the bitter sorrow of my Soul, that at last it is
time for them to discern that temptation, that has in all Ages of the Church
almost, made this Sacrament of our Union, to be the grand occasion or
instrument of our Divisions. And that, true Humility, and Acquaintance with our
selves, and Love to Christ, and one another, would show some Men, that it was
but their Pride and Prejudice, and Ignorance, that made them think so heinously
of other Men's manner of Worship. And that, on all sides, among true Christians,
the manner of their Worship is not so odious, as Prejudice, and Faction, and
Partiality represents it. And that God accepts that, which they reject. And
they should see, how the Devil has undone the common People, by this means, by
teaching them every one to expect salvation for being of that Party which he
takes to be the right Church, and for Worshipping in that manner which he, and
his Party, thinks best. And so wonderful a thing is prejudice, that every
Party, by this, Christ. Direct. p. 48.
is brought to think that ridiculous and vile, which the other Party accounts
best. But to magnify any one Church or Party, so as to deny due love and
communion to the rest, is Schism. To limit all the Church to your Party, and
deny all, or any of the rest, to be Christians, and parts of the Universal
Church, is Schism, by a dangerous breach of Charity. It is Schism also, to
condemn unjustly any particular Church, as no Church. And it is Schism, to
withdraw your bodily communion from a Church that you were bound to hold
communion with, upon a false supposition that it is no Church, or is not
lawfully to be communicated with. And it is Schism, to make Divisions or
Parties in a Church, P. 49.
though you divide not from that Church. The holiness of the Party that Men
adhere to, is made a pretense to excuse Schism; but this must make but a
gradual difference in our esteem and love to some Christians above others. If
really they are most holy, I must love them most, and labor to be as holy as
they: But I must not therefore, unjustly deny communion, or due respect to
other Christians, that are less holy, nor cleave to them as a Sect, or divided
Party, whom I esteem most holy. For the holiest are most Charitable, and most
against the Divisions among Christians, and tenderest of their Unity and Peace.
Own the best, as best, but none, as a divided Sect; espouse not their dividing
interest; confine not your especial love to a Party, but extend it to all the
Members of Christ. Deny not local Communion when there is occasion for it, to
any Church, that has the Substance of True Worship, and forces you not to
sin. Love them as true Christians, Baxter of Confirmation, p. 3.
and Churches, even when they drive you from their Communion. I have found that
Reformation is to be accomplished more by restoration of Ordinances and
Administrations to their Primitive Nature and Use, than by utter abolition.

Mr. Bagshaw objected to Mr. Baxter, that he chose to communicate in a very
populous Church upon Easter Day, purposely that it might be known: To this Mr.
Baxter Answers, p. 76. If a Man by many Years forbearing all Public Prayer,
and Sacraments, should tempt others to think that he is against them, or thinks
them needless; How should he cure that Scandal, but by doing that openly,
pleading for it which he is supposed to be against, Ministers being bound to
teach by Example as well as Doctrine?

Of the Liturgy.
1. Mr. Baxter in the 2d. page of his exceptions against the Liturgy, urged an
Objection of Mr. Hales in these Words. To load our Public Forms with Private
Fancies on which we differ, is the most sovereign way to perpetuate Schism, See
also, p. 48. The Bishops gave this Answer to the Objection; We heartily desire
that according to this Proposal, great care may be taken to suppress private
Conceptions of Prayer, lest private Opinions be made matter of Prayer, as it
has, and will be, if private Persons take liberty to make public Prayers. To
this I agreed, p. 201. Cure of Divisions, in these words; Every Separatist,
Anabaptist, Antinomian, does too willingly put his Errors into his Prayers: The
Sense of which Mr. Bagshaw thus expounds. p. 7. Of his Antidote, by mentioning
of Separatists, as a distinct body of Men from the Antinomian, Anabaptists,
etc. It is evident he can mean no other but his Presbyterian and
Congregational-Brethren.

2. That which God prescribed is lawful, but God prescribed Forms of Prayer, as
the Titles and Matter of many of the Psalms prove, which were daily used in the
Jews Synagogues. Christ. Direct. 2d. Edit. p. 139.

Q. 74. Is it lawful to impose Forms on the Congregation in public Worship?
Answ. Yes, and more than lawful. It is the Pastors duty so to do; for whether
he forethink what to pray, or not, his Prayer is to them a Form of Words, and
they are bound to concur with him in Spirit or Desire, and to say, Amen. So
that every Minister by Office is daily to impose a Form of Prayer on all the
People; only some Men impose the same Form many times over, or every day, and
others impose every day a new one. page 140. Ibid.

Page 142, 143. Mr. Baxter shows the conveniences and inconveniences, both of
see and prescribed Prayers; and adds, My own judgment is, that somewhat of both
ways joined together will best obviate the inconveniences of both, though by
this I cross the conceits of prejudiced Men on both extremes; I think I cross
not the judgment of the Church of England, which allows free Prayers in the
Pulpit, and at the Visitation of the Sick -- Nor of the Famous Non conformists,
Cartwright, Hildersham, Greenham, Amisius, Perkins, Bains, etc. Mr. Cartwright
all the time that he lived abroad, used the same Form before Sermon and after,
and read Prayers in the Church, and concluded with the Lords Prayer.

. 4. Page 102. Of, Mr. Baxter' s life, Part 1. Under pretense of the purity of
their Churches, the Separatists set themselves against the same Men, that the
Drunkards and Swearers set against, doing what they could to make them odious,
and put them down, only they did it more profanely than the Profane, in saying,
Let the Lord be glorified; let the Gospel be propagated; abusing Sacred
Scripture to their purpose. All this began in unwarrantable Separations, and
too much aggravating the faults of the Churches, and Common People, and
Common Prayer Book, and Ministry, which because they thought they needed
amendments it required their obstinate Separation, and allowed them to make
odious any thing that was amiss and if any Man had rebuked them for making it
more faulty than it was, they called him a pleader for Antichrist and Baal, and
every eror in the mode of Worship was Idolatry, Popery, Antichristianism,
Superstition, Will Worship, etc. When many of their own Prayers were full of
Carnal Passion, Faction, Disorder, vain Repetitions, unsound and loathsome
Expressions, and their Doctrine full of Errors and Confussion.

5. Page 169. Part. 3. Of B' s Life. I wrote a Book called Cain and Abel,
intending a third Part, to tell Dissenters, why I went to the Parish Church,
and Communicated; and why they should not suffer as Separatists, least they
suffer as Evil doers; which a Bookseller importuned me to let him Print, but
for Reasons then given, I delayed it; but at last consented to publish the
Reasons of my Communicating in the Parish Churches, and against Separations:
But a Manuscript of Dr. Owen's, containing Twelve Arguments against joining
with the Liturgy in Public Churches was sent me, which I answered, whereupon a
swarm of Revilers powered out their keenest Censures whom I answered. Another
said, that my Treatise of Episcopacy fully proved the duty of Separation;
whereupon I explained that Treatise, and all these things together I Published
in a Treatise in defense of Catholic Communion, to which I refer such as
desire farther Satisfaction.

7. I shall name but one Passage more on this Head, in his Defense of the
Principles of Love. page 88. The Covenant (he says) binds us to Reformation
according to God's Word, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches: But to
prefer no Public Worship, or a worse before the Liturgy, is Deformation and
Profaneness; and it is greater Reformation to prefer the Liturgy before none,
than to prefer Extemporate Public Worship before the Liturgy; for all the
Reformed Churches in Christendom do commonly profess to hold Communion with the
English Churches in the Liturgy, if they come among us where it is used, so
that it seems in Mr. Baxter's Judgment a breach of the Covenant to prefer no
Public Worship before the Liturgy, or to refuse Occasional Communion in the
use of the Liturgy, as if it were unlawful, when in Mr. B's as well as in the
Judgment of all the Reformed Churches, it is to be preferred to Extemporate
Public Worsip.

My Opinion as to Liturgy in general, Dispute the 4th. of Church Government.
is, 1. That a stinted Liturgy is in it self lawful. P. 358. P.
2. That a stinted Liturgy in some parts of Public Service is necessary. 359.
3. In the parts where in is not necessary, it may not only be submitted to,
but desired, when the peace of the Church requires it. 4. It is not of such
necessity to take the matter, and words out of the Holy Scriptures, See Christ,
Direct. P. 874.
but that we may join in a Liturgy, or use it, if the Form of Words be not from
Scripture. This is thus proved: 1. That which is not directly, or
consequentially forbidden by God, remains lawful. A stinted Liturgy is not
directly, or consequentially forbidden of God: Therefore it remains lawful.
The major is undoubted, because nothing but a prohibition can make a thing
unlawful; where there is no Law, there is no Transgression. Yet I have heard
very Reverend Men Answer this, That it is enough that it is not commanded,
though not forbidden, which is plainly to deny both Scripture and Civil
Principles. Now for the Minor, That a stinted Liturgy is not forbidden, we need
no other proof, than that no Prohibion can be produced. P. 361.


The main Body of Nonconformist Ministers did judge, that the Ordinary Liturgy
appointed for Public Worship, was such as a good Christian might lawfully join
in, Apol. p. 148.

If it be lawful for the People to use a stinted form of Words, P. 364.
in Public Prayer, then is it in it self lawful for the Pastors: But it is
lawful for the People, etc. For the Pastors Prayer (which they must pray over
with him, and not only hear it) is a stinted Form to them, even as much as if
he had learnt it out of a Book.

It is lawful to use a Form in Preaching, therefore a stinted Liturgy is
lawful. 1. Because Preaching is a part of that Liturgy. 2. Because the reason
is the same for Prayer as for that in the main.

That which has been the practice of the Church in Scripture times and down to
this day, and is yet the practice of almost all the Churches of Christ on
earth, is not like to be unlawful: But such is the use of some stinted Forms,
etc.

I have showed, that it was so in the Jewish Church. That it has been of
ancient use in the Church, since Christ, and at this day in Africa, Asia,
Europe, and the Reformed Churches in France, Holland, Geneva, etc. is so well
known, that I need not stand to prove it: And those few that seem to disuse it,
do yet use it in Psalms and other parts of Worship. As for the Common Prayer it
self, I never rejected it, because it was a Form; or thought it simply
unlawful, because it was such a Form; but have made use of it, and would do
again in the like case.

Object. But if a faulty manner of praying be prescribed, Christ. Direct. p.
748.
and imposed by a Law, I know it beforehand and am guilty of it. Answ. If the
thing be sinful, either it is, 1. Because the Prayers are defective and faulty;
Or, 2. Because they are imposed; Or, 3. because you knew the Fault beforehand,
but none of these can prove your joining with them sinful. 1. Not because they
are faulty; for you may join with as faulty Prayers (you confess) if not
imposed. 2. Not because imposed for that is an extenuation, See Christ. Direct.
p. 848.
and not an aggravation. For (1.) it proves the Minister less voluntary of the
two, than those are that do it without any command, through the error of their
own Judgments. (2.) Because (though lawful things often become unlawful when
Superiors forbid them, yet) no reason can be given, why a lawful thing should
become unlawful, because a lawful Superior does command it; else Superiors
might take away all our Christian Liberty, and make all things unlawful to us,
by commanding them. You would take it for a wild Conceit in your Children or
Servants, if they say, when you bid them learn a Catechism, or use a Form of
Prayer, It was lawful for us to do it till you commanded us, but because you
bid us do it, it is unlawful. If it be a Duty to obey Governors in all lawful
things, then it is not a Sin to obey them. 3. It is not your knowing before
hand, that makes it unlawful: for 1. I know in general before hand, that all
imperfect Men will do imperfectly: and though I know not the particular, that
makes it never the lawfuller, if foreknowledge it self did make it unlawful.
2. If you know that (e. g.) an Antinomian, or some mistaken Preacher, would
constantly drop some words for his Error, in praying or preaching, that will
not make it unlawful in your own Judgment, for you to join (if it be not a flat
Heresy.) 3. It is another Man's Error or Fault that you foreknow, and not
your own. 4. God himself does, as an Universal Cause of Nature, concur with Men
in those Acts which he foreknoweth they will sinfully do, yet is not the
Author or Approver of the Sin.

We (the Commissioners 1663.) Defense, p. 38.
all thought a Liturgy lawful, and diverse Learned and Reverend Nonconformists
of London met to consider how far it was their duty, or lawful to Communicate
with the Parish Churches, where they lived, in the Liturgy and Sacrament, and I
proved four Propositions: 1. That it is lawful to use a Form: 2. That it is
lawful to join with some Parish Churches in the use of the Liturgy: 3. That it
is lawful to join with some Parish Churches in the Lord's Supper: 4. That it is
to some a duty to join with some Parish Churches three times a year in the
Lord's Supper: and none of the Brethren seemed to dissent, but took the Reasons
to be valid.

Were I in Armenia, P. 176.
Abassia, or among the Greeks, I would join in a much more defective Form than
our Liturgy, rather than none. And this is the judgment of many New England
Ministers, conform to the old Non-conformists, who did some of them read the
Common Prayer, and the most of them judged it lawful to join in it, or else Mr.
Hildersham, Mr. Richard Rogers, etc. would not write so earnestly for coming to
the beginning, P. 54.
and preferring it before all private Duties. And truly, I am not able to bear
the thoughts of separating from almost all Christ's Churches upon Earth; but he
that separates from one, or many, upon a reason common to almost all, does
virtually separate from almost all; and he that separates from all among us
upon the account of the unlawfulness of our Liturgy, and the badness of our
Ministry, does separate from them upon a reason common to almost all, or the
far greatest part, as I conceive.

Those Forms of Liturgy which now are most distasted, Cure of Divisions, P. 200.
were brought in by the most zealous religious People at the first: The many
short Invocations, Versicles and Responses, which the People use, were brought
in when the Souls of the Faithful did abound with Zeal, and in holy fervors
break out in such expressions, and could not well endure to be bare Auditors,
and not vocally to bear their part in the praises of God and prayers of the
Church.

I have showed at large, P. 174.
How far God has given Men power to prescribe, and impose Forms for others,
and commanded others to obey them: P. 179.
when Christ said, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. he bound the Disciples
in duty to do as he bid them; P. 185.
How Forms may be imposed publicly on the Congregations of Believers, and on
the Ministers, yea though the Forms imposed be worse than the exercise of their
own gifts, (though among us no Man be forbidden to use his own gifts in the
Pulpit.) The Pharisees long Liturgy (it is like) was in many things worse than
ours; yet Christ and his Apostles often joined with them, Five Disp. p. 363.
and never condemned them. I shall now only add that the Lord's Prayer is a
Form directed to God as in the Third Person, and not to Man only as a directory
for Prayer in the Second Person: it is not, Pray to God your Father in Heaven
that his name may be Hallowed, his Kingdom come, etc. But, Our Father which art
in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc. And it seems by the Disciples words, that
thus John taught his Disciples to pray, Luke 11. 1. and we have in the
Scripture the mention of many Set Forms of Service to God, which therefore we
may well use. And I desire the Reader again to Note, that though Prayer was
corrupted by the Pharisees, yet Christ usually joined in their Synagogues, Luke
14. 17. and never meddled with our controversy about the lawfulness of Set
Forms. [This Mr. Baxter infers from Calvin's note on Matthew. 6. before the
Preface to the Defense.]

Page 76. Of Concord. I constantly join with my Parish Church in Liturgy and
Sacraments, and hope so to do while I live.

I take the Common Prayer to be better incomparably than the Prayers or Sermons
of many that I hear.

As for the Common Prayer it self, I never rejected it, because it was a Form,
or thought it simply unlawful, because it was such a Form, but have made use of
it, and would again in the like case.

He that separates upon the account of the unlawfulness of our Liturgy, and the
badness of our Ministry, does separate upon a reason common to almost all of
the far greatest part of the Churches. See the Defense, p. 54.

The defects of the Liturgy, and the faults of those by whom we suffer, are
easily heightened even beyond desert. Defense, p. 68.

Apology, p. 9. Having perused all the Foreign and Ancient Liturgies in the
Bibliotheca Patrum, I doubt not but our own is incomparably better than any
that is there.

That which is not unlawful in it self, is not therefore unlawful, because it
is commanded, Obedience to Superiors, is our duty and not our sin, unless in
sinful things. p. 152. Christ. Direct. 2d Edit.

Of Obedience to our Pastors.
We are endangered by divisions, Sacrileg. Deserting, P. 103.
principally because the self-conceited part of Religious people will not be
ruled by their Pastors, but must have their way, and will needs be rulers of
the Church and them. But pleasing the ignorant Professors humors, is a Sin that
shows us to be too humane and carnal, and has always sad effects at last. It
is a high degree of pride for persons of (ordinary) understandings, P. 101, 102.
to conclude, that almost all Christ's Churches in the World for Thirteen
Hundred Years at least, have offered such Worship to God, as that you are
obliged to avoid it, and all their Communion in it; and that almost all the
Catholic Church on Earth at this day is below your Communion, for using Forms.
Mark, Is it not more of the Women and Apprentices that are of this mind, than
of old experienced Christians?

I think till we have better taught, Baxter against Cramdon, p. 83.
even our godly People, what credit and obedience is due to their Teachers, and
Spiritual Guides, the Church of England shall never have peace, or any good or
established Order, Cure of Divis. p. 393.
We are broken for want of the knowledge of this truth; till this be known we
shall never be well bound up and healed. The People of the New Separation, so
much rule their Ministers, that many of them have been forced to forsake their
own judgments to comply with the violent.

Labor to maintain the Ordinances and Ministry in esteem. Saints Rest P. 519.


The Church is bound to take many a Man, Church Government. P. 131.
as a True Minister to them, and receive the Ordinances from him, in Faith and
expectation of Blessing upon promise, who yet before God is a sinful invader,
an usurper of the Ministry, and shall be condemned for it. (How much more then
to respect their lawful Bishops and Pastors?)

Of Lay Elders.
For Lay Elders, 5. Disput. Preface, p. 4.
As far as I understand, the greatest part, if not three for one of the English
Ministers, are of this mind, That unordained Elders wanting power to Preach or
Administer Sacraments, are not Officers in the Church of God's appointment: Of
this number I am one, and Mr. Vines was another.

In the Worcester Agreement Printed 1653. Mr. Baxter declared, that neither
Scripture nor Antiquity knew of any such Officers as Lay Elders.

In the Third Defense, p. 58. It was notorious, that the Parliament yielded to
Presbytery to exclude Episcopacy, because they had no other way to uphold their
Wars, without which they had no way to hold up themselves, but by help of the
Scots.

My first Book (Viz. the Preface to Saints Rest.) disclaims Lay Elders, Page
109. to Hinckly.

Of Bishops.
Page 832. of Mr. Baxter' s Directory, Q. 56. Mr. Baxter tells you in the
Margin of those Reasons for a larger Episcopacy, That in the Apostles Days
there were under Christ in the Universal Church, many general Officers that had
the care of gathering and over-seeing Churches up and down, and were fixed by
stated Relation unto none. And most Christian Churches think, that though the
extraordinary Gifts, Privileges and Officers cease, yet Government being an
ordinary part of their Work, the same Form of Government which Christ and the
Holy Ghost did settle in the first Ages, though not with the same extraordinary
Gifts and Adjuncts were settled for all following Ages: 1. Because we read of
settling that Form, (viz.) general Officers as well as Particular, but never of
any Abolition. 2. Because if we affirm a Cessation without Proof, we seem to
accuse God of Mutability, as setting a Form of Government for one Age only. 3.
And we leave room for audacious Wits to question other Gospel-Institutions, as
Pastors, Sacraments, etc. 4. It was general Officers that Christ promised to be
with to the end of the World, Matthew. 28. 20. And in this Premonition he says,
he does not dispute the Lawfulness of Archbishops, over Parochial-Bishops, as
Successors to the Apostles, and other general Officers of the first Age, in the
ordinary continued parts of their Office. And in his Plea for Peace, p. 263.
Some of us incline much to think, that Archbishops (i. e.) Bishops that have
oversight of many Churches, with their Pastors, are lawful Successors of the
Apostles, in the ordinary part of their Work. So also, First Plea, p. 35. and
of his accepting two parts of Episcopacy, not varying the Species in the
Preface to the second Plea.

In Church History, p. 37. and in Plea for Peace, p. 66. the Bishops in
Cyprian's time had the best ordered Churches in the World; and the Bishops were
the most Godly, Faithful, Peaceable company of Bishops since the Apostle's
times. In Preface to the Second Plea, we offered Archbishop Usher's Model, and
when his Majesty would not grant us that, he prescribed the Episcopacy of
England, as it stood with little Alteration, this we joyfully and thankfully
accepted, as a hopeful means of a common Conformity and Concord.

See more p. 3. of his Apology, and p. 161. I showed, that there are in
Directory, p. 832. such general Officers in the Church; as an Army, that is
headed by the general himself, and a Regiment by the Colonel, and a Troophy a
Captain; there was no parity then in the Church Officers.

In the Preface to the Five Disputations, p. 9. Two sorts of Episcopacy are
allowed, first, such as St. Hierome says were brought into the Church for a
Remedy against Schism; the Bishop of this Constitution was to preside over
Presbyters, and without him nothing was to be done in the Church that was of
Moment. S. 58. of Church Hist.

The Second is that which succeeds the Apostles in the ordinary parts of
Church Government, while some Senior Pastors have the care of Supervising many
Churches, as the Visitors had in Scotland; and are so far Episcopi-Episcoporum,
having no constraining Power of the Sword.

But a Power to admonish and instruct the Pastors, and to Regulate Ordinations,
Synods, and all great and common Circumstances that belong to Churches: For if
there were one Form of Government, in which some Pastors had such extensive
Work and Power, as Timothy, Titus, and the Evangelists had, as well as
Apostles, we must not change it without Proof, that Christ himself would have
it changed. Many wise Men think, that the Presbyterians rejecting all
Episcopacy, setting up unordained Elders, and National Churches headed by
National Assemblies, are divisive and unwarrantable, as their making by the
Scots Covenant, the renouncing of Episcopacy, to be the test of National
Concord was divisive. Page 72. of the Third Defense, Part the last.

Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hoper, Jewel, Davenant, Usher, Moreton, Abbot, Hall,
Potter, Charleton, were all Pious as well as Learned Bishops, and so were many
Conformist Ministers, Sibs, Preston, Fenner, Bolton, Whately, Dent, Crook,
Pike, Stock, Stoughton, Tailor, etc. My Judgment is, that a Peace with the
Divines of the Episcopal Judgment is much to be desired, and earnestly
endeavored. If it be Objected, that he calls the Bishops their Silencers and
Persecutors, p. 104. of his Apology he says, no Bishops have Silenced us by
Spiritual Government, that we know of, but only as Barons by the Secular Laws,
to which some of them gave their Votes, for Mr. Baxter acknowledges all did
not.

As for Bishops (viz.) a Diocesan, Five Disp. p. 20.
ruling all the Presbyters, but leaving the Presbyters to rule the People, and
consequently taking to himself the sole, or chief power of Ordination, but
leaving censures and absolution to them, except in case of Appeal to himself; I
must needs say, that this sort of Episcopacy is very ancient, and has been for
many Ages of very common reception through a great part of the Church -- And if
I lived in a place, where this government were established, and managed for
God, I would submit thereto, and live peaceably under it, and do nothing to the
disturbance, disgrace or discouragement of it. (You may see how far Mr. Vines
and Mr. Baxter did agree in the notion of a Bishop over many Presbyters.) P.
352.
Of which Grotius in his Commentary on the Acts, and particularly chap. 17.
says, that as in every particular Synagogue, many of which were in some one
City (in Jerusalem 480.) Sigonius de Repub. Heb. l. 2. c. 8.
there was (...), such was the Primitive Bishop. And doubtless the first
Bishops were over the community of Presbyters, as Presbyters, in joint relation
to one Church or Region; which Region being upon the increase of Believers
divided into more Churches, and in aftertimes, those Churches assigned to
particular Men; yet he the Bishop, continued Bishop over them still. For that
Mr. Baxter.
you say, he had a negative Voice, that is more then ever I saw proved, or I
think ever shall, for the first 200 Years; and yet I have labored to enquire
into it. That makes him Angelus Princeps, not Angelus Praeses, as Dr. Reinolds
says. Calvin denies that, and makes him Consul in Senatu, or as a Speaker in
the House of Parliament, which, as I have heard that D. B. did say, was but to
make him foreman of the Jury. As touching the Introduction of ruling Elders,
such as are modelled out by Parliament, my judgment is sufficiently known. I am
of your Judgment in the point, There should be such Elders, as have power to
Preach as well as Rule. On this Mr. Baxter reflects, p. 353. Though Mr. Vines
here yield not the negative Voice to have been de facto, in the first or second
age, nor to be de jure; yet he, without any question yielded to the stating of
a President, durante vita, if he prove not unworthy, which was one point that I
propounded to him; and I make no doubt, but he would have yielded to a
voluntary consent of Presbyters, de facto, not to ordain without the President.
And the difficulties that are before us, de facto, in setting up a Parochial
Episcopacy, which he mentions, I have cleared already in these Papers,
showing partly, that the thing is already existent, and partly how more fully
to accomplish it.

The Instances which he gives, are in the Episcopacy of the Protestant Churches
in Poland, from Adrian Regenvolscius, Hist. Eccles. Sclavon. l. 3. p. 424. N.
B. Whereas from the first Reformation of the Churches in the Province of the
lesser Polonia, it has been received by Use and Custom, that out of the Elders
of all those (Districtus) Divisions, which are 36 in Number, one Primate, or
Chief, in Order, who is commonly called Superintendent of the Churches of
lesser Poland, and does preside over the Provincial Synods, be chosen by the
Authority, Consent, and Suffrage of the Provincial Synod, and that he be
inaugurated, and declared (not by imposition of Hands, to avoid the suspicion
of Primacy, and the appearance of Authority and Power over the other Elders)
only by Benediction, and fraternal Prayers, and by reading over the Offices
which concern this Function, and the Prayers of the whole Synod, for the sake
of Government and good Order in the Church of God, etc.

The other instance is of the Churches of the Bohemian Confession, who have
among the Pastors of the Churches, their Conseniors and Seniors, and one
President over all, related by the same Regenvolscius, p. 315. The Elders or
the Superintendents of the Bohemian and Moravian Churches, etc. are for the
most part chosen out of their Fellow-Elders, and are Ordained and Consecrated
to the Office of Seigniory by Imposition of Hands, and Public inauguration,
etc.

Mr. Baxter dislikes our Species of Diocesan Bishops, because of their
Chancellors, which is very groundless for the power of Legislation, the
Foundation and Form of Government, which being wholly in the Bishops and
Clergy, who in Convocation have the sole Power of making Canons for the
Government of the Church; and there being no Censure to be inflicted but
according to those Canons, the Lay-Chancellor are but inferior Officers,
entrusted by their Bishops with some part of the Executive Power; the Bishops
themselves, as well as their Chancellors, having the Canons to direct and
overrule them in the Execution; and if there be any extra-judicial Process,
there lie Appeals from them both. Moreover, the Chancellors being bred up to
the Study and Practice of the Canon and Civil Laws, are most fit for Executing
the Canons, being acquainted with the Nature of Evidences, Probations, and
judicial Process, which mere Presbyters cannot be presused to understand so
well; and this Office of Chancellors being allowed by the Laws of the Land,
they may be submitted to as they are the King's Officers, by Mr. Baxter's own
Concessions. This may satisfy the impartial Reader against those bitter
Invectives of Mr. Baxter, against the Species of Diocesan Bishops, as being
Antichristian, and the Military Instruments of the Devil.

Those that treated with the Bishops, Defense, P. 65.
1660. did yield to such an Episcopacy, as the old Nonconformists would scarce
generally have consented to, i. e. to Bishop Usher's Model.

Episcopacy is not such an upstart thing, nor defended by such contemptible
Reasons, as that the Controversy is like to die with this Age; undoubtedly
there will be a Godly and Learned Party for it, while the World endures. And
it is a numerous Party: All the Greek Church, the Armenian, Syrian, Abassine,
and all others, but a few of the Reformed. For Denmark, Sweden, part of Germany
and Transylvania, have a Superintendency, as high as that I plead for, p. 11.
If you know no Godly Persons of the Episcopal way, I do, and as my acquaintance
increases, I know more and more, and some I take to be much better than my
self; I will say a greater word, that I know those of them, whom I think as
Godly, Humble Ministers, as most of the Non-conformists, whom I know, p. 12.
And I believe there are many hundred Godly Ministers in the Church of England,
and that their Churches are true Churches. And I am confident, most of the
Ministers in England would be content to yield to such an Episcopacy, as you
may find in the Published Judgments of Bishop Hall, Usher, Dr. Forbes,
Hodsworth, and others. Preface to the Five Disputations, p. 9.

Christ. Direct. the Second Edition, p. 189. Part 3. Q. How does the Holy Ghost
set Bishops over the Church? Answ. By making the Office it self so far as the
Apostles had any hand in it, Christ himself having made their Office. The Holy
Ghost in the Electors and Ordainers, directs them to discern the fitness of
the Persons, and so to call such as God approves of and calls by the Holy
Ghost in them, which is done by the ordinary help of God's Spirit, in the wise
and faithful Electors and Ordainers; the Holy Ghost does qualify them for the
Work, by due Life, Light and Love, Knowledge, Willingness and Activity, and so
inclining them to it, and marking out the Person by his Gifts, which was done
at first by extraordinary Gifts, and ever since by ordinary, special, and
saving in some, common, and only fitted to the Churches Instruction in others,
so that whoever is not competently qualified is not called by the Holy Ghost,
when Christ ascended he gave gifts to Men, some Apostles, etc. Ephesians. 4. 78, etc.

Of Sacrilege.
Q. 171. What is Sacrilege? Christ. Direct. p. 916.
Ans. It is a robbing God by the unjust alienation of Holy things. As deposing
Kings, silencing true Ministers, the unjust alienating of Temples, Utensils,
Lands, Days separated by God himself and justly consecrated by Man.

Mr. Vines his Letter to Mr. Baxter, p. 35. of the 5 Disput. concerning
Sacrilege.
As for your Question about Sacrilege, I am very near you in the present
Opinion. The point was never stated nor debated in the Isle of Wight; I did for
my part decline the dispute, for I could not maintain the cause as on the
Parliament side; And because, both I and others were unwilling, it was never
brought to open debate. The Commissioners did argue it with the King, but they
went upon grounds of Law and Polity, and it was only about Bishops Lands; for
they then averred the continuance of Dean and Chapter Lands to the use of the
Church. Some deny that there is any sin of Sacrilege under the Gospel, and if
there be any, they agree not in the definition. Some hold an Alienation of
Church-goods, in case of Necessity, and then make the necessity, what, and as
extensive, as they please. The most are of Opinion, that while the Church lies
so unprovided for, the donations are not alienable, sine Sacrilegio. If there
were a Surplusage above the competent maintenance, it were another matter. It
is clear enough, the Donors wills are frustrated, and that their general
intention, and the general use (Viz. the maintenance of God's Worship, and
Ministers) should stand, though the particular use might be superstitious. I
cited in my last Sermon before the Parliament a place out of Mr. Hildersham, on
Psalm. 51. touching Sacrilege, it did not please. If his description of it be
true, then you will still be of your own mind. I dare encourage no Purchasers,
etc.

Mr. Baxter's Advice to separating Brethren.
Mr. B' s Epistle to separate Congregations. Consider this, It is the judgment
of some, that Thousands are gone to Hell, and Ten thousands on their march
thither, that in all probability had not come there, if they had not been
tempted from the Parish Churches for enjoyment of Communion in a purer Church.

Page 21. Of Defense. The Interest of the Protestant Religion must be much kept
up by means of the Parish Ministers, and by Doctrine and Worship there
performed, and they that think and endeavor contrary, shall have the hearty
thanks and concurrence of the Papists.

And I am persuaded, that all the Arguments of Bellarmin, and other Books that
have been written, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the
Multitude of Sects among our selves. Defense p. 21.

In The Second Admonition to Bagshaw, p. 78. It is Lawful to hold Communion
with our Churches, having but tolerable Ministers, notwithstanding the
Parochial Order, and the Ministers Conformity, and the use of the
Common Prayer Book, and that we ought to do so when some special reason, as
from Authority, Scandal, etc. do require it.

A Ministers personal faults do not allow a People to separate from the Worship
of God, nor all Ministerial faults, but only those that prove him or his
Ministration utterly intolerable. Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet. p. 50.

The word Schism signifies any sinful Division among Christians; there may be
a Schism in a Church, when no party divides from it; as when one says, I am of
Paul, etc. 1 Cor. 3. 3. A Man may cause Divisions from a Church, that separates
not from it himself.

The sparks of Schism are kindled, when proud Persons are brainsick with a fond
estimation of their own opinions, and heart-sick for propagating them.

Till Church Divisions be rightly apprehended, as Whoredom, Swearing and
Drunkenness are, they will never be well cured. Imprint therefore on your minds
the true Character of them, and consider the Effects, and then you will fear
this confounding Sin, as much as a consuming Plague.

Page 63 When you are tempted to separate from any Church for defectiveness in
its manner of Worship; enquire how God is Worshipped in all the Churches on
Earth, and then consider if you lived among them, you would forsake communion
with them all. Read the Church History, and consider what Heresies have been in
times past, and what havoc Schisms have caused among Christians, for if this
had been known by well meaning Persons in our days, we should not have seen
those same opinions appleaded as New Lights, which were long ago exploded as
Old Heresies: Nor should we have seen many honest People taking that same
course to reform the Church now, and advance the Gospel, which in so many Ages
and Nations destroyed the Church, and cast out the Gospel. A narrow Soul that
takes all Christ's Interest in the World to lie in a few of their Separate
Meetings, and shuts up all the Church in a Nut-shell, must needs be guilty of
the foulest Schisms. It is a Catholic Spirit and Principles loving a Christian
as a Christian, abhorring the very name of Sects and Parties, as the Churches
Wounds, that makes a Catholic indeed.

Mr. Caudry in his Book of Schism; against Dr. Owen, p. 14. says, that
Toleration (of separate Congregations) had done more to the rooting out
Religion from the hearts of many in Seven Years, than the enforcing of
Uniformity in Seventy Years before.

As to Separation: Cure of Divis. p. 80.
Be the backwardest to divide and separate, and do it not without a certain
warrant, and extreme necessity; resolve with Augustine, I will not be the
Chaff, and yet I will not go out of the Floor, though the Chaff be there. Never
give over your just desire and endeavor for Reformation, and yet as long as
you can possibly avoid it. Forsake not the Church that you desire to reform; as
Paul said to them, that were to forsake a Shipwrackt Vessel, If these abide not
in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. Many a one, by unlawful flying and shifting
for his own greater peace and safety, does much more hazard his own and others.

Of Raising Churches against Churches.
Church gathering is Church scattering work, p. 110. Christ. Direct.

The Interest of the Christian Protestant Religion in England, Defense, p. 36.
must be much kept up by keeping up as much of Truth, Piety, and Reputation as
is possible in the Parish-Churches. Therefore, -- In Parishes where all may
hear the Parish-minister, Sacrilegious deserting, p. 92.
I would not have you, without necessity, to Preach at the same hour of the
day, but at some middle time, that you may not seem to vie with him for
Auditors, nor to draw the People from him; but let them go with you to hear
him, and after come and hear you.

Do not meet together in opposition to the public meeting, Saints Rest P. 518.
nor at the time of public Worship, nor yet to make a groundless Schism, or to
separate from the Church, whereof you are Members, nor to destroy the old, that
you may gather a new Church out of its Ruins, as long as it has the
Essentials, and there is hope of reforming it; nor yet would I have you forward
to vent your own supposed gifts and parts in teaching, where there is no
necessity of it; nor as a separated Church, but as a part of the Church more
diligent than the rest in redeeming time. Let all your private meetings be in
subordination to the public, and by the approbation and consent of your
Spiritual guides, Remembering them which have the rule over you, Heb. 13. 7, 8,
9. And I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned and avoid them, etc. Romans 16.
17, 18. I would you would ponder every one of these words, for they are the
precious advice of the Spirit of God, and necessary now as well as then.

The great advantages that Satan has got upon the Church through the sin of
the Pastors, Preface to Confess.
in these later days, is by division. By this he has promoted all the rest of
his designs. Our division gratifieth the Papist, Defense, p. 17.
and greatly hazardeth the Protestant Religion, more than most of you seem to
believe or regard. It advantageth Profaneness, and greatly hinders the
success of the Ministers; it pleases Satan and builds up his kingdom.

The hand of God is apparently gone out against the Separatists; Epistle to
separate Congregagations.
you see you do but prepare Persons for a further progress; Seekers, Ranters,
Quakers and too many professed Infidels, do spring up from among you, as if
this were the journeys end and perfection of your revolt. By such fearful
desertions did God formerly witness his detestation of those that withdrew from
the unity of the Church. Defense, p. 50.
And separation will ruin the separated Churches themselves; it will admit of
no consistency. Parties will arise in the separated Churches, and separate
again from them till they are dissolved. I beseech my Brethren to open their
eyes so far, as to regard experience. How few separated Churches do now exist,
that were in being an hundred years ago, can you name any? and would you have
all the Churches of Christ to be dissolved?

In the year 1634. Roger Williams of New England, an Assistant to Mr. Kalph
Smith Pastor at Plymouth, Answ. to Exceptions, p. 170.
where, having vented diverse singular opinions, he was dismissed, went to
Salem, which place in a years time he filled with Principles of rigid
Separation, tending to Anabaptistry, as that it is not lawful for an
unregenerate Man to pray, or take an Oath, in special not the Oath of Fidelity
to the Magistrate. He forbad any of his Church Members to hear the godly
Ministers of England when occasionally they went thither. He taught that the
Magistrate had nothing to do in matters of the First Table; that there should
be an unlimited Toleration of all Religions; that to punish any Man for his
Conscience was Persecution. He separated not only from the Churches of Old, but
of New England also, as Antichristian. After that, he would not pray, or give
thanks with his own Wife or Family, because they went to the Church Assemblies.
He kept private Meetings by way of separation from, and opposition to the
Church-Assembly; and being banished as a disturber of the Peace, he sat down at
a place called Providence, and there fell to Anabaptistry, renouncing Infant
Baptism. And after a while he told his People, that he was out of the way
himself, and had misled them, for he could not find that any on Earth had power
to administer Baptism, and therefore their last Baptism was a nullity as well
as the first, and that they must wait for the coming of new Apostles; and so
they dissolved and turned Seekers.

The case of the Summer Islands as related by Mr. Vaughan, a worthy Minister
come from thence upon discouragement, would make a Christians heart to bleed.
To hear how strict and regular, and hopeful that Plantation once was, and how
one godly Minister by Separation, selecting a few to be his Church, rejecting
all the rest from the Sacrament, the rejected party were dolefully estranged
from Religion, and the selected party turned Quakers. But our own case is yet a
more lamentable proof, what Separation has done against Religion; so that it
is my wonder that any good man can overlook it.

Above all things I entreat the dividing Brethren, Defense, P. 68.
if they can so long lay aside partiality, to judge of the reasons of their
separation. The defects of the Liturgy, and the faults of those by whom we
suffer, are easily heightened even beyond desert. But when many of us vent
untruths, and slanders against our Brethren, and multiply public untruths, we
never make scruple of communion with such. Suppose one should say, that a
People guilty of such sins, as are condemned, Exodus 23. 1, 2. Psalm. 15. 3. Romans
1. 30, etc. (i. e. raising false reports, reproaching our Neighbors, strife
and debates) should not be communicated with, especially when not one of those
offenders is called to repentance for it, what answer will you give to this
which will not confute your own objections against communion with many Parish
Churches in this Land?

As to Popery; Defense, p. 21.
The interest of the Protestant Religion must be much kept up, by the means of
the Parish Ministers, and by the Doctrine and Worship there performed; and they
that think and endeavor contrary to this, (of which side soever) shall have
the hearty thanks and concurrence of the Papists. Nor am I causelessly afraid,
P. 52.
that if we suffer the Principles and Practices, which I write against, to
proceed without our contradiction, Popery will get by it so great advantage as
may hazard us all, and we may lose that which the several Parties do contend
about.

Three ways especially Popery will grow out of our divisions, 1. By the odium
and scorn of our disagreements, inconsistency, and multiplied Sects, they will
persuade People, that we must either come for unity to them, or else all run
mad, and crumble into dust and individuals. Thousands have been drawn to
Popery, or confirmed in it, by this Argument already: And I am persuaded, that
all the Arguments else in Bellarmine, and all other Books that ever were
written, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the multititude
of Sects among our selves. Some Professors of Religious strictness and great
esteem for Godliness, having run from Sect to Sect, and finding no consistency
turned Papists themselves.

2. Who knows not how fair a game the Papists have to play by our divisions?
Methinks I hear them hissing on both Parties, saying to one side, Lay more upon
them, and abate them nothing: And to the other, Stand it out, and yield to
nothing: hoping that our divisions will carry us to such practices, as shall
make us accounted Seditious, Rebellious, and dangerous to the Public Peace,
and so they may pass for better subjects than we, or else, that they may get a
Toleration together with us. And shall they use our hands to do their work? We
have already served them unspeakably, both in this, and in abating the odium of
the Gunpower-Plot, and other Treasons.

3. It is not the least of our danger, Key for Catholics.
lest by our Follies, Extremities and rigors we so exasperate the common
People, as to make them readier to join with the Papists, than with us, in in
case of competitions, invasions or insurrections against the King and Kingdoms
peace.

The Papists account, that if the Puritans get the day, they shall make great
advantage of it; for they will be unsettled, and all in pieces, and not know how
to settle the Government. Factions and Distractions (say they) give us footing
for continual attempts. To make all sure we will secretly have our party among
Puritans also, that we may be sure to maintain our interest.

Let the Magistrate cherish the disputations of the Teachers, Baxter's Holy
Commonwealth.
and let him procure them often to debate together, and reprove one another:
For when Men see that there is nothing certain among them, they will easily
yield says Contzen the Jesuit.

Of Toleration.
Shall the mere pretense of Carnal Liberty be thought an Argument for a wicked
damning Liberty, a Liberty to destroy and deceive as many as they can; will
merciful Rulers set up a Trade for Butchering Souls, and allow Men to set up a
Shop of Poison for all Men to buy and take what they will, yea to proclaim this
Poison for Souls in the Streets and Church Assemblies. Saints Rest, p. 133.

Could I have believed him, that would have told me five years ago, that when
the Scorners of Godliness were subdued, and the bitter Persecuters of Church
were destroyed, that such should succeed them who suffered with us, and were
our intimate Friends, which we took sweet council, and went up together to the
House of God, should draw their Swords against each other, and seek each others
blood so fiercely? O what a potent instrument for Satan is a misguided
Conscience when it is set at Liberty.

Of Spiritual Pride.
Proud Men will not grow in the same Field, Epistle to separate Congregagations.
or Church, where Tares do grow, but will transplant themselves, because God
will not pluck up the Tares, especially if any Ministerial neglect of
Discipline be conjoined; and instead of blaming their own Pride, lay the blame
on the corruptions of the Church. -- The Pharisees Liturgy is frequent in
separate Assemblies, God I thank thee, I am not as other men. But this is very
remarkable, that it is a pretense of our impurity, and a greater purity with
you that is pleaded by such as first turn over to you; and that this height of
all impieties should be the usual issue or a way, pretended so exact and clean,
doubtless it is not Gods mind, by this to dis^ourag^ any from purity and true
Reformation, but to show his detestation of that spiritual pride, which makes
Men to have too high thoughts of themselves, and too much to contemn others,
and to desire to be further separated from them, than God in the day of grace
does allow of. Consider this, it is the judgment of some, that Thousands are
gone to Hell, and Ten Thousands on their march thither, that in all probability
had never come there, if they had not been tempted from the Parish Churches,
for enjoyment of communion in a purer Church.

He that causes differences of Judgment and Practice, Christ. Direct. p. 733.
and contendings in the Church, does cause divisions, though none separate from
the Church. If you may not divide in the Church, nor from it, then you may not
causelessly divide from it your selves.

And commonly Appearance, Cure of Divisions, P. 359.
Advantage, Interest, and a taking Tone and Voice do more with the most, than
solid evidence of truth. But they who desire to have a party follow them, and
are busy in persuading others to be of their mind, and speak perverse things,
etc. are guilty of Church divisions.

Do not you condemn a carnal state? Defense, p. 3.
Remember they are carnal, who are contentious dividers in the Churches, 1 Cor.
3. 1. You will disallow a fleshly mind and life; Remember then, that the works
of the flesh are these, As Adultery, Fornication, etc. So Hatred, or Enmity,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Cure of Divis. p. 77.
Seditions, (...), Dividings into Parties. -- When once Parties are engaged by
their Opinions in Anti-Churches, and fierce disputings, the Flesh and Satan
will be working in them against all that is holy, sweet and safe.

The Fire is blown up, when Men are desirous to have a party follow them, and
cry them up, and thereupon are busy in persuading others to be of their Mind,
and do speak perverse things to draw away Disciples after them, to be accounted
Masters of a Party. Christ. Direct. p. 52. part. 3.

Church dividers are the most successful Servants of the Devil, being Enemies
to the Family of Christ in his Livery. They gratify Satan and all the Enemies
of the Church, and do the very works that he would have them do, more
effectually than open Enemies could do: As mutineers in an Army may do more to
destroy it than the power of the Enemy, p. 60. It is a Sin that contradicts
all Gods Ordinances and means of Grace. A Sin against as great and lamentable
experiences as almost any Sin can be; this is a heinous aggravation of it, that
commonly it is justified and not repented of, yea it is fathered upon God,
every Sect pretending Gods Authority, and it represents his Kingdom worse than
that of the Devil which is not divided.

Of Superstition.
Do you not hate Superstition? p. 282.
Consider then, what Superstition is; it is the making of any new parts of
Religion to our selves, and fathering them upon God. Of this there are Two
sorts, Positive, and Negative. When we falsely say, This is a duty commanded by
God, or when we falsely say, This is a sin forbidden by God, take heed of both.
For instance, P. 288.
The Scripture tells us of no Church-Elders, but what were ordained, and of
none but such as were of the same Office with the Preaching Pastors or Elders,
of none that had not Authority to Baptize and Administer the Lord's Supper; nor
does Church History tell us of any other, as a Divine Office. But now we have
concluded, that there is a distinct Office of Ruling Elders, who need not be
Ordained, and who have no power to Baptize, or to Administer the Lord's Supper.
This I think is Superstition, P. 290.
for we feign God to have made a Church Office which he never made. -- That it
is simply unlawful to use a Form of Prayer, or to read a Prayer on a Book; That
if a Schoolmaster impose a Form upon a Scholar, or a Parent on a Child, it
makes it become unlawful; That our presence makes us guilty of all the
errors, or unmeet expressions of the Minister, in public Worship, at least if
we before know of them, and therefore that we must join with none, whose Errors
or Mis-expression we know of before; -- That we are guilty of the sins of all
unworthy or scandalous Communicants, if we communicate with them, though their
admission is not by our fault; That he whose judgment is against a
Diocesan-Church may not lawfully join with a Parish Church, if the Minister be
but subject to the Diocesin; That whatsoever is unlawfully commanded, is not
lawful to be obeyed; That it is unlawful to do any thing in the Worship of God,
which is imposed by Men, and is not commanded in the Scripture: These and more
such as these are Superstitions, which some Religious People have brought in.
And by all such inventions fathered upon God, P. 292.
and made a part of Religion, the minds of Men are corrupted, and disquieted,
and the Churches disturbed and divided.

Most of our Acquaintance think it their duty to keep up the Reputation of the
Public Conformable Ministry. p. 246. of Plea, and p. 109. We are far from
designing any abasement of the Clergy; nor do we deny or draw others to deny
any due Reverence or Obedience to them.

I repent, that I no more discouraged the peevish Spirit of quarelling with
Superiors, and Church Orders; And that I encouraged such by speaking too
sharply against those things, which I thought to be Church Corruptions.
Admonition to Bagshaw.

The People are ready to scorn the Gravest and Wisest Pastors, we are
endangered by Divisions; chiefly because the Self-conceited part of the
Religious People will not be ruled by their Pastors. Cure of Divisions, p. 393.

I repent, that I no more discouraged the Spirit of peevish quarrelling with
Superiors, and Church Orders, and (though I ever disliked and opposed it) yet
that I did sometime too much encourage such as were of their temper, by
speaking too sharply against those things which I thought to be Church
Corruptions, and was too loath to displease the Contentious, for fear of being
incapable to do them good, and meeting with too few Religious Persons, that
were not pleased with such invectives. P. 52. to Bagshaw.

In The Preface to Christ. Direct. It is said, That my Writeings differing from
the common judgment, had already caused offense to the Godly. Answ. 4. If God
bless me with opportunity and help, I will offend such Men much more, by
endeavoring further than ever I have done, the quenching that Fire which they
are still blowing up, and detecting the Folly and Mischiefs of those
Logomachies, by which they militate against Love and Concord, and inflame and
tare the Church of God: And let them know, that I am about it.

Of Prejudice.
Take heed of suffering Prejudice and Fancy to go for reason, Christ. Direct.
p. 66. Part. 3.
and raise in your Minds unjustifiable distasts of any way or mode of Worship.
It is wonderful to see what Fancy and Prejudice can do, get once a hard Opinion
of a thing, and your Judgments will make light of all that is said for it, and
will see nothing that should reconcile you to it. Partiality will carry you
away from Equity and Truth. Abundance of things appear now false and evil to
Men, that once imagined them to be so, which would seem harmless and laudable,
if tried by a Mind that is clear from Prejudice.

Of Censoriousness.
Is not Censoriousness and Rash Judging a Sin? Preface to Cure of Divisions.
Yet one Congregation of the Division labors to make others odious and
contemptible, and that is called the Preaching of Truth, and purer Worshipping
of God. I have seen this grow up to the height of Ranters, in horrid
Blasphemies; and then of Quakers, in disdainful Pride and Surliness, and into
Seekers, that were to seek for a Ministry, a Church, a Scripture, and
consequently a Christ. I have lived to see it put to the Question (in the
little Parliament) whether all the Ministers of the Parishes of England should
be put down at once. I have seen how confidently the killing of the King, the
rebellious demolishing of the Government of the Land, the killing of many
Thousands of their Brethren, the turnings and overturnings of all kind of Rule,
even that which themselves set up, have been committed, and justified, and
profanely fathered upon God; these with much more such fruits of love-killing
Principles I have seen.

If you converse with Censorious Separatists, Cur^. p. 152.
you shall hear so many invectives against them that are truly Catholic and
sober, as will make you think, that Love and Peace, and Catholic Communion are
some sinful and mischievous things.

The experience of Twenty six Years in this Kingdom may convince the World, P.
24.
what crimes may stand with high professions; such as the generation springing
up will scarce believe. What high Professors were the proudest overturners of
all Government, and resisters and despisers of Ministry and Holy Order in the
Churches? The most railing Quakers, and most filthy blaspheming Ranters, to
warn the World to take heed of being proud of superficial gifts, and high
profession, and that he that stands in his own conceit should take heed lest he
fall.

I have much ado to forbear naming some high Professors P. (...)
known lately at Worcester, Exeter, and other places, who died Apostate
Infidels, deriding Christianity, and the Immortality of the Soul, P. 188.
who once were Separatists. And I have heard of some Separatists, who when
others of a contrary judgment were going to the Churches at London, looked in
at the Doors, saying, The Devil choke thee, art thou not out of thy pottage yet?

I commend to all that of the Apostle, P. 22.
Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife and vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind let each esteem others better than themselves. Read this
Verse over on your Knees, and beg of God to write it on your Hearts. And I
would wish all Assemblies of dividers and unwarrantable Separatists, to write
it over the Doors of their Meeting places, and join with it, Romans 12. 10. but
especially study James 3. In a word, if God would cure the Church of Religious
Pride, the Pride of Wisdom, and the Pride of Piety and Goodness, the Church
would have fewer Heresies and Contentions, and much more Peace, true Wisdom and
Goodness.

The forwardness of many to keep open Divisions, Preface to Confess.
and to affect communion with none, but such as say as they do, is a down right
mark of a Schismatic. And I know that dividing Principles and Dispositions do
tend directly to the ruin and damnation of those in whom they do prevail.

When Men fall into several Parties, Christ. Direct. p. 734.
burning in Zeal against each other, abating charity, censuring and condemning
one another, backbiting and reviling each other, through envy and strife; when
they look strangely on each other, as being of several sides, as if they were
not Children of the same Father, nor Members of the same Body, or as if Christ
were divided, one being of Paul, and another of Apollo, etc. and every one of a
Faction, letting out their thoughts in jealousies and evil surmises of each
other, perverting the words and actions of each to an ugly sense; and snatching
occasions to present one another as fools, or odious to the hearers (as if you
should plainly say, I pray you hate, or despise these People, whom I hate and
despise:) This is the core of the Plague sore, it is Schism in the bud. S. 16.
When People in the same Church do gather into private Meetings, not under the
guidance of their Pastors, to edify one another in holy exercises, in love and
peace, but in opposition to their lawful Pastors, or to one another, to
propagate their single opinions, and increase their Parties, and speak against
those that are not on their side, Schism is then ready to increase and
multiply, and the Swarm is ready to come forth, and be gone. S. 17. When these
People actually depart, and renounce or forsake the communion of the Church,
and cast off their faithful Pastors, and draw into a separated Body by
themselves, and choose them Pastors, and call themselves a Church, and all
without any just, sufficient cause; when thus Churches are gathered out of
Churches, before the old ones are dissolved, or they have any warrant to
depart; when thus Pastor is set up against Pastor, Church against Church, and
Altar against Altar, this is Schism ripe and fruitful, the Swarm is gone and
hived in another place. S. 19. If they shall also judge that Church to be no
Church from which they separated, and so cut off a part of the Body of Christ
by an unrighteous Censure, and condemn the innocent, and usurp Authority over
their Guides; this is Disobedience and Uncharitableness, with Schism. A true
Christian that hates Fornication, Drunkenness, Lying, Perjury, because
forbidden in the Word of God, will hate Divisions also, which are so frequently
and vehemently forbidden, Jo. 17. 21, 22. To. 14. throughout. To. 15. 12. 1
Cor. 1. 10. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, etc. 1 Cor. 12. Phil. 3. 15. To. 16. 17, 18. 1 Timothy
1. 4. James 3. The mischief of Divisions may be seen at large, p. 739.

Q. May, Christian Directory. P. 854.
or must a Minister, silenced, or forbid to preach the Gospel, go on still to
preach it against the Law? Answ. He that is silenced by just power, though
unjustly, in a Country, that needs not his Preaching, must forbear there, and
if he can, must go into another Country, where he may be more serviceable. We
must do any lawful thing to procure the Magistrates license to preach in his
Dominions.

How Humane Laws bind the Conscience.
Q. Whether the Laws of men do bind the Conscience? p. 36. part the 4th.
Answ. p. 37. Taking Conscience in a stricter sense, as including essentially,
a relation to God's obligation, the full sense of the the question is this,
Whether it be a sin against God to break the laws of man? Answ. It is a sin
against God to break such Laws as Rulers are authorized by God to make: First,
because God commands us to obey our Rulers. God commands us to obey in
general, and their Law determines of the particular matter, therefore God
obliges us (in conscience of his Law) to obey them in that particular. 2.
Because by making them his Officers, by his Commission, he has given them a
certain beam of Authority, which is Divine, as derived from God; therefore they
can command us by a power derived from God: therefore to disobey is to sin
against a Power derived from God. Man being God's Officer, First his own Law
lays on us an obligation derivatively Divine, (for it is no Law, which has
no Obligation, and it is no Authoritative Obligation, which is not derived from
God.) 2. God's own Law binds us to obey Man's Laws, Romans 13.

And it may be a good reason, Baxter of Confirmation, P. 293.
to persuade Obedience to our Ecclesiastical Governors, because Preaching is a
cheap and easy work, in comparison of Church Government.

Take heed of engaging your selves in a Sect, Christ. Direct. part 4. p. 73.
or Faction; a narrow Sectarian separating mind will make all the Truths of God
give place to the opinions of his Party, and measure the prosperity of the
Gospel, by the prosperity of his Party; he will not stick to persecute all the
rest of the Church of Christ, if the interest of his Sect require it. Overvalue
not any private or singular opinions of your own, or others; for if once
spiritual Pride and Ignorance of your own weakness make you espouse particular
opinions, as peculiarly your own, you will think your conceits more
illuminating and necessary, than they are, as if Men's sincerity lay in the
embracing of them, and their Salvation on the receiving of them; and think all
that are against your Opinion, deserve to be cast out as Enemies to
Reformation; and perhaps, Twenty Years after, experience may bring you to your
wits, and make you see the falsehood, or smalness of all those points, which you
made so great a matter of, and then what comfort will you have of your
persecutions?

O the deceitfulness of the heart of Man! Cure of Divis. p. 254. P. 261.
Little do the many real Separatists, who cry out against Persecution suspect,
that the same spirit is in them. Whence is Persecution, but from thinking ill
of others, and abhorring or not loving them? and do not you do so by those whom
you causlesly separate from? It is one and the same sin in the Persecutor and
Divider, or Separatist, which causes the one to smite their Brethren, and the
other to excommunicate them; the one to cast them into Prison as Schismatics,
and the other to cast them out of the Church as profane; the one to account
them intolerable in the Land, and the other to account them intolerable in the
Church: the inward thoughts of both are the same, that those whom they smite or
separate from, are bad and unlovely, and unfit for better usage.

But I have observed that Professors of Religion did oppose and deride almost
all that Worship of God out of (pretended) Conscience, which others did out of
profaneness. Saints Rest, part 1. c. 7. Sect. 14.

It was none of the old cause, Holy Commonwealth. Eddit. to Pres. Prop.
that the People should have liberty, and the Magistrate should have no power,
in all matters of God's Worship, Faith and Conscience: And as it is not the old
cause, so it is not the good cause. For first, It contradicts the express
revelation of the Will of God in the Holy Scripture. Moses, as a Magistrate,
had to do in matters of Religion, and so had the Kings of Israel, and Judah. --
Law, and Providence, are both quite changed, if Toleration of false Worship,
and other abuses of Religion tend not to the ruin of the Commonwealth. If
Magistrates must give liberty for all to propagate a false Religion, then so
must Parents and Masters also, which would be a Crime so horrid in the Nature
and Effects of it, as I am loath to name with its proper titles.

The Magistrates will quickly find that the distractions of the Church will
breed and feed such distractions in the Commonwealth, Of Confir. P. 309.
as may make them wish they had quenched the fire, while it was yet quenchable.
-- Our unity is not only our strength, but their strength; and the fire that
begun in the Church, may, if let alone, reach the Court.

Page 423. of his 5 Disputations, He lays down this as the sum of what he had
said, That Man may determine of Modes and Circumstances of Worship, necessary
and commanded in genere, but not determined by God in specie, Sect. 65. and
then infers, Sect. 67. If the mischoosing of such circumstances by Church
governors be but an inconvenience, and do not destroy the Ordinance it self, or
frustrate the ends of it, we are to obey. 1. For he is the Judge in his own
work, and not we. 2. The thing is not sinful though inconvenient. 3. Obedience
is commanded to our lawful Governors. Sect. 70. And when we do obey in a case
of miscommanding, it is not a doing evil that good may come of it, as some do
misconceive; but it is only a submitting to that which is ill-commanded, but
not evil in him that does submit. It is the determiner that is the cause of the
inconvenience, and not the obeyer. Nor is it inconvenient for me to obey,
though it be worse perhaps to him that commands: while he sins in
commanding, he may make it my duty to obey, Page 461. Sect. 6. The reasons of
this are obvious and clear, even because it is the Office of the Governors to
determine of such Circumstances: It is the Pastor's Office to guide and oversee
the Flock, and when he determines these, he is but in his own way, and does
but his own work; and therefore he is therein the Judge, if the case be
controvertible. If none shall obey a Magistrate or Pastor in the works of their
own Office, as long as they think he did them not the best way, all Governors
then would be presently overthrown, and obedience denied. We are sure that God
has commanded us to obey them that are over us in the Lord, 1 These. 5. 12.
Heb. 13. 7. 17, etc. And therefore a certain duty may not be forborne on
uncertain conjectures, or upon every miscarriage of them that we owe it to.
This would un-church all Churches (as they are Political Societies:) for if
Pastors be taken down, and the work of Pastors, the Church is taken down. Sect.
7. And the things in which the Pastor is now supposed to err, are not of
themselves unlawful, but only by such an accident as being over-weighed by
another accident shall cease to make them unlawful. For instance, p. 461. Sect.
4. If of two Translations of Scripture, or two Versions of the Psalms the
Pastor use the worser, (so it be tolerable) we must obey. And Sect. 7. If the
Pastor appoint a more imperfect Version of the Psalms to be sung in the Church
(as is commonly used in England) the obeying of him in the use of this will not
bring so much hurt to the Church, as the disobeying on that account would do.
For besides the sin of disobedience it self, the Church would be in a confusion
if they forsake his conduct that preserves the Union; and some will be for this
and some for that, and so the Worship it self will be overthrown. And let it
still be remembered, that we allow both Magistrates and Pastors to see to the
execution of God's Laws, and to determine of circumstances in order thereto
that are necessary in genere, p. 482. Sect. 35. but not determined of God in
specie, p. 422. Sect. 65. It may be very sinful to command some Ceremonies
which may lawfully, yea must in duty be used by the Subject when they are
commanded, p. 398. Certain things commonly called Ceremonies may lawfully be
used in the Church upon humane imposition, and when it is not against the Law
of God; no Person should disobey the Laws of their lawful Governors in such
things.

If there should be any Pastors of the Churches who instead of concurring to
heal the Flock of these dividing Principles, Cure of Divisions. P. 253.
shall rather join with backbiters and encourage them in their misreports and
slanders, because it tends to the supposed interest of their party or
themselves; Let them prepare to Answer such unfaithfulness to their
Consciences, which will be shortly awakened; And to the great Shepherd of the
Flock, who is at the door, and who told even the Devils Agents that, A House or
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, but is brought to naught.

For farther Satisfaction I refer the Reader to Mr. Baxter's Case of
Separation, in the Appendix to his Life, p. 67, to p. 80. where he thus
concludes; More may be seen in Mr. Nye's Book for hearing the Parish Preachers,
and in Mr. Tomb's who wrote against Infant Baptism, vindicating the lawfulness
and duty of joining in ordinary Communion, in Word, Prayer, and Sacrament with
the Parish Churches.

FINIS.

