Of Justification: FOUR DISPUTATIONS Clearing and amicably Defending the Truth,
against the unnecessary Oppositions of diverse Learned and Reverend Brethren.

By Richard Baxter, A servant of Christ for Truth and Peace.

JOHN 3.18, 19. He that Believes on him, is not condemned: but he that
believes not is condemned already; because he has not believed in the Name of
the only begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that Light is come
into the world, and men loved darkness rather then Light, because their deeds
were evil.

Dr. Twiss, Vindic. Great. lib. 1. part. 3. page (Vol. min.) 302.

[Verum in diverso genere ad Justitiam Dei refertur Christi satisfactio, and
fides nostra: Christi satisfactio ad eandem refertur per modum, meriti and
condignitatis: nostra vero fides ad eandem refertur duntaxat per modum congruae
dispositionis.]

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster, and are
to be sold by him there; and by Nathaniel E^^^s, at the Gun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

The Preface.
Christian Readers,
TO prevent your trouble and misunderstanding in the perusal of these
Disputations: I have two things here at the entrance to acquaint you with.
First, The occasion of all these Writings: Secondly, The true state of the
Controversies here managed. The first Disputation is upon a Question of
considerable weight, whether Christ as Christ, and so as Prophet, Priest and
King* be the Object of that Faith by which we are justified? Three points
especially my Reverend Brother Mr. Blake was pleased to publish his Reasons
against, which in my Aphorisms I had asserted. These being vindicated by me in
an Apology, he renewed the conflict in his Treatise of the Sacraments. The
first about the Sacraments I have defended again in a Volume by it self. The
second is this in hand, which I had finished about fifteen or sixteen months
ago. The third is about the Instrumental efficiency of Faith to our
Justification, of which I had also begun above a twelve month since. But it
has lately pleased our wise and gracious Lord to call this Reverend Brother to
himself: whereupon, though this first Disputation was gone so far, that I could
not well recall it, yet the others, which was not out of my power, I resolved
to condemn to perpetual silence. If you ask me a reason of this resolution, I
must desire that my disposition and passion may go for part of a Reason this
once. The grief of my heart for the loss of this precious servant of Christ
would not permit me to appear any further in a way that seemed to militate with
the dead, and with one whose death, we have all so much cause to lament. Alas,
that our sin should provoke our dear Father, to put out the precious Lights of
his Sanctuary, and to call in such experienced faithful Laborers, while
ignorance, and error, and profaneness, and all Vice does so plenteously survive.
When these plants of Hell do thrive upon us, under all our care to weed them
up: what will they do when the Vineyard is left desolate? Though God in mercy
is raising up a supply of young ones, that may come to be Pillars in their
days: yet alas, what difference will the Church find between these, and their
grave experienced Guides: and how many years study, and experience, and
patience, is necessary to ripen these tender plants, to bring them to the
stature, and stability, and strength of such as this Blessed servant of Christ,
that is now taken from us. The sense of our loss does make it doubly bitter to
my thoughts, that ever I was unhappily engaged in any way of serving the Lord
of Truth, which must contein so much contradiction of such a friend of Truth.
As it is for God, or for Truth, or for the use of the Church, I dare not disown
it; but as it savoureth of disagreement (though necessitated to it) it is very
ungrateful to me to think of, or review. But our diseases will have their
pains. We must bear the smites of our own and our Brethrens weaknesses, rather
then neglect the service of Christ, his Church and Truth. We quickly pardon one
another, and at the furthest Heaven agrees us all: But the benefit of our
search, though mixed with our infirmities, may be somewhat serviceable when we
are gone.

The second Disputation is yet more ungrateful to me, then the first: the
Reverend Brother whom I contradict being as high and dear in my esteem as most
men alive; indeed being an Honor and Blessing to the Church in this unworthy
Generation. The Lord preserve him long for his service. But my Defense here
also is necessitated. 1. I did my best to have prevented the Necessity, and
could not: I mean, not by diswading him from opposing me in Print, for that
might have hindered the Church of the Benefit of his Opposition (for ought I
knew, till I had seen it:) But by trying first, whether I could receive or give
satisfaction. 2. I had publicly obliged my self, if this Reverend Brother did
Dissent, to search again: and by an Epistle, became more accountable to the
world for Dissenting from him then other men. 3. His Name deservedly precious
in the Church, has the greater advantage to over-lay the Truth, where humane
imperfection engages him against it. Yet do I not blame him for beginning this
Contest with me; but take the blame to my self that might occasion it, by
dishonouring his Name by a temeracious prefixing it to my undigested papers,
(though nothing but High estimation, and Affection was my Motive.)

The Letters that past between us were never intended for the view of the
world: And therefore I must desire the Reader to remember it, if sometime I be
more pressing and vehement, then manners and reverence require; because we use
to speak freelier in private among friends, then in the hearing of the world.
And yet I thought it my duty now to join them with the rest for these Reasons.
1. Because some passages in the Writings of this Reverend Brother, do in a
manner invite me to it. 2. Because the matter requires me to speak the same
things; and therefore it is as good affix the old, as be at the same labor
needlessly again. 3. And it can be no wrong to him, because it is my own Papers
that are the main bulk of what I publish: His Letters being brief, and annexed
but as the occasions of mine. 4. But especially, I was brought to think it
meet, by the open blame that I have received from some very dear and Reverend
Brethren, for not preventing this public Contest. And therefore I thought good
to let them see, that I was not wholly wanting to prevent it.

If there be any passages in these Writings too eager or provoking (which I
must needs suspect even where I have not observed them, as being conscious of
too keen a style, forgetting the persons while I speak merely to the words and
matter,) I do entreat my Brethren to pardon it, as being not designed to their
provocation or dishonor, and as I heartily do the like by theirs, and as I
hope God will do both theirs and mine. And I do adjure the Reader to believe
that this Controversy: for all our infirmities is managed with a very high
esteem and honor of those Reverend Brethren, whom I am necessitated to
gainsay. Nor would I have it be any dishonor to them (though an excuse to me,)
that they have been the Assailants, and begun the conflict: for the Truths of
God must be precious to us all, and I doubt not but they were confident that it
was some dangerous error, which they set upon, and I have here proved to be
the Truth. Nor is it any such wrong to either side, to be openly contradicted,
that Reasons may be openly produced, and men may have some further help, to see
into these Points. Let the proud swell or smart, because they are thus
proclaimed fallible, and mistaken; but the Humble that are devoted servants to
the Truth, are of another spirit, and have learnt another lesson.

And if any Papist or enemy to our unity and Peace, shall from these Writings
predicate our dissentions or divisions, let them know to their faces, that even
these differences as momentous as they seem, are not near so great as are
commonly published among themselves: nor are they for Number one to twenty,
perhaps to a hundred, that are agitated in their Schools, and the writings of
their Doctors: Had we such differences as those of the Jesuit Casuists opened
by Montaltas the Jansenian in his Mystery of Jesuitism, out of their own
writings, something they might then say against us. Yea I doubt not but we
differ with more hearty Christian Love, then they agree; and have more real
union in our controversies, then they have in their Articles of Faith, and are
nearer one another in our smaller differences, then the French and Italians are
in their very Fundamentals.

The third Disputation was called forth by Mr. Warner's Treatise of the Object
and Office of Faith, and takes up the subject of the first Disputation, with
some others.

When that was in the Press, Mr. Tombes's Book against Infant Baptism came
forth, in which I found the Papers that I sent to him (upon his importunity)
printed without my consent, (which if God will, I shall yet vindicate.) And
therefore seeing that it is his way, I thought he might do the like by other
Papers, which formerly I had wrote to him on this subject of Justification. And
therefore thinking it fitter that I should publish them (of the two) then he,
(I have saved him the charge of printing them, and annexed them to these.

The fourth Disputation was added, because it is the very heart of our
Controversy, which most of our Disputes about the isntrumental Causality of
Faith as to Justification, and the other Concomitant, are resolved into.

That the Reader may understand these Disputations the better, I shall here at
the entrance show him the face of the way that I maintain, and also of the way
that I oppose.

The way that I plead for is contained in these Propositions. 1. Man having
broken the Law of Nature or works, is lost, and disabled to his own Recovery,
or to do any works by which that Law will ever justify him.

2. Jesus Christ has Redeemed him from this lost condition, by his
Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection, etc. fulfilling the Law by his
obedience, and suffering for our not fulfilling it, and thereby satisfying the
Lawgiver, and attaining the ends of the Law, and more: making himself an
example to us of holiness, and becoming our Teacher, High Priest and King, to
save us from all sin and enemies, and recover us to God, for our Salvation, and
his Glory and Pleasure.

3. The Offices and Works of Christ, are for other ends as well as for our
justification; even for our Sanctification, Glorification, etc.

4. The Believer ought not to confound the offices, works, or ends and effects,
but to apprehend them as distinctly as he can.

5. The same Offices of Christ are exercised in the effecting several works: He
does justify us both as Priest, Prophet and King: and he sanctifies us as
Priest, Prophet and King, His Death purchasing both our justification and
sanctification; and his Teaching showing us the way to both, and his Kingly
Office conferring both, though most notably our justification; and the
Prophetical effecting more of our sanctification, then of our justification.

6, We must have part in Christ himself as our Head, in order of Nature before
we can partake of justification, Sanctification, (as following our first faith)
or Glorification from him.

7. Though our Physical Communion with Christ is effected by a Physical change
on the soul; yet our Right to him and to Justification, and other following
benefits is the effect of a free Gift, or Testament, or Promise, and that
Promise or free Gift is our Title, which is Fundamentum juris, or the efficient
Instrumental cause.

8. Christ and pardon, or justification, and Right to Heaven, etc. are given us
by one and the same Deed of Gift: so that he that has Right to Christ, has by
the same Title and on the same terms Right to these his benefits.

9. This Promise or Gift is conditional; though it be but the Condition of a
free Gift that is required.

10. No man's works, Repentance or Faith is his proper Title to pardon or life,
nor any proper meritorious cause of it; nor any efficient. Principal or
Instrumental causes of his Right; No act of ours can be more then a mere
condition of that Right; and a Causa sine qua non (which, as it is an act
that is pleasing to God, and has the Promise of a Reward, the Fathers called
improperly by the Name of Merit, which yet less fitly agrees to the Condition
of our first Justification then of our Glorification.)

11. Christ's pardon and life are given by this Gospel-Promise on condition of
our faith in Christ, that is, if we become Believers in Christ; or Christians;
which is, If we accept of Christ as offered in the Gospel, and that is, to
bring us from our sins and selves to God, by the acts of his Teaching,
Priestly, and Kingly Office; Or, if we believe in Christ as Christ. So that it
is not any one single act of Faith that is the condition of Justification: nor
are the several Benefits of Christ given us on condition of several acts of
Faith; as if we had Right to pardon by one act, and to Christ himself by
another, and to Adoption by another; and to Heaven by another, etc. Nor have
the several acts of our faith as divided an Interest in procurement of the
Benefits as Christ's actions had: But it is one and the same entire faith in
Christ as Christ, that is the condition of all these consequent special
Benefits; without division in the procurement. So that the Belief in Christ as
our Teacher and King has as much hand in our Justification, as believing in
him as Priest; it being the backwardness of nature to the acceptance of Christ's
Government and Doctrine, that is a special Reason why faith is made the
condition of that pardon, which Nature is not so backward to accept.

12. The Reasons to be assigned, why faith in Christ is made the condition of
Justification, is, 1. The will of the free Donor. 2. The fitness of faith to
that Office; as being suited to Gods Ends, and to Christ the Object, and to
man's necessitous estate. Not only because it is the Receiving of Righteousness,
but for all these Reasons together, in which its aptitude does consist; and its
Aptitude to the Honor of the Redeemer and free Justifier is the principal part
of its Aptitude: it being impossible that God should prefer man as his ultimate
and before himself.

13. Though the Reason why Faith is made by God the condition of our
Justification, must partly be fetched from the Nature of Faith, which some call
its Instrumentallity in apprehending Christ, yet the Reason why we are
Justified by Faith, must be fetched from the Tenor of the Promise and Will of
the Promiser. So that though the Remote Reason be that Aptitude of Faith, which
is the Dispositio material; yet the formal nearest Reason is, because God has
made it the condition of the Gift, which shall suspend the efficacy till
performed, and when performed, the benefit shall be ours.

14. As Faith has its denomination from some one or few acts, which yet
suppose many as concomitant and consequent: So those concomitant and consequent
Acts have their answerable place and Interest in the foresaid Conditionality,
as to our part in Christ and Justification.

15. And therefore it was not the Apostles meaning to set Faith against these
concomitant acts, (as Repentance, hope in Christ, desire of Christ, love to
Christ, etc.) and to exclude these under the notion of Works: but contrarily to
suppose them in their order.

16. The burdensome works of the Mosaical Law, suppoed to be such as from the
dignity and perfection of that Law, would justify men by procuring pardon of
sin, and acceptance with God, are they that the Jews opposed to Christ's
Righteousness and Justification by Faith, and which Paul disputes against, and
consequently against any works, or acts, or habits of our own, opposed to
Christ, or this way of free justification by him.

17. The not loosing our Justification and Title to Christ and Life, has more
for its condition, then the first Reception or Possession has. And so has the
final Justification at judgment, if men live after their first believing.

18. Justification at judgment, being the Adjudging us to Glory, has the same
conditions as Glorification it self has.

Reader, In these Eighteen Propositions, thou may fully see the Doctrine that
I contend for, which also in my Confession, Apology, and this Book I have
expressed.

And now I will show you somewhat of the face of the Doctrine, which the
Dissenters commonly do propugne, but not so largely, because I cannot open
other men's Doctrine so freely and fully as I can do my own.

1. They agree with me that Christ's Righteousness is the meritorious or
material cause of our Justification, though some add that it is the formal
cause, I suppose it is but a mistaken name.

2. They agree that Christ, and pardon, and Life, are Given us by the
Gospel-Promise.

3. They yield that an entire Faith in Christ as Christ, is the condition of
our Right to his entire Benefits.

4. But they say that the Acts of Faith in their procurement of the Benefits,
have as diverse an Interest as the Acts of Christ, which Faith believes.

5. And they say, that it is some one act (or two, or some of them) that is the
sole justifying act, though others be compresent.

6. This Justifying act some call the Apprehending of Christ as a Sacrifice:
some Affiance, or Recumbency, or Resting on him, as a Sacrifice for sin, or as
others, also on his active Righteousness, or an Apprehension of Christ's
Righteousness; or as others, A persuasion that his Promise is true; or an
Assent to that truth; or as others, an Assurance, or at least a Belief, fide
Divina, that we are justified.

7. They say, that the nearest Reason of our Justification by this faith is,
because it is an Instrument of our Justification, or of our Apprehending
Christ's Righteousness: And so, that we are justified by Faith as an
Instrumental efficient cause; say some: and as a Passive Receiving Instrument,
say others.

8. They say, that there being but two ways of Justification imaginable, by
faith, or by works, all that desert the former way (if they despair not of
Justification) fall under the expectation of the latter: And I grant that
Scripture mentions no third way.

9. Therefore say they, seeing that Paul's Justification by Faith, is but by the
act before mentioned: whoever looks to be justified, in whole, or in part, by
another act (as by Faith in Christ as Teacher, as King, by desiring him, by
Hoping in him, by Loving him, by disclaiming all our own righteousness, etc.)
does seek Justification by Works which Paul disputes against, and so set
against the only true Justification by Faith.

10. Yea, and they hold, that whoever looks to be Justified by that act of
faith, which themselves call the Justifying act, under any other notion then as
an Instrument, does fall to justification by works, or turn from the true
Justification by Faith.

By these unwarrantable Definitions, and Distinctions, and additions to Gods
Word; A lamentable perplexity is prepared for men's souls, it being not possible
for any living man to know, that he just hits on the justifying Act, and which
is it, and that he takes in no more, etc. and so that he is not a Legalist, or
Jew, and falls not from Evangelical Justification by faith in Christ. So that
Justification by faith in Christ as Christ, (considered in all essential to his
Office,) is with them no Justification by faith in Christ, but justification by
Works, so much disowned by the Apostle, the expectants of which are so much
condemned. I have gathered the sum of most of the Dissenters minds as far as I
can understand it. If any particular man of them, disown any of this, let him
better tell you his own mind: For I intend not to charge him with any thing
that he disowns. The Lord Illuminate and Reconcile all his people, by his
Spirit and Truth. Amen.

The CONTETS.
Disputation 1.
Quest. WHether we are justified by believing in Jesus Christ as our King and
Teacher, as well as by believing in his blood? Aff. page 1. The state and
weight of the Controversy p. 2, etc. Ten Propositions for fuller explication.
p. 10, etc. Argument first. p. 13 Argu. 2. p. 14 Argu. 3. p. 19 Argu. 4. p. 24
Argu. 5. p. 27 Argu. 6. p. 28 Argu. 7. p. 30 Argu. 8. p. 31 Argu. 9. p. 35
Argu. 10. p. 38 defended against Mr. Blak's assault. p. 40 Whether the Law of
Grace condemn any, and how. p. 44, 45 The Distinction of sides quae justificat,
and qua justificat considered. p. 46, etc. MR. Blak's first Argument answered.
p. 53 Argument 2. answered. p. 55 Argument 3. p. 57 Argument 4. p. 63 Argument
5. and 6. p. 64
Disputation 2.
Quest. WHether works are a condition of condition of Justification, and so
whether we are justified by works as such a condition? The terms [Works and
Justification] explained. p. 70, 71 The Term Condition explained. p. 72 The
Truth laid down in several Propositions. p. 75 Negative and Affirmative The
main Proposition proved. p. 79, etc. Quest. Can Christ be Instrumental in
justifying. p. 84 Quest. Did Christ expiate the sins, that by the Gospel men
are obliged to punishment for? p. 86 Of Repentance, and the habit of Faith in
Justification. p. 85, 86 Quest. Does the Gospel justify us? p. 86, 87, 88, 89
Other points briefly discussed. p. 90 The Opponents stating of the Question. p.
94, 95, 96 Diverse unjust charges repelled. p. 97, to 101 The Opponents Thesis
and Arguments. p. 101, 102 How Abraham was justified, debated to p. 110 All
works make not the Reward to be not of Grace, proved by six Arguments. p. 111,
to 115. And by Expositors. p. 115, etc. His second Argument from the difference
put between faith and other Graces in Justification. p. 118 The case of faiths
Interest opened by a similitude. p. 120 His third Argument considered: Our
first Justification how different from the following. p. 122, 123 His fourth
Argument of self Righteousness and causal conditions. p. 124, etc. His Fifth
Argument, Works are the fruits, therefore not the condition. p. 128 His sixth
Argument. p. 132 His seventh Argument. Of a twofold Righteousness or
Justification. p. 133 His eight Argument that cannot be a condition of
Justification, which it self needs Justification. p. 136 Answered. Paul
judges them dung. p. 140 How justifying faith belongs to the Law, and the
difference between the Law and Gospel. p. 142 More of Christ's suffering for the
violation of the new Covenant. p. 146 His ninth Argument, we fill men with
doubts. p. 147 Answered. His tenth Argument. p. 149 Of the reconciling of Paul
and James. p. 150. etc. Letters that past between this Reverend Brother and me.
p. 157 In which is discussed the Argument from Abraham's Justification. And in
the last Letter these questions. 1. Whether videre, audire, be only Grammatical
actions, and Physical Passions. p. 194, etc. 2. Whether Believing be only so,
and credere only pati. p. 198 3. Whether Faith be passive in its
Instrumentality. p. 207 4. Whether the Opponents way make not other Graces as
proper Instruments of Justification. p. 211 5. Whether Faith be a proper
Instrument of Justification. p. 212 6. Question. If Faith be an Instrument,
whether it justify primarily and proxime as such, or as an apprehension of
Christ or Righteousness. p. 214 7. Question, which is the more clear, safe and
certain Doctrine. p. 220 Repentance, whether excluded. p. 227 Of Faith
relatively taken. p. 228 Of the Assemblies Definition of faith. p. 230 The
Judgment of some Divines. p. 233, etc. whether a dying man may look on his own
Acts as the Conditions of the Covenant performed. p. 241, etc. Further
Explications. p. 244. etc.
Disputation 3.
Quest. WHether Besides the Righteousness of Christ imputed, there be a
personal evangelical Righteousness necessary to Justification and Salvation?
Affir. p. 259 Distinctions and Propositions Negative and Affirmative for
explication. p. 260, etc. Proved. p. 266 Objections answered. p. 269, etc. Mr.
Warner's Arguments confuted. p. 273 to 285 Mr. Warner's 13th chap. confuted
about Justistcation, and the Interest of Obedience, etc p. 286 Master Warner's
Arguments answered, by which he would exclude Christ as King, etc. from being
the Object of justifying faith. p. 293. etc. The other chief passages in his
Book considered. p. 305, etc. His distinction of fides quae and qua. p. 308,
etc. His Preface answered in an Epistle. p. 313
MR. John Tombe's, his friendly Animadversions on my Aphorisms, with a
Discussion of them. p. 322 Justification in Law-title by the Promise fully
vindicated. p. 332, etc. Whether Justification be a continued Act, or but one
Act. p. 341 etc. Whether Faith comprize Love, Subjection or other Graces: at
large. p. 345, etc. Whether Faith be only in the Intellect, or also in the
Will. p. 354, etc. Justifying Faith receives Christ as Lord, etc. p. 358 It is
Faith, and not only Love, or other Graces, by which the Will receives Christ.
p. 361. etc. The Gospel is a Law. p. 369, etc. Repentance necessary to
Justification. p. 370, etc. How Faith justifies. p. 377 Whether Christ had a
Title on Earth to Rule. p. 379 Of Christ's universal Dominion and Redemption. p.
380 More of the Justification by the Gospel-Promise. p.384 Of Preparatives to
Justification. p. 387 What Paul excludes as opposite to faith in
Justification. p. 391, 392 Of Intercision, of Justification, and the guilt of
particular sins. p. 393, etc.
Disputation 4.
Quest. WHether the Faith which Paul opposes to works in Justification, be one
only Physical Act of the Soul? Or, Whether all Humane Acts, except one Physical
Act of Faith, be the works which Paul excludes from Justification? Neg. p. 399
The Question opened: and its proved that this Faith is not one only, Act. 1.
Either Numerically. 2. Or of an inferior Genus, so as to be of one only
Faculty: Nor only God the Father, Christ, Promise, Pardon, Heaven, etc. the
Object. 3. Nor in specie specielissima, proved by many Arguments.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 23. read that 1. p. 13. l. 10. r. quae Christum. p. 14. l. 9. r.
promitentis. I. 22. r. has. p. 18. l. 3. r. as this. l. 34. r. proof of. p.
19. ^. 24. r. be the. l. 34. r. ^. p. 21. l. 17. r. that be is. p. 24. l. 35.
r. thus. p. 29. l. 13. r. though. p. 32. l. 32 r. must be p. 39. l. 6. r. with
p. 44. l. 1. r. I need. p. 45. l. 30. r. Commination. P. ^2. l. 11. r. as. p.
55. l 26. r. nostri. l. 32. r. exclusion. p. 64. l. 30. r. Curse. p. 74. l. 8.
r. capitibus. p. 81. l. 13. r. no. l. 20. r. All. p. 85. l. 6. blot out
against. p. 87. l. 22. r. that is. l. 21. r. execution. p. 88. l. 12. read
there. p. 94. l. 10. r. notion. p. 95. l. 3. r. u. l. 9. r. your. p. 99. l. 19
r. as mediate it. p. 119. l. 36. r. as. p. 135. ^. 5. r. that he has not. p.
136. l. 18. r. Christ. p. 139. l. 13. r. a means. page 152. l. 17. r. been. p.
166. l. 38. r. we may. p. 168. r. Gods. p. 170 l. 17. r signs. p. 175. l. 15.
r. diverse. p. 178. l. 19. r. be that works not. p. 180. l. 4. r. or. p. 183. l.
19. r. casuals. p. 186. l. 25. r. sensu. p. 197. l. 29. r. Potentia. p. 208. l.
8. r. Porret. l. 31. r. Passive in. p. 210 l 24. r. mediante. p. 212. l. 12. r.
except. p. 233. l. 7. r. in the. p. 243. l. 32. blot out till. p. 252. l. 13.
r. veritatus. p. 257. l. 14. r. exalted. p. 271. l. 10. r. righteous. p. 286.
l. 17. r. be. l. 24. r. the. p. 290. l. 1. r. marks. p. 294. l. 22. and l. 26.
and p. 265. l. 23. and 26. for. quae r. qud. p. 299. l. 1. r. unproved p. 314.
l. 36. r. cull. p. 319. ^. 14. r. that is. p. 320. l. 14 r. fur. p. 326 l. 31.
r. fruit. p. 354. l. ult. r. praemotione. p 360. l. 27. r. God. p. 361. l. 32.
r. though^. p, 386. l. 27. r. Is it not. p. 387. l. 32. r. sanctification. p.
390. l. 22. r. morally. p. 398. l. 15. r. probable. l. 23 r. Impenitency.

Quest. Whether we are Justified by Beliveing in Jesus Christ, as our King and
Teacher; as well as by believing in his Blood? Aff.
Though I have often spoken to this Question in the ears of the world, as taking
it to be of very great Consequence; yet upon the Invitation of this
opportunity, I shall once again attempt a brief Discussion of it; and the
rather, because the Answers of a Reverend Brother (Mr. Blake) to my former
Arguments, and his Arguments for the contrary opinion, may wrong the Truth and
the souls of men, if their Fallacy be not manifested by a Reply.

And I shall first speak somewhat of the Importance of the Question, and then
of the sense of it, and then endeavor a clear Resolution, and the Confirmation
thereof, and the Confutation of the contrary conceits.

And for the first, I shall give you my thoughts of it in these two
Propositions.

Proposition 1. The difference amongst Protestants about this Question is not
of so great moment, that either party must Eonomine be judged to deny the
Essentials (or Fundamentals) of the faith, and so to be of a different Religion
from the other, or to fall short of Salvation.

I lay down this Proposition first, Because of the Papists who stand looking
upon all our differences with a mind too like the mind of the Devil; rejoicing
in them, and endeavoring to increase them, and to make them seem greater in
the eyes of the world than indeed they are, that so they may make use of them
for the reproaching of our Profession, and take an advantage from them to make
the truth and Servants of Christ become odious unto others.

Secondly, And I do it also for the sake of some (even too many) among our
selves, that speak of controversies as they are concerned in them, or as the
party to whom they join does speak of them, or as they appear to them in the
dark, or at a distance, or upon a hasty superficial search; but have not the
skill (nor some of them, the will) to open the true state of a Controversy, and
make the difference appear no wider, then indeed it is.

To the proving of the Proposition, it must be observed, First, that the
Affirmers do yield, that it is not the Doctrine or Government of Christ, but
his blood that is the Ransom for one sins, and his Righteousness that is the
sole Meritorious Cause of our Justification: and that believing in Christ as
Prophet and King, is not a proper Instrument of our Justification; and that
Christ as a Ransom for us, and a deserver of our Justification, is the formal
Object of that other act (which accordingly believes in him) and not of this
act of believing in him as Prophet and King.

On the other side, it is granted by them that are for the Negative, that it is
our duty to believe in Christ as a Prophet and King and that it is of necessity
to salvation, yet to Justification it self; For they yield that it is the Fides
quae Justificat, the faith by whch we are Justified, but not qu^ Justificat, or
that it Justifies not qua talis, as such: They yield also that it is a
Condition of Justification, for so they confess that Repentance it self is; but
they only say, that it is not the Instrument of Justification, as they think
the other act is. So that the difference is here: They yield all that we affirm
(if I can understand them;) but they affirm somewhat more themselves, which we
do not yield: They grant that believing in Christ as our Teacher and Lord is a
Condition of our Justification, and the ^ides quae Justificat; which is all
that I desire: But then they add, that the Belief in Christ's blood and
Righteousness is the Instrument of our Justification, and that it justifies
qu^ talis; which we utterly deny, if the words be properly taken; and Tropes
should not upon choice be made the terms of our Question, while there are
plainer to be had. So that by this time its easy to see that neither of these
opinions are such as must unchurch or damn us, or make us Heretics. First, We
that are for the Affirmative are out of that danger; for we hold no more
positively then is yielded us by the other. All that they can charge us with;
is this Negative, that [believing in Christ's blood does not properly Justify
as an Instrument (that is, as an efficient Instrumental Cause of our
Justification) nor yet qu^ talis:] And I think they will not lay our salvation
on the Affirmative, when they consider what we yield (of which more anon) And
on the other side, we are far from passing any damning sentence on them that
are for the said Instrumentality; especially as we perceive it commonly held.
Let no Papist therefore insult over us and say, we are disagreed in our
fundamentals, unless he be resolved to do it in design against the light of his
own conscience. I the rather premise this Caution, because I hear that the
Papists do mutter thus against us already to silly people that cannot see their
deceit: They say, [Is not the death of Christ a fundamental? and yet some say
that he died for All, and some say he died only for the Elect; some say he paid
the Idem, and some but the Tantundem] but they tell not the people the true
state of the Controversy, and wherein we are agreed, or that they differ as
much about the extent of the death of Christ among themselves, without such a
charge. Christ is the Foundation: but yet whether his hair were cut, or not, or
whether he were thirty three or thirty five, or fifty years old when he died;
or whether he was buried in a Garden, or in a Sepulcher of stone, these are not
the foundation. So much to the first Proposition for narrowing our difference.

Proposition 2. Though this controversy be not of such Moment as is denied,
yet is it of great weight, and the Consequents of the Errors of one party
hereabout, are such, as if they were held practically and after the proper
sense of their expressions, would be a great hinderance to salvation, if not
plainly hazard it. And therefore the question is not to be cast by, as needless
or unprofitable. It is so near the great matters of our Redemption,
Justification, and the nature of faith, that it is it self the greater. And if
Amesius say true, that truths are so concatenated, that every Error must by
consequence overthrow the foundation, then it must be so in this. The
consequents shall be mentioned anon in the Arguments, where it will be more
seasonable. And in great matters, it is not a contemptible Error which
consists but in mis-naming and mis-placing them: It is a very great help to
the clear and full understanding of Truths, to have right Notions and Methods.
And the contrary may prove dangerous to many others, when the particular
Patrons of those mistakes may be in no danger by them. For perhaps their first
Notions may be righter than their second; and they may not see the consequents
of their mistakes; and yet when such mistakes in terms and methods shall be
commended to the world, other men that hear and read their words, and know not
their hearts and better apprehensions, are like enough to take them in the most
obvious or proper sense, and by one disorder to be led to more, and to swallow
the Consequents as well as the misleading Premises. And therefore I must needs
say, that this point appears of such moment in my eyes, that I dare not
desert that which I confidently take to be the Truth, nor sacrifice it to the
honor or pleasure of man

For the explication of the terms it is needless to say much, and I have
neither time for, nor mind of needless work. By [Justification] here we mean
not either Sanctification alone, or sanctification and remission conjunct as
making up our Righteousness, as the Papists do: (though we deny not but
sometime the word may be found in Scripture in some such sense:) For thus it is
past controversy, that our justification, that is, our sanctification as to
all that follows faith, is as much, if not much more, from our belief in
Christ as Teacher and King, as from our belief in him as a Ransom. But by
Justification we mean that Relative Change which Protestants ordinarily mean by
this word; which we need not here define.

The Preposition [By] (when we speak of being justified by faith) is not by all
men taken in the same sense. First, Sometime its used more strictly and
limitedly to signify only an efficiency, or the Interest of an Efficient
cause. And thus some Divines do seem to take it, when they say that we are
justified by faith in Christ's blood and Righteousness, and not by faith in him
as a Teacher or a Lord: which occasioneth the Papists to say our difference is
wider then indeed it is: For the word [By] has an ambiguity and in their
sense, we yield their Negative though not their Affirmative, in the
last-mentioned conclusion. Secondly, Sometime the word [By] is used to signify
a Conditionality, or the Interest of a condition only in special. And thus we
take it when we explain our selves in what manner it is that we are justified
by faith, and by these questioned acts in particular. And therefore those
Protestants that dispute against us who are for the Affirmative, do (if I
understand them) deny only the propriety of the phrase which we use, but not
the thing or sense which we express by it; for they grant that these acts of
faith are Conditions of our Justification, when they have never so much
disputed, that we are not justified by them, and so a small syllable of two
letters, is much of the matter of their controversy.

Thirdly, sometime this word is used to signify the Interest of any other
cause as well as the Efficient, and that either generally, or especially of
some one. This Paper is white By the whiteness as the formal cause: we are
moved to a godly life By God and salvation as the final cause etc.

Fourthly, Sometime the term [By] is taken yet more largely (and fitly enough)
for all or any Means in General, or the interest of any means in the attainment
of the End. And so it comprehends all Causes, even those Per accidens and
Conditions as well as Causes, and all that does but remove impediments. And in
this comprehensive sense we take it here in the Question, though when we come
to determine what is the special Interest of faith in Justification, I take it
in the second sense.

Take notice also, That I purposely here use this phrase [we are Justified by
Believing, or by Faith] rather than these, [justifying faith] or [Faith does
justify us.] And I here foretell you, that if I shall at any time use these
last expressions, as led to it by those with whom I deal, it is but in the
sense as is hereafter explained. The Reasons why I choose to stick to this
phrase, rather then other, are; First, Because this only is the Scripture
phrase, and the other is not found in Scripture; (that I remember) It is never
said, that [Faith does justify us] though it be said that [we are justified by
faith.] And if any will affirm, that I may use that phrase which is not found
in Scripture, he cannot say, I must use it. And in a Controverted case,
especially about such Evangelical truths, the safety of adhering to Scripture
phrase, and the danger of departing from it is so discernable, (and specially
when men make great use of their unscriptural phrases for the countenancing of
their opinions,) I have the more reason to be cautelous. Secondly, Because the
phrases are not always of one and the same signification. The one is more
comprehensive then the other, if strictly taken. To be justified by faith] is a
phrase extensive to the Interest of any Medium whatsoever: And there are Media
which are not Causes. But when we say that [Faith does justify us] or call it
[justifying Faith] we express a Causality, if we take the word strictly. Though
this last phrase may signify the Interest of a bare Condition, yet not so
properly and without straining as the former. The Reverend Author of the seond
Treatise of Justification, is of the same mind as to the use of the terms; but
he conjectures another reason for the Scripture use, then I shall ever be
persuaded of, viz. that it is because Credere is not Agere, but Pati; to
Believe is to Suffer, and not to Act: that it is a Grammatic all Action, but
Physically a Passion. Though I think this no truer, then that my brains are
made of a looking glass, and my heart of marble; yet is there somewhat in this
Reverend man's opinion, that looks toward the truth afar off. For indeed it
intimates that as to Causality or Efficiency; faith is not Active in the
justifying of a sinner, but is a mere condition or moral disposition, which is
necessary to him that will be in the nearest Capacity to be justified by God.

The last words, [Believing in his blood] I use not as the only way that is
taken by the Opponents; but as one instance among diverse. For they use to
express themselves so variously, as may cause us to think by many (as we know
it of some) that they take more ways then one in opposing us. First, Some of
them say, that the only Act of faith that justifies, is our believing in
Christ's blood, or sufferings, or humiliation. Secondly, Others say, That it is
the believing in, or apprehending, and resting on his whole Righteousness, even
his Obedience as Obedience, to be it self imputed to us. Thirdly, Other
Reverend Divines say, that it is the apprehending and resting on his Habitual,
as well as Active and Passive Righteousness; that his Habits may be imputed to
us, as our Habitual Righteousness, and his Acts as our active Righteousness; in
both which together we are reputed perfect Fulfillers of the Law; and his
sufferings as our Satisfaction for our breaking the Law. As for those that
mention the Imputation of his Divine Righteousness to us, they are so few, and
those for the most part suspected of unsoundness, that I will not number it
among the Opinions of Protestants. Fourthly, Others say, that the justifying
Act of Faith is not the apprehension of Christ's Righteousness or Ransom; but
of his Person, and that only as he is Priest, and not as Prophet or King.
Fifthly, Others think that it is the apprehension of Christ's person, but not in
his entire Priestly office; for he performs some Acts of his Priestly office
for us (Intercession) after we are justified: Therefore it is his Person only
as the Satisfier of justice, and Meritor of Life, which they make the adequate
Object of the justifying Act of Faith. Sixthly, Others say, that it is both his
Person and his satisfaction, Merit, Righteousness yet, Pardon and justification
it self, that is the adequate Object: By which they must needs grant that it is
not one only single Act, but many. Seventhly. One Reverend man that's now with
God (Bishop Usher) understanding that I was engaged in this Controversy, did
of his own accord acquaint me with his Judgment, as tending to reconciliation:
And because I never heard any other of the same mind, and it has a
considerable aspect; I shall briefly and truly report it as he expressed it. He
told me, that there are two Acts (or sort of Acts) of Faith. By the first we
receive the Person of Christ as a woman in Marriage does first receive the
Person of her Husband. This is our Implantation into Christ the true Vine, and
gives us that Union with him, which must go before Communion and Communication
of his Graces, and so before justification. The second of Faiths Acts are those
that apprehend the Benefits which he offers; Of which Justification is one
and this is strictly the Justifying Act of Faith, and follows the former. So
that (said he) it is true that the first Act which apprehends Christ's person
does take him as King, Priest, and Prophet, as Head and Husband that we may be
united to him: but the following acts which Receive his Benefits do not so, but
are suited to the several benefits.]

The opinion is subtle, and I perceived by his Readiness in it, that it was
one of his old studied points, and that he had been long of that mind; my
answer to him was this: [You much confirm me in what I have received: for you
grant the principal thing that I desire; but you add something more which I
cannot fully close with, but shall plainly tell you what are my apprehensions
of it. First, You grant that the act of faith by which we are united to Christ,
and which goes first, is the Believing in, or Receiving whole Christ as Priest,
Prophet, and King. This will do all that I desire. Secondly, You add, that
another act, even the Receiving of his Righteousness is after necessary, that
we may be justified Your reason seems to be drawn from the difference of the
effects: Union goes before Justification, therefore the uniting act goes before
the justifying act. This is it that I deny; My Reasons are these. First,
Scripture distinguishes between our Union with Christ and our Justification:
but no where between the uniting and justifying acts of faith. Secondly, The
nature of the thing requires it not, because faith justifies not by a Physical
causality, as fire warmeth me; but by the moral interest of a condition: and
the same act may be the Condition of diverse benefits. Thirdly, Scripture has
express, made the Receiving of the person in his Relations to be the Condition
of the participation of his benefits: [As many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God; John 1.12. whoever believes in him shall not
perish, but, etc. believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, etc.]
Fourthly, Your own Similitude clears what I say: Though the wife have not
possession of all that is her husbands as soon as she is married; yet she has
Right to all that is her part, and possession of the benefits merely Relative,
which consist but in a Right. The accepting his person in marriage is the
condition to be by her performed to instate her in his Honors so far as she
must partake of them. When she is made a wife by that Consent, there needs not
any other act before she can be noble, honorable, a Lady, a Queen, etc: For
the former was the full condition of the first possession of this benefit; and
the benefit immediately resulteth from the Union. Fifthly, I conceive that
these two acts which you mention are but one moral work (though diverse Physical
acts) and to be done without any interposition of time, before we can have
Christ for Union or Justification. For the end is Essential to Relations: and
he that receives Christ, must take him to some end and use: and that must be to
Justify, Reconcile and save him; to bring him to God that he may be blessed in
him. He that does not receive Christ to these ends, receives not Christ as
Christ, and therefore cannot be united to him: and he that does thus receive
him, does both those acts in one which you require. Sixthly, And the case is
much different between Physical and Relative benefits: For its true, that when
we are united to Christ, we may have after need of renewed acts of faith to
actuate the Graces of the Spirit Inherent in us; For here Right is one thing,
and Possession is another: But the Relation of Sonship, Justification, etc. are
benefits that arise from the promise or free Gift by a mere resultancy to all
that are united to Christ; and whoever has present Right to them, even thereby
has possession of them, so that this answers your Reason. For there is no
such distance of time between our Union with Christ and Justification, as that
any acts of our own must interpose; but they are in eodem instanti, and differ
only in order of nature. In sum, we prove a promise of pardon to all that
receive Christ himself, and believe in him: If any will affirm the necessity of
any other act before we can be justified, it is incumbent on them to prove it.

This was the substance of my Answer, to which the Reverend Bishop said no
more; whether satisfied or not, I cannot tell: But I thought meet to recite his
Judgment, both because it comes so near the matter, and because I know not of
any other that says the same or so much of seeming strength against us.

Against all these seven particular Opinions, I am now to defend the Thesis;
when I have first told you, in certain distinctions and propositions, how much
I grant, and what I deny; which I shall in short dispatch.

And here I need but to rehearse what I have said already to Mr. Blake, page
3.4. or to give you some short account of my thoughts to the same purpose.

First, We must not confound Justification by Constitution or Gift, and
justification by the Sentence of the Judge, and the Execution of that sentence,
which are three distinct things.

Secondly, We must not confound Justification with the assurance or feeling of
Justification.

Thirdly, We must distinguish between our first Justification from a state of
sin, and our daily Justification from particular Acts of sin.

Fourthly, Between that which is necessary on Christ's part, and that which is
necessary on our part to our Justification.

Fifthly, Between Christ's purchasing our Justification, and his actual
justifying of us.

Sixthly, Between these two senses of the phrase [justified by Fatih] viz. as
by an efficient Cause, or as a mere Condition.

Seventhly, Between the Causality of faith in the Physical effects of
sanctification on the soul, and its conducing to the efficacy of the Promise in
our Justification.

Proposition 1. Ex part Christi, We easily grant that it is not his Teaching,
or Ruling us, but his Ransom and Obedience that are the Meritorious cause of
our Justification and Salvation.

Proposition 2. Therefore if Christ did justify us per modum objecti aprehensi
in the nearest sense, as the Belief of sacred Truths does make a Qualitative
impression on the soul in our Sanctification, and the exciting and acting, of
our Graces then I should confess that it is only that Act of Faith which is the
apprehension of this Object, that does help us directly to the benefit of the
Object.

Proposition 3. But it is not so: For the Object justifies us causally by way
of Merit and Moral procurement, and the benefit of that Merit is partly the
Promise conveying to us Justification, and partly Justification conveyed by
that Promise (not to speak now of other benefits) and the Promise conveyeth
Justification by Moral Donation as a deed of Gift, or a Pardon to a Traitor:
Therefore the Gift flowing purely from the Will of the Giver, and the Promise
or deed of Gift being the Immediate Instrumental efficient Cause of it, as it
is signum voluntatis Donatoris, our Belief or Apprehension qua talis cannot
justify us, nor have any nearer or higher interest in our Justification, then
to be the Condition of it, as it is a free Gift. And therefore the Condition
must be judged of by the will of the Donor expressed in his Promise, and not
immediately by the conceits of men concerning its natural agreeableness to the
Object in this or that respect.

Proposition 4. Yea, Even ex part Christi, though he Merit Justification by
his Ransom and Obedience, yet he actually justifies us as King of his Church,
and that in regard of all the three sorts or parts of Justification. He gives
it constitutively by his Promise, as Lord and Legislator and Benefactor, on
these terms of Grace. He sentenceth us Just, as our Judge; and he executes that
sentence as a Just Judge, governing according to his Laws. So that if Faith did
justify ex natura rei, which they call its Instrumentality, I see not yet but
that the apprehension of Christ as Lord and Judge must justify us, because the
Object apprehended does thus justify us.

Proposition 5. I easily grant that in our Sanctification or the exciting and
exercise of our Graces, the case stands as the Opponents apprehend it to do
in Justification. This Interest of the Act must be judged of by the Object
apprehended. For it is not the Belief of a Promise that fears us, but of a
Threatening; nor the Belief of a Threatening that Comfort us, but of a
Promise. For here the Object works immediately on our minds, per modum
objecti apprehensi: But in Justification it is not so, where God is the Agent
as a Donor, and there can be nothing done by us, but in order to make us fit
Subjects; and the change is not Qualitative by an Object as such, but Relative
by a Fundamentum which is without us in the Gospel, and nothing within us but a
qualifying Condition, without which it will not be done.

Proposition 6. Accordingly I easily grant, that the Sense, or Assurance of
Justification in our Consciences is wrought by the Object as an Object: Because
this Assurance is a part of our Sanctification. But that Object is not directly
Christ's Ransom, but the Promise through his blood, and our own Faith which is
the condition of that Promise.

Proposition 7. I easily grant that Faith in Christ as Lord or Teacher of the
Church, is not the Instrumental efficient Cause of our Justification: They need
not therefore contend against me in this. But withal I say, that faith in his
Priesthood is not the Instrumental efficient Cause neither; though I allow it
to have a nearer Physical Relation to the Ransom which meriteth our
Justification.

Proposition 8. Though there is a greater show of Reason to assert the Interest
of the single Belief in Christ's Priesthood, for a particular Pardon, then for
our first general Pardon; yet indeed it is but a show, even there also. For it
is not only the applying our selves to his blood or Ransom, but it is also the
applying our selves to whole Christ, to make up the whole breach, that is the
Condition of our particular Pardon, (so far as a particular Act of says is a
Condition) which though it be not a Receiving Christ for Union with him, as we
did in the beginning, yet is it a receiving him ad hoc et secundum quid; and a
renewed Consent to his whole Office, and adhesion to him as our special, remedy
for recovery from that fall, by freeing us both from the guilt and stain of Sin.

Proposition 9. It is undoubtedly the duty of every Sinner, in the sense of his
guilt and misery, to fly to the Ransom of Christ's blood and the Merit of his
Obedience, as the satisfaction to Gods Justice, and the Purchaser of our
Justification. And he that does not this, how willing soever he may seem to
learn of Christ as a Master, or to be ruled by him, yet cannot be justified or
saved by him.

Proposition 10. I easily grant that Faith qud Christum Prophetam et Dominum
recipit, does not justify; but only fides qua Christum Prophetam and Dominum
recipit, and qua est promissionis Conditio praestita. But then I say the same
also of Faith in Christ as Priest, or in his Righteousness.

Having explained my meaning in these ten Propositions, for preventing of
Objections that concern not the Controversy, but run upon mistakes, I shall
now proceed to prove the Thesis, which is this.

Thesis. We are justified by God, by our Believing in Christ as Teacher and
Lord, and not only by Believing in his blood or Righteousness.

Argument 1. My first Argument shall be from the Concession of those that we
dispute with. They commonly grant us the point contended for: Therefore we may
take it for granted by them. If you say, What need you then dispute the point,
if they deny it not whom you dispute with? I Answer, some of them grant it, and
understand not that they grant it us, because they understand not the sense of
our Assertion. And some of them understand that they grant it in our sense, but
yet deny it in another sense of their own; and so make it a strife about a
syllable. But I shall prove the Concession, left some yet discern it not.

If it be granted us, that Believing in Jesus Christ as Lord and Teacher, is a
real part of the Condition of our Justification then is it granted us, that by
this believing in him we are justified as by a Condition (which is our sense,
and all that we assert) But the former is true: Therefore so is the later.

For the proof of the Antecedent (which is all) First, Try whether you can meet
with any Divine that dare deny it, who believes that Faith is the Condition of
the Covenant. Secondly, And I am sure their writings do ordinarily confess it.
Their Doctrine that oppose us, is, That Faith is both a Condition and an
Instrument: but other Acts, as Repentance, etc. may be Conditions, but not
Instruments. And those that have waded so far into this Controversy, seem to
join these other Acts of Faith with the Conditions, but not with the
Instrument. Thirdly, They expressly make it antecedent to our Justification, as
of moral necessity, ex constitutione permittentis; and say it is the Fides quae
justificat: which is the thing desired, if there be any sense in the words.
Fourthly, They cannot deny to Faith in Christ, as Lord and Teacher, that which
they commonly give to Repentance, and most of them to many other Acts. But to
be a Condition (or part of the Condition) of Justification is commonly by them
ascribed to Repentance; therefore they cannot deny it to these acts of faith.
So that you see I may fairly here break off, and take the Thesis pro Concessa,
as to the sense. Nothing more can be said by them, but against our phrase
whether it be proper to say that we are justified By that which is but a bare
Condition of our Justification, which if any will deny: First, We shall prove
it by the consent of the world, that apply the word [By] to any Medium: And Dr.
Twiss that told them (contr. Corvinum) over and over that a condition is a
Medium, though it be not a cause; and I think none will deny it. Secondly, by
the consent of many Texts of Scripture: But this must be referred to another
Disputation, to which it does belong, viz. about the Instrumentality of faith
in justifying us, which, God willing, I intend also to perform.

Argument 2. The usual language of the Scripture, is, that we are justified by
faith in Christ, or by believing in him, without any exclusions of any
essential part of that faith. But faith in Christ does essentially contain our
believing in him as Teacher, Priest, and King, or Lord: therefore by believing
in him as Teacher, Priest and Lord, we are justified.

The Major is past the denial of Christians, as to the first part of it. And
for the second part, the whole cause lies on it; For the Minor also is past
all controversy. For if it be essential to Christ as Christ to be God and man,
the Redeemer, Teacher, Priest and Lord: then it is essential to faith in Christ
(by which we are justified) to believe in him as God and man, the Redeemer,
Teacher, Priest and Lord. But the Antecedent is most certain: therefore so is
the Consequent.

The reason of the Consequence, is, because the act here is specified from its
Object. All this is past further question.

All the Question therefore is Whether Scripture do any where expound it self,
by excluding the other essential parts of faith, from being those acts by which
we are justified? and have limited our justification to any one act? This lies
on the Affirmers to prove. So that you must note, that it is enough for me to
prove that we are justified by faith in Christ Jesus: for this Includes all
the essential acts; till they shall prove on the contrary, that it is but
secundum quid, and that God has excluded all other essential acts of faith
save that which they assert: The proof therefore is on their part, and not on
mine. And I shall try anon how well they prove it.

In the mean time, let us see what way the Scripture goes, and observe that
every Text by way of Authority, does afford us a several Argument, unless they
prove the exclusion.

First, Mark 16.15, 16, 17. [ Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to
every Creature: he that believes and is baptized shall be saved; and he that
believes not shall be damned: and these signs shall follow them that believe,
etc.] Here the faith mentioned, is the believing of the Gospel, and the same
with our becoming Christians: and therefore not confined to one part or act of
saving says. That Gospel which must be preached to all the world, is it that
is received by the faith here mentioned; But that Gospel does essentially
contain more then the doctrine of Christ's Priesthood: therefore so does that
faith.

Object. It is not Justification but Salvation that is there promised.

Answ. It is that Salvation whereof Justification is a part: It is such a
Salvation as all have right to as soon as ever they believe and are baptized,
which comprehends Justification: And the Scripture here and everywhere does
make the same faith without the least distinction, to be the condition of
Justification and of our Title to Glorification: and never parcels out the
several effects to several acts of faith; except only in those Qualities or
Acts of the soul which faith is to produce as an efficient cause. To be
justified by faith or Grace, and to be saved by faith or Grace, are
promiscuously spoken as of the same faith or Grace.

Secondly, John 3.15, 16, 18. He that believes in him shall not perish, but
have everlasting life.] [He that believes on him is not condemned.] Not to be
condemned, is to be justified. Condemnation and Justification are opposed in
Scripture, Romans 8, 33, 4. Here therefore a saving faith and a justifying are
made all one. And it is [Believing in Christ] without exclusion of any
essential part, that is this faith; It is [Believing in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God.] ver. 18. which is more then to believe his Ransom.

Thirdly, John 3.35, 36. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things
into his hand, he that believes on the Son, has everlasting life; and he that
believes not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him.] To have Gods wrath abide on him to be unjustified. And the unbelievers
opposed to the Believers before mentioned, are such as [Believe not the son:]
which phrase cannot possibly be limited to the affiance in his blood: It is the
[(...)] often translated Disobedient: signifying, says Willet, both
unbelieving and disobedient, but rather Disobedient, properly it is
unperswadable. But of this more anon. And the faith here mentioned is
[Believing on the son] entirely, without exclusion of any essential acts; nay
expressly including the act in question, by showing that it is faith in Christ
as Lord, into [whose hands the Father has given all things] as the connection
of these words to the foregoing does manifest.

Fourthly, Romans 1.16, 17, 18. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it
is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes -- for therein is
the Righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, the
just shall live by faith.] where saving and justifying faith is made the same,
and that is to be a believer of the Gospel, or in Christ, without limitation to
any one essential part of it.

Fifthly, Romans 3.22. [Even the Righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe.] Here it is faith in Jesus
Christ by which we are justified, which therefore includes all that is
essential to it.

Object. Verse. 25. It is said to be by faith in his blood.

Answ. 1. But there is not a syllable confining it to faith in his blood alone.
It says not, (by faith only in his blood) Secondly, The ordinary course of
Scripture is to call it by that name (faith in Jesus Christ) which
comprehends all that's essential to it. But sometime upon special occasions,
its denominated from some one notable act or part. And that is, when it is the
scope of the text, to denote more the distinct Interest of that part of Christ's
Office which is related to that act of faith, then any sole Interest of that
act of faith it self. And so the Apostle here mentions faith in his blood as
a special act, because he now draws them especially to observe that blood
which is the Object of it; and in other places he instanceth in other acts of
faith; but commonly speaks of it entirely. And I think the Opponents will grant
that as (only) is not here expressed, so neither is it employed: for then it
would exclude also, faith in the rest of his satisfactory Humiliation, or at
least, in his active Righteousness, if not in his Person or Relation: of which
more anon.

So verse. 18.30, 31. Its called (faith) entirely, or without restriction by
which we are justified; and therefore none of the essentials are excluded.

But it would be too tedious to recite the particular Texts: Its known, that
[by faith] and [by believing] in Christ, without exclusion or limitation, is
the common please of Scripture, when it speaks how we are justified: as many
further be seen, Romans 5.1, 2. and 9.32. Gal. 2.16. ( we are justified by the
faith of Jesus Christ, and by believing in Jesus Christ, as opposed to the
works of the Law; but not by faith in his Priesthood, or Ransom, as opposed to
faith in him as our Lord and Teacher) Gal. 3.11, 24, 25, 26. and 5.5.6. Ephesians
2.8, 9. and 3.12, 17. Phil. 3.9. Romans 9.30. Heb. 11. throughout, John 6 35, 40,
47. Acts 10.42, 43. Romans 10 10. Acts 23.39. From these and many the like I
argue thus.

The Scripture does ascribe our Justification to faith; and does not limit it
to any one part of faith excluding the rest: Believing in Jesus Christ as
Redeemer, Prophet, Priest and King, is essentially this faith. Ergo, etc.

If the Scripture speaks of faith essentially, not limiting it ad partem fidei,
then so must we: But the Scripture does so; Ergo' etc. It is nowhere more
necessary then in such cases this to hold to the Rule, of not distinguishing
ubi lex non distinguit. First, Because it is an adding to the doctrine of
Christ in a point of weight. Secondly, Because it savoureth of a presumptuous
detraction from the Condition Imposed by Christ himself. If a Prince do make a
General act of Oblivion, pardoning all Rebels that will enter into Covenant
with him, wherein they consent to Accept his pardon, and take him for their
Sovereign Lord; He that shall now say, that Returning to his Allegiance, or
consenting to the Princes Sovereignty, is no part of the Condition of the
Traitors pardon, but that they are pardoned only by accepting of a pardon, and
not by the other act, will certainly be guilty of adding to the act of his
Prince, and of detracting from the condition by him required; and so is it in
our present case.

If God speak of any thing essentially, we must not presume without sufficient
proof of the restriction, to expound it only de part essentiali. If he invite
a Guest to his marriage feast, he means not the man's head only, or his heart
only: for neither of these is the man. If he require a lamb in sacrifice, we
must not expound it of the head only, or heart only of a Lamb.

To this Argument (briefly in my Apology) Mr. Blake (having first excepted at
the newness of the phrase [Lord-Redeemer] does answer thus [I say, Christ is to
be received as the Lord our Redeemer, and as our Master or Teacher; but faith
in Justification eyes Redemption, not Dominion.] Repl. First, The Phrase [Faith
in Justification] is as unacceptable to me, as [Lord-Redeemer] is to you: not
only for the Novelty, but the ambiguity, if not the false Doctrine which it
does import. First, If the meaning be [Faith as it is the Condition of our
Justification,] then its contrary to your own Concession after, that this
should eye Christ's Priesthood only; and its an untruth, which you utterly fail
in the proof, or do nothing to it. Secondly, If you mean [Faith in its
effecting of our Justification,] then it imports another mistake, which you
have not proved, viz. that faith does effect our Justification. If you mean
[Faith in Receiving Justification] either you mean the proper Passive
Receiving, and this is but Justificari, and the man Receives it as the
Subject, and his faith is but a Condition, or means of it: Or you mean the
Moral active Metaphorical Receiving; which is nothing but Consenting that it
shall be ours; or accepting: And this is neither part of Justification, nor
proper Cause; but a Condition, and but part of the Condition: And therefore
here your meaning must be one of these two, Either That Act of Faith which is
the accepting of Justification, is not the ^ying of Dominion: To which I reply,
First, taking it largely as a moral Act, its not true; for its comprehensive of
both, of which more anon: but taking it strictly as one Physical Act, its true:
Secondly, But then its nothing to the purpose: For we are not more truly
justified by that Act which is the accepting of Justification, or Consenting to
be justified, then we are by the Accepting of Christ for our Lord and Master;
the reason of which, you have had before, and shall have more fully anon; or
else you mean as before expressed, That Act of Faith which is our Consenting to
Justification, is the whole Condition of our Justification, and not the eying
of Dominion; But of that before. If I may Judge by your Doctrine elsewhere
expressed, you mean only That the act of Faith which accepts of
Justification, is the only Instrument of Justification; of which in its due
place: It may here suffice to say again, that I affirm not that in question to
the be Instrument of it. Be not offended that I enquire into the sense of your
ambiguous phrase, which I truly profess, is to me not intelligible, till you
have explained in what sense it is that you intend it; and therefore my enquiry
is not needless.

Ar. 3. If the Scripture does (not only by the specificke Denomination, as was
last proved, but also) by description, and mentioning those very acts, include
the believing in Christ as our Lord and Teacher, etc. in that faith by which as
a Condition, we are justified; then we are justified by believing in Christ as
our Lord and Teacher, etc. not only as a sacrifice or Meriter of Justification.
But the Antetedent is true: therefore so is the Consequent.

I prove the Antecedent by many Texts.

Romans 10 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. For Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness
to every one that believes. -- But the Righteousness which is of faith
speaks on this wise: Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? that
is to bring Christ down from above: or who shall descend into the deep? that is
to bring up Christ again from the dead: But what says it? The word is nigh
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which we
preach, that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved;
for with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto Salvation.] Here it is evident, that it is a Believing
unto Righteousness that is mentioned, and therefore it is the Believing by
which we are justified. And then it is evident that the faith here called [a
believing unto Righteousness] is the believing in the Lord Jesus; expressly
Christ as Lord and Savior, is made the Object of it; and is not confined to a
believing in one part of his Priesthood only. Also [that God raised Christ from
the dead] is the expressed object of this faith. And the Resurrection of Christ
is no part of his sacrifice or mere Priestly Office.

Romans 4.24, 25. [But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on
him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.] Here it is evident that it is
Justification it self that is the Benefit spoken of, even the Imputing of
Righteousness: And that faith here is mentioned as the Condition of that
Imputation [If we believe] And that this faith is described to be first a
believing in him that raised Christ, and not only in Christ. Secondly, A
believing in Christ Jesus our Lord, who is the express object of it; and so his
Lordship taken in; and thirdly, a believing in his Resurrection, and not only
in his blood or obedience. So that I see no room left to encourage any
doubting, whether we are justified by believing in Christ as Lord, and in his
Resurrection, and in God that raised him, as the Condition of our Justification.

John 1.9, 11, 12. [That was the true light that lights every man that comes
into the world. -- He came to his own, and his own received him not: But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, to them
that believe in his Name.] Here it is manifest, First, that it is the faith by
which we are justified that is spoken of; for its commonly agreed that
Justification is here included in Adoption, or at least that its the same act
of faith by which we are adopted and justified. Secondly, Also that the object
of this faith is Christ as the Light, which is not his mere Priesthood.
Thirdly, And that it is his person in his full office, and not some single
benefit. Fourthly, that it is called [his Name] and [Believing in his Name] is
more then consenting to be justified by his blood; and in Scripture-sense
comprehends his Nature and Office: and is all one as taking him as the true
Messiah, and becoming his Disciples: Fifthly, And its much to be Noted, that it
is not by way of Physical efficacy by apprehension (as I take Gold in my hand,
and so receive possession of it) that faith has its nearest Interest in our
Adoption: but it qualifieth the subject dispositively in the sight of God, and
so God gives men Power thereupon to become his sons.

So the forecited words, John 3.31, 35, 36. Where Life is given on Condition
that we believe on the Son; and that is expressed as the object of that faith,
as he is one that [Cometh from Heaven, and is above all, and whom the Father
loves, and has given all things into his hands.]

And so John 5.22 23, 24. [He has committed all judgment to the son, that all
men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; Verily, verily, I say
unto you, he that hears my word and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into Condemnation] Here the faith
mentioned is that which freeth men from Condemnation, and therefore is it by
which we are Justified: And the object of it is the Word of Christ (and
therefore not only his Priesthood) and the Father as sending the Son, even to
his whole office of Redemption.

Moreover, that faith by which our Justification is continued, it is begun by
this (both they and we are agreed in, though some yield not that any thing more
is required to its continuance.) But the faith by which Justification is
continued, is the Belief of the Gospel, which is preached to every Creature and
not only one branch of it. Col. 1.21, 22, 23. And it is called, Col. 2.6. a
Receiving Christ Jesus the Lord.

John 20.31. These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the son of God and that believing ye might have life through his Name:]
That faith by which we have life, is certainly it by which we are justified:
for as Justification is part of that life, so Right to Eternal life is given on
the same terms as Justification is. And the object of this faith here is,
Christ in Person and entire Office, the son of God by whose Name we have life.

Acts 2.30 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. [ Knowing that God had sworn with an
Oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, he would
raise up Christ, to sit upon his Throne, he seeing this before spoke of the
Resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in his Hell, neither his
flesh did see Corruption: This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all
witnesses; therefore being by the right hand of God exalted -- therefore let
all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made this same Jesus whom
ye have Crucified, both Lord and Christ. Now when they heard this -- Then Peter
said unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for the Remission of sins --.] Here it is evident that Remission of
sins is a Benefit that by this faith they were to be made partakers of; and so
that it is the faith by which we are justified, that they are Invited to: And
that the Object of this faith employed in the terms, Repent and be baptized,
etc. is the Name of Jesus Christ, and that eminently in his exaltation, as
Risen, and set at the Right hand of God, and as Lord and Christ.

So Acts 3.19.22.15. Repent therefore and be Converted, that your sins may be
blotted out -- For Moses truly said, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up
--.] Here the Jews are accused for killing the Prince of life, verse. 15. and
exhorted to Repent thereof, and so of their Infidelity, and be converted (to
Christ, and so to become Christians,) which is more then one act of faith; and
this was that their sins may be blotted out: And Christ as Prophet is
propounded to them as the object of this faith, which they are exhorted to.

So Act, 10.42, 43. with 36, 37, 38, 40, 41. [And he commanded us to preach
unto the people, and to testify that it is he that is ordained of God to be
the Judge of quick and dead; to him give all the Prophets witness, that through
his name, whosoever believes in him shall receive Remission of sins.] Here the
faith is described which has the Promise of Remission. And the Object of it is
at large set out to be Jesus Christ as Lord of all, ver. 36. as anointed with
the Holy Ghost and with power, raised from the dead, and made the Judge of the
quick and the dead; and it is called entirely a Believing in him, and the
Remission is through his name.

Act. 16.31. The faith of the Jailer as persuaded to for life* is the believing
in the Lord Jesus Christ entirely: and its called a Believing in God, ver. 34.

1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. The faith there mentioned is that By which we are
justified; he that believes on him shall not be confounded; and the Object of
it is, whole Christ as the Corner stone, Elect and Precious.]

John 5.10, 11, 12. [The faith there mentioned, is that by which we have Christ
and Life]: And the Object of it is, [the Son of God] and [God] and [the record
that God gave of his Son] even [that God has given us eternal Life, and this
life is in his Son.]

Mat. 11.27, 28, 29. The faith there mentioned, is called [a coming to Christ
weary and heavy laden, that he may give them rest,] which must comprehend Rest
from the Guilt of sin and punishment. And the Act of that Faith is directed to
Christ as one to whom all Power is given by the Father, and as one whose yoke
and burden we must take upon us. But I shall add no more for this.

To this last Mr. Blake says, page 504. This Text shows the Duty of men to be,
not alone to such rest and ease from Christ, but to learn of Christ and follow
him: But neither their learning nor their imitation, but faith in his blood, is
their freedom or Justification. Repl. Properly neither one act of faith nor
other is our Justification. Faith is a Quality in the Habit, and an act in the
exercise: and Justification is a Relation. Faith is a part of our
Sanctification; Therefore it is not our Justification. But supposing you speak
Metonymically, I say both acts of faith are our Justification, that is, the
Condition of it. And the Text proves it, by making our Subjection not only a
Duty, but an express Condition of the Promise. And this Conditionality you here
before and after do confess or grant.

Argument 4. If we are justified by Christ as Priest, Prophet and King
conjunctly, and not by any of these alone, much less by his Humiliation and
Obedience alone; then according to the Opponents own Principles (who argue from
the distinct Interest of the several parts of the Object, to the distinct
Interest of the several acts of faith) we are justified by believing in Christ
as Priest, Prophet and King, and not as Humble and Obedient only. But we are
justified by Christ as Priest, Prophet and King, etc. Ergo, etc.

The Consequence is their own. And the Antecedent I shall prove from several
texts of Scripture, and from the nature of the thing, beginning with the last.

And first it is to be supposed, That we are all agreed that the blood and
Humiliation of Jesus Christ, are the Ransom and Price that satisfies the
Justice of God for our sins, and accordingly must be apprehended by the
Believer: And many of us agree also, that his Active obedience as such, is part
of this satisfaction, or at least, Meritorious of the same effect of our
Justification. But the thing that I am to prove, is, that the Meritorious Cause
is not the only Cause and that Christ in his other actions, is as truly the
efficient Cause, as in his meriting, and that all do sweetly and harmoniously
concur to the entire effect; and that faith must have respect to the other
causes of our Justification, and not alone to the Meritorious Cause, and that
we are Justified by this entire work of Faith, and not only by that Act which
respects the satisfaction or merit. And first, I shall prove that Christ does
actually justify us as King.

The word Justification, as I have often said (and its past doubt) is used to
signify these three Acts. First, Condonation, or constitutive Justification,
by the Law of Grace or Promise of the Gospel. Secondly, Absolution by sentence
in Judgment. Thirdly, The Execution of the former, by actual Liberation from
penalty. The last is oftener called Remission of sin; the two former are more
properly called Justification.

First, As for the first of these, I argue this: If Christ do as King and
Benefactor, (on supposition of his antecedent Merits,) Enact the Law of Grace
or promise by which we are justified, then does he as King and Benefactor
justify us by Condonation, or constitution. For the Promise is his Instrument
by which he does it. But the Antecedent is certain, therefore so is the
Consequent.

As the Father by Right of Creation was Rector of the new created world, and so
made the Covenant of Life that was then made: so the Son (and the Father) by
Right of Redemption is Rector of the new Redeemed world, and so made the Law of
Grace, that gives Christ and Life to all that will believe. As it is a Law, it
is the Act of a King: As it is a Deed of Gift, it is the Act of a Benefactor:
as it is founded in his death, and supposes his satisfaction, thereby it is
called his Testament. In no respect is it part of his satisfaction or
Humiliation or Merit itself, but the true effect of it. So that Christ's merit
is the Remote Moral Cause of our Justification, but his granting of this
promise or Act of Grace, is the true natural efficient Instrumental Cause of
our Justification, even the Immediate Cause.

Secondly, Justification by sentence of Judgment is undeniably by Christ as
King: For God has appointed to Judge the World by him. Act. 17.31. and has
committed all Judgment to him, John 5.22. And therefore as Judge he does
justify and Condemn. This is not therefore any part of his Humiliation or
Obedience, by which he ransometh sinners from the Curse. To deny these things,
is to deny Principles in Politics.

Thirdly, And then for the Execution of the sentence by actual liberation,
there is as little room for a doubt, this being after both the former, and the
act of a Rector, and not of a Surety in the form of a servant. So that it is
apparent, that as the Merit of our Justification is by Christ in his
Humiliation; So our actual Justification in all three senses is by Christ as
King.

And therefore Faith in order to Justification, must accordingly respect him.

Secondly, As the Teacher of the Church; Christ does not immediately justify,
but yet mediately he does, and it is but mediately that he justifies by his
Merits. The Gospel is a Law that must be promulgate and expounded, and a
Doctrine that must be taught and pressed on sinners, till they receive it and
believe, that they may be justified: And this Christ does as the Teacher of his
Church. And Faith must accordingly respect him.

Thirdly, The Resurrection of Jesus Christ was part of his exaltation by Power
and Conquest, and not of his Humiliation; and yet we are justified by his
Resurrection, as that which both showed the perfection of his satisfaction, and
by which he entered upon that state of Glory, in which he was to apply the
benefits.

Fourthly, The Intercession of Christ is a part of his office, as he is a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck: but it is no part of his
Humiliation or Ransom. And yet we are justified by his Intercession: And
therefore Faith must respct it for Justification.

Let us now hear what The Scripture says in these cases, Mattthew 9.6. [ But
that you may know that the Son of man has Power on earth to forgive sins,
etc.] Here it is plainly made an Act of Power and not of Humiliation, to
forgive sins.

Mat. 11.27, 28, 29. All things are delivered unto me of my Father, etc. Come
to me all ye that are weary, etc. so Mat. 28.18, 19. compared with Mark 16.15,
16. show that it is an act of Christ exalted or in Power, to pardon, or grant
the promise of Grace.

John 1.12. To give power to men to become the Sons of God, must be an act of
Power.

John 5.22, 23, 24. it is express of the sentence.

Acts 5.31* [Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
Repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.] He forgiveth as a Prince and
Savior.

Act. 10.42, 43. he is preached as the Judge of quick and dead, and so made the
Object of the faith, by which we have Remission of sins.

Romans 4.25. [Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised for our
justification.] And this Resurrection (as is said) was part of his Exaltation.
And the Apostle thence concludes (as is aforesaid) that this is the faith that
is Imputed to us for Righteousness [If we believe in him that raised up Jesus
our Lord from the dead.] verse. 26.

Romans 8.33, 34. [Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God
that justifies: who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.] Here God, and the Resurrection, and Session at Gods right
hand, and the intercession of Christ, are all made the grounds or causes of our
Justification, and not only Christ's death; Yea, it is expressed by [it is Christ
that died, yea rather that is risen, etc.]

1 Cor. 15.1, 2.3, 4. The faith by which Paul tells them they were saved, had
Christ's Resurrection for its object, as well as his dying for our sins.

Phil. 3.8.9, 10. Paul's way of Justification was first to [win Christ, and be
found in him] and so to have a Righteousness of God by faith in Christ (whole
Christ,) and not that of the Law: that he might know the power of his
Resurrection, etc.

The true Nature of this faith is described, 1 Pet. 1.21. [Who by him do
believe in God that raised him from the dead, and gave him Glory, that your
Faith and Hope may be in God.]

1 Pet. 3.21. [The like Figure whereunto even Baptism, does now also save us --
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, who is gone into Heaven, and is on the
right hand of God; Angels and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject to
him.] It is certain that the salvation of Baptism consists very much in
Remission of sin or Justification.

In a word, it is most evident in Scripture, that merit and satisfaction are
but the moral, remote preparatory Causes of our Justification (though exceeding
eminent, and must be the daily study, and everlasting praise of the Saints) and
that the perfecting nearer efficient causes, were by other acts of Christ; and
that all concurred to accomplish this work. And therefore even ex part
Christi, the work is done by his several acts, though merited by him in his
humiliation only. And therefore it is past doubt on their own principles, that
faith must respect all, in order to our Justification. And the faith by which
we are justified must be that of the Eunuch, Acts 8.37. that believed with all
his heart that Christ was the son of God, and so received him as Christ
entirely.

Argument 5. If it be a necessary Condition of our being baptized for the
Remission of sin, that we profess a belief in more then Christ's Humiliation and
merits then is it a necessary Condition of our actual Remission of sin, that we
really believe in more than Christ's Humiliation and Merits: But the Antecedent
is certain. For the Prescript, Mat. 28.19, 20, and the constantly used form of
Baptism, and the Texts even now mentioned, 1 Pet. 3.21. Act. 8.37. do all show
it: And I have more fully proved it in my Dispute of Right to Sacraments. And
the Consequence is undeniable: And I think all will be granted.

Argument 6. If the Apostles of Christ themselves before his death, were
justified by believing in him as the son of God, and the Teacher and King of
the Church, (yea perhaps without believing at all in his Death and Ransom
thereby) then the believing in him as the son of God, and Teacher and King,
conjunct with believing in his blood, are the faith by which we are now
justified. But the Antecedent is true: therefore so is the Consequent.

The reason of the Consequence is, because it is utterly improbable that the
addition of further light and objects for our faith, should null the former,
and that which was all or so much of their justifying faith, should be now no
part of ours.

The Antecedent I prove, Matthew. 16.21.22, 23. [ From that time forth began
Jesus to show unto his Disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and
suffer many things of the Elders and chief Priests and Scribes, and be killed,
and be raised again the third day: then Peter took him and began to rebuke him,
saying, Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee] etc. -- John
12.16. These things understood not his Disciples at the first; but when Jesus
was glorified, then, etc. Luke 28. [Then he took unto him the twelve, and said
unto them; Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by
the Prophets concerning the son of man, shall be accomplished: For he shall be
delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked and spitefully entreated and
spit upon, and they shall scourge him and put him to death, and the third day
he shall rise again: And they understood none of these things; and this saying
was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken.]

Luke 24.20, 21, 22. [ The chief Priests and Rulers delivered him to be
condemned to death, and have crucified him; but we trusted that it had been be
which should have redeemed Israel: and beside all this to day is the third day
since these things were done; and certain women also of our company made us
astonished which were early at the Sepulcher -- O fools and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken! Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his Glory? verse. 45. Then opened be their
understanding that they might understand the Scripture.]

John 20.9. [For as yet they knew not the Scripture that he must rise again
from the dead.] By all this it is plain that the Disciples then believed not
Christ's death or Resurrection.

Yet that they were justified, is apparent in many Texts of Scripture, where
Christ pronounces them clean by the word which he had spoken, John 15.3. and
often called them blessed, Mat. 5. and 16.17 Luke 6. And he says that the Father
loved them: John 16.27. They were branches in him the living Vine, and exhorted
to abide in him, John 15 5, 6, 7. -- And that they were Believers is often
expressed, and particularly that they Believed in him as the son of God, and
trusted it was he that should redeem Israel: that is by Power, and not by
Death: and that they took him for their Master and Teacher, and the King of
Israel; some of them desiring to sit at his right and left hand in his Kingdom,
and striving who should be the greatest about him, John. 16.27. The Father
himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out
from God.] John 1.49. [Nathaniel answered and says unto him, Rabbi, thou art
the son of God: thou art the King of Israel] Here was the saving faith of the
Disciples, Matthew. 16.16. Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ, the
son of the living God.]

Object. But was it possible for them to be justified without the blood of
Christ?

Answ. No: as to the Fathers acceptance, his blood even then before it was
shed, was the meritorious cause of their Justification: But they were justified
by it, without the knowledge or belief of it, thought not without faith in
Christ as the son of God, the Messiah, the Rabbi, and the King of Israel. Which
also shows that faith did not then justify them in the new Notion of an
Instrumental cause apprehending the purchasing cause; or that the effects of
Christ's several acts were not diversifyed according to the several acts of
faith to those as Objects.

I hope all that have Christian Ingenuity will here understand, that I speak
not this in the least measure to diminish the excellency or necessity of that
act of faith which consists in the believing on Christ as crucified, or in
his blood and Ransom! Or that I think it less necessary then the other to us
now* because the Disciples then were justified without it. I know the case is
much altered; and that is now of necessity to Justification that was not then.
But all that I endeavor is, to show that we are justified by the other acts of
faith, as well as this, because it is not likely that those acts should not be
now justifying, in conjunction with this, by which men were then justified
without this.

Argument 7. If the satisfaction and merits of Christ be the only Objects of
the justifying act of faith, then (according to their own principles) they must
on the same reason, be the only objects of the sanctifying and saving acts of
faith. But the satisfaction and merit of Christ are not the only Objects of the
sanctifying and saving acts of faith: therefore not of the justifying.

To this Mr. Blake answers, by finding an Equivocation in the word Merit; and
four terms in the Syllogism (as in other terms I had expressed it.) And says
[We look at Christ for justification as satisfying Justice, and meriting pardon
and remission, not as meriting sanctification.] Repl. But this is his
misunderstanding of plain words The term [Meritor] was not equivocal, but the
General comprehending both effects: And that which he nakedly affirms, is the
thing which the Argument makes against. Here it is supposed as a granted truth,
that we can be no more sanctified, then justified without Christ's blood and
merits: and so the scope of the Argument is this: Christ as a Ransom and a
Meritor of sanctification, is not the only object of the sanctifying act of
faith: therefore by parity of Reason, Christ as a Ransom and Meritor of
Justification, is not the only object of the justifying act of faith. The
Antecedent of this Enthymeme or the Minor of the Argument thus explained, is
not denied by them. They confess that faith for sanctification does receive
Christ himself not only as the Meritor of it, but as Teacher Lord, King, Head,
Husband; and does apply his particular promises. But the meriting
sanctification by his Blood and Obedience, is no part of Christ's Kingly or
Prophetical Office, but belongs to his Priesthood, as well as the meriting of
justification does. For Christ's sacrifice lays the general Groundwork of all
the following benefits, both Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
Glorification: but it does immediately effect or confer none of them all; but
there are appointed ways for the collation of each one of them after the
Purchase or Ransom. So that if the apprehending of the Ransom which is the
general Ground do only justify; then the apprehending of the same Ransom as
meriting sanctification, should only sanctify. And neither the justifying nor
sanctifying acts of faith should respect either Christ's following acts of his
Priesthood, (Intercession) nor yet his Kingly or Prophetical office at all. And
therefore as the sanctifying act must respect Christ's following applicatory
acts, and not the purchase of sanctification only; so the justifying act (to
speak as they) must respect Christ's following Collation or application, and not
only his Purchase of Justification. And then I have that I plead for: because
Christ effectively justifies as King.

Argument 8. It is the same faith in Habit and Act by which we are Justified,
and by which we have right to the spirit of sanctification (for further
degrees) and Adoption, Glorification, etc. But it is believing in Christ as
Prophet, Priest and King, by which we have Right to the spirit of
sanctification, to Adoption and Glorification: Therefore it is the believing in
Christ as Prophet, Priest and King, by which we are justified.

The Minor I suppose will not be denied; I am sure it is commonly granted. The
Major I prove thus.

If the true Christian faith be but one in essence, and one undivided Condition
of all these benefits of the Covenant then it is the same by which we are
justified, and have Right to the other benefits (that is, they are given us on
that one undivided Condition* But the Antecedent is true: as I prove by parts
thus.

First, That it is but one in essence* I think will not be denied; If it be, I
prove it, first from Ephesians. 4.5. There is one faith.

Secondly, If Christ in the Essentials of a Savior to be believed in, be but
One, then the faith that receives him, can be but One: But the former is true:
Therefore so is the later. Thirdly, If the belief in Christ as Prophet, as
Priest, and as King, be but several Essential parts of the Christian faith, and
not several sorts of faith, and no one of them is the true Christian faith it
self alone (no more then a Head or a Heart is a humane body,) then true faith
is but one (consiisting of its essential parts) But the Antecedent is
undoubted, therefore so is the Consequent.

Secondly, And as Faith in Essence is but One faith, so this One faith is but
One undivided Condition of the Covenant of Grace, and it is not one part of
faith that is the Condition of one benefit, and another part of another, and so
the several benefits given on several acts of faith, as several conditions of
them: but the entire faith in its Essentials is the condition of each benefit:
and therefore every essential part is as well the Condition of one promised
benefit, as of another. This I prove: First, In that Scripture does nowhere
thus divide, and make one part of faith the condition of Justification, and
another of Adoption, and another of Glorification, etc. and therefore it is not
to be done. No man can give the least proof of such a thing from Scripture. It
is before proved that its one entire faith that is the Condition. Till they
that divide or multiply conditions according to the several benefits and acts
of Faith, can prove their division from Scripture, they do nothing.

Secondly, we find in Scripture not only Believing in Christ made the One
Condition of all benefits; but the same particular acts or parts of this faith,
having several sorts of benefits ascribed to them (though doubtless but as
parts of the whole conditions.) Its easy, but needless to stay to instance.

Thirdly, Otherwise it would follow by parity of reason, that there must as
many Conditions of the Covenant as there be benefits to be received by it, to
be respected by our faith: which would be apparently absurd. First, Because of
the number of Conditions. Secondly, Because of the quality of them. For then
not only Justification must have one condition, and Adoption another, and
Sanctification another, and Glorification another, and Comfort and Peace of
Conscience another, but perhaps several graces must have sveral conditions, and
the several blessings for our present life and Relations and Callings, and so
how many sorts of Faith should we have as well as justifying faith? even one
faith Adopting, another Glorifying, etc.

And (as to the quality) it is a groundless conceit that the belief or
Acceptance of every particular inferior mercy should be our title to that
particular mercy: For then the covetous would have title to their Riches,
because they accept them as from Christ, and the natural man would have this
title to his health, and life, and so of the rest: whereas it is clear that it
is faith in Christ as Christ, as God and man, King, Priest and Prophet, that is
the condition of our Title, even to health, and life, and every bit of bread so
far as we have it as heirs of the Promise.

The promise is that all things shall work together for good (not to every one
that is willing to have the benefit, but) to them that love God, Romans 8.28. If
we seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, ( not righteousness
alone, much less pardon alone) other things shall be added, Matthew. 6.33.

Fourthly, If the Receiving of Christ as Christ, essentially, be that upon
which we have title to his benefits, then there are not several acts of faith
receiving those several benefits, necessary as the condition of our Title to
them. But the Antecedent is true: as I prove thus.

The Title to Christ himself includes a title to all these benefits (that are
made over to the heirs of Promise:) But on our acceptance of Christ we have
title to Christ himself: therefore upon our acceptance of Christ (as the simple
condition) we have title to all these benefits.

Romans 8.32. [ He that spared not his own son, but gave him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?] so that all things are
given in the gift of Christ, or with him. Therefore Receiving him is the means
of Receiving all.

1 John 5.11, 12. [God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his son:
He that has the son has life; and he that has not the son has not life.] So
that accepting Christ as Christ, makes him ours (by way of condition;) and then
our life of Justification and sanctification is in him and comes with him.

Coming to Christ as Christ, is the sole undivided condition of Life, John 5
40. Ye will not come to me that ye may have Life.]

Yet here I must crave that Ingenuous dealing of the Reader, that he will
observe (once for all, and not expect that I should on every call recite it)
that though I maintain the unity of the condition, not only in opposition to a
separating division, but also to a distributive division of Conditions; yet I
still maintain these three things. First, that quoad materiale Conditionis,
that faith which is the condition, does believe all the essential parts of
Christ office distinctly; and so it does not look to his Exaltation in stead of
his Humiliation; nor e Contra; but looks to be Ransomed by him as a sacrifice,
and meritoriously justified by his Merits, and actually justified by him as
King, Judge, and Bnefactor, etc. And that it eyeth also distinctly those
Benefits which salvation does essentially consist in (at least.) And it takes
Christ finally to Justify, Adopt, Sanctify, Glorify, etc. distinctly. But
still its but one condition on which we have Title to all this.

Secondly, That I maintain that in the Real work of sanctification, the several
acts of faith on several objects are distinct efficient causes of the acting of
several Graces in the soul. The Belief of every attribute of God, and every
Scripture truth, has a several real effect upon us: But it is not so in
Justification, nor any receiving of Right to a benefit by Divine Donation; for
there our faith is not a true efficient cause, but a Condition: and faith as a
condition is but One, though the efficient acts are diverse. The Belief of
several Texts of Scripture, may have as many sanctifying effects on the soul;
But those are not several conditions of our Title thereto. God says not I will
excite this Grace if thou will believe this Text, and that grace if thou will
believe that Text. In the exercise of Grace God works by our selves as
efficient causes: but in the Justifying of a sinner, God does it wholly and
immediately himself without any Co-efficiency of our own, though we must have
the disposition or Condition.

Thirdly, I still affirm, that this One undivided condition may have diverse
appellations from the Respect to the Consequent benefits (for I will not call
them the effects;) This one faith may be denominated (importing only the
Interest of a condition) a justifying faith, a sanctifying faith, an Adopting
faith, a saving faith, preserving faith, etc. But this is only, if not by
extrinsick denomination, at the most but a Virtual or Relative distinction; As
the same Center may have diverse denominations from the several lines that meet
in it: Or the same Pillar or Rock may be East, West, North, or South, ad
laevam, vel ad dextram, in respect to several other Correlates: Or (plainly) as
one and the same Antecedent, has diverse denominations from several
Consequents. So if you could give me health, wealth, Honor, Comfort, etc. on
the condition that I would but say One Word [I thank you:] that one word, might
be denominated an enriching word, an honoring word, a comforting word from the
several Consequents. And so may faith. But this makes neither the Materiale,
nor the Formale of the Condition to be diverse: either the faith it self, or
condition of the Promise.

Argument 9. If there be in the very nature of a Covenant Condition in general,
and of Gods imposed Condition in specicial, enough to persuade us that the
benefit depends usually as much or more on some other act, as on that which
accepts the benefit it self: then we have reason to judge that our
Justification depends as much on some other act, as on the acceptance of
Justification; but the Antecedent is true, as I prove: First, As to Covenant
Condition in general, it is most usual to make the promise consist of somewhat
which the party is willing of, and the condition to consist of somewhat which
the Promiser will have; but the Receiver has more need to be drawn to. And
therefore it is that the Accepting of the benefit promised is seldom, if ever,
expressly made the Condition (though implicitly it be part;) because it is
supposed that the party is willing of it. But that is made the express
condition, where the party is most unwilling: So when a Rebel has a pardon
granted on condition he come in, and lay down arms, it is supposed that he must
humbly and thankfully accept the pardon; and his returning to his allegiance,
is as truly the condition of his pardon, as the putting forth his hand and
taking it is. If a Prince do offer himself in maraiage to the poorest Beggar,
and consequently offer Riches and Honors with himself, the accepting of his
person is the expressed condition, more then the accepting of the riches and
honors; and the latter depends on the former. If a Father give his son a
purse of gold on condition he will but kneel down to him, or ask him
forgiveness of some fault: here his kneeling down and asking him forgiveness,
does more to the procurement of the gold, then putting forth his hand and
taking it.

Secondly, And as for Gods Covenant in specie, it is most certain, that God is
his own end, and made and does all things for himself. And therefore it were
blasphemy to say that the Covenant of Grace were so free as to respect man's
wants only, and not Gods Honor and Ends, yea or man before God. And therefore
nothing is more certain then that both as to the ends, and mode of the
Covenant, it principally respects the Honor of God. And this is it that man
is most backward to though most obliged to. And therefore its apparent that
this must be part, yea the principal part of the condition. Every man would
have pardon and be saved from hell: God has promised this which you would
have, on condition you will yield to that which naturally you would not have.
You would have Happiness; but God will have his preeminence; and therefore you
shall have no Happiness but in him. You would have pardon: but God will have
subjection, and Christ will have the honor of being the bountiful procurer of
it, and will be your Lord, and Teacher, and Sanctifier as well as Ransom: If
you will yield to one, you shall have the other. So that your Justification
depends as much on your Taking Christ for your Lord and Master, as on your
receiving Justification or consenting to be pardoned by him. Yea the very mode
of your acceptance of Christ himself and the benefits offered you, (that you
take them thankfully, lovingly, humbly, renouncing your own worth, etc.) are
necessary parts of the condition of your pardon. There is as great a Necessity
laid upon that part of the Condition which Christ's honor lies on, and that in
order to your Justification, as of that part which directly respects your
Salvation. And me thinks common reason and ingenuity should tell you that it
must be so, and that its just and meet it should be so. And therefore I may
safely conclude ex natura rei, that the taking of Christ for our ^eacher and
Lord* is as truly a part of the condition of our Justification, and our
Justification lies as much upon it, as the Affiance in Christ's sufferings.

If you say, [But the efficiency is not equal, though it be equally a
Condition] I answer; Neither of them have any proper efficiency in justifying
us, unless you will unfitly call the Conditionality an Efficiency, or the
Acceptableness of believing in the sight of God, an efficiency; there is no
such thing to be ascribed to our faith as to the effect of Justification. But
this belongs to another Controversy.

I know not what can be said more against this, unless by the Antinomians who
deny the covenant of Grace to have any proper Condition, but only a priority
and posteriority of Duties. But the express conditional terms of the Covenant
do put this so far out of doubt, and I have said so much of it in other
writings, that I shall not trouble my self here with this sort of Adversaries:
Only to prevent their mistake, I shall tell them this: that in a condition
there is somewhat Essential, and that is found in the conditions of Gods
Promise; and therefore they are proper conditions: and there is somewhat
Accidental: as First, sometime that the thing be Uncertain to the Promiser:
This is not in Gods Conditions: It is enough that in their own nature the
things be contigent. Secondly, That the matter of the condition be somewhat
that is gainful to the Promiser, or otherwise have a merit, or moral
causality: But this is separable: In our case it is sufficient that it be
somewhat that God likes, loves, or is pleasing to him, though it properly
merit not.

And the evident Reason why God has made some Promises conditional, is, that
his Laws and Promises may be perfectly suited to the nature of man on whom they
must work, and so may show forth Gods Infinite Wisdom, and may in a way
agreeable to our natures attain their ends: and man may be drawn to that which
he is backward to by the help of that which he is naturally more forward to, or
by the fear of that evil which naturally he does abhor: As also that the
Holiness of God may shine forth in his Word; and it may be seen that he loves
Justice, Holiness, Obedience, and not only the persons of men: and so all his
Attributes may be seen in their conjunction and the beauty that thence
resulteth in the Glass of his Word.

Argument 10 If the condemning Unbelief which is the Privation of the faith by
which we are justified, be the Not-be-believing in Christ as King, Priest and
Prophet, than the faith by which we are justified, is the believing in him as
King, Priest and Prophet. But the Antecedent is true: therefore so is the
Consequent.

Only the Antecedent needs proof, though the Consequence have the hard hap to
be denied also.

Here note, that by The condemning Unbelief, I mean that which is the
peremptory-condemning sin according to the special Commination of the Gospel:
Where I suppose first, that there is a condemnation of the Law of Nature or
works which is simply for sin as sin. Secondly, And a distinct condemnation by
the New Law of Grace, which is not simply for sin as sin, but for one sort of
sin in special, that is, the final rejection of the Remedy: And of this sort of
condemnation I speak in the Argument. The confirmation of this distinction I
shall be further called to anon by Mr. Blake.

The Antecedent I prove. First, from John 3.18, 19, 20, 21. [ He that believes
on him is not condemned, (There Is the justifying faith:) But he that believes
not, is condemned already. (There Is the condemning unbelief, contradictory to
the justifying faith) [Because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God:] (here is a special condemnation proved, distinct from
that by the Law of works.) [ And this is the condemnation (that is the
condemning sin or cause) that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil] For every one that
does evil hates the light, etc. The 19 verse describes the Condemning
unbelief, and the 20. gives the reason of men's guiltiness of it. And the
unbelief described is a shunning or not coming to Christ as he is the Light to
discover and heal their evil deeds. So that if contradictories will but show
the nature of each other, I think our controversy is here plainly resolved.

So is it in Psalm. 2.12. [Kise the Son left he be angry, and ye perish from the
way; when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him.] The faith that saves from punishment, saves from Guilt:
The faith that saves from Guilt, is justifying faith: The faith here described,
is that which saves from punishment: And the faith here described is [kissing
the Son,] which comprehends subjection, and dependence, and love; and is the
same for all that, which is after called [trusting in him.]

So Luke 19.27. [But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither, and destroy them before me.] Unwillingness to have
Christ reign over them, is here made (not a common, but) the special condemning
sin, called commonly Unbelief; and so is the contrary to justifying faith.

So John 3.36. [ He that believes on the Son, (this as all confess, is
justifying faith) has everlasting life: and he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.] Here it is apparent
that this Unbelief is the privation, the contradictory or contrary to
justifying faith. First, because they are so directly opposed here
denominatively, that else the words would be equivocal, and not intelligible.
Secondly, Because the contrariety of effects also is added to put the thing
past doubt. [The wrath of God abides on him*] is contrary to justifying, which
takes the wrath of God off him; especially considering, that it is cursing,
comminatory, obliging wrath that is principally meant; the great executing
wrath being not on men till their damnation.

And that materially this unbelief thus opposed to justifying faith does
consist in contumacy, rebellion, or unperswadableness, is plain in the words,
[(...)] which signify [They that are contumacious or disobedient to the Son,
or unperswadable.]

And 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. This faith and unbelief are opposed; and the unbelief
consists in [not believing the record that God has given of his Son] and
that record is not only concerning Justification, or the merit of it.

So 2. These. 2.12. [That all they might be damned, who believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness.] So 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9, 10. [That obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ] is the description of the Unbelievers,
opposed to [them that believe,] ver. 10.

So Jo. 8.24. [If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins,]
which as to the act and effect is contrary to justifying faith. And [that I am
he] is not only [that I am the Ransome] but also [that I am the Messiah and
Redeemer.]

So John 16.8, 9. [He willl reprove the world of sin. -- (not only in general
that they are sinners, but of this sin in specie) because they believed not in
me.]

Many texts may be cited where justifying faith and condemning unbelief are
described from acts of the understanding (though the will be employed) as
believing, or not believing that Christ is the son of God, etc. which cannot
possibly be restrained to his Ransom and Merit alone.

The Consequence cannot be denied, if it be but understood that this unbelief
does thus specially condemn, not in general as sin, or by the mere greatness of
it, but as the privation of that faith by which only men are justified. For
Privatives show what the Positives are. And if this unbelief did condemn only
as a sin in general then all sin would condemn as it does: but that is false.
And if it condemned only as a great sin, then first, every sin as great would
condemn as it does; and secondly, it would be Derogatory to the preciousness
and power of the Remedy, which is sufficient against the greatest sins, as
great: It remains therefore that as it is not for the special worth of faith
above all other Graces, that God assigned it to be the condition of
Justification; so it is not for a special greatness in the sin of unbelief that
it is the specially condemning sin, but as it is the Privation of that faith
(which because of its peculiar aptitude to that Office, is made of such
necessity to our Justification.

But says Mr, Blake [ This is like the old Argument; Evil works merit
condemnation: therefore good works merit salvation. An ill meaning damns our
good meaning; therefore saves.]

Repl. First, A palpable mistake. Meriting, and saving by merit, are effects or
efficiencies so plainly separable from the things themselves, that the
invalidity of the Consequence easily appears: But in good sadness, did you
believe when you wrote this, that he that argues from the description or
nature of a privation, to the description or nature of the thing, of which it
is the Privation, or that argues from the Law of opposites and contradictions,
does argue like him that argues from the moral separable efficiency, or effect
of the one, to the like efficiency or effect of the other?

Secondly, But understand me to argue from the effect it self if you please, so
it be as affixed by the unchangeable Law or Covenant of God: I doubt not but
the Argument will hold good. As under the Law of works it was a good argument
to say [Not-perfect-obeying is the condemning evil: therefore perfect-obeying
is the justifying condition.] So is it a good argument under the Covenant of
Grace to say, Not-believing in Christ as King, Priest and Prophet, is the
specially-condemning unbelief; therefore believing in Christ as King, Priest
and Prophet, is the faith by which we are justified] The main force of the
reason lies here, because else the Covenant were equivocating, and not
Intelligible, if when it says [He that believes shall be saved; and he that
believes not shall be damned.] it did speak of one kind or act of faith in one
Proposition, and of another in the other. If when it is said, [ He that
believes shall be justified from all things, etc. and he that believes not
shall be condemned] [if you believe you shall not come into condemnation; but
if you believe not, you are condemned, and the wrath of God abides on you] [He
that believes shall be forgiven, and he that believes not shall not be
forgiven] I say, if the Affirmative and Negative Propositions, the Promise and
the Threatening do not here speak of the same believing, but diverse, then there
is no hope that we should understand them, and the language would necessitate
us to err. Now the Papists Argument ab effectis has no such bottom; Bad works
damn, therefore good works save. For the Covenant is not [He that does good
works shall be saved, and he that does bad works shall be condemned] But [he
that obeys perfectly shall be justified, and he that does not shall be
condemned] Or if they argue from the threatening of the Gospel against bad
works, to the merit of good, quoad modum procurandi, it will not hold, viz.
that Evil works procure damnation by way of merit: therefore good works procure
salvation by way of merit. For there is not eadem ratio, and so no ground for
the Consequence; Nor did I argue ad modum procurandi;] Rejecting Christ as King
does condemn by way of merit; therefore accepting him as King does save by way
of merit] This was none of my arguing: But this [Rejecting or not believing in
Christ as King, is part of that Unbelief which is by the Law of Grace,
threatened with condemnation: therefore accepting or believing in Christ as
King, is part of that faith which has the Promise of Justification] And so if
a Papist should argue, not ad modum procurandi, but ad naturam actus and
effecti; I would justify his Argument [Raigning sin, Rebellion, or the absence
of Evangelical good works, is Threatened by the Gospel with condemnation at
Judgment: therefore good works have the Promise of salvation, or justification
at Judgment.]

And that I may and must thus understand the Condemning Threatening, and the
Justifying promise, to speak of one and the same faith, I am assured by this:
because it is usual with God in scripture to imply the one in the other. As in
the Law of works with perfect man, the promise was not expressed, but employed in
the Threatening [In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die.] So in the
Gospel the Threatening is often employed in the promise [He that believes shall
not perish] When the Lord says [The soul that sins shall die] It implies
that [the soul that sins not shall not die.] And though we cannot say the
like of the prohibition of Eating the forbidden fruit, that is, because the
same Law did on the same terms prohibit all other sin as well as it. And [in
the day that thou sinnest, thou shall die] does imply [if thou sin not, thou
shall not die.] So [he that believes, shall be saved,] does imply, he that
believes not, shall be condemned. And so, If thou believe, thou shall be
justified, implies, If thou believe not, thou shall not be justified. If you
consent not to this, you then must maintain that this Covenant excludes not
Infidels from salvation, the term only being not employed in the promise of
pardon to Believers: But if you grant all this, (as sure you will) then it is
most evident that Believing is taken in the same sense in the promise, and in
the threatening: For no man breathing can tell me, either how a Promise to one
kind of faith, can imply a threatening against the want of another kind or act
of faith; or else what that other faith must be that is so employed, if not the
same. And if it be the same faith that is employed (which is a most evident
truth) then it will follow, that if I prove the Threatened unbelief to be a
Rejecting of Christ as King, the faith then that is made the condition of the
promise, must be the accepting of him as King as well as Priest. But I have
proved that not believing in Christ as King, is part of the unbelief that is
specially threatened werth condemnation: therefore believing in him as King is
part of that faith which has the promise, or is the Condition of Justification.

But says Mr. Blake, [I further answer, Rejecting Christ as King, is a sin
against the moral Law, which damns: Yet somewhat more then subjection to the
Moral Law is required than a sinner may be saved]

Repl. For my part, I know no Law but moral Law. Its a strange Law that is not
Moral, as it is a strange Animal that is not quid Physicum. But yet I partly
understand what some others mean by the phrase Moral Law; but what you mean I
cannot tell, for all your two volumns. And its to small purpose to dispute upon
terms whose sense we be not agreed in, nor do not understand one another in:
And you must better agree with yourselves before you agree with me: I cannot
reconcile these speeches.

Mr. Blake of the Covenant, page 111. I know no other Rule but the old Rule:
the Rule of the Moral Law: that is with me a Rule, a perfect Rule, and the only
Rule.

Mr. Blake here. page 563. Yet somewhat more then subjection to the Moral Law
is required, that a sinner may be saved.

I am confident you will allow me to think you mean somewhat more ex part
nostri and not only ex part Christi: And can that somewhat more be required
without any Rule requiring it? And yet I find you sometimes seeming offended
with me, for telling you I understand you not.

But I further answer you: The rejecting of Christ as King, is no further a sin
against the Moral Law, then the accepting him as King, is a duty of the Moral
Law. Will you not believe this without a Dispute, when you are told by Paul,
that where there is no Law, there is no transgression, and elsewhere that sin
is a transgression of the Law? And need not stand to prove that the same Law
which is the Rule prescribing duty, is the Rule discovering sin, even that sin
which is the Privation of that duty. I desire no Readers that will not receive
these things without any more arguing.

Mr. Blake adds [Vnbelief, if we speak properly, does not at all condemn,
further then as it is a breath of a Moral Commandment. The privation of which
you speak, only holds the sentence of the Law in force and power against us:
which me thinks should be yeur judgment as well as mine, seeing you are wont
to compare the new Law (as you call it) to an act of oblivion: And an act of
oblivion saves many, but condemns none. -- ]

Repl. It is in more then one thing I perceive that we differ. But this is a
truth that you must not so easily take out of our hands. Though having had
occasion to speak largely of it elsewhere, I shall say but little now.

First, Again, I know no Commandment that is not moral. But if you mean by
Moral the Commandment either merely as delivered by Moses, or as written in
Nature; I am not of your mind, nor ever shall be. To be void of the belief of
these Articles of the faith [ that this Jesus is the Christ, that he was
actually conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under
Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried: Rose again the third day,
ascended into Heaven; sits in our nature at the right hand of God; gave the
Holy Ghost to his Apostles to confirm the Doctrine of the Gospel] with many
more; does condemn further then as it is a breach either of the Mosaical or
Natural Law: yea in some respects as it is no breach of those Laws.

And yet the same sin materially may be a breach of several Laws; and condemned
by several.

Secondly you very much mistake my judgment here, if you think it the same
with yours: Nor will the mention of an act of oblivion justify your mistake I
suppose an Act of oblivion may possibly have a Penalty anexed, (as, that all
that stand our, and accept not of this pardon by such a year or day, shall be
remediless, and liable to a greater Penalty,) And I think if no Penalty be
named, there is one employed.

For my part, I am satisfied that the Remedying Law, or the Law of Grace, has
its special Threatening, when I so often read it, [He that believes shall be
saved, and he that believes not shall be damned] and [unless ye believe that I
am he, ye shall die in your sins.] And I take it to differ from the Threatening
of the law of works, thus.

First, In the matter of the condition; which is not sin in general; any sin:
but a special sin, viz. the final rejecting the Remedy; that is, Refusing to
turn to God by faith in Christ.

Secondly, In the Penalty: First, The Gospel Penalty, is Non-liberation from
the curse of the Law. Not to be forgiven or saved. This had been but a
Negation, and not Penal, if there had been no Christ and Gospel: But it is a
privation and penal, now, because by a special sin, we forfeit our hopes and
possibilities. Secondly, As to the degree, I find it will be a far sorer
punishment, Heb. 10.29. The Law of greatest Grace does threaten the greatest
punishment. Thirdly, And doubtless in Hell, Conscience will have a special kind
of Accusations and self-tormentings, in reflecting on the refusals of the
remedy, and treading under foot the blood of the new Covenant; which is a
punishment that was never threatened by the Covenant of works. Fourthly, And
there will be a Privation of a greater Glory, then ever was promised under the
Law of works. Fifthly, As also of a special sort of eternal felicity,
consisting in loving the Redeemer, and singing the song of the Lamb, and being
his members, etc.

Thirdly, And as there are these five differences in the Penalty, besides that
of the Condition of it, so is there a considerable modal difference in the
consummation it self. viz. that of the Law of works was not peremptory,
excluding a Remedy: but the Threatening of the Law of Grace is peremptory,
excluding all further Remedy to all Eternity: which I think is a most weighty
difference. I know, this is not much pertinent to our present Controversy; but
you have made it necessary for me thus to touch it: But I shall not digress now
to prove it to those that see it not by its own light: But I must say, that if
I should be drawn by you to deny it, I should have but a strange Method of
Theology in my understanding, and should think I let open the door to more
Errors then a few.

So much for the proof of the Thesis.

The Principal work is yet behind, which is to confute the Arguments of the
Opponents. I call it the Principal work, because it is incumbent on them to
prove, who make the limitation and restriction, and add a new proposition to
the Doctrine of the Gospel: and till they have proved this proposition, our
ground is good; we say that [ Believing in the Lord Jesus Christ is the faith
by which we are justified [and this is past denial in the Scriptures. They say,
that [Believing in him as a Ransom and Purchaser, or apprehending his
Righteousness, is the only act of faith by which we are justified,] and not
also Believing in him as Lord, Teacher, Intercessor, etc. When they have proved
the restriction and exclusion, as well as we prove our Assertion that excludes
no essential part of faith, then the work is done, and till then they have done
nothing.

And first, before I come to their Arguments, I shall consider of that great
Distinction, which contains much of their opinion, and which is the
principal Engine to destroy all, our Arguments for the contrary. And it is to
this purpose.

[ Believing in the Lord Jesus Christ as King, Teacher,] etc. is the fides quae
Justificat, but it justifies not qua talis; but qua fides in Christum
satisfacientem, etc. Fides qua Justificat, must be distinguished from fides
quae Justificat. A man that has eyes does hear, and that has ears does see;
but he hears not as he has eyes, but as he has ears; and he sees not as he
has ears, but as he has eyes. So faith which believes in Christ as King does
justify, but not qua talis, as it believes in him as King, but as it
believes in him, or apprehends him as our Righteousness. Repl. As just and
necessary Distinction riddeth us out of the fruitless perplexity of confused
disputings; so unsound Distinctions, especially with seeming subtilty, are
Engines to deceive and lead us into the dark. The last time I answered this
Distinction, I was so improvident as to say, that, it [it is the general ^heat]
meaning no more then a Fallacy, and thinking the word had signified no worse:
But Mr. Blake publishes this Comment on that syllable [ And as it seems you
have met with a pack of Impostors, and that of the most Learned in the Land,
that out of their great Condescension have written for your satisfaction. This
word you think sounds harshly from Mr. Crandon, as indeed it does, and is no
small blemish to his great pains; you may then judge how it will sound from
your self in the ears of others.

Such insinuations, as if it were to breed dissension between those Learned
Brethren and my self, are not fair dealing. First, I do not remember one or two
at most of all those Brethren, that in their Papers to me used that
distinction! How then can you tell the world in print, that it seems I have met
with a pack of Impostors, even them you mention? Did you ever see my Papers, or
theirs? Did they ever tell you that this distinction is in them? I solemnly
profess it was not in my thoughts so much as to intimate that any one of their
Papers was guilty of that distinction. But if you will say so, what remedy But
perhaps I intimate so much in my words; In what words? when I say, that [all
that I have to do with, grant the Antecedent] and what is that to the question in
hand? many a hundred may grant that this act is the fides quae, that assert not
the other act to be the fides qua, and allow not the use of the distinction
which I resist. But perhaps its my next words that imply it [ For the general
cheat is by the distinction of fides qua and qua, etc.] But sure it cannot be
understood, that its general with all the world, nor general as to all that I
have had to do with: There is no such thing said or meant by me; for then it
must extend to all that are of my own mind: and I told Mr. Blake enough of the
contrary as to the persons he mentions, by telling him how they owned not the
Instrumentality of faith, and then they cannot well maintain this use of this
distinction. It is the general deceit or cheat of all that are deceived by it;
and of most that in this point oppose me. But if Mr. Blake think either that
all that vouchsafe me their writings, do it by way of opposition (when many do
it but by explication and reconciliation) or that all that oppose me, do oppose
me in that point, he thinks no truer then here he writes.

Secondly. And as he feigneth me to speak of many reverend persons that I never
meant, so he feigneth me to take them actually for Impostors, because I take
the distinction for a cheat. But is it not possible that it may cheat or
deceive themselves, though some never utter it to the deceiving of others? Much
less as impostors with an intention to deceive: I would you had never learned
this art of confutation.

Thirdly, But I perceive how you would take it if I had applied this to your
self. And what is this, but plainly to forbid me to dispute with you? (which I
had never done on other terms then for Defense.) Can I not tell you that your
Argument is a Fallacy, but you will thus exclaim of me, as making you an
Impostor? why then if you be so tender, who may deal with you? On the same
grounds, if I say that your Major or Minor is false* you may tell the world I
make you a Liar; and I must either say as you say, or let you alone; lest by
contradiction I make you a Liar or an Impostor. Prove that ever I blamed Mr.
Crandon for such a passage as this, if you can. It is not [this word] thus
applied, but other words that I excepted against; I will not yet believe it all
one to call an Argument or distinction a cheat or fallacy, and to call the
person a Cheater and Deceiver, and that designedly, as purposely dissembling
his Religion.

Mr. Blake proceeds. [And I much marvel that this distinction, that everywhere
else would pass, and be confessed to be of necessity, to avoid confusion in
those distinct capacities in which men usually act, should here not alone be
questioned, but thus branded. Does not every man that undergoes various
relations, variously act according to them? And do not men that make address,
address themselves in like variety? He that is at once a Husband, a Parent, a
Master, a Schoolmaster, a Physician, acts variously according to all of these
capacities. Some come to him as a Father, some as a Master, some as a Teacher;
all of them come to him as a Physician: But only they that come to him as a
Physician are cured by him. Believers through faith go to Christ that hears all
the Relations mentioned. But as they seek satisfaction in his bloodshedding,
which is an act of his Priesthood, they are justified.]

Repl. I ever granted that we are justified by trusting in Christ's blood: But
not [only] by that.

Secondly, It was God that sought satisfaction in Christ's blood, the Believer
seeks for the fruit of that satisfactition.

Thirdly, But now to the distinction, I shall tell you freely my thought of it,
and the reasons of my resisting your use of it, and then answer your reasons
for it.

And first, We must understand what it is that is distinguished: whether the
Habit of faith, or the Acts? As far as I am able to understand them, they that
understand themselves, do intend to distinguish of the Habit by a virtual
distinction, and their meaning is [ The Habit of Faith which produces both
these acts does justify: but not as it produces the act of believing in
Christ as Lord, Teacher, etc. but as it produces the Act of believing in his
blood] that is, [The habit is the remote cause, and the act is the nearer
cause; and the habit justifies by this Act, and not by the other.] I verily
think this is their meaning; I am sure this is the most probable and rational
that I can imagine. But then first, This contradicts their ordinary
assertion, that it is not the Habit of faith, but the act by which we are
justified. Secondly, Then they do not mean that the act of believing in Christ
as Lord, etc. is so much as the fides qua, which if they will speak out and
make no more ado, the controversy will be much better understood. For then it
is a question that's easily apprehended, Whether only the act of faith in
Christ's satisfaction do justify, or the believing in Christ as King, Priest
and Prophet, or all that is essential to Christian faith] This is a plain case;
which fides qua and qua do not illustrate.

But then I must add, that this begs the question as used by them, but decideth
it not. And as [qua] respects but the Matter of the condition; q. d. The
habit as it produces this act, and not that, is the condition of
Justification] (for else it justifies neither as it produces the one or the
other,) so it is the very Question between us, Whether it be one act, or the
whole essence of the Christian faith that is the Condition?

And this supposes the determination of other controversies that are not yet
determined. There are three opinions of the Habit of faith. First, that the
several acts of faith, have several habits. Secondly, that the diverse acts have
but one habit of faith distinct from the habits of other graces. Thirdly, That
faith, love, and all graces have but one habit. If the first hold, then the
distinction as before explained, has no place. If the last hold, then the
Habit of Love, or Fear, may be on the same ground, said to justify.

If I have before hit on their meaning, then the distinction of the Habit is
virtualis, and the distinction of the acts is realis, and they totally exclude
all acts, save that which they fix upon; not from being present, but from a
co-interest. But from what interest? Of a Cause? that we deny even to all: Of a
Condition? that they grant to these which they exclude.

Next, we must understand the members of their Distinction: And sometime they
express one branch to be [fides qua justificat] and sometime [ fides qua
apprehendit Christum satisfacienrem, etc.] As to the former, it cannot be
contradistinct from [faith in Christ as Lord,] but from faith as sanctifying,
etc. it being but a denominative or virtual distinction of one and the same
faith, from the several consequents. And so I easily grant that fides qua
justificat, non sanct ficat vel glorificat* and so of all the consequents of
it. As it is the condition of one, it is not the condition of the other: which
is no more, then to say that there is between the consequents Distinctio
realis, from whence the antecedent (Really the same) may be denominatively or
virtually distinguished: As the same man that goes before a hundred particular
men, has a hundred distinct Relations to them, as Before them all. The very
same condition in a free Gift, may be the condition of many hundred benefits,
and accordingly be Relatively and denominatively distinguished; when yet it is
as truly the condition of all as of one, and has equal interest as to the
procurement.

And as for the other phrase that [fides qua recipit Christum satisfacientem,
justificat,] properly it is false Docrine; if qua signify the nearest Reason
of faiths interest in procuring justification; for then it is but to say that
[fides, qua fides, justificat] which is false. The denomination and the
description express but the same thing; fides is the denomination; and Receptio
Christi is the description: if therefore it justify qua Receptio Christi, then
it justifies qua fides, that is qua haec fides in specie: which is to ascribe
it to the ^ credere with a witness. And elsewhere I have disproved it by many
Arguments.

But if qua be taken less properly, as denoting only the aptitude of faith to
be the condition of Justification, then still the Question is begged. For we
say, that as the act of believing in Christ's bloodshed has a special aptitude
in one respect, so the act of believing in his Resurrection, Intercession, etc.
and receiving him as King, Teacher, etc. has a special aptitude in other
respects, upon which God has certainly made them the Conditions of our
Justification with the other.

But if any should distinguish of the act of faith, and not the Habit, and say
that [fides qua credit in Christum ut Regem, justificat, sed non qua credit in
Christum ut Regem] I accept the former as being all that I desire, and grant
the latter: But then I say the like of the other act of faith, that [ fides qua
credit in Christum satisfacientem non justificat, because fides qua fides, non
justificat, sed fides qua conditio praestita.] And I think I need to say no
more for the opening the Fallacy, that this distinction uses to cover.

And now I come to peruse all that I can find that is produced to support this
distinction. And the most is certain pretended similitudes, that have little or
no similitude as to this.

The common similitude is [ A man that is oculatus hears, but not qua
oculatus, but qua auritus, etc.] Repl. First, If you take qua strictly, the
affirmative is not true. For then aquatenus ad omne, every man that is auritus
would hear: whereas he may stop his ears, and be where is no sound, etc. And a
man that has eyes may wink, and be in the dark, etc. Secondly, If qua signify
the aptitude, or causal interest, I deny the similitude; It is dissimile: and
the reason of the difference is evident; for a man's eyes are Physical efficient
causes of his sight, and his ears of hearing; naturally in their aptitude and
potentiality determined to their proper objects: but says is no efficient
cause of our Justification, or of our interest in Christ at all; much less a
Physical efficient cause. But the Interest it has is Moral, which depends on
the Donors will; and it is no higher then that of a condition: and therefore
the act that Physically has least respect to the object, may in this case if
the Donor please, do as much to procure a Title to it, as that which has the
nearest physical respect to it. As if you have a deed of Gift of a Country on
Condition you will discover a Traitor, or marry one that owes it: here the
alien act has more interest in procuring your Title, then your Apprehending,
or treading on the soil, or taking possession, yea or accepting the deed of
Gift it self. So God has made our Accepting of whole Christ to be the
condition of life and pardon; and consequently, the Accepting him in other
Relations (in which he destroys sin, advances God, etc.) does as much to our
Justification as the accepting him at our Ransom.

Now to Mr. Blakes Reasons: when he says that this distinction would pass
every where else as necessary, he is much mistaken: for as he does not tell us
at all what sort of distinction it is, whether Realis, Rationis, Modalis,
Formalis, Virtualis, etc. so I could give him an hundred instances in which it
will not pass in any tolerable sense, but what are his own select instances,
from a man's various Relations to the variety of his actions and their effects.
But is it Christ or the believer that you put in these various Relations? Its
plain that you mean Christ: But that's nothing to the question: I maintain as
well as you that Christ performs variety of works, according to the diverse
parts of his office, and that he meriteth not Justification as King, but as a
Sacrifice; as he effectively justifies, not as a sacrifice, but as a King; and
he teaches as a Teacher* etc. this was never denied by me. But the question is
whether the Interest of the several acts of our faith be accordingly distinct?
which I deny, and confidently deny. In the works that Christ does in these
several Relations, there is distincti^ realis, and Christ is the proper
efficient cause of them. But though our faith must accept Christ in all these
Relations, and to do the several works in the several Relations, yet it is no
proper cause of the effects, and (as I said) the interest it has in the
procurement is merely moral, and that but of a condition, and therefore it is
to be judged of by the will of the Donor.

But you say that [only they that come to Christ as a Physician are cured by
him] Repl. Very true: I never denied it: But not only By coming to him as a
Physician; especially as the Worker of this one part of the cure.

You add [Believers through faith go to Christ that hears all ^ the Relations
mentioned: But as they seek satisfaction in his bloodshedding, they are
Justified.] Repl. Very true (if by as you understand only the aptitude of the
act to its office, and the certain connection of the effect: otherwise it is not
as they believe at all that they are justified; but it is not only as they seek
satisfaction in his blood; but also as they believe in him as King, Teacher,
Rising, Interceding, etc. Though it be Christ's blood, and not his Dominion,
that Ransometh us; yet his promise gives the fruit of that blood as well on
the condition of believing in him as King, as of the believing in his blood.
Hitherto we have come short of your proofs, which next we shall proceed to, and
freely examine.

Mr. Blake. I shall take the bodlness to give in my Arguments, to make good
that faith in Christ qua Lord, does not justify.

First, That which the types under the law, appointed for atonement and
expiation, lead us unto in Christ, our faith must eye for atonement, expiation,
and reconciliation; this cannot be denied: These Levitical Types lead us
doubtless to a right object, being Schoolmasters to lead us unto Christ, and
shaddows whereof he is the substance: As also to that office in him (who is the
object of faith) which serves for that work: But those types lead us to Christ
in his Priestly office, for the most part as sacrificing, sometime as
interceding, John 1.29. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 1.18. A great part of the Epistle
to the Heb. is a proof of it.]

Reply I grant you both Major and Minor: but the question is a mere stranger to
the Just conclusion. First, it will not follow, because our faith must eye
Christ as Priest for Reconciliation, that therefore it must eye him only as
Priest for Reconciliation. And if only be not in, your exclusion of other acts
of faith follows not.

Secondly, No, nor if it were in neither: for ex perte Christ's for
Reconciliation only Christ's Priesthood is to be eyed as the meritorious cause
(speaking in their sense that take the priestly office to comprehend not only
Christ as Sacrificer, but as sacrifice, yea and as obeying in the form of a
servant, the sicness whereoff now pass by:) but ex part nostri, the so eying
him is not the only act of faith by which we are justified: so that for is
ambiguous, and either signifies Christ's procurement of our Justification, or
ours: In the former sense grant as aforesaid, these Types show us that Christ
only as Priest and sacrifice does satisfy for us. But as to the procuring
Interest of our faith, these Types show us not that only this act procures our
Interest. Nor is there a word in the texts you mention to prove any such thing:
Jo. 1.19. says that, Christ [the Lamb of God takes away the sin of the
world,] but it does not say that only believing in him as the Lamb of God is
the faith upon which we have part in his blood. and are justified by him. 1
Pet. 1.18. tells us we were Redeemed by his precious blood; but it does not tell
us that only believing in that blood is the faith by which we have interest in
it; but contrarily thus describes that faith, ver. 21. [Who by him do believe
in God that raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and
hope might be in God.] 2. Cor. 5.21. tells us that he was made sin for us, etc.
but it says not that our believing thus much only, is the full condition of
our Interest in his Righteousness; But contrarily expresses it by [our own
being reconciled to God] to which Paul exhorts.

Thirdly, The Types which you mention, were not all the Gospel (or Covenant of
Grace, or Promise) then extant: If therefore there were any other parts of Gods
word then, that led them to Receive Christ entirely as the Messiah, and
particularly as the King and Teacher of his Church, and promised life and
pardon on this condition, your Argument then from the Types alone is vain;
because they were not the whole word (unless you prove that they exclude the
rest, which you never can.) And indeed not only the very first promise of the
seed of the woman, etc. does hold out whole Christ as Priest, and Prophet and
King, as the object of justifying faith, but also many and many another in the
old Testament. And the Epistle to the Hebrews which you cite, does begin with
his Kingly office as the object of our faith in the two first chapters, which
are almost all taken up in proving it.

Fourthly, you confess your self that Christ as Interceding is the object of
justifying faith; and if you mean it of his Heavenly intercession; that was no
part of his meritorious obedidience or humiliation. Its true indeed, that it is
for the application or Collation of the fruits of his blood, and so is much of
his Kingly and Prophetical office too.

Mr. Blake. Secondly, That which the Sacraments under the Gospel, setting forth
Christ for pardon of sin, lead us unto, that our faith must eye for
Reconciliation, Pardon and Justification. This is clear. Christ in his own
instituted ordinances will not misguide us; But these lead us to Christ
suffering, dying for the pardon of sin, Mat 26 28. -- A broaken, bleeding,
dying Christ in the Lords Supper is received.

Reply, First, I hope you would not make the world believe that I deny it; Did
I ever exclude a dying Christ from the object of justifying faith? But what
strange Arguments are these, that are such strangers still to the question? you
prove the inclusion of [faith in Christ dying,] but do not so much as mention
the exclusion of the other acts of faith, which is the thing that was incumbent
on you.

Secondly, If you say that [only] is meant by you, though not expressed, then I
further reply, that this Argument laboring of the same disease with the last,
requires no other answer. First, The Sacraments being not the whole Gospel,
you cannot prove your Exclusion from them unless you prove somewhat exclusive
in them (which you attempt not, that I see,) Secondly, If therefore you
understand the Minor exclusively as to all other parts of Christ's office, I
deny it, and the texts cited say not a word to prove it. Thirdly, And if they
did, yet faith may eye a dying Christ only as purchasing Pardon; and yet ex
part Christi that act that so eyeth him may not be the only act that is the
condition of our Title to a dying Christ or to the pardon purchased. Fourthly,
And yet (though it would not serve your turn) even ex part Christi, your
exclusion is so far from being proved that its contradicted both by the
Sacraments and by Scriptures: much more ex part nostri, your excusion of the
other acts of faith. For, First, In Baptism its apparent (which is appointed
for our solemn initiation into a state of Justification; which the Lords Supper
is not.) First, Christ foundeth it in his Dominion, Mat. 28.18. All power is
given to me in Heaven and Earth; go ye therefore etc. Secondly, He makes the
very nature of it to be an entering men into a state of Disciples, and so
engaging them to him as their Master, ver. 19. Go ye therefore and Disciple (or
teach) all Nations baptizing them. Thirdly, The words of the Jews to John (If
thou be not that Christ nor Elias, nor that Prophet, why baptizest thou? John
1.25.) and their flocking to his baptism, and the words of Paul, I Cor. 14.15.
(I thank God that I baptized none of you, -- lest any should say, that I
baptized in my own name) do plainly show that baptizing was then taken, as an
entering into a state of Disciples. And I have before proved that baptism does
list us under Christ the Commander, King and Master of the Church. Fourthly,
And therefore the Church has ever baptized into the name of the Father Son and
Holy Ghost, with an abrenunciation of the flesh, the world and the devil, not
only as opposite to Christ's blood, but as opposites to his Kingdom and
Doctrine. Fifthly, And the very water signifies the spirit of Christ as well
as his blood: Though I think not, as Mr. Mead, that it signifies the spirit
only. Sixthly, And our coming from under the water was to signify our
Resurrection with Christ, as Romans 6. shows. So that it is certain that Christ
in all parts of his office is propounded in baptism to be the object of our
faith, and this baptism comprizing all this, is said to be [for the Remission
of sin.]

Secondly, And though the Lords supper suppose us justified, yet he
understands not well what he does, that thinks that Christ only as dying is
there propounded to our faith. For, First, In our very receiving we profess
Obedience to Christ as King, that has enjoined it by his Law. Secondly, And to
Christ our Teacher that has taught us thus to do. Thirdly, The signs
themselves are a visible word (of Christ our Teacher) and teach us his
sufferings, promises, our duty, etc. Fourthly, By taking, eating, and drinking,
we renew our Covenant with Christ; And that Covenant is made with him not only
as Priest, but as the Glorified Lord and King of the Church. On his part the
thing promised which the Sacrament seals, is, (not that Christ will dye for
us, for that's done already, but) that Christ will actually pardon us on the
account of his merits. And this he does as King: and that he will sanctify,
preserve, strengthen, and glorify us: all which he does as King, though he
purchased them as a sacrifice. On our part we deliver up our selves to him to
be wholly his* even his Disciples, and Subjects, as well as pardoned ones.
Fifthly, Yea the very bread and wine eaten and drank do signify our spiritual
Union and Communion with Jesus, who is pleased to become one with us, as that
bread and wine is one with our substance. And surely it is to Christ as our
Head that we are United, and not only as dying for us: and as to our Husband,
who is most dearly to be loved by us, and is to rule us, and we to be subject
to him, being made bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; Ephe. 5.23, 24,
25, 30. Sixthly, We are to do it as in remembrance of his death, so also in
expectation of his coming, which will be in Kingly Glory, when he will drink
with us the fruit of the Vine new in the Kingdom of his Father.

Object But Christ does not pardon sin in all these respects. Answ. First* But
in the Sacrament he is represented to be believed in entirely in all these
respects. Secondly, And he pardons as King, though he merit it as a
sacrifice. And as his Sacrifice and Merit are the cause of all that following,
so therefore it is specially represented in the Sacrament, not excluding but
including the rest. Thirdly, Believing in Christ as King and Prophet, even as
his offices respect his Honor and our sanctity, may be as truly the condition
of our Justification, as believing in his blood.

Mr. Blake. As the spirit of God guides faith, so it must go to God for
propitiation and ^^tonement. But the Holy Ghost guides faith to go the blood of
Christ for atonement, Romans 3.25. and 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. 1 John. 1.7.

Reply. Concedo totum: The conclusion can be but this [therefore faith must go
to the blood of Christ for attonement] Who ever questioned this I But your
Thesis which you set at the Head of your Arguments, was [ Faith in Christ qua
Lord does not justifie] which is little kin to any of your Arguments.

But in the explication, you have here, at last, the term Only, and therefore I
may take that to be supposed in the Argument; But then with that Addition. I
deny your Minor. The texts mentioned say nothing to prove it.

Romans 3.25. has no only in it, nor any thing exclusive of the other acts of
Christ: And if it had, yet it would not follow that all other acts of our faith
were excluded. As his blood is the meritorious cause, and so the foundation of
all the benefits, and so all the Applying Causes are supposed in the mention of
it and not excluded so are all other acts of our faith in the mention of that
act.

Romans 5.9. says not that we are justified only by his blood. N^r is it any
adding to the Scripture, to add more, unless you can prove that these texts are
the whole Scripture, or that the other Scriptures add no more.

Ephe. 1 7. and 1 John 1.7 do neither of them exclude either the other acts of
Christ, or other acts of faith: Nay John seems to make somewhat else the
condition on our part, then the belief in that blood only, when he says there
[If we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin] Or if
you think this [if] denotes but a sign, yet other texts will plainly prove
more.

To conclude, If I were to go only to the blood of Christ for atonement, yet it
would not follow, that going to that blood only for it, is the only act of
Faith on which Justification is promised or given me in the Gospel, as is
before declared.

Mr. Blake. You demand, [Will you exclude his Obedience, Resurrection,
intercession]? To which I only say, I marvel at the question: If I exclude
these, I exclude his blood: His shedding of blood was in Obedience, John 10.18.
Phil. 2.8. his Resurrection was his freedom from the bands of death, and an
evidence of our discharge by blood: His Intercession is founded on his blood.
He intercedes not as we by bare petition, but by merit: He presents his blood
as the high Priest in the Holy of Holies.

Repl. It was the thing I had to do, to prove that Romans 3.24. and those other
texts, are not exclusive of all but his blood, and that the word Only is no
more meant, then it is expressed in them. And now you grant it me: And needs
must do it, while Scripture tells us, that by the Obedience of one, many are
made Righteous, Romans 5.19. and that he is Risen for our Justification, Romans 4
^5. and that Righteousness shall be imputed to us, if we believe on him that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. ver. 24. and It is God that justifies:
who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea, rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God; who also makes Intercession for
us, Romans 8 33, 34. he that believes all these texts will not add only to the
first, at least if he understand them; for they do not contradict each other.
Well! but you marvel at my question! I am glad of that! Are we so well agreed,
that you marvel at my supposition of this difference? To satisfy you, my
question employed this Argument. If the Resurrection, Intercession, etc. be not
in those texts excluded, nor faith in them, then we may not add only to
interpret them; but etc. Ergo.

But let us hear the reasons of your marveling. First, As to Obedience, you say
His shedding of blood was in Obedience. Answer. But though all bloodshed was
in Obedience, yet all Obedience was not by bloodshed, nor suffering neither.
And the text Romans 5.19 seems to speak of Obedience as Obedience, and not only
as in blood shed.

Secondly, You say His Resurrection was his freedom, etc. Ans. But Suffering is
one thing, and freedom from suffering is another thing. I herefore faith to our
justification must eye Christ's conquest and freedom from death as well as his
death it self. Moreover, Resurrection was an act of Power, and his Entrance on
his Kingdom, and not a mere act of Priesthood: Nor will you ever prove that
faith (to Justification) must only look at the Resurrection as connoting the
death from which he rises.

Thirdly, You say, His Intercession is founded on his blood, etc. Answer. So is
his Kingdom and Lordship, Romans 14 9. Mat. 28.18. Phil. 2.9, 10. It seems then
faith in order to Justification must not only look at Christ's blood, but that
which is founded on it. His Government, in Legislation, Judgment, Execution,
is all founded in his blood. etc. because he has drank of the brook in the
way, therefore did he lift up the Head, Psalm 110.7.

You add He Interceeds by Merit. Answer. Not by new purchasing Merit, but by
the virtue of his former Merit, and the collation of the effects of it from the
Father. And so he Reigns and Governs both by virtue of former Merit, and
for the applying that Merit and attaining of its Ends.

Whereas therefore you say If I exclude these, I shall exclude his blood; It is
a weighty Answer. And the like you may say also of his Kingly and Prophetical
office. The operation of them are so woven and twisted together by infinite
wisdom, that all do harmoniously concur to the attainment of the ends of each
one; and if you lay by one, you lay by all; you exclude Christ's blood as to the
end of Justification, if you include not his Kingly and Prophetical offices,
and look not to him as making the Covenant or Grant of pardon in his blood; and
as teaching and persuading and working us into Union with himself that we may
have part in his blood: and as conferring daily the fruits of his blood as
King, in Renewed pardon of daily sins; and as justifying us at Judgment as
King and Judge. His blood is a Foundation without a building, if you take it
without all these: Overlook these, and you deny it as well as by over-looking
his Resurrection.

Besides, Session at Gods Right Hand which is one thing that the Apostle
instanceth in, Romans 8.35. is his Glorification it self.

And when you say [ He presents his blood as High Priest, etc.] I answer. But
not as a renewed sacrifice; presenting it is not shedding it, or offering it in
sacrifice. And the presentation is not a minding God of what he knows not, or
has forgot, or an arguing with him to extort his Mercy; but as the value and
merit of Christ's sacrifice has its continual Being before God, so Christ does
give out all his benefis to his Church as procured and received from the Father
by the merit of his sacrifice: and this is his Intercession. But your arguing
yiedeth, that to Justification, we must not only believe in Christ as shedding
his blood for us on earth, but also on Christ as presenting his blood for us in
heaven: which is enough to my ends.

Mr. Blake. You tell me further that the thing I had to prove was not the
exclusion of faith in his commands, but of faith in Christ as Lord and Teacher.
I can no more distinguish Lord and Command than I can Blood and Sacrifice; it
being the office of a Lord to Rule, as of blood to make atonement.

Repl. First, If you cannot distinguish, there is no remedy but you must err by
confusion. Its obvious to an ordinary understanding that even Blood and
Sacrifice may as well be distinguished as Earth and Man, or Ink and Writing;
[Blood] signifying only the matter, yea but part of the matter; and [a
Sacrifice] signifying that matter with its moral Form.

Secondly, And its as obvious that Lord and Command do otherwise differ then
Blood and Sacrifice; for Lord, as it signefieth principally a Proprietary, is
toto caelo distinct from command, as standing in another series: And Lord as it
signifies a Rector, does differ from Command, as the efficient from the
effect; which is otherwise then as part of the matter does from the whole
informed.

It is no Argument against the truth which I maintain, that you cannot
distinguish these.

Thirdly, If it be the office of a Lord to Rule; then you may well distinguish
between the office and the work: But indeed in the first sense, Lord signifies
a Proprietary, and but in the second a Rulers Power; which is not always
properly called an Office neither; no more then the Sovereign is properly an
Officer.

Fourthly, To make Atonement is not all one as to be a Sacrifice, which was
your former term: for Atonement is the effect of a Sacrifice: not of blood as
blood, but as a Sacrifice meritorious and accepted.

Fifthly, And as to the point in difference between us, the difference is
palpable and weighty between believing in Christ as King, and believing or
obeying his Commands. As his Kingly Power belongs to the Constitution of his
mystical body or Republike, and his commands that flow from it to the
Administration: so Subjection to his Power and Relation, and consenting to this
constitution do enter us into the Body and unite us to him: when believing and
obeying his Laws for Administration, do follow as the fruits. If you could have
distinguished between the Root and Fruits, between Faith and Obedience, between
making Disciples, and teaching to observe, etc. Mat. 28.19.2^. or becoming
Disciples, and Learning; you might have distinguished between becoming a
Subject and obeying. And what ever you do, I am sure others of your way do
grant, that Receiving Christ as Lord and Teacher, is the faith that justifies,
though not qua talis, but they will not say so by receiving or obeying his
Governing Laws, which are distinct from the constitution or fundamental Law.

Mr. Blake. You yet tell me it was fittest for Paul to say, by faith in his
blood; because he intends to connote both what we are justified by ex part
Christi, and what we are justified by ex part nostri; but the former
principally. To this I say. If this were fittest for Paul, then it is unfit for
any to come in with Animiadversions, and tell us of any other thing ex part
Christi, or ex part nostri for Justification. I pray you rest here and we are
well agreed. Here is Christ's Priestly Office on his part alone, and I am
resolved to look no further.

Repl. Though I may not hope to change you, if you are Resolved, yet I may take
leave to render a reason of my contrary as peremptory Resolution: I am resolved
to look further ex part Christi, then to his blood, yea or his whole Merit yea
or whole Priesthood for my Justification; even to whole Christ, and in special
to his Regal constitution and sentence. Yet I rest where you desire me, as to
the Truth of what I said; and if we are agreed, its better then I can perceive
in your other words. First, Though Paul there mention the Priestly office
alone, yet that is not all his Epistles, nor all the Scriptures; nor does he
here exclude the rest.

Secondly, It may be fittest to Paul's design in that particular discourse to
mention faith in his blood, and yet it may be fit for another to come in with
animadversions, and tell you of more necessary both ex part Christi and
nostri. Its common to express our meaning of a whole in a summary notion taken
from a chief part: And indeed in Political discourses it is hard to meet with a
fitter way of expression.

Thirdly, Paul himself was not of your opinion, nor Christ neither, and yet it
was not unfit for them to discover it. The same Paul that here thought it
fittest to mention faith in his blood, did elsewhere think it fit to mention
Jusstification by his Obedience, and that he Rose again for our Justification;
and to promise Jmputation of Righteousness to us, if we believe on him that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, Romans 4.24, 25. with the like passages
before mentioned. But most frequently it is the comprehensive phrase of
[believing in Christ Jesus our Lord] that he uses. The same Christ that
calls himself so often the Lord and Master of his followers, excludes not
thereby his other Relations And when he says in one place [I am the Vine] he
may freely say else where, [ I am the good Shepherd:] And he that speaks of
laying down his life for the sheep, does not thereby make it unfit to mention
other Pastoral a is for them. And he that tells us of eating his flesh and
drinking his blood, intended not the exclusion of the spirit that quickneth. I
am therefore Resolved by his Grace to adhere to whole Christ as the object of
that faith which is the Condition of Justification. And I think this full
comprehensive faith is safer then the groundlesly distinguishing faith; and
this Doctrine more agreeable to the Scriptures.

Mr. Blake. Fourthly, Our faith must look on Christ so as to obtain
righteousness by him, by virtue of which we may appear before God as righteous:
But it is by his Obedience as a servant that we obtain righteousness, and stand
before God as righteous, Romans 5.19. by the obedience of one many are made
righteous.

Repl. First, I grant the whole: but its nothing to our Question. Its a strange
error that runs through so many Arguments, that they should be impertinent to
the question. You should have concluded that Faith in Christ qua Lord, does not
justifie] which in terminis is the conclusion that you undertook to prove:
whereas all that this Argument will conclude, is, that [ our faith must look at
Christ's obedience for Righteousness, etc.] which I have said no more against
then you have done.

Secondly, But if [Only] be employed as adjoined to [obedience] then it will
exclude his suffering as suffering in that formal respect, and take it in only
as the Matter of his Obedience.

Thirdly, And by this Argument you destroy what you not only mantained, but
resolved to stick to in the last, that is, that it is not fit for any one to
tell us of any other thing then faith in his blood for justification, and that
you are resolved to look no further then Christ's Priestly office alone. For
Obedience extends further then bloodshed: therefore if we are justified by
Christ's whole obedience, then by more then his blood. Yea you will be put hard
to it to prove, that all Christ's obedience was offered by him as a Priest to
his Father: It belongs to a Subject, a Servant, a Son to obey; but obedience is
far from being proper to a Priest.

Fourthly, If you intend the Major exclusively as to all other considerations
of the object, I still deny it as false. Our faith (even as the condition of
Justification) must look at Christ, not only to obtain Righteousness by him,
but also to subject our selves to his Teaching and Government, and to glorify
him in and for his Mercy.

Fifthly, Yea, the Minor it self is false, if you imply the exclusive Only. For
we obtain Righteousness and are justified before God effectively by Christ as
King first by constitution, and secondly, by sentence, as well as meritoriously
by Christ as Priest.

Mr. Blake. Fifthly, That way that Christ took to bring us to God, our faith
must eye and follow: But Christ by death the Sacrifice of of himself brings us
to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, etc.

Repl. Still the same error: an Ignoratio Elenchi. I grant the whole, but the
conclusion's wanting. Did I ever deny that faith must eye and follow Christ's
death to bring us to God? yea for Justification. But you should have said [by
his death alone] or you say nothing. And when you prove that by his death alone
Christ brings us to God, you will do somewhat. And yet if you did, it would not
follow that we are brought to God in Justification only by eying the cause of
Justification as such.

Mr. Blake. Sixthly, As Christ freeth us from the curse, so he justifies us,
and in that notion our faith must look to him for Justification. This is plain;
Justification being no other but our acquittal from the curse, which is the
sentence of the Law of Moses, Act. 13.8. but Christ freeth us from the cause in
suffering as a Sacrifice, not ruling as a Lord, Gal. 3.13. Christ has Redeemed
us, etc.

Repl. First [Only] is again left out in the Major proposition, and so I grant
it: But if it be employed that faith must look to him for Justification only in
that notion as he justifies us, yea only as he meriteth Justification, then I
deny it, and you say nothing to prove it. Secondly, The exclusive of your Minor
is a dangerous error: Christ freeth us from the curse by Justifying us as a
King, and teaching, and ruling, and sanctifying us; and not only by becoming a
curse for us: For if you here put in [Only] you plainly exclude all his
Obedience as such, and much of it materially: for it is not a cursed thing to
obey God. The Law curses for disobeying: therefore Obeying is not the Curse,
nor is it materially a Curse to Love God, and Trust him, and be zealous for his
Glory, etc. The whole office of Christ is employed in freeing us from the
Curse: and when Paul says, he was made a Curse to free us, he never said or
thought that he did nothing else to free us; for an hundred texts do tell us of
more.

Thirdly, And on the by I must say, that I am not of your mind in the
description of Justification; for, omitting the controversy whether
Justification only free us from the Curse, I do not believe that this curse is
only the sentence of the Law of Moses. If it were, either you must prove that
all the Gentile world that heard not of it was under the Law of Moses (which
abundance of most Learned men deny with better grounds then you have to affirm
it) or else that all these are under no curse for Justification to remove. The
Law of Nature was materially part of the Mosaical Law; but the form
denominateth.

So much to Mr. Blakes Arguments, which are so little to the purpose, that if
the weight of the cause, and the prejudice of some Readers did not call more
earnestly for a Reply, then any apperance of strength in them, I had spared my
self and the Reader this Labor. But that [Christ as Christ is the object of
that faith by which as a Condition we must be justified] and so that we are not
justified only by believing in his blood, but also by believing in him entirely
as Jesus Christ our Lord, and by becoming his Disciples, or true Christians,]
this is a truth, that deserves more then my Pen to defend it; and that while
God affords me time and strength, I shall never desert.

Nov. 1656.

A DISPVTATION OF JUSTIFICATION: Whether any Works be any Conditions of it?

Containing a necessary Defense of ancient Verity; against the unnecessary
Opposition of a very Learned, Reverend, and dearly Beloved Brother, in his
Treatise of Imputation of Righteousness, and his Lectures on John 17.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in
Kederminster, 1657.

Whether Works are a Condition of Justification? And so whether we are
justified by Works as such a Condition?
THough we have said enough already on these Questions (which for dispatch I
join together,) yet seeing there are some that must needs have more, or the
same again; I shall yield so far to their Importunity, as to recite here
briefly the state of the Controversy, and some of that evidence which is
elsewhere more largely produced for the truth.

And First, We must explain what is meant by Works, and what is meant by
Justification; what by a [Condition] and what by the Preposition by here, when
we speak of Justification by works: And then we shall lay down the truth in
several propositions, Negative and Affirmative.

It seems strange to me to hear men on either side to speak against the
Negative or Affirmative of the Question, and reproach so bitterly those that
maintain them, without any distinction or explication; as if either the error
lay in the terms, or the terms were so plain and univocal, that the
Propositions are true only on one part, what sense soever they be taken in. No
doubt but he says true, that says that Works are the Condition of
Justification: and he says as true, that says they are not, if they take the
terms in such different senses as commonly Disputers on these Questions do take
them. And its past all doubt that [ a man is justified by faith without the
works of the Law; and that it is not of Works, but of Grace: and its as certain
that [ a man is justified by works and not by faith only; and that by their
Words men shall be justified, and by their Words they shall be condemned.] Gods
word were not true, if both these were not true.

We must therefore necessarily distinguish: And first of Works.

First, Sometime the term, Works is taken for that (in general) which makes the
Reward to be not of Grace but of Debt: Meritorious works: Or for such as are
conceited to be thus meritorious, though they be not. And those are materially,
either Works of perfect obedience without sin, (such as Adam had before his
fall, and Christ had, and the good Angels have,) or else Works of obedience to
the Mosaical Law, which supposed sin, and were used in order to pardon and
life, but mistakingly by the blind Unbelievers, as supposing that the dignity
of the Law did put such a dignity on their obedience thereto, as that it would
serve to life without the satisfaction and merit of Christ, or at least must
concur in Co-ordination therewith. Or else lastly, they are Gospel duties, thus
conceited meritorious.

Secondly, But sometime the word Works is taken for that which stands in a
due subordination to grace: and that first, most generally, for any moral
virtuous Actions, and so even faith it self is comprehended and even the very
Receptive or fiduciall act of faith: or less generally, for external acts of
obedience, as distinct from internal habitual Grace: and so Repentance, Faith,
Love, etc. are not Works: or for all acts external and internal, except faith
it self. And so Repentance, Desire after Christ, Love to him, denying our own
Righteousness, distrust in our selves, etc. are called Works. Or else for all
Acts external and internal besides the Reception of Christ's Righteousness to
Justification: And so the belief of the Gospel, the Acceptance of Christ as our
Prophet and Lord by the Title of Redemption, with many other acts of faith in
Christ, are called works: besides the disclaiming of our own Righteousness, and
the rest before mentioned.

Secondly, As for the word Justification, it is so variously taken by Divines,
and in common use, that it would require more words then I shall spend on this
whole Dispute, to name and open its several senses; and therefore (having
elsewhere given a brief schem of them) I shall now only mention these few which
are most pertinent to our purpose. First, Some take Justification for some
Immanent Acts of God, and some for Transient. And of the former some take it
for Gods eternal Decree to justify, which neither Scripture calls by this
name, nor will Reason allow us to do it, but improperly. Sometime its taken for
Gods Immanent present Approbation of a man, and Reputing him to be just, when
he is first so constituted. And this some few call a Transient Act, because the
Object is extrinsick: But most call it Immanent, because it makes no Alteration
on that object. And some plead that this is an eternal act without beginning,
because it is Gods essence which is eternal; and these denominate the Act from
the substance or Agent; And other say, that it begins in time, because Gods
Essence does then begin to have that Respect to a sinner which makes it capable
of such a denomination: And so these speak of the Act denominatively, formally,
respectively: Both of them speak true but both speak not the same truth.

Sometime the word Justification is taken for a transient Act of God that
makes or conduces to a change upon the extrinsick object. And so first, Its
sometime taken by some Divines, for a Conditional Justification, which is but
an act that has a tendency to that change; and this is not actual
Justification. Secondly, Sometime it is taken for actual Justification, and
that is threefold. First, Constitutive: Secondly, Sentential: thirdly,
executive. First, Constitutive Justification, is first either in the qualities
of the soul, by inherent holiness; which is first perfect, such Adam (once) and
the Angels, and Christ had; secondly, or Imperfect, such as the sanctified here
have. Secondly, Or its in our Relations: when we are pardoned and receive our
Right to Glory: This is an act of God in Christ by the free Gift of the Gospel,
or Law of Grace: and it is first, The first putting a sinner into a state of
Righteousness, out of a state of Guilt. Secondly, Or it is the continuing him
in that state, and the renewing of particular pardon upon particular sins.
Secondly, Sentential pardon or Justification, is, first, by that Manifestation
which God makes before the Angels in heaven. Secondly, at the day of Judgment
before all the world. Thirdly, Executive Justification, viz. the execution of
the aforesaid sentence, (less properly called Justification, and more properly
called pardon) consists in taking off the punishment inflicted, and
forbearing the punishment deserved, and giving possession of the happiness
adjudged us: so that it is partly in this life, viz. in giving the spirit, and
outward mercies, and freeing us from judgments (And thus sanctification it
self is a part of Justification) and partly in the life to come, in freeing us
from Hell, and possessing us of Glory.

Thirdly, As for the word Condition, the Etymologists will tell us, that it
first signifies Actionem condendi: and then, Passionem, qua quid conditur, and
then qualitatem ipsam per quam condere aliguis, vel condi aliquid potest; and
hinc est pro statu qui factus est rem condendo; and deinceps pro omni statu,
quem persona vel res aut causa quoquo modo habet aut accipit. But we have
nothing to do with it in such large acceptions, in which all things in the
world may be called Conditions. Vid. Martin. in Nom. They come nearer our use
of the word, when they expound it by, Moderatio, Circumscriptio, determinatio,
limitatio.

In Naturals the word Condition is often used pro ratione formali* per quam
alicujus disciplina subjectum adaquatu^ constitui solet. As e. g. Physicus
considerat corpus, cum conditions mobilitatis, Geometer considerat quantitatem
cum conditions continuitatis, Arithmaticus cum conditions disjunctionis;
Modicus considerat humanu^ corpus cum conditions, f^i^. quatenus agretare and
sanari potest. Sometimes also any quality, or action, which is sine qua non to
an effect or event is in mere Naturals called a Condition; as the dryness of
the wood, and the approximation of it to the fire, etc. are conditions of its
burning: the non-impedition of a more powerful Agent, is a Condition of the
efficacious action of every lower cause, etc.

Many other acceptions of the word in Physics by Zabarel, Claudius Alberius
and others; you may see in Goclenii Lexic. Philosoph. in nom. conditio. But we
are not in a Physical, but a moral discourse, and therefore must be understood
according to the subject matter. It is therefore a Civil or Legal Condition that
we have to enquire after, and must fetch our descriptions from Lawyers, and not
from Physics, and therefore it is but deceitful equivocation in some
Opponents, to fetch their opposition from Physical instances.

The Lawyers give us diverse Definitions of Condition, but for the most part
they come all to one in sense. Some say, conditio est Lex adposita hominum
actionibus, eas suspendens, Prat. Conditio (say others) est modus qui suspendit
actum, donec co existente confirmetur. Vult. in Instit. de haere. instit* 3. n.
6. Accursus faith, Conditio est suspensio, cujus de futuro effectus vel
confirmatio pendet: Bart. Conditio est futurus eventus, in quem dispositio
suspenditar. Cuiacius, Conditio est Lex addita negotio, quae donec praestetur
eventum suspendit. These are of conditions de futuro: But those that are de
praesenti vel de praeterito, suspend not the obligation, unless as they are yet
futurae quoad cognitionem, though not quoad esse, and so the knowledge of a
Right may be suspended. They are commonly divided into Casuaeles, Potestativas,
and mixtas. The moral operation of Conditions as such, is not in causing the
effect when performed, but in suspending the effect till performed. The reason
of the appointing of them for such suspensions is various: sometime its because
the person Giving, promising, or otherwise constituting the condition, is
uncertain of the event of the performance, and would not have the effect come
to pass without it. But that's not always: sometime though he might be sure of
the event of performance, yet if he that is to perform the Condition be
uncertain, it may make way for this constitution. It is therefore a vain Plea
of them that say, God appoints no conditions of his Promises, because the
event is not to him uncertain. Says Mat. Martin in nom. Cond. Defimri solet
Dispositionis suspensio ex eventu incerto futuro ei opposito. Sic sane apud
homines quo futura non norunt, sed Deus jub certis conditionibus etiam nobiscum
agit* at omnium eventuum ipse gna^us, pro infinita sua sap entia qua praevidet
quid occur urum nobis, and quid nos amplexuri, vel declinatur^ sim^s. Confer.
Deuteronomy. 28 29 30, 31. and 32. Capitobus.] Commonly the reason of appointing
Conditions is the desireab^ness of the thing to be performed, conjoined with
some backwardness or possibility of backwardness in the person that is to
perform it, and therefore he is drawn on by the promise of that which he is
more willing to receive: But many other reasons there may be.

The first cause of the Condition, is the Requirer, whether he be Testator,
Donor, Stipulator, Legislator, etc. And so the Condition of the Law or Covenant
of Grace, is first, Gods condition as the Imposer. Secondly, And its the
condition of each Subject as obliged to perform it. Thirdly, And the condition
of each professing Christian as having Promised the performance. Fourthly, And
the condition of true Christians only as actual Performers of it.

The condition of the Gospel has several respects according to the various
respects of the Law that does impose it. Its the Condition of a free Gift; for
the Gospel is a free Gift of Christ and Life: It is the Condition of a Promise;
because much of the Gospel benefits are future. It is the Condition of a
Testament, because Christ dying did leave this to the Church as his last Will,
and it was confirmed by the death of the Testator. It is the Condition of a
premiant Law, and Act of Grace and oblivion; because God made it as Legislator
and Rector of the world in order to the conducting of his people to their
happiness: It is the condition of a Minatory Law, in that it is a duty commanded
on pain of death and for the avoiding of that death.

Fourthly, The preposition [by] in our present question, may signify, either
the use and Interest of any Medium in General; or else of a true cause
constitutive or efficient. So much of the terms.

Proposition 1. Since Adams fall, it is impossible for man to be justified by a
perfect sinless Obedience of his own, (except Christ only:) and consequently
impossible for him to be justified by the Law considered in that form and tenor
as it was given to Adam: for all men are sinners; and that Law will ustifie no
sinner.

Proposition 2. By the works of the Mosaical Law, no man can be justified. And
therefore the Jews seek Righteousness where it is not to be found, while they
think that pardon of sin and acceptance with God are to be obtained by the bare
works of that Law: while they overlook or reject Christ who is the end of that
Law for righteousness to every Believer Specially now that Law is Abrogated or
ceased, it were a double error to expect Justification by its works.

Proposition 3. Much less can they be justified by the foresaid Law, who in
stead of fulfilling it, do but falsely imagine that they fulfill it.

Proposition 4. No man can be justified by works properly meritorious, because
no man has any such at all; nor may we once imagine that we have any such
works as Paul speaks of (and the Jews thought they had) which make the reward
to be not of Grace but of Debt, Romans 4.4. much less that we are justified by
such; even Gospel works and faith it self do not justify on this account, and
a conceit that they are thus meritorious would but turn them into condemning
sins.

Proposition 5. No act of man's, no not faith it self can justify as an act or
work, nor as This act in specie that is* the nearest and formal reason of its
justifying Interest must not be fetched either from the General or special
nature of the act it self: and therefore it is not faith as faith, that is, as
it is an apprehension of Christ or recumbency on him, that Justifyeth: nor yet
as an Instrument thus acting. The nature of the act is but its aptitude to its
office or justifying Interest, and not the formal cause of it.

Proposition 6. No work or act of man is any true proper cause of his
justification, (as Justification is commonly taken in the Gospel:) neither
Principal or Instrumental. The highest Interest that they can have, is but to
be a condition of our Justification and so a Dispositio moralis, which
therefore some call cansa dispositiva, and some causa sine qua non, and its
indeed but a Nominall cause, and truly no cause at all.

Proposition 7. Whatsoever works do stand in opposition to Christ, or disjunct
from him, yea or that stand not in a due subordination to him, are so far from
Justifying even as conditions, that they are sins which do deserve condemnation.

Proposition 8. Works, as taken for the Imperate Acts of Obedience external,
distinct from the first Radical Graces, are not so much as conditions of our
Justification as begun, or our being put into a Justified state.

Proposition 9. Repentance from dead works, denying our our selves, renouncing
our own Righteousness, etc. (much less external Obedience) are not the
receptive condition of our Justification, as faith is, that is, Their nature is
not to be an actual Acceptance of Christ that is, they are not faith and
therefore are not designed on that account to be the Condition of our
Justification.

Proposition 10. God does not justify us by Imputing our own faith to us in
stead of perfect Obedience to the Law, as if it were sufficient, or esteemed by
him sufficient to supply its place; For it is Christ's Righteousness that in
point of value and merit does supply its place: nor does any work of ours
justify us by satisfying for our sins: for that's the work of Christ the
Mediator: Our faith and love and obedience, which are for the receiving and
improving of him and his Righteousness and so stand in full subordination to
him, are not to be made copartners of his office or honor.

Affirm. Proposition first. We are justified by the merits of a perfect sinless
Obedience of Christ (together with his sufferings) which he performed both to
the Law of nature, the Law of Moses, and the Law which was proper to himself as
Mediator, as the subject obliged.

Proposition 2. There is somewhat in the nature of faith it self in specie,
which makes it fit to be elected and appointed by God to be the great summary
Condition of the Gospel; that it be Receptive (an Acceptance of Christ) is the
nature of the thing: but that it be a condition of our Justification, is from
the will and constitution of the Donor and Justifier.

Proposition 3. There is also somewhat in the nature of Repentance,
self-denial, renouncing all other Saviors, and our own righteousness, desiring
Christ, loving Christ, intending God and Glory as our end, (procured by
Christ,) confessing sin, etc. which make them apt to be Dispositive Conditions,
and so to be comprised or employed in faith the summary Receptive condition, as
its necessary attendants at least.

Proposition 4. Accordingly God has joined these together in his Promise and
constitution, making faith the summary and receptive Condition, and making the
said acts of Repentance, self-denial renouncing our own righteousness and
disclaiming in heart Justification by the works of the Law, and the renouncing
of all other Saviors, also the desiring and loving of Christ offered, and the
willing of God as our God, and the renouncing of all other Gods and so of the
world, flesh and devil; at least in the resolution of the heart; I say making
these the dispositive Conditions, which are ever employed when faith only is
expressed, some of them as subservient to faith, and perhaps some of them as
real parts of faith it self. (Of which more anon.)

Proposition 5. The Gospel promises Justification to all that will Believe,
(or are Believers.) To be a Believer and to be a Disciple of Christ, in
Scripture sense is all one, and so is it to be a Disciple and to be a
Christian: therefore the sense of the promise is, that we shall be justified,
if we become true Christians or Disciples of Christ; and therefore justifying
faith comprehends all that is essential to our Disciple^ship or Christianity
as its constitutive causes.

Proposition 6. It is not therefore any one single Act of faith alone by which
we are justified, but it is many Physical acts conjunctly which constitute that
faith which the Gospel makes the condition of Life. Those therefore that call
any one Act or two by the name of justifying faith, and all the rest by the
name of works, and say that it is only the act of recumbency on Christ as
Priest, or on Christ as dying for us, or only the act of apprehending or
accepting his imputed Righteousness, by which we are justified, and that our
Assent, or Acceptance of him as our Teacher and Lord, our desire of him, our
love to him, our renouncing other Saviors and our own Righteousness, etc. are
the works which Paul does exclude from our Justification, and that it is Jewish
to expect to be justified by these though but as Conditions of Justification;
these persons do mistake Paul, and pervert the Doctrine of Faith and
Justification, and their Doctrine tends to corrupt the very nature of
Christianity it self. Though yet I doubt not but any of these acts conceited
meritorious (or otherwise as before explained in the Negative) if men can
believe contradictories, may be the matter of such works as Paul excludes: And
so may that one act also which they appropriate the name of justifying faith to.

Proposition 7. Sincere obedience to God in Christ is a condition of our
continuance in a state of Justification, or of our not losing it. And our
perseverance therein is a condition of our appearing in that state before the
Lord, at our departure hence.

Proposition 8. Our Faith, Love, and Works of Love, or sincere Obedience, are
conditions of our sentential Justification by Christ at the particular and
general Judgment (which is the great Justification.) And so as they will prove
our Interest in Christ our Righteousness, so will they materially themselves
justify us against the particular false Accusation of being finally
impenitent, Unbelievers, not Loving, not obeying sincerely. For to deny a false
accusation is sufficient to our Justification.

Proposition 9. As Glorification and Deliverance from Hell, is by some called
Executive pardon or Justification; so the foresaid acts are conditions of that
execution, which are conditions of Justification by the sentence of the Judge.

Proposition. 10. As to a real inherent Justice, or Justification, in this life
we have it in part (in our Sanctification and Obedience) and in the life to
come we shall have it in perfection.

So much for the explicatory Propositions.

I Come now to prove the sum of the Affirmative Proposition, together so far as
they resolve the Question in hand, viz. that works or acts of man have such an
Interest in our Justificaon, and are so far conditions as is here asserted.

My first proof is from those Texts of Scripture which expressly speak of
Justification by such acts or works.

If we are justified By our words and works, then are they no less then
conditions of Justification. But we are justified By them. Ergo. etc.

The Consequence of the Major is plain, first, In that the Preposition [By]
does signify no less then the Interest of some means: but these Works can be
no means, but either a condition or a cause, which is more: A cause, the
persons that now I deal with, will not affirm them to be: If they do, then they
ascribe much more to them then to be a condition. Secondly, The Interest of
faith it self is expressed by no higher terms then [By,] that is, (...), or
(...), or (...): and so is the Interest of these other acts.

The Minor is express, 1. Mat. 12.36, 37. [For by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned]. ((...):) that is, at the
day of Judgment, in the great Justification. 2. Jam. 2.24. ye see then how
that By Works ((...)) a man is justified, and not by faith only ((...)) This
speaks of Justification in this life.

When men argue against Justification by our words or works, I desire 1. to
understand whether it be the words or the sense that they argue against. If the
words, then it is either against the use of them simply, as being false or
unmeet: or else against unseasonable use of them. For the former they have no
ground; for you see it is the express language of Christ himself and his
Apostle. And as to the later, I easily grant that no Scripture phrase should be
unseasonably used. But if it be not the words but the sense that they blame,
why then do they harp so much on the words themselves, and raise the most of
the odium from thence? And what is the unwarrantable sense? I know not of any
lower sense that they can put on these words, then what imports the Interest
of a condition: As for that of Mat. 12. they say little to it. And as to that
of James, they interpret it differently among themselves. First, Some of them
say that James speaks of Justification before men, and others say he speaks of
Justification before God. The former are easily confuted (as they restrain the
text to that alone) by the express words of the Text. For, first, ver. 23. it
expressly speaks of Righteousness by divine Imputation, and of Gods accepting
Abraham into friendship. Secondly, The text speaks of that Justification which
concurreth with Salvation, ver. 14. [ can faith save him?] Thirdly, It speaks
of the Death of faith without works, as to Profiting, ver. 16.17. which is
different from manifestation. Fourthly, It instanceth in the secret act of
Rahab, and such an act of Abraham, as we read of no men that then justified him
for, nay they were liker to condemn him. Fifthly, Men may justify an Hypocrite
as soon as the truly godly, and can but conjecture at the faith by the works.
But the scope of the text shows that it is no such frivolous justification that
is here meant.

Secondly, They that say that it is justification before God that is here
meant, (as no doubt it is) have yet diverse interpretations of the word Works.
Some say, that by Works is not meant [Works themselves] indeed, but a working
faith. To them I say, first, I deny it, and wait for better proof then is yet
brought. Secondly, The text names [works] expressly twelve times in a few
verses: which is not usual in speeches so tropicall as this is supposed to be.
Thirdly, In many or most of the texts, that interpretation would make the words
nonsense, as the perusal will declare. Fourthly, If the word [works] did
emphatically signify the [working nature] of faith, or faith not qua fides,
but qua operans, it will be all one as to the matter in question, and yield
what I desire.

Others say that by works is indeed meant the works themselves properly; but
then they say that the text speaks not of the Justification of the person by
them, but of faith by them, for faith, say they, alone does justify the
person, and works only justify faith. Answer, But first, this contradicts
the express text: for verse 14. It is the Salvation of the person that is
denied; and ver. 21. It it the justification of Abraham himself that is there
mentioned; and ver. 24. it is the man that is said to be justified by works and
not by faith only; and verse 25. it is Rahab her self that is said to be
justified by works. Secondly, The answer contradicts themselves, or grants
what I desire: for if works justify the faith, they must needs justify the
person in tantum, against any accusation of gross Infidelity and Hypocrisy.
Sometime the person is justified when his Action cannot be justified (as in
case of satisfaction and pardon:) but to justify the action it self, is the
highest sort of justifying the person.

So that all other Interpretations being either overthrown, or resolved into
that which we maintain, I need to say to more for the defending of it.

My next proof is from those texts that say, we shall be Judged according to
our works, and rewarded according to our Labor, etc. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. 1 Cor.
3.8. 1 Pet. 1.16, 17. Matthew 16.27. etc.

If men shall be justified according to their works, then those works are no
lower then a condition of that justification: But the Antecedent is true, as I
prove thus. If men shall be judged according to their works, therefore they
shall be justified according to their works: The reason of the Consequence is
evident; because judging is the Genus, which comprehends Justification and
condemnation as its species. The reason also of the consequence of the former
Argument is apparent: because the term [of judging according to works] does in
the common use of men signify ordinarily that which they call the Meritum
causae, but never any thing lower then a bare condition: nor can any lower
tolerable judiciary sense be put upon them, as might easily be showed if it
were worth the standing on.

My next proof is from those texts that expressly promise the pardon of sin on
condition of Repentance, Confession, etc. If Repentance, and other acts are
made by the Gospel, conditions of pardon, (and our first general Pardon) then
are they made conditions of our first admission into a state of Justification.
But the Antecedent is plain, in Act. 2.38. Mar. 14. Luke 13.35. Isa. 55.67. and
1.16, 17, 18. Ezekiel. 33.11, 16. and 18.28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Prove. 28.13. Act.
3.19. with many more. The Consequence is plain, in that Pardon is by very many
made the whole of our Justification; and by others confessed a chief part; and
by all its confessed to be made ours on the same terms as is Justification it
self.

My fourth Proof is from those texts which make these kind of Acts to have the
place of a condition in order to salvation; if they are conditions of
salvation, then are they no less then conditions of our final Justification:
But the Antecedent is ordinarily acknowledged by the Opponents, and its proved,
1 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 5.9. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Luke 11.28. and 13.24 1 Cor. 9.24, 25,
26, 27. Rev. 22.14. John 12.26. Romans 8.13. Mat. 5.20. Mat. 19.29. Mat. 6.1, 2,
4, 6. and 5.12, 46. and 10.41, 42. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6. Col. 3.23, 24. Heb. 6.10.
2. Tim. 4.7, 8. Gal. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 2. Cor. 9.6, 9. John 5.22, 27, 28,
29, etc. The Consequence is proved good, first, In that final Justification and
Glorification have the same conditions; as is plain, both in many Scriptures
(mentioned) and in the nature of the thing: for that Justification is the
adjudging us to that Glory; and therefore so far as any thing is the cause or
condition of the Glory it self, it must be the reason of the sentence which
adjudgeth it to us. Secondly, And salvation is as free as Justification, and no
more deserved by man: and therefore the Apostle equally excludes works from
both, Ephesians. 2.5, 8, 9. By Grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God; not of work, lest any man should boast. so
Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. more fully. Now if Salvation by grace through faith without
works, exclude not sincere obedience from being a Condition of Salvation, then
Justification by grace through faith without works, does not (in Scripture
sense) exclude sincere obedience from being the condition of our final
Justification, nor Repentance from being the condition of our justification as
begun: (for there is eadem ratio, and the Text makes the one as free without
works, as the other) But the Antecedent is plain in the Scriptures, Ergo, etc.

My fifth Proof is from those texts that in terms seem to assign a causality to
such obediential acts, which can be interpreted of no less then a
conditionality; such are Luke 19.17. Mat. 25.31, 23, 34, 35, 40, 46. Genesis
22.16, 17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 34.26, 27. Psalm 91.9, 14. Mark 7.29. 1 John 3.22, 23.
John 16.27. Rev. 3.10. and 3.4. and 7.14, 15. etc. And though some of these
texts speak not of Divine acceptance to life; yet first, some do; secondly, and
the rest speak of no mercy but what is as freely given as Justification. A man's
own works are excluded other Means and parts of salvation, as well as that.

I run over these briefly and generally, both because I expect that the bare
texts without my Comments, should work upon the Considerate, and because I have
been so much upon it formerly in other writings (as Confess.. 3. p. ^6. cap. 3.
and cap 5.. 2. page 117, 118. and alibi passim) as that I apprehend in this
work more tediousness than necessity.

But the chief thing that I further here intend, is to answer some Objections,
that by a Reverend Brother in his second part of his Treatise of Justification
are brought against me.

But before I come to his Arguments, its necessary that I a little animadvert
on his Description of Justification, that we may first agree upon the sense of
our terms, or at least, know how to understand one another.

Treat. Of Justification. p. 126. [ Justification is a gracious and just Act of
God, whereby through Christ our Mediator and Surety, a sinner, but repenting
and believing, is pronounced just, and hereby put into a state of
Reconciliation and favor with God, to the praise of Gods glorious attributes,
and to the Believers eternal salvation. I shall not examine this Description by
accurate Logical Rules, etc.

Answ. First, Doubtless an accurate, rather then popular definition would as
soon be expected from you, as from most; and here as anywhere in a Treatise
purposely on the Subject. Secondly, Pronunciation does not go before
Constitution, not put us into a state of Reconciliation and favor, but find us
in it, you say your self. page 120. To justify, is to constitute and to
declare or pronounce righteous, And in your first Treatise of Justification.
page 7. Indeed the Apostle, Romans 5. says, many are made righteous by the
second Adam; which if not meant of inherent holiness does imply that the
righteousness we have by Christ, is not merely declarative, but also
constitutive; and indeed, one is in order before the other; for a man must be
righteous, before he can be pronounced or declared so to be.]

Treat. p. The Application of (Justification) is attributed to the Holy Ghost.

Answ. I know not of any such, except first, where Justification is taken for
Sanctification. Secondly, or as the Holy Ghost is made the Author of the
Promise, though I doubt not but he is the Author of faith also.

Treat. 16. The Socinians say Christ justifies only Instrumentally, not
principally; even so faith is said to save: but this cannot be, because Christ
is God as well at Man, and therefore cannot be instrumental, but principal.

Answ. As they err on one hand, that say Christ justifies only Instrumentally
(which flows from their blasphemous denial of his Godhead) so its an error on
the other hand, to say that Christ cannot be Instrumental, but principal; I
prove the contrary; first, If Christ may be an Officer appointed by the Father
to the Redemption, and ruling of mankind, then may he be an Instrument. But,
etc. Ergo, etc.

Secondly, If Christ may be a means, he may be an Instrument; but he may be a
means, for he is called by himself the way to the Father: and a way is a means.

Thirdly, He is called the Fathers servant: therefore he may be an Instrument.

Fourthly, He is said to come to do his Fathers will, therefore he is his
Instrument.

Fifthly, All Power is said to be given him, even the Power of judging, John
5.22. and Matthew 28.18, 19. therefore he is the Fathers Instrument in judging.

And your reason is invalid, ( viz. because Christ is God) for he is Man as
well as God, and so may be Instrumental.

Treat. p. 129, 130. It sounds as intolerable Doctrine in my ears, that Christ
our Mediator did only expiate by his death sins against the Law and Covenant of
works, but that those that are against the Covenant of Grace, etc.

Answ. A sin is against the Law of Grace or Gospel, first, because it is
against some object revealed in the Gospel, which the sin is against, (as
Christ) Thus sin was expiated by Christ: 2ly. As it is against a Precept of the
Gospel and thus it is expiated by Christ: 3ly. As it is a breach of a man's own
Promise or Covenant made to Christ upon the Gospel invitation. And thus it is
expiated by Christ. 4ly. Or as it has respect to the Gospel commination, so as
to make a man the object of the actual curse of this New Covenant, or the
person to whom its proper penalty is become actually due; as every sin made the
penalty of the first Law actually due to us. This is it that I have said, that
Christ does not expiate, and none but this. Some Divines say, the Gospel has
no proper curse or commination and penalty. I am past doubt that it has, even
non-liberation, a privation of all the salvation offered them, and the
Remedilesness of their state, etc. and I have often opened this, and proved that
only final Impenitency and Infidelity, or the final nonperformance of the
conditions of life, are thus peremptorily threatened, and make a man the Subject
of the proper actual curse of this Law of Grace. And if after all explications,
you will still carry it in confusion, or intimate that men hold intolerable
Doctrine, omitting their explications, and by generals making that theirs which
they disclaim: our next reply shall be patience; or if you think indeed, either
that the Law of Grace does oblige any under the penalty of remediless
non-liberation, besides the finally Impenitent and Unbelievers, or that Christ
dyed to expiate any man's predominant final Impenitency or Unbelief, I will not
trouble you with any other consutation then a denial of it.

Treat. p. ibid. Repentance is not an ingredient to our Justification as faith
is; Repentance qualifieth the Subject, but faith immediately receives it.

Answer. The Word Ingredient is more ambiguous then to be worthy the labor of
discussing: But your assigned difference I ever did allow. And yet must we
voluminously differ, when I have told you that I allow it? But then I add, that
this difference is in the nature of the acts, and in their aptitude to their
office. But in the general nature of being Conditions of pardon, which is the
nearest reason of their interest, they agree, though upon several reasons they
are made conditions.

Treat. [We are not justified by the Habit of faith; but by the Act.]

Answer. I said so too in my Aphorisms. But the reasons of a learned man (Dr.
Wallis in his friendly animadversions) have persuaded me that it is unsound.

Treat. p. 129. It is asserted, that Justification called in Titulo, or
virtual, is nothing but the Grant of it in the Gospel: But I see not how that
can be called our Justification.

Answ. First, That which is asserted, is, first, That the Gospel, is the
Instrument justifying. Secondly, That the moral act of the Gospel-Grant (and
Gods Will by it) is Justification in sensu activo. Thirdly, That the Relation
resulting therefrom, is our passive Justification.

Secondly, Can you see how a Princes pardon under his handwriting can be the
Instrument of a Traitors pardon; and how the moral or civil Action of that
Instrument, and of the Prince by it, can be active pardon; and how the Relation
effected by it can be passive pardon? If you can see it there, you may see it
here: And if you cannot, many a one can.

Treat. It is the sign or Instrument declaring it: not justification it self.

An. Who ever said, and where, that passive Justification (yea or active) is
the Gospel it self, or the sign? The Letter is the sign; The actual
signification of Gods will thereby is the justifying act. The Relation thence
resulting on us, is our passive Justification. These have been often recited.

Treat. As the grant or promise of our Sanctification is not our Sanctification.

Answ. Good reason: The difference is not to you unknown: Sanctification
(passive) being a Physical effect, must have a Physical cause, and therefore a
bare moral cause cannot produce it. But pardon or justification being but a
Relative effect, may be produced per nudam resultantiam a fundamento. 2. But
suppose God had made a promise of Sanctification on condition of faith; would
not the Right to Sanctification have resulted immediately from this promise,
the condition being performed? And that Right has the same Relative nature, as
constitutive Justification, and pardon it self has.

Treat. And as on the contrary our condemnation while we abide in sin, or Gods
anger against the sinner, is not the threatening promulged, but that which comes
from God himself.

Answ. 1. Our Condemnation per sententiam Judicis, is not the thing in
question, not yet the explication of it; but our constitutive condemnation. And
that it is not indeed the Letter of the Law, (whoever said so) but active, it
is the action of the Law, and passive sumpta, it is the Relative effect of the
Law.

2. From your own Argument reverst, I unresistibly make good my Cause against
you. Condemnation active is the Laws act, and condemnation Passive is the Laws
immediate effect: therefore Justification is alike produced by the Promise or
Gift in the Gospel. The Antecedent is proved, John 3.18. he that believes on
him, is not condemned, (for the Obligation is dissolved) but he that believes
not, is condemned already.] Which must be by some Law, it being before
Judgment and Execution, 2 Cor. 3 9. The Law in its delivery is called [the
ministration of condemnation] and that of the Gospel [the ministration of
righteousness] Iam. 2.9. men are said to be [convinced of the Law as
transgressors.] Though Paul confute the false conceits of Justification by the
Law, yet he took them for no unfit phrases, to speak of [the Law working wrath]
Romans 4.15. [The curse of the Law] Gal. 3.13. And says, Whatsoever the Law
says, it says to them that are under the Law] Romans 3.19. When the Law comes,
sin reviveth, and we die, Romans 7.8 9. therefore we are said to be [delivered
from the Law,] Romans 8.2. and Gal. 3.13. Romans 7.6. And Gal. 3.21. If there had
been a Law given which could have given life, righteousness should have been by
the Law. Hence then is mention of being Justified by the Law, Gal. 5.4. and
men's being debtors to the Law, Gal. 5.3. And somewhat this way is employed by
Nicodemus, John 7.51. does our Law judge any man before, etc.] In a word, what
more common among Divines, then to say, [the Law curses or condemns sinners]
And then it is not abhorrent from the nature of a Law of Grace, an act of
Oblivion, to absolve and justify sinners.

Treat. Neither then could we say, that we are justified by Christ given to us,
but by the proposition laid down in the Scripture, whereas all say that the
objectum quod of our faith is ens incomplexum, not the promise of Christ, but
Christ himself promised.

Answ. Its no impossible thing to be justified both by Christ, and by the
Promise. There is no ground to suppose co-ordinates to be contraries. Why may
not Christ given us* justify us as the meritorious cause, and a principal
efficient; and his Gospel-grant, as his Instrument? And accordingly each of
them may be the object of faith. The principal object is an ens incomplexum,
Christ himself: but a subordinat Object is both the Doctrine Revealing what he
is and has done, and the promise which offers him to us, and tells us what
he will do. If a Princes Son redeem a woman from Captivity, or the Gallows, and
cause an Instrument under his own hand (and the Kings) to be sent to her,
assuring her of pardon, and liberty, and honors with himself, if she will take
him for her husband, and trust him for the accomplishment? Is it not possible
for this woman to be pardoned and delivered by the King, by the Princes ransom,
by the Prince espoused, and by her marriage with him and by the Instrument of
pardon or conveyance? You may be enriched by a Deed of Gift and yet it may be
an ens incomplexum that is bestowed on you by that Deed, and enricheth you too.
Your Money and your Lease, both may give you title to your house. The promise
is Gods Deed of Gift, bestowing on us Christ and pardon, or Justification with
him.

Treat. Besides, Abraham was Justified, and he is made the pattern of all that
shall be Justified: Yet there was no Scripture-grant, or deed of gift in
writing, declaring this: God then communicating himself to Belivers in an
immediate manner.

Answ. Was there no Gospel-grant then extant? no deed of Gift of Christ and his
Righteousness to all that should believe? Nothing to assure men of
Justification by faith, but immediate communications to Believers? If so, then
either there was no Church, and no salvation: or a Church and salvation without
faith in Christ: and either faith in the Messiah to come for pardon and life,
was a duty, or no duty: If no duty, then -- If a duty, then there was a Law
enjoining it, and that Law must needs contain or be conjunct with a revelation
of Christ, and pardon and life to be had by him. I suppose that whatever was
the standing way of Life and Justification then to the Church, had a standing
precept and promise to engage to the duty and secure the benefit. I know not of
duty without Precept, nor of faith without a word to be believed. But this word
was not written! True! but what of that? Was it ever the less a Law or Promise,
the Object of Faith, or Instrument of Justification? The promise of the seed
might be conveyed by Tradition, and doubtless was so. Or if there had been no
general conditional grant or offer of pardon through Christ in those times, but
only particular communications to some men, yet would those have been
nevertheless instrumental

Treat. Therefore to call this Grant or Conditional Promise in the Scripture,
Whosoever shall believe shall be justified, a transient act of God, is very
unproper, unless in such a sense, as we say, such a man's writing is his hand,
and that is wholly impertinent to our purpose.

Answ. There are two distinct acts of God here that I call Transient. The first
is the Enacting of this Law, or giving this promise. If this were not Gods act,
then it is not his Law or promise. If it be his act, it is either Transient, or
Immanent. I have not been accustomed to believe that Legislation, Promising,
etc. are no acts, or are Immanent acts. The second is the continued Moral
Action of the Word, which is also Gods Action by that Word as his Instrument:
As it is the Action of a written Pardon to Acquit, and of a Lease to give
Title, etc. And so the Law is said to absolve, condemn, command, etc. What it
says, it says to them that are under the Law: And to say, is to Act. Though
physically this is no other Action, then a sign performs in signifying, or a
fundamentum in producing the Relation, which is called the nearest efficient of
that Relation. Now either you think that to oblige (the most essential act of
Laws) to absolve, condemn, etc. are Gods acts by his Word, or not. If not, the
mistake is such as I dare not confute, for fear least by opening the greatness
of it, I offend you. If yea; then either it is Gods Immanent act, or his
Transient. The former I never to this day heard or read any man affirm it to
be. That which is done by an Instrument, is no Immanent act in God: To oblige
to duty, to give right to Impunity and Salvation, etc. are done by Instruments,
viz. the Word of God, as it is the signifier of his will: therefore they are
not Immanent Acts. Moreover, that which is begun in time, and is not from
Eternity, is no Immanent Act. But such are the forementioned: because the word
which is the Instrument, was indicted in time. Lastly, that which makes a
change on the extrinsick object is no Immanent act, but such are these Moral
acts of the Word: for they change our Relations, and give us a Right which we
had not before, etc. therefore they are certainly transient acts. A thing that
I once thought I should never by man have been put to prove.

Treat. page 130. Its true at the day of Judgment there will be a solemn and
more complete Justifying of us, as I have elsewhere showed.

Answ. You have very well showed it: and I take gratefully that Lecture, and
this Concession.

Treat. page 131. Indeed we cannot then be said to be justified by Faith, etc.
Hence this kind of Justification will cease in heaven (as implying
imperfection.)

Answ. And I desire you to observe, that if it be no dishonor to Christ, that
we be there (through his grace) everlastingly justified without his Imputed
righteousness, or pardon, or faith pro futuro, it cannot be any dishonor to
him here, that we should repent, and believe, and be sanctified, nor that those
should be conditions of further mercy, and sufficient of themselves to justify
us against any false charge that we are Impenitent unsanctified Infidels. If a
perfect cure disgrace not our Physician then sure an imperfect cure and the
acknowledgement of it, is no dishonor to our Physician now.

Treat. page 137. Thus all those Arguments, If we be Justified by faith, then
by our own work, and that this is to give too much to faith, yea more then some
say they do to works, which they hold a condition of our Justification; All
these and the like Objections vanish; because we are not justified by faith, as
Justification is considered actively, but passively.

Answ. 1. I yet think that I have said enough in my private Papers to you, to
confute the conceit of faith's being Passive. 2. If I had not, yet you yield me
what I desire: If faith act not, but suffer, to our Justification, then is it
no efficient Instrumental cause. For all true efficiency is by Action. And so
you keep but a Metaphorical Instrument. But of this more hereafter.

Treat. page 141. We cannot call Remission of sin a state, as we call
Justification.

Answ. I do not believe you: and I can bring many Scriptures against you. Put
to your self its enough to ask, How can you constantly make Remission an
Essential part of Justification, and yet say, that we cannot call it a state,
as we do Justification. In your first Treat. of Just. Lect. 17. page 145. you
say, Prop. 4. Remission is not to be considered merely as removing of evil, but
also as bestowing good. It is not only ablativa mali, but collativa boni, a
plentiful vouchsafing of many gracious favors to us, such as a Sonship, and a
Right to eternal life, as also peace with God, and communion with him.] And why
may we not say, [A state of Sonship or salvation] as well as of Justification?

Treat. ib. There is a Justification of the cause, and of the person, always
to be distinguished.

Answ. There is no Justification of his cause, which does not so far justify
the person: Nor any sentential Justification of the person, but by justifying
his cause. Though his actions may not be justifiable; yet when the cause to be
tried is, Whether sinful actions be pardoned by Christ, that cause must be
justified, if that man be justified. Even as Accusations are not charged upon
the person, without some cause real or pretended.

Treat. page 152. Not only Bucer who is known to place Justification both in
Imputed righteousness and Inherent, thereby endeavoring a Reconciliation with
the Papists -- But Calvin li. 3. cap. 17. sect. 8. -- To this purpose also
Zanchy --.

Answ. Why then might not I have had as fair measure as Lud. de Dieu, Bucer,
Calvin, Zanchy? especially when I go not so far. And yet I take my self
beholden to Guil. Rivet, for helping me to some scraps of Phil. Codurcus, who
drives at this mark, as you say Bucer does, though I cannot yet get the Book it
self.

Treat. page 158. O this is excellent, when a man is amazed and in an holy
manner confounded at his holiness, as well as at his offenses.

Answ. So you before say, they must be ashamed of their Righteousness as well
as their sins. I do not well understand these distinctions. Nothing in all the
world confounds me so much as the imperfection of my Holiness: But I dare not
think that imperfection to be no sin, left I must think the perfection to be no
duty, and so come to works of supererrogation and Evangelical Counsels. And
Holiness considered in it self, and not as sinful and imperfect, is amiable in
my eyes, and I know not how to be ashamed of it, without being ashamed of God
that is its object and exemplar, and heaven that is the state of its perfection.

Treat. ib. Set some few, even a remnant aside, comparatively, the whole
Christian world both Doctors and people, learned and unlearned, fasten on a
Justification by works. --

Answ. I hope not so many as you fear, or affirm. First, all the Doctors and
people of your judgment do not: And if you thought those so exceeding few
among Christians, you would not take me for so singular as you do. 2. None of
the truly sanctified are such as you here affirm. 3. The multitude of
groundless presumers of Free Grace are not such. And truly though I doubt
Justiciaries are too common, I do not think that such Presumptuous ones are so
small a Remnant. 4. The Libertines and Antinomians, and many other Sects of
their mind, are none of this great number. 5. I will yet hope for all this,
that you cannot prove it of the Doctors and people of half the Christian world.
Their hearts God knows. And I will not yet believe that in their Doctrine about
Justification by works, the Greek Churches, the Armenians, Jacobites, Copti's,
Abasine^, etc. do fasten on such dangerous sands, or differ so much from you.
6. I heard as eminent Divines as most I know (some yet living) in a public
meeting say, that Bishop Usher and Mr. Gataker affirmed, that the Papists did
not fundamentally differ from us in the Doctrine of Justification.

Treat. page 167. By all these subtle Distinctions, men would be thought --

Answ. Your scope in that page seems to be against any distinguishing
whatsoever about works, in this proposition, We are justified by faith, and not
by works, If so, that we must not run to any distinction, but say, that in
every motion or sense, Works are excluded, and do justify in none, then I
profess it is past my uttmost skill to justify you for accusing Althamer as
you do, for saying, Mentiris Jacobe in caput tuum: Yea if he had upon the
reading of Mat. 12.36. risen higher, and said, Mentiris Christ in caput tuum.
For sure he that says [By thy words thou shall be justified] Or by works a man
unjustified, and not by faith only] can no way possibly be excused from that
crime, if no distinction may verify his words; but they must then be taken as
absolutely false: which I will not be persuaded of.

Treat. page 219. Sermon. 23. Observe. That even the most holy and regenerate man
is not Justified by the works of grace which he does. This truth is the more
diligently to be asserted, by how much the error that confronts it is more
specious and refined, and maintained by such abettors, whose repute is not so
easily cast off as the former we spoke of.

Now you come purposely, I perceive to deal with me. I confess the repute of
Abettors does much to bear up opinions through the world, even with them that
speak most against implicit faith. But you need not despair of casting off the
repute of them you mention Mr. Robertson and Mr. Crandon can teach any man that
will learn that lesson.

Treat. ib. The Question is not, Whether we are Justified by works, though
flowing from grace, as meritorious or efficient of Justification. This the
Opinionists we have to deal with, do reject with indignation. To make Works
either merits or efficient causes of our Justification before God, they grant
it directly to oppose the Scriptures; yea they seem to be offended with the
Orthodox, as giving too much to faith, because its made an Instrument of our
Justification: therefore they are to be acquitted at least from gross Popery.

Answ. This is one passage which I understand by your Preface to you Sermons on
John 17. you looked for thanks for: and I do freely thank you for it: for the
world is such now, as that I must take my self beholden to any man that does
injure me with moderation and modesty. But you might have done that justice to
us Opinionists, as to have put [any causes at all] instead of [efficient
causes] when we had so often told you (the Orthodox) that we disclaimed all
true causality; and then your Reader would have been ready to hope that we are
free also from the finer Popery as well as the gross. But since I have heard of
late times, what it is that goes under the name of Antichristianity and Popery,
even with many that are able to call themselves Orthodox, and others that
dissent from them, worse then Opinionists; I confess I begin to have charitable
thoughts of a man that is but freed from the charge of gross Popery: and if
those tongues should free him also from the imputation of all the finer Popery,
I should begin to suspect that somewhat is amiss.

Treat. ib. 2. Although to maintain faith and Obedience to be the conditions,
and a causa sine qua non of our Justification, be the professed and avowed
Doctrine of the Socinians, yet some of late have asserted the same Doctrine,
that yet abhor Socinianism --.

Answ. For this also I give you the thanks which you expected, on the foresaid
grounds. But if we assert the same Doctrine with the Socinians, either it is
the same false Doctrine, or the same sound Doctrine. If the later, you might as
well have said, the Socinians assert that there is a God, and so do we: But to
what purpose? If the former, then either it is false quoad terminos, or quoad
sensum. The former cannot be said without absurdity: the words can have no
other falsness, but an unfitness, distinct from the sense: And if the terms be
any part of Socinianism, then Christ and James were guilty of Socinianism; quod
absit. If it be the sense* First, I crave no other favor of the impartial
Reader, before he judge, then to read the Socinians explication of themselves,
and to read my explication here, and in my confession. Secondly, And if he will
also peruse the Allegations in the end of that confession, let him judge
whether the Orthodox be not guilty of Socinianism. Or if he be tempted to
believe Dr. Owens intimations, as if I had dealt injuriously with the Authors
there alleged, I only desire him to turn to the places cited, and peruse them
in the Authors, and freely censure me.

Treat. 220. Neither is the question about the necessity of holiness, etc. --
Only the question is upon what account these are required in justified persons;
whether in some causality, or concurrence as faith is, only not with such a
degree of excellency? Whether good works be required as well as faith, so that
we may say, justifying Repentance, justifying Law, (Love, it should be) as well
as justifying faith? This is positively and vehmently affirmed by some: but
certainly those Arguments and Reasons they bring are too weak to gainsay the
Torrent of the Orthodox Divines.

Answ. Upon the reading of this, I complained of hard measure in the Preface to
my confession: to which you reply somewhat in your Preface to Sermons on John
17. I shall recite the reasons of my complaint. First, I did both at large in
private writings to your self, and publicly to the world, profess that I took
neither faith nor works for any causes at all of our Justification; was it just
then to make this the state of the Question, and say I positively and
vehemently affirmed it? (for you deny not that it is me that you mean, and I
know it by passages here agreeable to your private letters) Secondly, I never
once imagined the difference between faith and holy obedience or
sanctification, to lie (in order to Justification) in the degree of excellency.
I never to my remembrance so thought, or wrote, or spoke. But the difference I
laid here, first, That (as to actual obedience, yea and Repentance) faith has
a peculiar aptitude to this office, as being a Receptive act, and fited to the
object, as that object is fitted to our necessity. Secondly, That (as to
assent, desire of Christ, love to Christ offered, accepting him as Teacher, and
Lord) they are essential acts of faith, and so differ not at all, as they are
by many supposed to do. Nay, I rather expected that some should have charged me
with preferring Holiness before faith in excellency, while I made faith but the
seed, and holiness as the fruit; faith to be but the covenanting, and Obedience
the performance of what we consented to; and in a word, while I made perfect
holiness the end of faith, because the end is better then the means: And I was
glad when I found you saying the like, Vindic. Legis, Lect. 4. page 45. [13.
Holiness and Godliness inherent, is the end of Faith and Justification.] But
little did I think to have been charged, and that by you, for making the
difference to lie in faiths higher degree of excellency, and only in that.
Thirdly, I never owned the phrase of [justifying Repentance, justifying Love.]
nor ever said that we may as well use these as [justifying faith] And when none
of these things were ever said or written by me, ought you to have left on
record to Generations, that [this is positively and vehemently affirmed.] On
the consideration of this dealing, I must say again, O what is man, and what a
sad case were we in, if the best of men were our Judges! when they will not
stick deliberately to publish to the present and future Ages, that we
positively and vehemently affirm those things, which we never thought nor
wrote, but have by Letters and in printed books both positively and vehemently,
and very frequently professed the contrary. Is here any room for further
disputing? yea, when I have told you of this dealing, you own it still, and
defend it in your Preface to your Sermons on John 17. I shall therefore before
I proceed, examine that Defense.

Preface. page 3. [Now when I had endeavored to state the Question in a most
candid and fair way between those that deny a Condition sine qua non of our
Justification, and those who affirm. A Reverend and Learned Brother, judging
himself concerned in this opinion likewise, does complain of the want of Candor
and truth in my stating of the Question, when I rather expected thanks for my
Ingenuity: -- Now let any judicious Reader, that is acquainted with
controversy, decide, wherein any (and or truth may be desired here. For I say
[causality] which is a general word, not efficiency or merit; Again, I say,
some causality, Causalitas quaedam, which is terminus diminuens: yea I added
the word Concurrence, which might satisfy any how low I brought the Question.

Answer. Will you call to any judicious Reader, to tell you that which I
particularly expressed to you? Again, Then let the judicious Reader judge whether
you should have said to the world, any of the forementioned particulars; First,
That I give any Causality to works as to Justification. Secondly, Or that I
difference them only in degree of excellency. Thirdly, Or that I affirm, that
we may say, justifying Repentance, justifying Love, as well as justifying
faith. Fourthly, And this is affirmed positively, and vehemently: and all this
when I had positively and vehemently denied them. Fifthly, Yea, and that only
this is the question between us.

And what do your defenses do to justify such dealing? [you said only
Causality in general, and not Efficiency or Merit] And did not I openly and
privately to you deny Causality in general, and not only Merit or Efficiency?
and is that positive or vehement affirming it? Secondly, you said, Causalitas
quaedam, which is terminus diminuens.] If quoad esse causalitatis it be
terminus diminuens, then the meaning is, that I make them no causes. But do you
think any Reader will English Causalitas quaedam, by [no Causality] But
doubtless you mean that it is Terminus diminuens as to the quality or nobility
of the cause. But first, I never heard before that quaedam was terminus
diminuens; and if no Readers must understand you, but those that know this to
be true, I think it will be but few. Secondly, But what if that were so? Did
you not know that I denied even all causality, how diminute soever quaedam can
express, if it be but real. Thirdly, But you added [Concurrence] But it was in
Concurrence with the several unjust passages before mentioned: and sure the
neighborhood of that word has not force enough to make them all true.

Preface. [My Reverend Brother says, He vehemently disclaimeth all Causality
of works in Justification: surely his meaning is all Proper causal efficiency,
and so did I in the stating of it: But to deny Causality in a large sense, is
to contradict himself.

Answer. If so, what hope of Justice? Must I in paper after paper disclaim all
true Causality, and will you not only persuade the world of the contrary, but
persist in it, whether I will or not, and say I mean a [proper causal
efficiency] Reader, I have no other remedy left, but to advise thee, that if
yet after this it be affirmed the next time that I disclaim not all true
causality, or mean not as I say, thou believe not the affirmation.

Preface. [ For in his Aphoris. 74. These. They both, viz. Faith and Works
justify in the same kind of causality, or mediate it (should be media,) and
improper causes, or as Dr. Twiss causae dispositivae, but with this difference,
Faith as the principal, Obedience as the less principal. Here is causality,
though improper; Here is a causa dispositiva: and yet shall I be blamed after I
had removed Efficiency and Merit?

Answer. This is but to add injustice. When I have written at large that faith
and works are no true causes of Justification, and after tell you that a
condition is commonly called causa sine qua non, which is causa fatua, and no
cause at all, but merely nominal, having by custom obtained that name, and that
Dr. Twiss calls this causa dispositiva: when I say that they have only a
causality improperly to called, which indeed is no causality. Is it justice for
you still to persuade the world that I mean some causality, though not
efficiency? The thing I renounce: the name is not it that you only charge me
with: if you had, I was not the maker of it. It was called causa sine qua non,
before I was born: I must comply with common language, or be silent: especially
when I tell you, I take it for no Cause. You give me such justice as the host
of the Crown Tavern in Cheap Side had, who (as Speed says,) was hanged for
saying merrily, that his Son was Heir of the Crown, and his exposition would
not save his life. I pray you hereafter remove more then Efficiency and Merit.
I take not works to be either the material or formal cause of Justification, no
nor the final, though you (in the words before cited) affirm it such. Who then
gives more to works, you or I? The final cause is so called, because it causes
us to choose the means to it; Justification is not a means of our using, but an
act of God. Therefore works are not properly the end of it, as to us.

And yet let me say this to you, lest you should mistake me: As vehemently as I
disown all true causality of works to our Justification, I intend not to fall
out with all men that call them causes. As first, Not with Piscator nor such
other that call them causes of our final absolution and salvation. Secondly,
Nor with those that call them meritorious in the same sense as the Fathers did,
though they unfitly use the word. Thirdly, Nor with those that will say, that
because they please God, and so are the object of his complacency and will,
they may therefore, speaking after the manner of men, be called Procatarctike
causes of his act of Justification: and so that the Amiableness and
desirableness of faith and holiness, is the cause why he assigned them to this
Noble place and office. Fourthly, Nor with them that say, faith is a moral or a
Metaphorical, passive or active Instrument of Justification. Though I say not
as these men, I will not quarrel with them.

Preface. But I need not run to this; for my Arguments militate against works,
at works justifying under any pretended Notion whatsoever.

Answer. By the help of this, I shall interpret all your Arguments. And if so,
then they militate against the act of faith justifying under the pretended
notion of an Instrument, unless you will say that faith is no Act, or
Instrumentality is no pretended notion.

Preface. And this makes me admire how my learned Brother could let fall one
passage wherein he may be so palpably and ocularly convinced to the contrary by
the first looking upon my Arguments; that which he says is [the strength of my
Arguments, lies upon a supposition, that conditions have a moral efficiency] --
There is no one of these ten Arguments brought against Justification by works,
as a Condition sine qua non, that is built upon this supposition, or has any
dependence on it, only in the fourth Argument after their strength is
delivered, I do ex abundanti, show that a Condition in a Covenant strictly
taken has a moral efficiency.

Answer. First, you confess it is your Assertion, that such Conditions have a
moral efficiency. Secondly, I never said that you made that a Medium in all
your Arguments, nor that you intended that as their strength; but that their
strength lies on that supposition; and if I have mistaken in that, I will not
stand in it: But I think to show you that without that supposition your
Arguments have no strength: which if I do, then judge at what you marvailed.

But its a farther act of injustice in you, in alleging me Apol. page 8.
saying that some conditions are impulsive causes, when I told you it is not qua
conditions, but only as materially there is somewhat in them that is
meritorious. I doubt not but the same thing may be the matter of a cause and a
condition.

I shall now return to your Lect. of Justification, and there speak to the
other passage in your preface, about justifying Repentance and Love, etc.

Treat. page 220. [ This therefore I shall (God willing) undertake to prove,
that good works are not a condition, or a cause sine qua non of our
Justification.

Answer. But remember that it is Justification, either as begun in
constitution, or continued, or as pronounced by the Judges Sentence, that the
Question comprehends, and not only the putting us into a justified state; And
its works under any notion that you speak of, and not only under the
reduplication, qua works.

Treat. p. 221. First I shall instance in the great pattern and example of our
Justification, Abraham; from whom the Apostle concludes a Justification of all
Believers in the like manner he was. Now that Abraham was not Justified by
works, or his working, though a godly man, the Apostle, etc.

Answ. 1. I distinguish between works in Paul's sense, and works in James his
sense. And because you say so much against distinguishing of works, (before) as
deceitful; I will first prove the necessity of distinguishing. 1. Works in
Paul's sense are such as make the Reward to be not of Grace, but of Debt. Works
in James his sense are not such: therefore they are not the same. Works in
Paul's sense, are actions as valuable offered to God, and justifying by their
value. But works in James his sense, are none such. Proved. The works that
James speaks of must necessarily be done: Works in Paul's sense, we may not so
much as imagine that we can do; viz. such as make the Reward of Debt, and not
of Grace. Though the matter of such works may be done, which Justiciaries thus
conceive of, yet under such a notion, no man may once imagine that he has them.

2. Works in Paul's sense are such as stand in competition with Christ, or at
least, would be copartners with him in a co-ordination. But works in James his
sense are none such, but such as stand in a due subordination to Christ; such
undoubtedly there are: And such James speaks of.

That Paul speaks of works as Competitors with Christ, or as coordinate, an
hundred Texts will prove; and the case is so plain, that I think it not worth
the insisting on, seeing the impartial reading over the Epistles may satisfy.

2. I distinguish of Justifying, quoad modum procurandi, or of the distinct
Interests of men's actions therein, signified in the preposition [By.] Paul
speaks of Justification [By] works, as by valuable deserving causes, or
procatarctike causes, moving God to justify us by their worth, or by some true
causality procuring it. But James speaks of Works as supposing the perfect
Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, and that all that is valuable to the causal
procurement of our Justification is to be found in him alone, and therefore he
leaves no causality herein to works but takes them as a mere condition, which
cease suspending when performed. For the efficiency of a condition, is only in
suspending till performed: And so Rebellion can suspend; when the ceasing of
that Rebellion by obedience, does not cause, but only cease suspending.

Now I answer to your Minor, that Abraham was not justified by works in Paul's
sense, but he was in James's sense, unless you will own the saying which you
chide Althamer for. (Though I must say that in his Conciliationes Loc. Script.
Althamer deals more mannerly with James.) Abraham was not justified by works,
as making the Reward of debt, and not of grace: for he had no such works: But
Abraham was justified 1. By the act of faith, as a condition: therefore by an
act under some notion. I know of few Divines that deny that faith is a
condition of Justification. 2. However you confess your self that Abraham was
Justified by faith as an instrument: and you say that it was by the act of
faith (and not the habit.) And though you take this to be but a nominal act,
and really a Passion, yet so do not others: for herein you are more singular (a
thousand to one, as far as I am able to understand) then I am in the Doctrine
which you charge with singularity. 3. The faith that Abraham was justified by,
was not only a bare apprehension of Christ's Righteousness, but a receiving of
Christ as Christ, which is called, Works, by your party. 4. It was either By or
Because of his External Obedience, that Abraham was justified. Proved. 1 By
James 2.21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works, when he had offered
Isaac his son upon the Altar? 2. From Genesis 22.12, 16, 18. By my self have I
sworn says the Lord, for because thou have done this thing, and have not
withheld thy son, thine only son, that in blessing I will bless thee, etc. And
in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, because thou have
obeyed my voice* But then I must add, that this was none of Abraham's first
Justification, for he was just before this; but it was a renewed Acceptance and
Approbation of God, and a kind of sentential Declaration thereof, by the voice
of the Angel. But a Justification it was, and so James calls it.

Now let us hear your Replies.

Treat. page 221. This cannot be a solid Answer. 1. Because the Apostle
speaks generally of works in this description of Justification, though in
other places he sometimes says [the works of the Law] yet Abraham could not be
Instanced in for such works, etc. -- When we read the Holy Ghost spoke
generally of all works, who are we that we should limits it to some? -- By
their interpretation, the believer should be opposed only to some kind of works
and faith, etc.

Answ. 1. The ordinary strain of the Apostles speech, being expressive of the
works of the Law, is Expository of the rest, 1. Because a few passages must be
usually expounded by many. 2. And because a few (much more abundance of)
limiting passages, must expound those where the restriction is not expressed.

2. Have not I ever yielded to you that all works are excluded from Justifying
as works? but it follows not that therefore they are (as you may say) excluded
under any Notion whatsoever.

3. And why might not Abraham be instanced in? Your proof is none. 1. Is it not
a good Argument Negative, Abraham was not justified by works, therefore we are
not? And a good Argument to prove the Antecedent: Because he had no works that
could justify: No nor those which were then trusted on to Justification. 2.
Does not Paul show that he speaks of these, when he proves his assertion, 1.
Because Abraham was then in uncircumcision, Romans 4.10. (what is that to Gospel
obedience?) 2. Because the Law was long after the promise, and was not then
given, Gal. 3.17. 3. Paul makes it all one to be justified by works, and to be
justified by the Law; as abundance of passages show. A multitude of particular
Texts do expressly show that it is a Legal Justification only that he speaks of,
and that he directly intends only Legal works. I will now instance but in
one, viz. Romans 4.13. compared with Genesis 22.18. [ For the promise that he should
be heir of the world, was not to Abraham and his seed by the Law, but through
the righteousness of faith.] Now compare with this, the words of the promise it
self, [And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, because
thou have obeyed my voice.] So ver. 16, 17. Because thou have done this thing,
etc.]

4. Its not easy to conceive how any man can expect a Legal or Pharisaical
Justification by Evangelical works without a gross contradiction: For example;
to be justified Legally by Evangelical faith, desire, love, thanks, joy,
self-denial, confession, etc. are all palpable contradictions: And such a man's
faith must be thus expressed; I expect to merit Justification legally, by
believing in Christ as the sole Meriter of my Justification and salvation, or
by desiring Christ, or by loving Christ as the sole Meriter of my salvation: Or
by thanking him, or rejoicing in him as the Sole-meriter of my salvation? Or I
expect legally to merit Justification, by denying that I can merit it, by any
righteousness of my own; or by confessing that I deserve damnation by my sins,
or by praying or seeking for salvation by free gift, as merited only by
Christ.] All these are palpable contradictions; and no man can hold both that
knows what he does.

5. Yet I will suppose that though no man can so trust to his works for legal
Justification, that are apprehended by him as Formally Evangelical, yet perhaps
he may do it by some works that are Materially Evangelical, and fancied by him
to be what they are not. And so I still say, that though it were Legal works
that Paul did directly dispute against, yet consequentially and indirectly he
disputes against works commanded only in the Gospel, if men will do them to
Legal ends, and fancy them to be of the value legally to justify them.

6. I will therefore suppose some men to be so unreasonable, as to expect a
Legal Justification, by their believing or confessing that Christ only can
Legally justify them, and not themselves; and so I will grant you, that Paul
does (consequentially) exclude all works, even Evangelical works from
Justification: But though he exclude all works, yet not in every notion, nor
does he exclude All interest of All works in our Justification. All works as
valuable offerings, he excludes, and so as meritorious, not only in point of
Commutative Justice, but also in point of Legal worth and Legal Justice, as the
Pharisees supposed them meritorious: All works he excludes from all proper
Causality. But he does not exclude all works from having any Interest at all in
subordination to Christ. Do you verily believe that Repentance and Faith have
no Interest in our Pardon, in sub-ordination to Christ? If you say, No, not
any, you contradict God, and your self, and all the Christian world. If you
say, Yea, but they justify not qua works; you say nothing to the controversy:
For I have over and over as loud as you, professed that they justify not
formaliter as works. If you say they have any Interest: 1. Tell us better what
it is. 2. And then you confute your general assertion. There Is no Christian
that I know but will confess that the Gospel works have the interest of
Declaring signs in our final Justification. And few will deny that Repentance
has the interest of a necessary qualification, or condition to our first
Justification. Now would you persuade us that Paul excludes this kind of
Interest, or opposes faith to it? If not against the signal interest of works,
then not against all Interest; therefore if Paul's general exclusion will
consist with your signal Interest, then I shall maintain that it will consist
with the fore-explained Conditional interest.

I will not therefore be guilty of your charge of limiting the Holy Ghost. If
he spoke of all works, I will believe he means All works. But 1. If he over and
over near an hundred times at least, explain himself as speaking of the Law, I
will not shut my ears against that explication. And 2. I will grant it is also
all Evangelical Works, at least by consequence: But I need not therefore grant
that because he excludes All Work, therefore he excludes All kind of Interest
of all works; but only that sort which he disputes against.

Besides all this, I must distinguish of Justification, Legal and Evangelical,
respective to the promises and threatenings of the Law and Gospel, which do
differ. No works at all did justify Abraham, from the charge of the Law, Thou
art a sinner, as being the Righteousness of the Law, and the matter of that
Justification. Nor will any works at all so justify us. But it does not
follow, that therefore no works will justify a man from the false accusation
of being an Impenitent, Unbeliever, and so having no part in Christ, whose
Righteousness must stop the mouth of the Law: Or that no works are the matter
of the righteousness required in this Constitution, [He that believes shall be
saved: Repent that your sins may be blotted out.] Which are here required as
the condition of our freedom from the Law, by the righteousness of Christ. In a
word, Paul bestows a large dispute to prove that no works of ours do answer the
expectation of the Law, and so cannot justify us themselves from its
Accusation. Its an ill consequence, that therefore Paul proves that no works
of man's do answer the special constitution or condition of the Gospel [ Repent
and Believe in Christ, etc.] and so are not the Condition of our interest in
that perfect righteousness of Christ, which is the only valuable cause of our
foresaid Justification.

Treat. 222. Again, that works of all sorts are excluded, is plain, if you
consider the Object of Justification, who it is that is here said to be
justified, and that is, the ungodly. By the ungodly is one meant that has not
a sufficient and adequate holiness: so that Abraham though regenerated, yet as
to Justification is ungodly, he cannot stand before God, or endure, if all his
imperfections be enquired after. Now certainly he that fulfilleth the
conditions of Justification, cannot be called ungodly; for he does all that is
required.

Answ. 1. Again, I grant all works excluded: but not in all their relations;
nor are all their Interests in Justification excluded. 2. This Argument I
should not have expected from you. You confess that by ungodly, is meant such,
though Regenerate and holy, that have not an adequate holiness: Adequate; To
what? to the Law? or to the constitution of the condition in the Gospel? Marvel
not if I deny the Consequence of your Argument, and if I be unable to digest
your reason for it. You say, [He that fulfilleth the Condition of
Justification, cannot be called ungodly.] But what Condition? I confess he that
fulfilleth the Laws condition cannot be called ungodly, nor be unjustifiable by
that Law. But he that performs the Gospel-Condition of liberation, may be
called ungodly in the sense you now mentioned, that is, unjustifiable
immediately for his works by the Law: or one that has not an holiness adequate
to the Law. Though indeed he cannot be called Evangelically ungodly. I suppose
you clearly see that your Argument makes as much against any Condition of
Justification in us, as against works being the condition. For against faith it
self, being any Condition, you may equally argue, [ Its the ungodly that are
justified: But he that fulfilleth the conditions of Justification, is not to be
called ungodly. Ergo, etc.] But if you take ungodliness (as you do) for
unadequate holiness (to the Law) I deny your Minor. Can no man but the
Perfectly obedient, perform the condition of pardon in the Gospel?

Treat. ib. So that this is very considerable, that all those whom God
justifies, he justifies them not for any thing they have of their own, or any
conditions they have performed; but as such who are sinners in a strict
examination, and so deserve condemnation, and therefore no works of grace are
looked upon.

Answ. I have answered this fully in Colvinus. 1. Though Protestants often say,
that God saves men for their obedience, and Scripture use the term [because]
often, yet I am willing to yield to you that men be not saved nor justified for
any thing of their own, or for any conditions: But yet he would not justify
them without the performance of some conditions; but would condemn them for the
nonperformance, even with a special condemnation, distinct from that which is
for their sins against the Law.

2. Colvinus was the first man, and you are the second that ever I read (to my
remembrance) saying that God justifies men as sinners. A quatenus ad omne
valet consequentia. If as sinners, then all sinners are justified. If not as
performers of any Condition, then not as Believers! These things want proof.

Treat. ib. Lastly, that all works are excluded, is evident by the Apostles
allegation out of David, who makes man's blessedness to be in this, that God
imputes righteousness without works.

Answ. 1. This is sufficiently answered in the former. 2. Paul hence
immediately concludes that Righteousness comes not only on the Circumcision:
whence you may see what works he means. 3. Your selves expound the foregoing
term ungodly, of men that have not adequate holiness, though sincere; therefore
you must so take this equipollent term [without works] for [without that
adequate holiness]: but it follows not, that therefore its without any humane
act. 4. Yet still I grant this also, that its without any humane act,
considered as the matter of a Legal righteousness, or as opposite to Christ, or
coordinate with him: but not without any humane act, as subordinate to Christ,
and as the matter of that Evangelical righteousness which is required in this
Constitution [Repent and Believe the Gospel] viz. sincerely.

Treat. page 223. And indeed it is at last confessed, that its faith only that
makes the contract between God and the soul: that good works are not required
to this initial consenting unto Christ, so as to make him ours, but in the
progress. This is that in effect, which the Papists affirm in other words, That
the first Justification is only by faith, but the second by good works.

Answ. How would you have your Reader understand these two insinuations? 1.
Have I so often asserted that which you call my Confession, and put it into an
Index of distinctions, least it should be over-lookt, and told you as much so
long ago in private writings, and do you now come out with an [Its at last
confessed.] I hope you would not intimate that ever I denied it: or that ever I
wrote Book of that subject, wherein I did not expressly aver it. But then
(that you think not better of me then I deserve) I must tell you, that when I
still excluded works from our begun Justification, it was external Obedience,
and not Repentance, nor those acts of faith (even the Receiving Christ as Lord
and Teacher) which those that oppose me call works.

2. If you take it but for an argument to convince such as I, that [ the
Papists hold it: Ergo* etc.] I must complain that it is uneffectual: But if you
intend it for another effect on other persons, viz. to affright them with the
sound of so horrid a name, or drive them away by the slink of it, then you may
possibly attain your ends. But you should have attempted it only by truth. Is
it true, that [this is that in effect, which the Papists affirm in other
words?] Yea is it not a notorious truth, that it is quite another thing which
the Papists affirm in somewhat like words? 1. The world knows that the Papists
by the first Justification, mean the first infusion of renewing special grace.
2. And that by the second Justification, they mean, the adding of further
degrees of Sanctification, or actuating that which before was given. 3. That
they hold, faith justifies in the first Justification constitutive. 4. And
that works or holiness justify constitutive in the second Justification, even
as Albedo facit album, vel doctrina indita facit doctum. On the other side, I
have told you often privately and publicly, that, 1. By Justification I mean
not Sanctification, nor any Physical, but a Relative change. 2. That by first
and second, I mean not two states, or works, but the same state and works as
begun, and as continued. 3. That faith justifies neither constitutive and
inhaerenter, nor as any cause, but as a Receiving Condition. 4. And that works
of external obedience are but a dispositive condition, and an exclusion of that
ingratitude that would condemn. And now judge on second thoughts, whether you
here speak the words of Truth or Equity.

Treat. ib. Against this general exclusion of all works, is opposed ver. 4.
where the Apostle says, To him that works the Reward is of debt; from whence
they gather that works only which are debts, are excluded.

Answ. I never used or heard such a collection. All good works are debts to
God; but our collection is, that works which are supposed by men to make the
reward of Debt, and not of Grace, are excluded.

Treat. But if this be seriously thought on, it makes strongly against them;
for the Apostles Argument is a Genere: if it be by works, its of Debt:
therefore there are not works of Debt, and works of no Debt.

Answ. 1. If the Apostle argue a Genere, then he argues not from an Equivocal
term; and therefore of no works but what fall under his Genus. 2. And the
Apostles Genus cannot be any thing merely Physical, because his subject and
discourse is moral: and therefore it is not every act that he excludes. 3. Nor
can it be every Moral Act that is his Genus: but only Works in the notion that
he uses the word; that is, All such Works as Workmen do for hire, who expect
to receive wages for the worth or desert of their works.

I shall therefore here confute your assertion, and shall prove that All works
do not make the Reward to be of Debt, and not of Grace: and consequently that
Paul means not either every Act, or every Moral Act, here; but only works
supposed Rewardable for their value! (What you mean by Works of Debt, and Works
not of Debt, I know not: they are not Scripture words, nor my words; For still
I say, All Good works are of Debt to God from man.)

Argument 1. Ex natura rei; There are many Moral Acts that make not the Reward
from men to be of Debt, and not of Grace: Much less will such Works make the
Reward from God to be of Debt, and not of Grace. The Consequence is grounded on
these two or three Reasons. 1. God is infinitely above us; and therefore less
capable of being obliged by our works then man. 3. God is our absolute
Proprietary, and we are wholly his; and therefore we can give him nothing but
his own. 3. God is our Supreme Rector, and we are bound to a perfect fulfilling
of his Law: and we are sinners that have broak that Law, and deserve eternal
death: therefore we are less capable of obliging him by our works as our
Debtor, then of obliging men (and indeed incapable.) 4. Gods Reward is Eternal
Glory, and man's is but some transitory thing: therefore we are less capable of
making God our Debtor for Justification and Salvation, then man for a trifle.
This proves the Consequence.

Now the Antecedent I prove by Instances. 1. If a man be ready to drown in the
water, and you offer to help him out, if he will lay hold of your hand: this
act of his is Actus humanus vel moralis, and yet makes not the deliverance to
be of Debt, and not of Grace. 2. If a man be in prison for Debt and you ransom
him, and offer him deliverance on condition he will but consent to come forth
on the account of your Ransom: this moral Action makes not his Deliverance to
be of Debt, and not of Grace. 3. If a man be condemned for Treason, and upon
Ransom made, you procure and offer him a pardon, on condition he will take it,
or if you say, If you will give me thanks for it, or take it thankfully; or, If
also you confess your Treason; or, If also you crave pardon of the Prince; or,
If also you confess me your benefactor; or, If also you will profess your
purpose to take up rebellions arms no more; or, If also you will openly profess
the Princes Sovereignty, and renounce the Leaders of the Rebels, whom you have
followed; Upon any one, or on all these conditions, you shall have a free and
full pardon; without any cost or suffering of your own. Do you think that any
of these do make the pardon to be of Debt, and not of Grace? 4. If you give a
man a Lordship on condition he take it as a free Gift from you, and pay you
yearly a grain of sand, or do some act of homage (as to say I thank you) which
has in it no consideration of value, but only of acknowledgment of dependence,
does this make your Gift to be not of Grace? 5. If you give a beggar a piece of
gold, on condition he will take it, and put off his hat, and say, I thank you.
I will not believe, that any of these Acts do make the Reward to be not of
Grace. But if you bid them, Go and do me so many days work for it, importing
somewhat profitable or valuable for yourself, then the case is altered.

Argument 2. Those works which a man cannot be justified without, make not the
Reward to be of debt and not of Grace: But there are some works that a man
cannot be justified without, Jam. 2.24. Matthew 12.37. what ever they be, some
they are.

Argument 3. Those works which a man cannot be saved without, make not the
Reward to be of Debt and not of Grace. But there are some works that we cannot
be saved without. Therefore there are some works that make not the Reward of
Debt and not of Grace.

The Major is proved by the express exclusion of works in this sense, from
salvation: both as begun, and as consummate, 2 Timothy 1.9. who has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but his own purpose
and grace, etc. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. For by Grace ye are saved, through faith, and
not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should
boast, Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Not by works of Righteousness which we have done, but
according to his Mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration and the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, -- that being justified by his Grace, we should be
made Heirs according to the hope of eternal life, Romans 6.23. For the wages of
sin is death, but the Gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord,] Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, Mat. 25.34. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, etc.] whence
Expositors conclude against works.

The Minor may be proved by an hundred texts, Mat. 25.35. For I was hungry,
etc. Rev. 22.12. and 2.23. Mark 13.34. Rev. 20.13. Jam. 2 14. 1 Pet. 1.17. He
will judge every man according to his works, etc.

Argument 4. Those works which Grace commands, and causes the Godly to
perform, do not make the Reward to be not of Grace, but of debt. But there are
some such works. Ergo, etc.

The Major is evident: What Saint dare say, that he has a work that makes not
the Reward of Grace, especially when it is a work of Grace?

The Minor is as true as Scripture is true, 2 Cor. 9.8. Col. 1.10. 2 Thessalonians.
2.17. 2 Timothy 2.21. Tit. 3.1. Heb. 13.21. Mat. 5.16. Heb. 10.24. 1 Pet. 2.12.
Tit. 2.14. and 3.8, 14. Ephesians. 2.10. etc. -- Dare any say that God has not
commanded good works? or yet, that he has commanded us in the Gospel, so to
work that the Reward may not be of grace, but debt? Will any say that the
Saints do no good works? or else that they do such good works as make the
Reward to be not of Grace but of debt? I hope not.

Argument 5. Repentance is a moral Act: Repentance makes not the Reward to be
of debt, and not of grace: therefore there are some works that make not the
Reward to be not of grace, but of Debt. The same I say of Faith it self, and
other Acts.

But perhaps some one else will object, that though its true that there be such
works, yet they have no Interest in the business of our Justification, and
therefore Paul does hence exclude them. Answer. First, It sufficed to my last
purpose to prove that there are works which will not bear his description, and
therefore are not they that he means. Secondly, But that those other works have
some Interest in the business of our Justification, I have proved in the
beginning. Repentance has the promise of Pardon: so has faith, etc. But I Will
not unseasonably here digress to this, but refer you to what is said before and
after, and elsewhere more at large.

Argu. 6. In ver. 5. the opposite term [he that works not] does not signify
him that performs no moral act. Therefore in the fourth verse, [he that
worketh] does not signify him that does perform any moral act. The consequence
is undeniable from the evident immediate opposition, between him that works,
and him that works not. The Antecedent I prove, First, From the words of the
Text, which mention one act, even believing, as opposite to working, and
employed in, or consistent with not working. [To him that works not, but
believes.] Secondly, Because else it would subvert the Gospel. What sense
would you make of it if you should interpret this and such texts as this of all
moral Acts? Such as Christian ears would abhor. If [working] be the Genus, and
the Text will hold as extended to Believing, Repenting, etc. as the species,
and that even in their due Evangelical notion: Let us try them a little in such
an Exposition. ver. 4, 5. [to him that works, that is, Repents, Believes,
etc. the Reward is not of Grace, but of Debt. But to him that works not,
(that is, that Repents not, Loves not God* Desires not Christ or Grace,
believes not in Christ,) but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith (supposing he have it not) is imputed to him for righteousness.] Is this
a sweet and Christian sense? If we should run over an hundred such Texts by
such an Interpretation, you would hear no sweeter Melody.

Let us hear some modern Expositors, (for I will give you no thanks to grant me
the Ancients, without citing them)

1. Calvin, (that excellent Expositor) says thus [Optrantem vocat qui s^is
meritis aliquid promeratur: non operantem, cui nihil debetur operum merito.
Neque enim fideles vult esse ignavos; sed tantum Mercenarios esse vetat, qui a
Deo quicquam reposcant, quasi jure Debitum.] Is not this one of the
Opinionists, that so far joyneth with the Socinians and Papists?

2. Bullinger (and Marlorate citing him) makes the Apostle to argue thus [ Si
quis sit qui promereatur aliquid opere suo, res promerita, non imputatur illi
gratis; sed ut debita redditur: Fides reputatur in justitiam, non quod aliquod
tale promereamur, sed quia Domini bonitatem apprehendimus. Ergo, etc.

3. Beza: Atqui ei qui operatur, (...): Id est, ei qui ex opore sit aliquid
promeritus. Cui opponitur, (...), qui non operatur, id est, qui opus nullum
adfert cujus mercadem flagitet, sed gratuita Dei promissione nititur --
Justificatio enim gratiae est in Christo, ista vero Meriti est in nobis.

4. Piscator in Schol. Sic argumentatur Paulus: Ei qui operibus meretur, merces
non imputatur. ver. 4. Atqui Abrahamo justitia fuit imputata; ver. 3. Ergo
Abrahamus justitiam non est meritus operibus.

5. Peter Martyr also is a down right Opinionist; In loc. page (mihi) 168. Et
cum audimus a Paulo, Operanti and non operanti, nequaquam sic accipere debemus,
quasi illi qui crodant non operentur. Nam de illa tantum operations loguitur,
qua moreamur, ant mereri velimus Justitiam. Etherl^^^ consideratu dignum, est,
quod apud Theologos sehelasticos jam inveteravit us dicant meritum a Paulo
appellari debitum: Quare cum hic Paulus a Justificatione debitum auferet,
necessario* etiam tollit meritum, si proprie ac vere de illo velimus loqui.

6. Aretius in loc. Tertium Argumentum ex vi relativorum, opera postulant
mercedem suo jure, ac debito non ex gratia, sed Abrahamo justitia debito, non
sao jure, sed ex gratia est collata: Ergo, etc. -- ver. 5. Nam si opera non
opus fuisset imputatione, sed tanquam (...) postulasset meritorum suorum
debitum mercedem.

7. Anton. Faeyus in loc. Argumentatur Apostollus ex locati and conduct^ inter
homines recepto jure: qui enim locat operam suam, pasciscitur cum conductore,
ut congruens operae pretium ipsi numeretur: adeo ut non obtineat mercedem
gratis, sed ex operae cum ipsa mercede (...) -- Argumentum ergo est a
disparatis: sunt enim disparata merces and donum, ut and operans and non
operans. Operans accipit mercedem debitam: non operaens accipit donum. Est enim
inter Deum and homines (...) illa quae est inter donantem, and donatarium. --
Quod ad nomen mercedis spectat, apparet illam duplicom esse: nempe mercedem
debitam ex proportione operae cum re, per proportionem Geometricam: ut cum
operario pro diurna opera datur quod aequum est, ex mutuo stipulatu. (This he
thinks is here meant). A lia merces est non debita, sed gratuita: estque
tanquam fructus vel commodum quoddam -- (This he thinks not here meant.)

Operantem vocat illum qui legis operibus Justitiam venatur: non quod unquam
ullus extiterit qui sic operatus est, ut mercedem debitam merito possit
postulare, sed ex hypothesi loquitur, hoc modo; siquis operaretur ut decet,
mercedem debitam posset exigere.

8. Dav. Paraeus in loc. Explicat quid sit fidem imputari pro justitia: minime
videlicet idem quod actum vel opus fidei suo merito reputari pro justitia (sic
enim nihil confecissit,) sed credenti iustitiam ex gratia imputari nullo merito
aut debito -- Operantem non vocat cum qui bona opera facit, sed qui bonis
operibus confidit, justitiam quarit, seu qui operatur debitae mercedis causa.
Nam and credentes been operantur, non vero ut Mercenarii: nec operibus
Justitiam and vitam mereri volunt. Qui enim sic operatur excluditur a gratia,
etc. -- Ita, inquit res habet inter homines: qui laborat pro mercede, in vinea,
militia, ruri, vel domi, ei merces per acto labor non imputatur vel donatur ex
gratia, sed redditur ex debito ut meritum; idque ex ordine justitiae (...) quae
sancit aequalitatem Arithmeticam laboris and mercedis. Talis enim labor est
meritum, opus indebitum, mercedem ex indebita faciens debitam propter
justitiam. -- Abrahae igitur promissa and imput^tio fuit justitiae merces,
nullo operum merito, sed mera gratia. -- Qui vero non operatur, nempe pro
mercede, h. e. qui non quaerit Justi^iam operum meritis.

9. Dr. Willet in loc Q. 12. By him that works is understood, him that
works with an intent thereby to merit or to be justified: For he that
believes also works; but he is said, not to work secundum quid, because he
does it not to the end to merit by.

10. Dav. Dickson in loc. Ratio 3. Mercenario operanti, seu Justitiam ex
operibus quaerenti, merces non potest esse gratuita, sed ex debito seu merito
retribuenda est.

11. Cartwright cont. Rhem. in loc. For if the Reward should be given according
to works, God should be a Debtor unto man: But it is absurd to make God a
Debtor to man. 2. He speaks not of that Reward that ignorant men challenge to
themselves; but of the Reward that God should in justice give, if men had
deseerved it by their works.

12. Hemi^gius (even a Lutheran) supposes the Argument to be thus. Imputatio
gratuita non est operantis merces: justitia credentis est imputatio gratuita:
ergo justitia credentis non est operantis merces. Major probatur per
contrarium; Merces operanti, id est, ei qui aliquid operibus promeretur, datur
ex debito. -- Probatio haec per concessionem Rhetoricam intelligenda est.
Nequaquam enim Paulus sentit, quod quisquam ex debito fiat justus revera, sed
quae sit natura rerum indicat -- Imputare est aliquid gratia confer, non ex
debito tribuere. -- Merces proprie est quod debebatur ex merito: hoc est.
Debiti solutio.

Yea in his blow at the Majorists he confesses the truth [8. Evertitur little
dogma, qui clamant, opera necessaria ad salutem, quae salus cum a
Justificatione separari nequit, non habet alias causas aut merita, quam ipsa
Justificatio. Hoc tamen fatendum est, quod opera necessario requirantur in
Justificatis, ut iter intermedium, non ut causa aut merita.

13. Mich. Ragerus (a Lutheran) in loc. Imputatio fidei opponitur imputationi
ex merito; imputatio fidei fit secundum gratiam: E. fides in negotio
Justificationis, non consideratur ut opus morale: quid enim per modum operis
imputatur, secundum debitum and meritorie imputatur -- [Et qui operatur] sive
operans renatus sit, sive non, dummodo ea intention operetur, ecque fine, ut
mercedem reportet and opera sua censorio Dei judicio opposita velit.

14. In like manner Georg Calixtus (a Lutheran) in loc. page 26.28, etc.

To these I might add many other Protestant Expositors, and the votes of
abundance of Polemical Divines, who tell the Papists that in Paul's sense its
all one [to be justified by works: to be justified by the Law: and to be
justified by merits.]

But this much may suffice for the vindication of that Text, and to prove that
all works do not make the Reward to be of Debt* and not of Grace, but only
meritorious mercenary works, and not those of gratitude, etc. beforenamed.

Treat. ibid. [ The second Argument may be from the peculiar and express
difference that the Scripture gives between faith and other graces, in respect
of Justification. So that faith and good works are not to be considered as
concurrent in the same manner, though one primarily, the other secondarily: so
that if faith when its said to Justify, does it not as a condition, but in
some other peculiar notion, which works are not capable of, then we are not
Justified by works as well as faith. Now its not lightly to be passed over that
the Scripture still uses a peculiar expression of faith, which is
incommunicable to other graces. Thus Romans 3.25. Remission of sins is through
faith in his blood, Romans 4.5. Faith is counted for Righteousness, Romans 5.1.
Galatians ^.16. etc.

Answer. First, This is nothing to the Question, and deserves no further
answer. The Question is not now whether faith and works justify in the same
manner: that's but a consequent (rightly explained) of another thing in
question; your self has here made it the question, whether Works be Conditions
of Justification? And that which I affirmed is before explained. I grant, that
if faith justify not as a condition, but proxime in any other respect, then
Faith and Repentance, etc. justify not in the same manner: so that the
sameness of their Interest in the general notion of a condition, supposes
faith to be a condition; but if you can prove that it is not, I shall grant the
difference which you prove. Now it is not our question here, whether faith be a
condition, or an Instrument; but whether other works (as you choose to call
them) or humane acts be conditions.

Secondly, Scripture takes not faith in the same sense as my Opposers do, when
it gives it the peculiar expressions that you mention. Faith in Paul's sense, is
a Belief in Jesus Christ (in all the respects essential to his person and
office) and so a hearty Acceptance of him for our Teacher, Lord and Savior;
(Savior I say both from the guilt and power of sin) and as one that will lead
us by his word and spirit into Possession of eternal Glory which he has
purchased.] So that it includes many acts of Assent, and a Love to our
Savior, and desire of him; and it implies self-denial, and renouncing our own
righteousness, and all other Saviors, and a sense of our sin and misery, at
least, Antecedents or concomitants; and sincere Affiance and Obedience in
gratitude to our Redeemer, as necessary consequents: And this faith is set by
Paul, in opposition to the bare doing of the works of Moses Law (and
consequently of any other works with the same intention) as separated from
Christ who was the end and life of it, or at least, coordinate with him; and
so as the immediate matter of a legal Righteousness; and consequently as
mercenary, and valuable in themselves, or meritorious of the Reward. This is
Paul's faith. But the faith disputed for by my Opponents, is the Act of
recumbency or Affiance on Christ at Justifier or Priest, which they call the
Apprehension of Christ's righteousness; and this as opposed to the Acceptance of
Christ as our Teacher* and King* our Husband, Head, etc. (further then these
contain his Priesthood:) and opposed to Repentance, to the love of our Savior,
to denying our own righteousness, confessing our sins, and confessing Christ to
be our only Savior, Thankfulness for free grace, etc. all which are called
works by these men, and excluded from being so much as Conditions attending
faith in our Justification or Remission of sin.

The case may be opened by this similitude. A Physician comes to a populous
City in an Epidemical Plague: There is none can escape without his help: he is a
stranger to them, and they have received false informations and apprehensions
of him that he is but a mountebank and deceiver; though indeed he came of
purpose in love and compassion to save their lives, having a most costly
receipt which will certainly cure them. He offers himself to be their
Physician, and freely to give them his Antidote, and to cure and save them, if
they will but consent, that is, if they will take him for their Physician, and
thankfully take his medicine; His enemies dissuade the people from believing in
him, and tell them that he is a Deceiver, and that if they will but stir
themselves, and work, and use such diet and medicines as they tell them of,
they shall do better without him; and a third party that seem to be friends,
tell them, though you do take him for your Physician yet must you work your
self to health, and take those other medicines as well as his, if you will be
cured. But the Physician says, its only your trusting in me that can cure you.
Now here we are at a loss in the interpreting of his conditions. Some say, that
they must be cured barely by believing or trusting in him, and not by taking
his person in the full relation of a Physician, or at least, not by taking his
medicine, which they abhor, nor by exercising or sweating upon it, or observing
the diet and directions which he gives them. But I rather interpret him thus;
in requiring you to take him for your Physician, it is employed, that you must
take his medicines, how bitter soever, and that you must order your selves
according to his directions, and must not take cold, nor eat or drink that
which he forbids you; for though it be only his precious medicine that can
cure you, yet if you will take those things that are destructive to you, it may
hinder the working of it, and an ill diet or disordered life may kill you. The
working therefore that he excluded, was not this employed observance of his
directions, but your own Receipts and Labourings, as abovesaid.

3. I further answer to your observation, that the same Scripture that says,
[We are justified by faith] does also say, that Except ye Repent, ye shall all
perish. Luke 13.3, 5. And Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins, Acts 2.38. and mentions the
Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sin; and joyneth the preaching of
Repentance and Remssion, Luke 24.47. Repent and be Converted, that your sins
may be blotted out, etc. Luke 6.37. Forgive and it shall be forgiven you, Jam.
5.15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick -- and if he have committed sins
they shall be forgiven him, Mat. 6.14, 15. If you forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will forgive you; but if you forgive not, etc. Mark 11.11,
25. Forgive, that your Father may forgive you. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, etc. Isa. 55.6, 7, etc.
And he that says, We are Justified by faith, says also, that [ by works a man
is justified, and not by faith only;] and that [by our words we shall be
justified.]

4. Lastly, to your argument from the peculiar attributions to faith, I say,
that we do accordingly give it its prerogative, as far as those attributions do
direct us, and would do more, if it were not for fear of contradicting the
Scripture.

Treat. page 224. From these expressions it is that our Orthodox Divines say,
that faith justifies as it is an Instrument, laying hold on Christ, etc. ad
page 226.

Answ. Though I could willingly dispatch with one man at once, yet because it
is the matter more then the person, that must be considered, I must crave your
Patience as to the Answering of this Paragraph, till I come to the Dispute
about faiths Instrumentality, to which it does belong, that so I may not
trouble the present Dispute by the Interposition of another.

Treat. page 226 The third Argument is, If in the continuance and progress of
our Justification we are justified after the same manner we were at first, then
its not by faith and works, but by faith only as distinct to works, Romans 1.17.
Galat. 3.11. --

Answ. 1. I grant the whole, understanding faith and works as Paul does, but
not as you do.

2. By [the same manner] either you mean, [the same specifically (as specified
from the Covenant and Object) as distinct from Jewish Righteousness, or from
all false ways, or all Mercenary meritorious works (so intended), or any
manner that is not subordinate to Christ, and employed in Believing.] And thus
your Antecedent is true, and your Consequence (in your sense of faith and
works) is false; Or else you mean [the same manner] in opposition to any
additional act employed in our first believing as its necessary Consequent.] And
thus your Minor or Antecedent is false. If you will not believe me, believe
your self, who as flatly spoke the contrary Doctrine, as ever I did, being not
as it seems in every Lecture of the same thoughts; page 118. you write it for
observation in a different Character, thus [For though holy works do not
justify, yet by them a man is continued in a state of Justification: so that
did not the Covenant of grace interpose, gross and wicked ways would out off
our Justification, and put us in a state of Condemnation.] But because you may
avoid your own authority at pleasure many ways, I shall give you a better
authority that cannot be avoided.

1. In our first Justification, we were not justified by our words: but in our
last Justification at Judgment we shall, Mat. 12.36, 37. therefore they so far
differ in the manner.

2. In our first Justification we were not justified by our works; but
afterward we are, in some sense, or else James spoke not by the Spirit of God,
Jam. 2.24. The Major is plain, in that the works of Abraham, Rahab and such
like, that James speaks of, were not existent at their first Justification.

3. In our first Justification we are not Judged, (and so Justified) according
to our works. But in the last we are: therefore they differ in the manner.

4. In our first Justification we are not justified by the mouth of the Judge,
in presence passing a final irreversible sentence on us: but in the last we
are: therefore they differ in the manner.

5. Our first pardon is not given us on condition of our first forgiving
others: but the continuance is, Matthew. 18.35. and 6.14, 15.

6. Our first pardon is not given us if we confess our sins: (For we may be
pardoned without that): but the renewed or continued pardon is, if we be called
to it, 1 John 1.9.

7. Reconciliation and final Justification is given to us in title, If we
continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope
of the Gospel, etc. Col. 1.23.

8. In our first Believing we take Christ in the Relation of a Savior, and
Teacher, and Lord, to save us from all sin, and to lead us to glory. This
therefore imports that we accordingly submit unto him, in those his
Relations, as a necessary means to the obtaining of the benefits of the
Relations. Our first faith is our Contract with Christ, or Acceptance of him as
our Savior: And all contracts of such nature, do impose a necessity of
performing what we consent to and promise, in order to the benefits. To take
Christ for my Savior, is to take him to save me, viz. from the power and guilt
of sin; therefore if I will not be saved by him when I have done, but had
rather keep my sin, then I did but nominally and hypocritically take him for my
Savior. To take him for my Teacher and become his Disciple, imports my
Learning of him, as necessary to the benefit.

And in humane contracts it is so. Barely to take a Prince for her husband may
entitle a woman to his honors and lands: But conjugal fidelity is also
necessary for the continuance of them: for Adultery would cause a divorce.
Consent and listing may make a man your Soldier: but obedience and service is
as necessary to the Continuance, and the Reward. Consent may make a man your
servant, without any service, and so give him entertainment in your family. But
if he do not actually serve you, these shall not be continued, nor the wages
obtained. Consent may enter a Scholar into your School: but if he will not
Learn of you, he shall not be continued there. For all these after-violations
cross the ends of the Relations. Consent may make you the subject of a Prince,
but obedience is necessary to the continuance of your Privileges. All
Covenants usually tie men to somewhat which is to be performed to the full
attainment of their ends. The Covenant-making may admit you, but its the
Covenant-keeping that must continue you in your privileges, and perfect them.
See more in my Confess. page 47.

3. But I further answer you, that according to the sense of your party, of the
terms [faith and works] I deny your consequence: For with them [Faith] is
[Works]: And though in Paul's sense we are not at all justified by works; and in
James his sense we are not at first justified by works: Yet in the sense of
your party, we are justified by works even at first. For the Accepting of
Christ for our King and Prophet, is Works with them: and this is Paul's faith,
by which he and all are justified. Repentance is works with them: And this is
one of Gods Conditions of our pardon. The Love and Desire of Christ our Savior
is works with them: but this is part of the faith that Paul was justified by.
The like I may say of many acts of Assent, and other acts.

Treat. Lect. 24. p. 227. Argu. 4. He that is justified by fulfilling a
Condition, though he be thereunto enabled by grace, yet he is just and
righteous in himself: But all justified persons, as to Justification, are not
righteous in themselves, but in Christ their Surety and Mediator.

Answ. 1. If this were true in your unlimited latitude, Inherent Righteousness
were the certainest evidence of damnation. For no man that had inherent
Righteousness, i. e. Sanctification, could be justified or saved. But I am loath
to believe that.

2. This Argument does make as much against them that take Faith to be the
Condition of Justification, and so look to be justified by it as a Condition,
as against them that make Repentance or Obedience the Condition: And it
concludes them all excluders of the true and only Justification. I am loath to
dissent from you: but I am loather to believe that all those are unjustified,
that take faith for the Condition of Justification. They are hard Conclusions
that your Arguments infer.

3. Righteousness in a man's self is either Qualitaetive, or Relative, called
imputed. As to the later, I maintain that all the justified are Righteous in
themselves by an Imputed Relative Righteousness, merited for them by Christ,
and given to them. And this belief I will live and die in be the grace of God.
Qualitative (and Active) Righteousness is threefold. 1. That which answers the
Law of works, [Obey perfectly and live.] 2. That which answers the bare letter
of Moses Law, (without Christ the sense and end) which required an operous task
of duty, with a multitude of sacrifices for pardon of failings, (which were to
be effectual only through Christ whom the unbelieving Jews understood not.) 3.
That righteousness which answers the Gospel imposition Repent and Believe. As
to the first of these, A righteousness fully answering the Law of nature. I
yield your Minor, and deny your Major. A man may be justified by fulfilling the
condition of the Gospel which gives us Christ to be our Righteousness to
answer the Law, and yet not have any such righteousness qualitative in himself,
as shall answer that Law. Nay it necessarily implies that he has none: For
what need he to perform a Condition, for obtaining such a Righteousness by free
gift from another, if he had it in himself. And as to the second sort of
Righteousness, I say, that it is but a nominal righteousness, consisting in a
conformity to the Letter without the sense and end, and therefore can justify
none: besides that none fully have it. So that the Mosaeical Righteousness, so
far as is necessary to men, is to be had in Christ, and not in themselves. But
the performance by themselves of the Gospel Condition, is so far from hindering
us from that gift, that without it none can have it. But then as to the third
sort of righteousness qualitative, I answer, He that performs the Gospel
Condition of Repenting and Believing himself, is not therefore Righteous in
himself with that righteousness qualitative which answers the Law of works.
But he that performs the said Gospel Conditions, is Righteous in himself. 1.
Qualitatively and actively, with that righteousness which answers the Gospel
Constitution, [ He that believes shall be saved, etc.] which is but a
particular Righteousness, by a Law of Grace, subordinated to the other as the
Condition of a free gift. 2. And Relatively, by the Righteousness answering the
Law of Works, as freely given by Christ on that Condition. This is evident,
obvious, necessary, irrefragable truth, and will be so after all opposition.

Treat. page 228. Yea I think if it be well weighed, it will be found to be a
contradiction, to say they are Conditions, and yet a Causa sine qua non of our
Justification; for a causa sine qua non, is no Cause at all: but a Condition in
a Covenant strictly taken, has a Moral efficiency, and is a Causa cum qua, not
a sine qua non.

Answ. 1. You do but think so; and that is no cogent Argument. I think
otherwise, and so you are answered. 2. And Lawyers think otherwise, (as is
before showed, and more might be) and so you are over-answered. A Condition qua
talis (which is the strictest acception) is no Cause at all; though the matter
of it may be meritorious, among men, and so causal. If you will not believe me,
nor Lawyers, nor custom of speech, then remember at least what it is that I
mean by a Condition, and make not the difference to lie where it does not.
Think not your self sounder in matter of Doctrine, but only in the sense of the
Word [Condition]; but yet do somewhat first to prove that too; viz. that a
Condition as such, has a moral efficiency. Prove that if you are able.

Treat. ib. If Adam had stood in his integrity, though that confirmation would
have been of grace, yet his works would have been a causall Condition of the
blessedness promised. In the Covenant of Grace, though what man does is by the
gift of God, yet look upon the same gift as our duty, and as a Condition, which
in our persons is performed, This infers some Moral Efficiency.

Answ. 1. See then all you that are accounted Orthodox, the multitude of
Protestant Divines that have made either Faith or Repentance Conditions, what a
case you have brought your selves into. And rejoice then all you that have
against them maintained that the Covenant of Grace has on our part no
Conditions; for your Cause is better then some have made you believe: and in
particular, this Reverend Author. Yea see what a case he has argued himself
into, while he has argued you out of the danger that you were supposed in: For
he himself writes against those that make Repentance to be but a sign, and
deny it to be a Condition to qualify the subject for Justification. Treat. of
Iustif. part. 1. Lect. 20. And he says that in some gross sins there are many
Conditions requisite (besides humiliation) without which pardon of sin cannot
be obtained: and instanceth in restitution. page 210. with many the like
passages.

2. Either you mean that Adams works would have been Causall quatenus a
Condition performed, or else quatenus meritorious ex natura materia, or some
other cause: The first I still deny, and is it that you should prove, and not
go on with naked affirmations: The second I will not yield you, as to the
notion of meritorious, though it be nothing to our question. The same I say of
your later instance of Gospel Conditions. Prove them morally efficient, qua
tales, if you can.

Treat. ib. And so, though in words they deny, yet in deed they do exalt works
to some kind of causality.

Answ. I am persuaded you speak not this out of malice: but is it not as unkind
and unjust, as if I should persuade men, that you make God the Author of sin
indeed, though you deny it in words? 1. What be the Deeds that you know my mind
by to be contrary to my words? Speak out, and tell the world, and spare me not.
But if it be words that you set against words. 1. Why should you not believe my
Negations, as well as my (supposed) affirmations. Am I credible only when I
speak amiss, and not at all when I speak right? A charitable judgementi 2. And
which should you take to be indeed my sense? A naked term [Condition] expounded
by you that never saw my heart? and therefore know not how I understand it,
further then I tell you; Or rather my express explication of that term in a
sense contrary to your supposition. ^ear all you that are impartial, and judge:
I say [A Condition is no Cause] and [Faith and Repentance are Conditions]. My
Reverend Brother tells you now, that in word I deny them to be efficient
Causes, but in deed I make them such, viz. I make them to be what I deny them
to be. Judge between us, as you see cause. Suppose I say that [Scripture is
Sacred] and withal I add that by Sacred, I mean that which is related to God,
as proceeding from him, and separated to him: and I plead Etymology, and the
Authority of Authors, and Custom for my speech. If my Reverend Brother now will
contradict me only as to the fitness of the word, and say that sacer signifies
only execrabilis, I will not be offended with him, though I will not believe
him: but should so good and wise a man proclaim in print, that sacer signifies
only execrabilis, and therefore that though in word I call Scripture Sacred,
yet in deed I make it execrable, I should say this were unkind dealing. What!
plainly to say that a Verbal controversy is a Real one; and that contrary to
my frequent published professions! What is this but to say Whatever he says, I
know his heart to be contrary. Should a man deal so with your self now, he has
somewhat to say for it: For you first profess Repentance and Restitution to be
a Condition (as I do) and when you have done, profess Conditions to have a
Moral Efficiency (which I deny): But what is this to me, that am not of your
mind?

Treat. page 229. A fifth Argument is that which so much sounds in all Books.
If good works be the effect and fruit of our Justification, then they cannot be
Conditions, or Causa sine qua non of our Justification. But, etc.

Answ. 1. I deny the Minor in the sense of your party; Our first Repentance,
our first desire of Christ as our Savior, and Love to him as a Savior, and
our first disclaiming of all other Saviors, and our first accepting him as
Lord and Teacher, and as a Savior from the Power of sin, as well as the guilt;
all these are works with you; and yet all these are not the effects of our
Relative Justification; nor any of them.

2. As to External acts and Consequent internal acts, I deny your Consequence,
taking it of continued or final Justification; though I easily yield it as to
our Justification at the first. 1. All the acts of justifying faith, besides
the first act, are as truly effects of our first Justification as our other
graces or gracious acts are. And does it therefore follow that they can be no
Conditions of our continued Justification? Why not Conditions as well as
Instruments or Causes? Do you think that only the first instantaneous act of
faith does justify, and no other after through the course of our lives? I
prove the contrary from the instance of Abraham: It was not the first act of
his faith that Paul mentions when he proves from him Justification by faith.
As its no good Consequence [Faith afterward is the effect of Justification
before; therefore it cannot afterward justify, or be a Condition.] So its no
good Consequence as to Repentance, Hope, or Obedience, 2. It only follows that
they cannot be the Condition of that Justification whereof they are the effect,
and which went before them (which is granted you.) But it follows not that they
may not be the Condition of continued or final Justification. Sucking the
breast, did not cause life in the beginning: therefore it is not a means to
continue it: It follows not. You well teach that the Justification at the
last Judgment is the chief and most eminent Justification. This has more
Conditions then your first pardon of sin had, yea as many as your salvation
has, as has been formerly proved, and may be proved more at large.

Treat page 230. By this we may see that more things are required to our
Salvation, then to our Justification; to be possessors of heaven, and (than it
should be) to entitle us thereto.

Answ. 1. Its true, as to our first Justifying; and its true as to our present
continued state: because perseverance is still requisite to salvation. But its
not true as to our final sentential Justification: There is as much on our part
required to that, as to salvation it self. 1. The promise makes no difference.
2. The nature of the thing does put it past doubt. For what is our final
Justification, but a Determination of the Question by public sentence, on our
side, Whether we have Right to salvation or not? The 25. of Matthew shows the
whole.

2. I argue against you from your own Doctrine here, thus; If Justification be
it that gives us Right or Title to salvation, then that which is the Condition
of our Right to salvation, is the Condition of our Justification: the
Antecedent here is your own Doctrine, and is partly true: And the Consequence
is undeniable; whereto I add, [But the Doing of Christ's Commandments is the
Condition of our Right to salvation: therefore also of our Right to
Justification, viz. as Consummate. The Minor I prove, from Rev. 22.14. Blessed
are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the tree of
life, and may enter in, etc.] Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord
shall be saved, Romans 10.13. Acts 2.21. We are saved by hope, Romans 8.24. Who so
walks uprightly shall be saved, Prove. 28.18. Baptism does save us, 1 Pet.
3.21. [In doing this thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.] 1 Timothy 4.16. If he [have not works, can faith save him?] James 2.14.

Treat. ib. Its true, that Justification cannot be continued in a man, unless
he continue in good works: Yet for all that, they are not Conditions of his
Justification: they are Qualifications and Determinations of tht subject who is
justified; but no Conditions of his Justification. As in the generation of man,
etc. Light is necessarily required, and dryness, as qualties in fire, yet, etc.

Answ. 1. Its well you once more confess that the thing is necessary! Our
question then is only of the nature, and reason of that necessity? Whether it
be necessitas medii ad finem, as to the continuance or consummation of our
Justification? This I hope you will never deny. If medii, then what medium is
it? not a cause. If not a condition, then tell us what, if you can.

Secondly, You say nothing to the purpose, when you give us Instances of
Natural properties and qualifications. For besides that some of them are not
media (as Light to burning) the rest that are media, are Physically necessary
ad finem: But First, We are not discoursing of Physics, and Physical
necessities: but of Morals, and moral necessity. Secondly, You cannot here
pretend (or at least prove) that there is an absolute Physical necessity ad
finem to every one of the things in question to their end. Thirdly, Much less
that this is the nearest reason of their Interest, and that God has not
morally superadded the necessity of a Condition by his Constitution.

I prove that the necessity is moral. First, It is imposed by way of Precept,
which causes a moral necessity. Secondly, The Precept has varied at the
pleasure of God, there being more Duties now, then formerly were, and some
ceased that were then imposed.

Yea, That its a condition having necessity ad finem, is evident. First,
Because it is the modus promissionis imposed on us by God as Promiser in a
conditional form of words, as necessary to our attaining of the benefit
promised. [ If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy
heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10.9. If you
forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you, etc.] Mat.
64.15. Secondly, And it is not of Physical necessity; for then God could not
save us without it, but by a Miracle. Whereas he saved men before Christ by
believing in a Messiah in general, without beliveing that this Jesus is he, and
without believing that he was actually conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, was crucified, buried, rose again, ascended, etc. And he saves
Infants, that themselves believe not at all; so that when you say it is a
qualification of the subject, you mean either [the subject as justified] and
that is nothing to the business: for then the question is not what Relation our
actions have to that which is past, but to that which is future. Or else you
mean the subject as to be Justified at Judgment, or here to be so continued.
And then the question still remains, whether those qualifications are means
or no means? And if means, of what sort, if not conditions?

Treat. page 231. The sixth Argument: If Justification be by works as a
condition, then one man is more or less Justified then another; and those works
are required to one man's Justification which are not to another, so that there
shall not be two godly men in the world Justified alike. For if faith Justified
as a work, then he that had a stronger faith, would be more Justified then he
that has a weaker.

Answer. First, I grant the conclusion, if you had taken Works in Paul's sense,
for the works of a hirling, or any that are supposed to justify by their value.

Secondly, I deny your first consequence: And I give you the reason of my
denial (I hope a little better then yours for the proof of it) First, It is not
the degree of Repentance or Obedience that is made the Condition of our
continued and final Justification: but the Sincerity. Now the sincerity is the
same thing in one as in another; therefore one is no more justified hereby then
another. Secondly, You might as well say, that different degrees of faith, make
different degrees of Justification. But that is not just, because it lies all
on the sincerity; therefore it is as unjust here for the same reason.

Your Reason is such as I expected not from you. [ For if Faith (say you)
justify as a work] But who says it does justify as a work? Your Reader that
suspecteth nothing, but fair in your words, may think I do; when I have again
and again in terminis disavowed it. And do you think it is a cogent reason
indeed, [If works or faith justify as a condition, there will be various
degrees of Justification: Because if it justify as a work, there will be
various degrees.] The reason of the Consequence is as strange to me, as a
baculo ad angulum. Once more: First, Faith does not justify as a Physical act:
Secondly, Nor as a Moral act, or virtue in general. Thirdly, Nor as a mercenary
meritorious act. Fourthly, But as an act adapted to the object, and specially
fitted to this gracious design, it is chosen to be the condition, and
repentance and self-denial accordingly to attend it. Fifthly, And as the
appointed condition, we are justified by it. Sure therefore it does not
justify as a work. But how they will avoid your consequence that say it
justifies as an Instrument, let them see.

As to your Consequence, I answer* First, That which is absolutely necessary,
is sincere Repentance and sincere Obedience; and this is the same in all.
Secondly, But the matter of both these, viz. the sins repented of, and the
duties of Obedience may differ in many particulars in several persons. One may
not have the same sins to Repent of as another, and one may have some
particular duties more then another: though in the main, all have the same sin
and duty. But this difference is no absurdity, nor strange thing. When Christ
mentions the final Justification of some, Mat. 25. and gives the reason from
their works [ for I was hungry and ye fed me, etc.] I read of none that took it
for an absurdity, because. First, The poor. Secondly, Infants. Thirdly, Those
that dye before they have opportunity, do no such works.

Treat. page 231. The seventh Argument. This Assertion according to the sense
of the late Writers (that are otherwise Orthodox, for I mean not the Socinians)
will bring in a Justification two ways, or make a twofold Justification,
whereof one will be needless. For they grant an Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness in respect of the Law; he fulfilled that, and satisfied Gods
Justice, that the Law cannot accuse us. And besides this, they make an
Evangelical personal Righteousness by our own Evangelical works. Now certainly
this later is wholly superfluous; for if Christ's Righteousness be abundantly
able to satisfy for all that righteousness which the Law requires of us; what
is the matter that it removes not all our Evangelical failings, and supply
that righteousness also? surely this is to make the stars shine, when the Sun
is in its full luster. Thus it may be observed, while men for some seeming
difficulty avoid the good known way of truth, they do commonly bring in
Assertions of far more difficulty to be received. In this case its far more
easy to maintain one single Righteousness, viz. the Obedience of our Lord
Christ, then to make two, etc.

Answ. First, This twofold Righteousness is so far from being needless, that
all shall perish in everlasting torment that have not both. I doubt not but you
have both your self; and therefore do but argue with all this confidence
against that which you must be saved by, and which you carry within you. As if
you should argue that both a heart and a brain are needless, and therefore
certainly you have but one. But the best is, concluding you have but one, does
not really prove that you have but one; for if it did, it would prove you had
neither; and then you were but a dead man in one case, and a lost man in the
other. First, Did ever any man deny the necessity of inherent Righteousness,
that was called a Protestant? Object. But that's nothing to its necessity to
Justification. Answ. First, its the very being of it that you plead against as
needless, if your words are intelligible. 2ly. Its as gross a contradiction to
talk of a Righteousness that makes not righteous, or will not justify in
tantum, according to its proportion, as to talk of whitness that makes not
white, or Paternity that makes not a father, or any form that does not inform,
or is a form, and is not a form.

Secondly, If there be two distinct Laws or Covenants, then there is a
necessity of two dstinct Righteousnesses to our Justification. But the
Antecedent is certain. I suppose it will be granted that Christ's righteousness
is necessary to answer the Law of works. And I shall further prove that a
personal righteousness given from Christ, is necessary to fulfill the condition
of the new Covenant or Law of Grace, believe and be saved, etc.

Thirdly, Christ did not himself fulfill the condition of the Gospel for any
man, nor satisfy for his final nonperformance; therefore he that will be
saved, must perform it himself or perish. That Christ performed it not in
person, is past doubt. It was not consistent with his state and perfection to
repent of sin, who had none to repent of; to return from sin to God, who never
fell from him; to beleve in Christ Jesus, that is, to accept himself as an
offered Savior, and to take himself as a Savior to himself, that is, as one
that redeemed himself from sin, to deny his own righteousness, to confess his
sin, to pray for pardon of it, etc. Do you seriously believe that Christ has
done this for any man? For my part, I do not believe it. Secondly, That he that
has not satisfied for any man's final predominant Infidelity and Impenitency, I
know you will grant, because you will deny that he dyed for any sin of that
person (or at least, your party will deny it.) Thirdly, All that shall be
saved, do actually perform these conditions themselves. I know you will confess
it, that none (adult) but the Penitent, Believers, Holy, shall be saved. This
sort of Righteousness therefore is of necessity.

Fourthly, The Benefits of Christ obedience and death are made over to men by a
conditional Promise, Deed of gift, or act of oblivion. Therefore the condition
of that Grant or Act must be found before any man can be justified by the
righteousness of Christ. It is none of yours till you repent and believe:
therefore you must have the personal Righteousness of faith and repentance, in
subordination to the imputed righteousness, that it may be yours. And will you
again conclude, that [Certainly this later is wholly superfluous]. Has not God
said? ]He that believes, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be
damned.] And Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. etc.]
Is it not necessary that these be done then, both as duty commanded, and as a
condition or some means of the end propounded and promised? And is this wholly
superfluous? In Judgment, if you be accused to have been finally impenitent,
or an Infidel, will you not plead your personal faith and repentance, to
justify you against that accusation? or shall any be saved that says, [I did
not repent or believe, but Christ did for me?] If it be said that [Christs
satisfaction is sufficient; but what is that to thee that performedst not the
conditions of his Covenant, and therefore have no part in it?] Will you not
produce your faith and repentance for your Justification against this charge,
and so to prove your Interest in Christ? Nay is it like to be the great
business of that day to enquire whether Christ have done his part or no? or yet
to enquire, whether the world were sinners? or rather to judge them according
to the terms of grace which were revealed to them, and to try whether they have
part in Christ or not; and to that end, whether they believed, repented, loved
him in his members, improved his Talents of Grace or not? Or can any thing but
the want of this personal righteousness then hazard a man's soul?

But you ask [ If Christ's righteousness be able to satisfy, what is the matter
that it removes not all our Evangelical failings? etc.] Answ. Either you ask
this question as of a penitent Believer, or the finally impenitent Unbeliever.
If of the former, I say, First, All his sins Christ's righteousness pardons
and covers; and consequently all the failings in Gospel duties. Secondly, But
his predominant final Impenitency and Infidelity Christ pardons not, because
he is not guilty of it; he has none such to pardon; but has the personal
righteousness of a performer of the conditions of the Gospel: And for the
finally impenitent Infidels, the answer is, because they rejected that
Righteousness which was able to satisfy, and would not return to God by him;
and so not performing the condition of pardon, have neither the pardon of that
sin, nor of any other which were conditionally pardoned to them.

If this Doctrine be the avoiding the good known way, there is a good known way
besides that which is revealed in the Gospel: And if this be so hard a point
for you to receive, I bless God, it is not so to me. And if it be far more
easy to maintain one single righteousness, viz. imputed only; it will not
prove so safe as easy. If one righteousness may serve, may not Pilate and
Simon Magus be justified, if no man be put to prove his part in it? and if he
be, how shall he prove it, but by his performance of the conditions of the Gift.

Treat. page 232. Argu. 8. That cannot be a condition of Justification, which
it self needs Justification: But good works being imperfect, and having much
dross cleaving, need a Justification to take that guilt away.

Answ. First Again, hearken all you that have so long denied the Covenant to
have any conditions at all: Here is an Argument to maintain your cause: for it
makes as much against faith as any other acts (which they call works) for faith
is imperfect also, and needs Justification, (a pardon I suppose you mean; I had
rather talk of pardoning my sins, then justifying them, or any imperfections
what ever.)

Secondly, But indeed its too gross a shift to help your cause. The Major is
false, and has nothing to tempt a man to believe it that I can see. Faith and
Repentance are considerable. First, As sincere. Secondly, As imperfect: They
are not the conditions of pardon as imperfect, but as sincere. God does not say
[I will pardon you if you will not perfectly believe,] but [If you will
believe.] Imperfection is sin: and God makes not sin a condition of pardon and
life. I am not able to conceive what it was that in your mind could seem a
sufficiennt reason for this Proposition, that nothing can be a condition that
needs a pardon. Its true, that in the same respect as it needs a pardon; that
is, as it is a sin, it can be no condition. But faith as faith, Repentance as
Repentance is no sin.

Treat. ibid. Its true, Justification is properly of persons, and of actions
indirectly and obliquely.

Answ. The clean contrary is true, as of Justification in general, and as among
men, ordinarily. The action is first accusasable, or justifiable, and so the
person as the cause of that Action. But in our Justification by Christ's
satisfaction, our Actions are not justifiable at all, save only that we have
performed the condition of the Gift that makes his righteousness ours.

Treat. page 233. This question therefore is again and again to be propounded:
If good works be the condition of our Justification, how comes the guilt in
them that deserves condemnation to be done away? Is there a further condition
required to this condition? and so another to that with a processus in
infinitum?

Answ. Once may serve turn, for any thing regardable that I can perceive in it.
But if so, again and again you shall be answered; The Gospel gives Christ and
life upon the same condition to all; This condition is first a duty, and then a
condition. As a duty we perform it imperfectly and so sinfully: for the
perfection of it is a duty, but the perfection is not the condition, but the
sincerity. Sincere Repentance and faith is the condition of the pardon of all
our sins: therefore of their own Imperfections, which are sins. Will you ask
now [ If faith be imperfect, how comes the guilt of that Imperfection to be
pardoned? is it by a further condition, and so in infinitum?] No: it is on tht
same condition: sincere repentance and faith are the conditions of a pardon for
their own Imperfections. Is there any difficulty in this, or is there any doubt
of it? Why may not faith be a condition, as well as an Instrument of receiving
the pardon of its own Imperfection? I hope still you perceive that you put
these questions to others as well as me, and argue against the common Judgment
of Protestants, who make that which is imperfect, to be the condition of
pardon. [ Repent and be baptized (says Peter) for the remission of sin; Of
what sin? is any excepted to the Penitent Believer? certainly no: It is of all
sins. And is not the imperfection of faith and repentance a sin? The same we
say of sincere obedience as to the continuance of our Justification, or the not
losing it, and as to our final Justification. If we sincerely obey, God will
adjudge us to salvation, and so justify us by his final sentence, through the
blood of Christ from all the imperfections of that obedience: what need
therefore of running any further toward an infinitum?

Treat. ibid. The Popish party and the Castellians are so far convinced of
this, that therefore they say our good works are perfect. And Castellio makes
that prayer for pardon not to belong to all the godly.

Answ. It seems they are partly Quakers. But they are unhappy souls, if such an
Argument could drive them to such an abominable opinion. And yet if this that
you affirm, be the cause, that Papists have taken up the doctrine of
perfection, I have more hopes of their recovery then I had before; nay, because
they are some of them men of ordinary capacities, I take it as if it were done
already. For the Remedy is most obvious; Understand, Papists, that it is Faith
and Repentance and Obedience to Christ in Truth, and not in Perfection that is
the Condition of your final Justification at Judgment, and you need not plead
for perfection any more. But I hardly believe you, that this is the cause of
their error in this point.

And you may see that if Protestants had no more Wit then Papists, they must
all be driven by the violence of your Argument, to hold that Faith and
Repentance are perfect.

And seeing you tell us of Castellio's absurdity, I would entreat you to tell
us, why it is that you pray for pardon your selves; either you take Prayer to
be Means to obtain pardon, or you do not: If not, then 1. Pardon is none of
your end in praying for pardon. 2. And then if once it be taken for no means,
men cannot be blamed if they use it but accordingly. But if you do use it as a
means, then what means is it? Is Prayer any cause of Pardon? say so, and you
say more then we that you condemn, and fall under all those censures that per
fas aut nefas are cast upon us. If it be no cause of pardon; Is it a condition
sine qua non, as to that manner of pardoning that your prayer does intend? If
you say yea, you consequentially recant your disputation (or Lecture) and turn
into the tents of the Opinionists. But if it be no condition of pardon, then
tell us what means it is if you can. If you say, it is a duty. I answer, Duty
and Means are commonly distinguished, and so is necessitas praecepti and medii.
Duty as such, is no means to an end, but the bare result of a command. Though
all Duty that God commands is also some means, yet that is not qua Duty. And
so far as that Duty is a means, it is either a Cause, (near or remote) or a
Condition, either of the obtainment of the benefit, simply, or of the more
certain, or speedy, or easy attainment of it, or of obtaining some inferior
good, that conduces to the main. So that still it is a Cause or a Condition,
if a means. If you say, It is an Antecedent. I say, qua tale, that is no means,
but if a Necessary antecedent, that which is the reason of its necessity may
make it a means. If you go to Physical prerequisites (as you talked of a man's
shoulders bearing the head that he may see, etc.) you go extra oleas; Its a
moral means that we treat of, and I think you will not affirm Prayer to be a
means of physical necessity to pardon. If it were, it must be a Physical cause,
near or remote, or a Dispositio materiae of natural necessity, etc. If you say,
that prayer for pardon, is dispositio subjecti, I answer, that's it that we
Opinionists do affirm: But it is a dispositio moralis, and necessary ut medium
ad finem: and that necessity must be constituted by the Promiser or Donor: and
that can be only by his modus promissionis, which makes it in some measure or
other a condition of the thing promised. So that there is no lower moral medium
then a mere condition sune qua non, that my understanding can hitherto find
out, or apprehend.

Treat ibid. Paul Judges them dung and dross in reference to Justification;
yea all things, etc.

Answ. 1. But what are those All things? 2. And what Reference to Justification
is it? If All things simply in all relation to Justification, then he must
judge the Gospel dung and dross as to the Instrumental collation of
Justification; and the Sacraments dung and dross as to the sealing of it; and
the Ministry dung and dross, as to the preaching and offering it, and
beseeching men to be reconciled to God: and Faith to be dung and dross, as to
the receiving of it; as well as Repentance and Faith to be dung and dross as
conditions of it; or Prayer, Obedience, as conditions of continuing it.

2. Its evident in the text that Paul's speaks of All things that stand in
opposition to Christ, and that stand in competition with him, as such; and not
of any thing that stands in a necessary subordination to him as such.

3. He expressly adds in the text, [for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord] this therefore is none of the [ all things that are dung]
for the All things are opposed to this. And it contains that faith, which is
works with the Opponents: for this is more then a recumbency on Christ as
Priest: It is the Knowledge of him as Lord also. I am confident I shall never
learn to expound Paul thus [I esteem All things, even the knowledge of Christ
Jesus as Lord and Prophet, as dung for the Knowledge of him as Priest.] Also
Paul here excepteth his suffering the loss of that All. I am confident that the
[All] that Paul suffered the loss of, comprehended not his Self-denial,
Repentance, Prayer, Charity, Hope, etc.

4. It is not only in reference to Justification that Paul despises All
things; but it is to the winning of Christ (who doubtless is the Principle of
Sanctification as well as Justification) and to be found in him, which
contains the sum of his felicity. If a man should be such a self-contradicter
as to set Repentance, or Faith in Christ, or Prayer in his Name, or Hope in
him, etc. against winning Christ, and against being found in him, or against
the knowledge of him, let that man so far esteem his faith, hope, prayer, etc.
as dung. If you should say, [I account all things dung for the winning of God
himself as my felicity.] Would you have me interpret you thus, [ I account the
love of God dung, and prayer to him, and studious obeying him, and the word
that reveals him, etc. even as they stand subordinate to him.] This same Paul
rejoiced in the testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity he had had his conversation among them: and he beat or subdued his
body, and brought it into subjection, lest he should be Reprobated after he was
justified, and he prayed for pardon of sin, and tells Timothy, [ In doing this
thou shall save thy self, etc.] therefore these things thus used, were none of
the All things, that he opposed to the knowledge of Christ, as dung.

Treat. page 234, 235. Others would avoid this Objection, by saying, that
Gospel graces, which are the Conditions of the Covenant, are reducible to the
Law, and so Christ in satisfying the Law, does remove the imperfections
cleaving to them. And they judge it absurb to say, that Christ has satisfied
for the sins of the second Covenant, or breaches, which is said to be only
final unbelief.

Answ. As this is brought in by head and shoulders, so is it recited lamely,
without the necessary distinctions and explications adjoined, yea without part
of the Sentence it self: and therefore unfaithfully.

Treat. But this answer may be called Legion; for many errors and
coctradictions are in it. 1. How can justifying faith qua talis in the act of
Justifying, and Repentance, be reducible duties to the Law taken strictly?
Indeed as it was in a large sense discovered to the Jews, being the Covenant of
Grace, as I have elsewhere proved (Vindic. Legis) so it required Justifying
Faith and Repentance. But take, it in the sense as the Abettor of this opinion
must do, justifying faith and repentance must be called the works of the Law.

Answ. Its easilier called Legion then faithfully reported, or solidly
confuted. 1. Let the Reader observe how much I incurred the displeasure of Mr.
Blake, for denying the Moral Law to be the sufficient or sole Rule of all duty,
and how much he has said against me therein; and then judge how hard a task it
is to please all men: when these two neighbors and friends, do publicly thus
draw me such contrary ways, and I must be guilty of more then ordinary error
whether I say Yea or Nay. And yet (which is the wonder) they differ not among
themselves.

2. But seeing your ends direct you to fetch in his controversy, so
impertinent to the rest, its requisite that the Abettor do better open his
opinion, then you have done, that the Reader may not have a Defense of he knows
not what.

My opinion so often already explained in other writings, is this.

1. That the Law of Nature as continued by the Mediator, is to be distinguished
from the Remedying Law of Grace, called the New Testament, the Promise, etc.
(Whether you will call them two Laws, or two parts of one Law, is little co the
purpose; seeing in some respect they are two, and in some but one.)

2. That this continued Law of Nature has its Precept and Sanction, or does
constitute the Dueness, 1. Of Obedience in general to all that God has
commanded or shall command. 2. And of many duties in particular. 3. And of
everlasting death as the penalty of all sin. So that it says, The wages of sin
is death.

3. That to this is affixed the Remedying Law of Grace, like an act of
Oblivion, which does 1. Reveal certain points to be believed. 2. And command
the belief of them, which other particular duties in order to its ends. 3. And
does offer Christ, and Pardon, and Life, by a Conditional Donation enacting
that whosoever will Repent and Believe shall be Justified, and persevering
therein with true obedience, shall be finally adjudged to everlasting life, and
possessed thereof. Its tenor is, He that Repents and Believes shall be
saved, and he that; does not shall be damned.

4. That the sense of this Promise and Threatening is, He that Repents and
Believes at all in this life, though but at the last hour, shall be saved; and
he that does it not at all shall be damned. Or he that is found a penitent
Believer at death, etc. And not, he that believes not to day or to morrow
shall be damned, though afterward he do.

5. That the threatening of the Law of Nature was not at first Peremptory and
Remediless; and that now it is so far Remedyed, as that there is a Remedy at
hand for the dissolving of the Obligation, which will be effectual as soon as
the Condition is performed.

6. That the Remedying Law of Grace, has a peculiar penalty, that is, 1.
Non-liberation, A privation of Pardon and life which was offered (For that is
now a penal privation, which if there had been no Savior, or Promise, or
Offer, would have been but a Negation.) 2. The certain Remedilesness of their
misery for the future, that there shall be no more sacrifice for sin. 3. And
whether also a greater degree of punishment, I leave to consideration.

7. I still distinguished between the Precepts and the Sanction of the Law of
Grace or New Covenant, and between sin as it respects both: And so I said,
that Repentance and Faith in Christ (even as a means to Justification) are
commanded in specie in the Gospel, which constituteth them duties, but
commanded consequently in genere in the Law of nature under the general of
Obedience to all particular precepts: and whether also the Law of Nature
require the duty in specie, supposing God to have made his supernatural
preparations in providing and propounding the objects, I left to enquiry.
Accordingly I affirmed that Impenitency and Infidelity, though afterward
Repented of, as also the Imperfections of true faith and repentance, are sins
against the General precept of the Law of Nature, and the special precept of
the Law of Grace, and that Christ dyed for them, and they are pardoned through
his blood, upon condition of sincere Repentance and Faith.

8. Accordingly distinguishing between the respect that sin has to the precept
and prohibition on one side, and to the promise and threatening on the other, I
affirmed, that the foresaid Impenitency and Infidelity that are afterward
repented of, and the Imperfections of true Faith and Repentance are condemned
by the Remediable threatening of the Law of Nature only, and that the person is
not under the Actual obligation of the peculiar Threatening of the Law of Grace;
that is, that though as to the Gospel Precept, these sins may be against the
Gospel as well as the Law, yet as to the Threatening, they are not such
violations of the New Covenant, as bring men under its actual curse; for then
they were remediless. And therefore I said, that its only final Impenitency and
Unbelief, as final, that so subjects men to that Curse or Remediless peremptory
sentence. The reason is, because the Gospel makes Repenting and Believing at
any time before death, the Condition of promised pardon: and therefore if God
by death make not the contrary impenitency and unbelief final, it is not that
which brings a man under the Remediless Curse; (except only in case of the
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which is ever final.)

9 Accordingly I affirm that Christ never bore, or intended to bear the
peculiar Curse of his own Law of Grace. 1. As not suffering for any man's final
impenitency and unbelief, which is proved in his Gospel constitution, which
gives out pardon only on Condition of Faith and Repentance: and therefore the
nonperformance of his Condition is expressly excepted from all pardon, and
consequently from the intended satisfaction, and price of pardon. 2. In that he
did not bear that species of punishment, as peculiarly appointed by the Gospel,
viz. To be denied Pardon, Justification and Adoption, and to be Remediless in
misery, etc.

10. Also I said, that all other sins are pardonable on the Gospel Conditions;
but the nonperformance (that is, final) of those Conditions is everlastingly
unpardonable (and consequently no sin pardoned for want of them.)

Reader, this is the face of that Doctrine which Reverend Brethren vail over
with the darkness and confusion of these General words; that I say, [Christ
has not satisfied for sins against the second Covenant.] And all these
explications I am fain to trouble the world with, as often as they are pleased to
charge me in that confusion. But what remedy? This is the Legion of errors and
contradictions; which I leave to thy impartial judgment, to abhor them as far
as the Word and Spirit shall convince thee that they are erroneous, and to
bless those Congregations and Countries that are taught to abhor them, and to
rejoice in their felicity that believe the contrary.

Treat. page 235. 2. If so, then the works of the Law are Conditions of our
Justification, and thus he runs into the extreme he would avoid.

Answ. 1. The works which the Law requires to Justification, that is, perfect
obedience, are not the Conditions of Justification. 2. Nor the fulfilling of
the Mosaical Law of Sacrifices, etc. 3. But from among duties in general
required by the Moral Law, after the special Constitution of the Gospel, God
has chosen some to be the Conditions of life. And if you believe not this, I
refer you to Mr. Blake, who will undertake to prove more.

2. But your assertion is groundless. I said not that they are works of the
Law. What if the Law condemn the neglect of a Gospel duty? Do I call the duty,
a work of the Law, because I say the Law condemns the neglecters of it?

3. But are you indeed of the contrary opinion, and against that which you
dispute against? Do you think that the Law does not threaten unbelievers, when
the Gospel has commanded faith? Have I so much ado to persuade the men of your
party, that the Gospel has any peculiar threatening or penalty, and that it is
truly a Law (which the Lutherans have taught too many) and now do you think
that its only the Gospel that Curses impenitent unelievers, and that makes
punishment due for the remnant of these sins in penitent Believers? Let the
Reader judge who runs into extremes and self-contradiction.

Treat. ib. But above all, this is not to be endured, that Christ has not
suffered for the breaches of the New Covenant, and that there is no such breach
but final impenitency: For are the defects of our Repentance, faith and love in
Christ, other then the partial breaches of the Covenant of Grace? our
unthankfulness, unfruitfulness, yea sometimes with Peter, our grievous revolts
and apostacies; What are those but the sad shakings of our Covenant Interest,
though they do not dissolve it? But it is not my purpose to fall on this,
because of its impertinency to my matter in hand.

Answ. I rather thought it your purpose to fall upon it, though you confess it
impertinent to your matter in hand. For I thought you had purposed before you
had Printed of Preached.

Reader, I suppose thee one that has no pleasure in darkness, and therefore
would see this intolerable error barefaced. To which end, besides what is
said before, understand, 1. That I use to distinguish between a threefold
breach of the Covenant. 1. A sin against a mere precept of the Gospel, which
precept may be Synecdochically called the Covenant. 2. A sin against our own
Promise to God when we Covenant with him. 3. A violation of Gods constitution,
[Believe and be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned] making us the
proper subjects of its Actual Curse or Obligation to its peculiar punishment.
2. On these distinctions I use to say as follows; 1. That Christ suffered for
our breaches of Gospel precepts. 2. And for our breaches of many promises of
our own to God. 3. And for our temporary nonperformance of the Gospel
Conditions, which left us under a non-liberation for that time, (and therefore
we had no freedom from so much as was executed.) 4. But not for such violation
of the New Covenant, or Law of Grace, as makes us the actual subjects of its
Curse or Obligation to Remediless punishment. These are my usual limitations
and explications. And do I need to say any more now in defense of this opinion,
which my Reverend Brother says is not to be endured? 1. Is it a clear and
profitable way of teaching to confound all these, under the general name of
Covenant Breaking? 2. Or is it a comfortable Doctrine, and like to make
Congregations blessed, that our defects of repentance, unfruitfulness, and
unthankfulness, etc. are such violations of the Law of Grace, or the Conditions
of the Gospel, as bring us under its actual obligation to Remediless
punishment? That is, in plain English, to say, We shall all be damned.

Treat. ib. Argument 9. If works be a condition of our Justification, then must
the godly soul be filled with perpetual doubts, and troubles, whether it be a
person justified or no. This does not follow accidentally through man's
perverseness from the forenamed Doctrine: but the very Genius of it tends
thereunto. For if a Condition be not performed, then the mercy Covenanted
cannot be claimed: As in faith; if a man do not believe, he cannot say, Christ
with his benefits are his. Thus if he have not works, the Condition is not
performed, but still he continues without this benefit. But for works; How
shall I know when I have the full number of them? Whether is the Condition of
the species or individuums of works? Is not one kind of work omitted when its
my duty, enough to invalidate my Justification? Will it not be as dangerous to
omit that one as all, seeing that one is required as a Condition?

Answ. Your Argument is an unproved Assertion, not having any thing to make it
probable. 1. Belief in Christ as Lord and Teacher, is Works with the Opponents.
Why may not a man know when he believes in Christ as King and Prophet, and is
his Disciple, as well as when he believes in him as Priest?

2. Repentance is Works also with the Opponents. Why may not a man know when he
Repents, as well as when he believes.

3. Do you not give up the Protestant cause here to the Papists in the point of
certainty of salvation? We tell them that we may be certain that our faith is
sincere. And how? why by its fruits and concomitants, and that we take Christ
for Lord as well as Savior, or to save us from the power of sin as well as the
guilt? And is it now come to that pass that these cannot be known? What not the
signs by which faith it self should be known, and therefore should be notiora?
This it is to eye man, and to be set upon the making good of an opinion.

4. Let all Protestants answer you, and I have answered you. How will they know
when they Repent and Believe, when they have performed the full of these?
believed all necessary Truths? Repented of all sins that must be Repented of?
Whether it be the species or individual acts of these that are necessary! Will
not the omission of Repentance for one sin invalidate it? Or the omission of
many individual acts of faith? are not those acts conditions? etc. Answer
these, and you are answered.

5. But I shall answer you briefly for them and me. Its no impossible thing to
know when a man sincerely believes, repents and obeys, though many
Articles are Essential to the Assenting part of faith, and many sins must be
Repented of, and many duties must be done. God has made known to us the
Essentials of each. It is not the Degree of any of them, but the Truth that is
the Condition. A man that has imperfect Repentance, Faith and Obedience, may
know when they are sincere, notwithstanding the imperfections. Do you not
believe this? Will you not maintain it against a Papist when you are returned
to your former temper? what need any more then to be said of it?

6. Your Argument makes as much against the making use of these by way of bare
signs, as by way of Conditions. For an unknown sign is no sign to us.

7. And how could you overlook it, that your Argument flies too boldly in the
face of Christ, and many a plain Text of Scripture? Christ says, John 15.10.
If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept,
etc. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, Mat. 7.21. Not
every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he
that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. 23, 24. Whosoever hears
these sayings of mine, and does them, etc. Mat. 5. throughout. verse 20. Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven. 1 John 3.10. In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother.] An
hundred such passages might be cited. And will you meet all these with your
objections, and say, [ How shall I know when I have the full number? etc.] Know
that you have sincere Faith, Repentance and Obedience, and you may know you
perform that Condition of the Gospel: else not.

Treat. page 236. That if good works be a Condition of Justification, then none
are justified till their death; because in every good work is required
perseverance, in so much that perseverance is that to which the promise is
made, Mat. 24.6. Heb. 10.38. Rev. 2.7, 20. So that it is not good works simply,
but persevered in that is required: and therefore no Justification to the end
of our days, so that we cannot have any peace with God till then. Neither does
it avail to say, Justification is not complete till then; for it cannot be at
all till then, because the Condition that gives life to all is not till then.

Answ. 1. And is not perseverance in faith as necessary as perseverance in
obedience? Read Col. 1.23. John 15.2, 3, etc. and many the like, and judge.
Will you thence infer that none are justified till death?

2. But a little step out of the darkness of your Confusion, will bring the
fallacy of your Argument to the light, and there will need no more to it. The
Gospel conveyeth to us several benefits: some without any Condition, and
several benefits on several Conditions. 1. Our first Actual pardon and
Justification, and right to life, is given on Condition of our first Faith and
Repentance: and not on Condition of External works of Obedience, nor yet of the
persevering in faith it self, much less in that Obedience. 2. Our state of
Justification is continued on condition of the continuance of Faith and
Repentance, with sincere Obedience. 3. Our particular following sins have a
particular pardon, on Condition of the Continuance of the habits and renewing
of the acts of that faith and repentance, for known observed sins. 4. Our full
Justification by Sentence at Judgment, is on the same condition as
Glorification, viz. On perseverance in Faith, Repentance, Hope, Love and
sincere Obedience.

Prove now if you can that perseverance is the Condition of our first pardon.
Prove if you can that final perseverance is the Condition of our continuance in
a justified state till now. You say, Justification and peace cannot be ours
till the condition be performed. But what condition? of that gift? or of
another gift? If of that, its granted: but its still denied that perseverance
is any of the Condition of our first pardon? If of another gift; its no reason
of your Consequence. If you speak of final Justification and Salvation, I grant
you all thus far, that you have no full Right of possessing them but on
perseverance* nor no Right at all, or certainty of Salvation, but on
supposition of perseverance as necessary to the possession. And therefore if
you can prove that we have no certainty of perseverance, I will yield that we
have no certainty of salvation.

Treat. Thus we have asserted this truth by many Arguments; and though any one
singly by it self may not convince, yet altogether may satisfy -- Now to the
great Objections --

Answ. I heartily wish that wiser Readers may find more truth and satisfaction
in them then I can do, if it be there to be found; and to that end that they
make their best of them all.

Treat. James says, Abraham was justified by works -- so that in outward
appearances these two great Apostles speak contradictions, which has made some
deny the Canonical authority of James 's Epistle. Yea one said blasphemously,
Althameirius, Mentiris Jacobe in caput tuum. But this is to cut, not untie the
knot. --

1. The scope of the Apostle Paul is to treat upon our Justification before
God, and what is the Instrument and means of obtaining it -- But the Apostle
James takes Justification for the Declaration and Manifestation of it before
men. --

Answ. This is not the only sense of James (as I have proved before, to which I
refer you) no nor any part of the sense of the word Justification with him,
though he mention showing faith by works to men, as an argument for his main
conclusion, yet he nowhere expounds the word Justification by it. James
expressly speaks of Imputation of Righteousness by God, and of that
Justification which is meant in the words of Genesis concerning Abraham, even the
same words that Paul expounds; and of that Justification which infers
salvation.

Treat. Paul informs us that faith only justifies, and James, what kind of
faith it is, even a lively working faith.

Answ. I have answered this in the beginning of this Disputation.

Treat. Its said, They dare not go against the plain words of the Apostle. But
its not the (...) but (...), not the words, but the sense --

Answ. Our Question is, How the sense of James shall be known? Will you say,
not by the words, but by the sense? The words are to express the sense; and we
must take heed of forcing them as much as we can. As to your saying of the
Anthropomorphites, and Hoc est corpus meum; I answer; the Tropical sense is often
the plainest; and in particular in these instances. If any man point to several
pictures, and say, This is Caesar, and this is Pompey, etc. I shall by use of
speech (the interpreter of words) take the tropical sense to be the plainest,
and not the literal; viz. That this is Caesar's Image, and not that it is his
person. And so here.

2. Give me any cogent Evidence that I must leave the plain sense, and I am
satisfied.

3. Remember I pray you, that its not the words, but the sense that you except
against. Do not you except hereafter against the saying that (we are Justified
by works, and not by faith only] as James does; but against the ill sense that
you can prove to be put upon the words.

Treat. page 238. Lastly, They are forced to add to the Apostle; for they say,
works justify as the Condition of the Gospel, which the Apostle does not speak
a Word of.

Answ. 1. We say not that Jams calls them a condition; therefore we add not to
him as his.

2. Every Exposition and application is an addition of another sort, but not as
of the same.

3. I use not the active phrase that Works justify, agreeing so far with you,
who note a difference between these sayings, Faith justifies, and we are
justified by faith: for all that Mr. Blake despises the observation, which
perhaps he would scarce have done, if he had known that you had being guilty of
it also.

4. Scripture supposes Grammar, Logic, Physics, etc. and no more is to be
expected from it but its own part. If James tell you that we are justified by
works, he does not say that (...) is a verb, and (...) is a noun, and so of the
rest; but he warranteth you to say so without any unjust addition, supposing
that Grammar so call them; If the Scripture say, that God created the Heavens
and the earth, it does not say here in terms, that God was the efficient cause:
but it warranteth you to say so: If it say, that Christ dyed for us, and was a
Sacrifice for our sins, and has obtained eternal redemption for us; yet it
says not that he is the meritorious cause, or the material cause of our
Justification: But it will warrant you to say so, without the guilt of unjust
additions. If you may say as a Grammarian and a Logitian, when you meet with
such words in Scripture, [These are Paronyma, and these Synonyma, and these
Homonyma, and this is an universal, that a singular, that a particular, and
that an indefinite; this is an efficient cause, that a material, formal or
final; this is a noun, that a verb, the other a participle or an adverb; I pray
you then why may not I say, when I read in Romans 10.9. that [ If thou confess
with thy mouth, and believe in thy heart, etc.] that [If] is a conjunction
conditional? Is this adding to the Scripture unjustly? If I did, when ever I
read that we are justified by faith, collect thence that faith is an
Instrumental cause, as if by were only the note of an Instrument, then you
might have accused me of unwarrantable addition, or collections, indeed.

Lastly, If you have a mind to it, I am content that you say by the
unscriptural names (or additions as you speak) of nouns, pronouns, verbs,
antecedents, consequents, efficient, or material causes, etc. and I will lay by
the name of a condition, as you do of an Instrument: and we will only use the
Scripture phrase, which is, If you forgive men, your Father will forgive you;
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive: we are justified
by faith without the works of the Law: A man is justified by works, and not by
faith only: By thy Words thou shall be justified. Every man shall be judged
according to his works,] etc. Let us keep to Scripture phrase if you desire it,
and you shall find me as backward as any to lay much stress upon terms of Art.

Having gone thus far, I shall in brief give you a truer reconciliation of Paul
and James then you here offer us. 1. They debate different questions. 2. And
that with different sorts of persons. 3. And speak directly of different sorts
of works. 4. And somewhat differ in the sense of the word Faith. 5. And somewhat
about the word Justification. 6. And they speak of works in several Relations
to Justification.

1. The Question that Paul disputed was principally Whether Justification be by
the works of the Mosaical Law, and consequently by any mercenary works, without
Christ, or in Co-ordination with Christ, or any way at all conjunct with
Christ? The question that James disputed, was, Whether men are justified by
mere believing without Gospel-Obedience?

2. The persons that Paul disputed against, were, 1 The unbelieving Jews, that
thought the Mosaical Law was of such perfection to the making of men righteous,
that there needed no other, much less should it be abrogate. Where specially
note, that the righteousness which the Jews expected by that Law, was not (as
is commonly imagined) a righteousness of sinless obedience, such as was
required of Adam; but a mixed Righteousness, consisting of accurate Obedience to
the Mosaical Law in the main course of their lives, and exact sacrificing
according to that Law for the pardon of their sins committed, (wherein they
made express confession of sin) so that these two they thought sufficient to
justify, and looked for the Messiah but to free them from captivity, and repair
their Temple, Law, etc. And 2. Paul disputed against false Teachers, that would
have joined these two together (the Righteousness of Moses Law, and Faith in
Christ) as necessary to life.

But James disputed against false Christians, that thought it enough to
salvation barely to believe in Christ, (or lived as if they so thought) its
like misunderstanding Paul's Doctrine of Justification as many now do.

3. The works that Paul speaks of directly, are the services appointed by Moses
Law supposed to be sufficient, because of the supposed sufficiency of that Law.
So that its all one with him to be justified by the Law, and to be justified by
works; and therefore he ofter speaks against Justification by the Law expressly,
and usually styles the works he speaks of, the works of the Law: yet by
consequence, and a parity of Reason, he may well be said to speak against any
works imaginable that are set in opposition to Christ, or competition with him,
and that are supposed meritorious, and intended as Mercenary.

But James speaks of no works, but Obedience to God in Christ, and that as
standing in due subordination to Christ.

4. By Faith in the Doctrine of Justification, Paul means our Assent to all the
essential Articles of the Gospel, together with our Acceptance of Jesus Christ
the Lord, as such, and affiance in him; that is, To be a Believer; and so to
have faith, is with Paul, to be a Disciple of Christ, or a Christian: Though
sometime he specially denominates that faith from one part of the object (the
promise) sometime from another (the blood of Christ) sometime from a third (his
obedience.) And in other cases he distinguishes Faith from Hope and Charity:
but not in the business of Justification, considering them as respecting Christ
and the ends of his blood.

But James by faith means a bare ineffectual Assent to the Truth of the
Christian Religion, such as the Devils themselves had.

5. Paul speaks of Justification in its whole state, as begun and continued.
But James does principally, if not only speak of Justification as continued.
Though if by works any understand a disposition to work in faith, or conjunct
with it (as Dr. Iackson does) so his words are true of initial Justification
also.

6. The principal difference lies in the Relations of works mentioned. Paul
speaks of works as the immediate matter of a legal personal Righteousness, in
part or whole. But James spoak of Works, not as answering the Law, but as
fulfilling the condition of the Gospel, and employed (as promised or resolved
on) in our first believing, and so as subservient to the Sacrifice, Merit and
Righteousness of Christ, as the avoiding of poison or dangerous meats (that may
kill, though the conrtary cannot cure) is subservient to the curing medicine of
a Physician, and employed in our taking him for our Physician at first.

And so much briefly to satisfy you and the world of the Reasons of my Dissent
from you, that I may not differ from so Dear and Reverend a Brother, without
making it appear, that necessity did compel me.

That which I have passed over, being about the Instrumentality of Faith, I
shall speak to, (if God will) together with Mr. Blakes Reasonings on that
Subject, in another Disputation.

Oppon. Works are not a Condition, much less a Cause of our Justification,
under any Notion whatsoever they are taken: i. e. Neither Faith in Christ as
Lord and Teacher, becoming his Disciples, Repentance, Love, Hope, Prayer for
Pardon, Confession, Self-denial, sincere Obedience, etc. are Causes or
Conditions of Justification, as begun, continued, or as it is most eminent in
the sentence at Judgment. Cons. Erg. This Faith, Repentance, Prayer,
Obedience, etc. are not truly means of our Justification now or at Judgment.

Ergo. Not means to the pardon of sin, and freedom from punishment.

Ergo. Not means of Salvation from Hell, or of that Glory to which the final
Justification will adjudge us.

Ergo. 1. They are not necessary necessitate medii, and 2. No Man must use them
as means to his present pardon, or Justification, or final Justification or
salvation.

Ergo. No means must be used for present or final Justification or Salvation,
but only the Instrumental receiving, or apprehending of Christ's Righteousness,
or of Christ as Priest. Ergo. --

Object. There are means besides Causes and Conditions.

Answ. Besides Causas and Conditiones proximas, there are: but besides Causas
and Conditiones and proximas and remotas, in this case there are none that I
know of: if there be, name them.

LETTERS That past between This REVEREND, Much HONORED BROTHER, And my SELF.
1649, and 1650.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in
Kederminster.

HAving heard that Mr. -- disliked some things in my Aphorisms, and by the
persuasions of some, intended a Confutation of them: I wrote to him an earnest
Request, that he would acquaint me with what he disliked, annexing his Reasons
to convince me of my Errors, professing my earnest Desire of Information,
especially from him: To which he replied, as follows.

Dear Sir,
I Have indeed declared to some, who happily may have informed you of it, as I
desired, that there were several* Doctrinal points asserted in your Book, to
which I could not pedibus ire, much less cord; such are many positions about
Christ's Righteousness, about faiths Justification in your sense, and the
Efficacy of new Obedience in this work as well as faith. Yea Love made some
kind of the actings of Faith: The good old sound definition of Faith waved, and
a new one substituted. Not the (...), credere, but the (...) operari also
called into Evangelical Righteousness, and this made our personal
Righteousness. These things and diverse others do make me vehemently dissent
from you in the matters asserted. Yet I do really honor you, for your great
Abilities and zealous Piety, earnestly desiring of God that he would prolong
your life, and have mercy upon hss Church by sparing this Epaphroditus.

But whereas you have been told, that I had animadversions on your Book, this
was a mistake: for the truth is, though I have cast my thoughts upon some part
of it, yet I have not any digested or prepared considerations about it: but do
defer such a work, till I shall have opportunity to discharge that part I have
publicly promised about imputed Righteousness; which Subject I cannot yet
prosecute, being hindered by other avocations: It is true, I have had
advertisement from some honored friends of mine at London, that it is
expected, I should do something in those points, because by your Inscription of
my name (which I take as an Act of your real Love and respect to me, though I
am unworthy of any such Testimony) they think I am interested. Had I known the
Contents of the book before published, I would have most importunately urged
you at least to have taken more time of deliberation about the divulgation of
them, which you know have much novelty in them. I know things are not to be
embraced or rejected, because either old or new; yet Paul does dislike (...),
if we may so read it, and not (...). I shall conclude with this: Let not any
difference from you in Judgment be any obstruction to improve your utmost
Abilities (which are many and lovely) to the finding out, and propagating of
Truth. If God prolong your life, I hope this next Summer we may have mutual
oral Conference together, which is the most conducible way to clear both Truth
and our Opinions.

Your faithful Friend and Brother --
December. 3. To the Reverend, and his much Honored Friend, Mr. Baxter, Preacher
of the Word of God at Kederminster, those Deliver.

Sir,
I Received yours, which I acknowledge a Favor: but not so great as I expect.
Your dissent is so generally known, that I cannot but hope to know some of the
Grounds of it. I hope you cannot so vehemently dissent in points of such
Moment, and yet deny me a discovery of mine Error. The defering of such a work
till you have wrote another Book, does intimate what will be injurious to the
Church, your self and me: If you intend to publish a Confutation, when I am
dead, and deny me any help for conviction while I live. 1. The Church will lose
the fruit of my own Recantation. 2. And your self, one part of the fruit of
your Labor. 3. And I may dye in error unrecanted, and you (being now importuned
for, your help) be guilty of it. If you did but know how gladly I would
publicly recant, you would not deny your help. You that would have so
importuned me to deliberate, if you had known before, I hope will not deny your
assistance for my recovery. I did not hastily that I did. But though I wanted
the opportunity of consulting you before, yet I hope it is not too late. I am
confident if you know me, you are not so uncharitable as to think me uncurable.
It is therefore your flat duty not to suffer sin upon me. Let me therefore
entreat you to send me one or two of your strongest Arguments against some of
the weightyest points in difference; and to answer mine. I know it is not an
hours work with you to do that much; and I would bestow twenty for you. If you
suspect that I will any way mis-imploy your papers, you shall prescribe me the
Law therein your self. Whether you will read (...) or (...), I am indifferent,
being no friend to either. I thought it a greater novelty to say, Faith
justifies only or primarily as an Instrument, then to say, it justifies as
the Condition, which the free Lawgiver has promised Justification upon. I knew
it was no novelty to say, we must have a personal Righteousness besides that
imputed: And I took it to be as old as the Gospel, to say, that this consists
in Faith and sincere Obedience. I called it Evangelical, because I trembled to
think of having an inherent Righteousness which the Law of works will so
denominate. What you say of the [Efficacy of Obedience and Faith] I disclaim
both, as never coming into my thoughts: I acknowledge no efficiency as to
Justification in either, but a bare conditionality. I aver confidently that I
give no more to works, then our Divines ordinarily do, viz. to be a secondary
part of the Condition of the new Covenant, and so of Justification, as
continued and consummate, and of Glorification: only if I err, it is in giving
less to Faith, denying it to be the Instrumental Cause of Justification, but
only a condition. My Definition of Faith is the same (in sense) with Dr.
Prestons, Mr. Calverwell, Mr. Throgmorton, Mr. Norton of new England in his
Catechism, etc. O how it grieveth me to dissent from my Reverend Brethen! Some
report it to be a pernicious Book: others overvalue it, and so may receive the
more hunt if it be unsound. Truly Sir I am little prejudiced against your
Arguments; But had rather return into the common road then not, if I could see
the Light of truth to guide me. I abhor affected singularity in Doctrine:
therefore I entreat you again to defer no longer to vouchsafe me the fruit of
one hours labor, which I think I may claim from your Charity and the Interest
God has given one member in another, and you shall hereby very much oblige to
thankfulness

Jan. 22. 1649. Your unworthy fellow servants Richard BAXTER.
To my Reverend and very much valued friend, Mr. -- Preacher of Gods Word at --
These present.

Dear Sir,
I Received your letter, and I returned some Answer by Mr. Bryan, viz. that now
the days growing longer and warmer, I shall be glad to take occasion to confer
with you mouth to mouth about those things wherein we differ, for I conceive
that to be a far more compendious way, then by letters, wherein any mistake is
not so easily rectified: I shall therefore be ready to give you the meeting at
Bremicham any Thursday you shall appoint that may be convenient with your
health; that so by an amicable collation, we may find out the truth. In the
mean while I shall not wholly neglect your request in your letter, but give you
an hint at one of those several Arguments that move me to dissent from you;
which although it be obvious, yet such Arguments as most men pitch upon, have
the greatest strength: and that is the peculiar and proper expressions the
Scripture gives to faith in the matter of Justification, and that when the
Doctrine is purposely handled, as Paul in his Epistle to the Romans.
attributing it so to faith, as it excludes not the presence, but the
cooperation of any other. He does so include faith, as that he does exclude
all works under any notion: for Abraham was then godly, and abounded in other
Graces, yet the Apostle fastens his Justification upon this: in so much that if
a man would have desired the Apostle to make a difference between faith and
other Graces, it could not have been done more evidently. As for the Apostle
James, your sense cannot be admitted to reconcile them, but rather makes that
breach wider: the one says, a Justification without works; you make Faith as
well as works, though one primarily: whereas the Orthodox both against Papists
and Arminians, and Socinians, do sweetly reconcile them. By the hint of this, I
see a Letter cannot represent the vigor of an Argument. I shall only add one
thing: we may hold Opinions, and dispute them speculatively in Books; but
practically, and when we come to dye, we dare not make use of them. I know not
how a godly man at his death can look upon his Graces as Conditions of the
Covenant fulfilled by him; though the Grace of God and the Merits of Christ be
acknowledged the procuring cause. The Papists also verbally come to that
refuge: For how come the Imperfections in the Conditions to be pardoned, and
conditions have a moral Efficiency? Raptim. But of these things more fully when
I see you.

The Lord preserve you an Instrument in his Church, and direct and sanctify
all your parts and abilities for his Glory.

Feb. 13. Your loving Brother in the Lord --
To his very loving and much respected Friend Mr. BAXTER, Minister of Gods Word
at Kederminster, these be delivered.

Sir,
FOr the expressions of your love in your two Letters, and your offer to meet
me for conference; I return you hearty thanks. But I told you of my weakness,
which is so great that I am not able to travel, nor to discourse to any purpose
if I were with you: a few words do so spend me (except when I have a little
ease, which falls out perhaps once in a month for a few hours unexpected)
therefore I am resolved to importune you once again, and if you now deny me, to
cease my suit. It is expected at London, Cambridge, etc. that you write a
confutation, and you intimate your purpose to do so hereafter: which I will not
dissuade you from, so I might but see your Arguments, that before I dye, I
might know whether I have erred, and not dye without repenting or recanting:
and if I err not, that I might show you my grounds more fully; And if you deny
this request to one that has so even unmannerly importuned you, and yet
purpose to do it, when I can neither be the better for it, nor defend my self,
you walk not by that Rule as I thought you did, nor do as you would be done by.
But for my part, I have done my endeavor for information, and so have
satisfied my own conscience. For what should I do? There is none in this
Country that will attempt a convincing of me, by word or writing, nor for ought
I hear, gainsay: and you are the nearest from whom I may hope for it. In your
last you overpass all the particulars almost touched in your former, and pitch
on Justification by works. Where you mention Paul's attributing it to Faith, to
which I have answered, and have no Reply. 1. Where you say Paul excludes the
Cooperation of any other; I answer, So do I. And of Faith too I deny the
operations as effective. 2. When you say, he excludes works under any notion, I
answer. 1. Would I could see that proved. 2. Then how can James say true* 3.
Then he excludes faith under the notion of an Instrument. 4. And Repentance
under the notion of a preparative, or condition. 5. But if you mean only that
he excludes the cooperation, or efficiency of works, I yield as before. 6.
Paul expressly excludes only the works of the Law, that is, such as are
considered in opposition to Christ, or co-ordination as required by the Law of
Works, and not such as Christ himself enjoyneth in subordination to himself; so
they keep that place of subordination. 7. Paul's Question is, What is the
Righteousness which must denominate a sinner just at the Bar of the Law? And
this he says is no Works (under any notion) no not Faith, but only Christ's
Righteousness, and so faith must be taken relatively: for certainly it is
Christ, and not Faith that is that Righteousness. Is not this all that our
Divines say, or require? and so say I, over and over. But Paul does not resolve
there [what is the Condition on which Christ makes over this Righteousness of
his?] so directly, but collaterally. 8. Or if you say he do: yet if Paul speak
of our first possession of Justification, I say it is without, not only the
operation, but the presence of works, which is more then you say. 9. Or whether
he speak of begun, or continued Justification, I say we are justified without
works in Paul's sense: yea that they are not so much as a condition of the
continuance of Justification. For works in Paul's sense relate to the reward, as
of debt, and not of Grace. As a man that works to yearn wages, as Paul plainly
says, Romans 4.4. To him that works, the Reward is not of Grace, but of Debt.
These works I disclaim as sinful in their ends. But obeying the Gospel, or
being willing that Christ who has redeemed us, should rule over us, and
running that we obtain, and fighting the good fight of faith, and suffering
with Christ that we may be glorified with him, and improving our Talent, and
enduring to the end, and so doing good works, and laying up a good foundation
against the time to come: I think Paul excludes not any of these from being
bare conditions, or causae sine quibus non of our Justification at Judgment,
or the continuance of it here. Abraham's faith excluded works in Paul's sense, as
before, but not works in this sense, or in James his sense. When you say my
sense for reconciling Paul and James cannot be admitted. 1. I would you had
told me what way to do it better: and answered what I have said in that. 2.
Your reason appears to me of no seeming force. For first you say [the one says
a Justification by faith without works, you make Faith as well as works, etc.]
Answer 1. Paul says not barely without works, but without the works of the
Law. And I have showed you what he means by works, Romans 4.4. 2. I say no more
then James, that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only: I believe
both these Scriptures are true, and need no reconciling, as having no
contradiction in the terms. And yet I speak not so broad usually, as James
does. Where you say that [the Orthodox do sweetly reconcile them] I know not
who you mean by the Orthodox. For I doubt not but you know the variety of
interpretations to reconcile them. Piscator and Pemble have one Interpretation,
and way of Reconciliation. Calvin, Paraeus and most Divines another. Camero
confuteth the best esteemed, and has another. Brochmond with most of the
Lutherans have another. Jac. Laurentius, Althemor, and many more tell us of
diverse: which of these you mean by the Orthodox, I know not. But if you exclude
all those from the Orthodox, that say as I say in this, you will exclude as
Learned Divines, and well reputed of, as most Europe has bred, viz. excellent
Conrad. Bergius, Ludov. Crecius, Johan, Crocius, Johan. Bergius, etc. Who
though they all dispute for Justification by faith without works, understanding
it of the first Justification (for most Divines have taken Justification to be
rigidly simul and semel till Dr. Downam evinced that it is a continued Act) yet
they both take works for meriting works, that respect the reward as of Debt,
and they say that otherwise Obedience is a Condition (or cause as they make it)
of continuing, or not losing Justification once attained. And is not that to
say as much as I? And many more I can name you that say as much. And you
approve of Mr. Bals book, which says that works (or a purpose to walk with
God) do justify as a passive qualification of the Subject capable of
Justification. You add that [ we may dispute, etc. but you know not how a godly
man at his death can look on his Graces as Conditions of the Covenant fulfilled
by him, etc.] Which speech seems strange to me. I confess if I be so, I am
ungodly. For I have been as often, and as long in the expectation of death as
most men, and still am: and yet I am so far from being afraid of this, that I
should live and dye in horror and desperation, if I could not look upon the
conditions of the Covenant of Grace fulfilled by my self through goes workings.
If by our Graces you mean Habits, I think it more improper to call them the
fulfilling the conditions of the Covenant. For what you say of the Papists, you
know how fundamentally almost they differ from me in this, confounding the
Covenants Righteousness, etc. If it were not to one that knows it better then
my self, I would show wherein. For your question, How come the imperfections in
our conditions to be pardoned? You know I have fully answered it, both in the
Aphorisms, and Appendix. And I would rather you had given me one discovery of
the insufficiency of that answer, then asked the Question again. Briefly thus.
Guilt is an obligation to punishment (as it is here to be understood) Pardon is
a freeing from that Obligation, or Guilt and Punishment. All Punishment is due
by some Law. According to the Law or Covenant of Works the imperfection of our
Faith, Love, Obedience, etc. deserve punishment, and Christ has satisfied that
Law, and procured forgiveness of these imperfections, and so acquit us from
Guilt and punishment. The new Law, or Covenant of Grace does not threaten death
to any but final Unbelievers, and so not to the imperfection of our Faith,
Love, Obedience, where they are sincere. And where the Law threatens not
Punishment, there is no obligation to Punishment (or Guilt) on the party from
that Law, and so no work for Pardon. Imperfect believers perform the conditions
of the new Covenant truly: and it condemns none for imperfection of degree*
where there is sincerity: No man is ever pardoned, whom the new Law condemns,
that is, final Unbelievers, or Rejecters of Christ. So that Christ removes, or
forgiveth that obligation to punishment, which by the Law of Works does fall on
us for our imperfections. And for the Law of Grace where it obliges not to
punishment, that obligation which is not, cannot be taken off: nor that man
pardoned, that was never guilty. Your Question occasioneth me to be unmannerly
in opening these easy things to you, that I doubt not knew them sure twenty
years ago and more. Though I confess I had not the clear apprehensions of them
seven years ago. What ever I was then thought by others, I confess I was
ignorant, and am glad that God has in any measure healed my ignorance, though
with the loss of my reputation of being Orthodox. Where you add that conditions
have a moral efficiency, either you mean all or some; if all, or if this
whereof we are in speech, though I am loath to contest with you in Philosophy,
yet I must confess I never read so much in any Author, nor can force my self to
believe it, Causa sine qua non, est causa fatua. It is as Schibler and others,
a mere Antecedent. The word Moral is ambiguous; but if you mean it as I
conjecture you do* for an efficiency, interpretative in sense of Law, as if the
Law would ascribe efficiency to him that fulfills the condition: I utterly deny
it in the present case; or if you mean that our fulfilling the conditions has
an efficiency on God to move him to justify us, as an impulsive procatarctick
cause; I not only deny it, but deny that any such cause is properly with God,
or has efficiency on him; nor can it have the operation of the final cause,
which some call moral, seeing it is none of Gods end, nor can any thing move
God but God, nor be his end but himself. If you mean by moral efficiency any
thing else which is indeed no efficiency, I stick not on mere words.

Sir, I should not have presumed to expect so much labor from you as to write
a sheet for my satisfaction, had I not perceived that others expect much more
to less purpose, and that your letters express that hereafter you intend more.
If you deny me your answer to this, I will trouble you no more. And because I
would have your labor as short as may be, I shall only desire your answer to
these few Questions, which I ground on both your Letters, because the clear
resolving of these, will be the readiest way to satisfy me.

Quest. 1. Has the Covenant of Grace (which promises Justification and
Glorification) any condition on our parts, or none? If it have

Quest. 2. What are the Conditions? Is not Love and Obedience part of the
Condition?

Quest. 3. Must not those Conditions be fulfilled by our selves? or has Christ
fulfi^led them by himself for any man.

Quest. 4. If we must fulfill him* why may not a dying man look on them? Or
what m^^^ Paul to rejoice in the testimony of his Conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity he had his conversation? etc. And that he had
fought a good fight, and finished his cour^^ etc. And that in all good
conscience, etc. and Hezekiah, Remember Lord that I have walked before thee,
etc.

Quest 5. Can a man have any assurance ordinarily that death shall not let him
into ^ell, who has no assurance that he has performed these conditions, and
how should he have it? Can he know that all shall work to him for good, though
he know not whether he love God? or that there is no condemnation to him,
though he know not that he is in Christ, and walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit?

Quest. 6. If our Love and Obedience have no tendency to salvation, but as mere
figures, then is not the Antinomian Doctrine true, that we may not Act for
Salvation?

Q. 7. What do you mean your self, when you write against those that deny
Repentance to be a Condition to qualify the Subject to obtain forgiveness, but
a sign Lect. 20. of Justification? And when you say that Scripture limits
Justification, and Pardon only to those Subjects that are so and so qualified.
p. 171. where you instance in Repentance, Confession, Turning, Forgiving
others, etc. and make faith an Instrumental cause, but say, there are many
qualifications in the Subject. p. 172. And what mean you when you say, p. 210.
In some gross sins there are many conditions requisite (besides humiliation)
without which Pardon of sin cannot be obtained: where you instance in
Restitution. Besides those, p. 148, 149, 150. Is it not safe when a man has
prerformed these conditions, to look on them either living or dying? Or what do
you say less then I do here? I know you are none of the men of contention, and
therefore will not recant your own Doctrine in opposition to me. And if you did
not mean that these are conditions of Pardon, and Justification, when you say
they are, who can understand you? If those gross sins be in the unjustified,
you will not say that the conditions of his Pardon are no conditions of his
Justification. I know that you give more to faith (and so to man) then I do,
viz. to be the Instrument of his own Justification, (which I will not contend
against with any that by an improper sense of the word Instrument, do differ
only in a term) but what do you give less to Repentance, and the rest then I
do? you say they are conditions, and I say no more.

Qu. 8. And what do the generality of our Divines mean, when they say that
Faith and new Obedience are our conditions of the Covenant? As I have cited out
of Paereus, Scharpius, Willet, Piscator, Junius, Aretius, Alstedius, who says,
the condition of the new Covenant of Grace is partly faith, and partly
Evangelical Obedience, or Holiness of life, proceeding from faith in Christ.
Distinct. Chap. 17. p. 73. And Wendeli^ the like, etc. If it be said that they
mean they are conditions of Salvation but not of Justification; Then

Quest. 9. Whether and how it can be proved that our final Justification at
Judgment (which you have truly showed is more complete then this Justificatio
viae, and our Glorification have different conditions on our part, and so of
our persevering Justification here.

Quest. 10. And whether it be any less disparagement to Christ to have man's
works to be the conditions of his Salvation, then to be the bare conditions of
his ultimate and continued Justification? Seeing Christ is a Savior as
properly as a Justifier, and Salvation comprizeth all.

Quest. 11. What tolearable sense can be given of that multitude of plain
Scriptures which I have cited? These. 60. For my part, when I have often studied
how to forsake my present Judgment, the bare reading of the 25 of Matthew has
still utterly silenced me, if there were no more. Much more when the whole
Gospel runs in the like strain.

Quest. 12. Is not the fulfilling of the conditions of the new Law or Covenant
enough to denominate the party righteous, that is, not guilty of
non-fulfilling, or not obliged to punishment, or guilty as from that same Law
or Covenant? And does not every man that is saved so fulfill the conditions of
the new Covenant? and so is Evangelically righteous? The condition is not
Believe, and obey perfectly, but sincerely.

Quest. 13. If there be no such thing as a personal Righteousness necessary to
salvation, besides imputed Righteousness: 1. What is the meaning of all those
Scriptures cited These. 22. that say there is? 2. And of our Divines that say
there is inherent Righteousness? And 3. What real difference between the godly
and the wicked, the saved and damned?

Quest. 14. Have you found out any lower place for Love and Obedience, then to
be bare conditions, if you acknowledge them any way conducible to final
Justification, or Salvation? If you have, what place is it? and how called? and
why has it not been discovered unto the world? To say they are qualifications
of the Subject, is too general, and comprizeth qualifications of different
Natures; and it shows not how they are conducible to the said ends; and why a
man may not be saved without qualifications, as well as with them, if God have
not made them so much as conditions?

Quest. 15. Seeing I ascribe not to Evangelical Obedience the least part of
Christ's Office or Honor, nor make it any jot of our legal Righteousness, where
then lies the error or danger of my Doctrine?

Quest. 16. Do not those men that affirm we have an inherent Righteousness,
which is so pronounced properly by the Law of works, accuse the Law of God for
blessing and cursing the the same man and action? And how can that Law
pronounce a man, or his action righteous, which curses him, and condemns him
to Hell for that same Action? It makes me amazed to think what should be the
reason that Divines contest so much, that it is the Law of Works that
pronounces them inherently righteous, which they know condemns them; rather
then the Law of Grace or new Covenant, which they know absolveth them that
sincerely perform it. When all Divines acknowledge an inherent Righteousness,
and that the Law of Works is fulfilled by none, and that it pronnunceth none
righteous, but the fulfillers: and when the condition of the new Covenant must
be performed by all that will be saved: and when the Holy Ghost says that it
was by faith (and so pronounced, and measured by the Law of faith) that Abel
(the second Righteous man in the world) offered the excellent Sacrifice, and by
it obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gift, etc.
Heb. 11.4.

Quest. 17. Do not those Divines that will affirm that [our inherent
Righteousness is so called from its imperfect conformity to the Law of works]
and that [it is the Law that pronounces them righteous] lay a clear ground for
Justification by works in the worst sense? for if the Law pronounce their
works, and them properly righteous, then it justifies them: and then what need
have they (at least so far) of Christ, or Pardon? yea and what Law shall
condemn them, if the Law of Works justify them? At least do they not compound
their Righteousness (as to the law of Works) partly of Christ's satisfaction,
and partly of their own Works?

Quest. 18. Whether you should not blame Dr. Preston, Mr. Norton, Mr.
Culverwel, Mr. Throgmorton, etc. for laying by the good sound definition of
Faith (as you call it) as well as me? And is it not great partiality to let the
same pass as current from them, which from me must be condemned? And why would
you agree to such a corrupt definition, being one of the Assembly, when theirs
in the lesser Catechism (and indeed both) is in sense the very same with mine?
And why may not I be judged Orthodox in that point, when I heartily subscribe
to the National Assemblies Definition? viz. that Faith is a saving Grace,
whereby we receive, and rest on Christ alone for Salvation, as he is offered to
us in the Gospel.]

Qu. 19. Do I say any more then the Assembly says in the preceding Question? [
What does God require of us, that we may escape his wrath and curse due to us
for sin? Answ. God requires of us (to escape the said wrath and curse, etc.)
Faith in Jesus Christ, repentance unto life, with the diligent use of all the
outward means, whereby Christ communicates to us the benefits of Redemption.]
And is not Justification one benefit? And is not final Justification a freeing
us from that Curse?

Quest. 20. Which call you the good, sound definition of Faith? When our famous
Reformers placed it in Assurance; Camero, and others in persuasion (such as is
in the understanding) others in Assent, as Dr. Downam, etc. Others in a Belief
of Gods special Love, and that sin is pardoned. Others in Affiance or
Recumbency. Others in diverse of these. Some, as Mr. Ball, calling it a fiducial
Assent. Others an obediential Affiancce. Did not each of these forsake that
which by the former was accounted the good sound Definition? And why may not I
with Dr. Preston, Mr. Wallis, etc. say it is an Acceptance, or consent, joined
with Assent? or with the Assembly, and the rest, say it is a receiving, which
is the same in a more Metaphorical term.

Quest. 21. If you judge as Melanchton, John Crocius, Davenant, Amesius, etc.
that Faith is in both faculties; how can you then over-leap the Elicite Acts of
the will (which have respect to means) Eligere, consentive, uti?

Quest. 22. If the formal reason of justifying faith lie in a Belief or
Persuasion that Christ will pardon and save us: or in an Affiance or resting on
him, or Trusting to him only for Salvation: or in an Acceptance of him as a
Savior, merely to justify and save from Hell: Why then are not almost all
among us justified and saved? when I scarce meet with one of an hundred, that
is not unfeignedly willing, that Christ should pardon, and justify, and save
them, and do verily trust, that Christ will do it; and the freer it is, the
better they like it. If they may whore and drink, and be covetous, and let
alone all the practice of Godliness, and yet be saved, they will consent. If it
be said that they rest not on Christ for Justification sincerely; I Ans. They
do it really, and unfeignedly, and not dissemblingly, which as we may know in
all probability by others, so we may know it certainly by our own hearts, while
unregenerate. So that it is not the natural, but the moral Truth, that is
wanting: And what is that? And wherein is the Essential, formal difference
between a wicked man's resting on Christ for Justification, and a true
Believers? To say it is seen in the Fruits, is not to show the Essential
difference.

Quest. 23. If resting on Christ for Justification be the only condition of
final Justification, What is the reason that Perkins, Bolton, Hooker, Preston,
Tailor, Elton, Whately, and all the godly Divines also yet living do spend most
of their labor to bring men to obey Christ as their Lord, and not the hundredth
line or word to press them to Trust that he will pardon and save them? All the
powerful Perachers that ever I heard, however they dispute, yet when they are
preaching to the generality of people, they zealously cry down laziness,
lukewarmness, negligence, unholyness, profaneness, etc. As that which would be
the liklyest cause of the damnation of the people. But if only the foresaid
says be the condition, and all other Graces or Duties be but mere signal
effects of this, and signal qualifications of the subject, and not so much a
conditions, what need all this? Were it not then better to persuade all people,
even when they are whoring, or drunk, to trust on Christ to pardon and justify
them? And then when they have the tree and cause, the fruits and signal effects
will follow.

Quest. 24. Yea, Why do the best Divines preach so much against Presumption?
And what is Presumption, if it be not this very faith which Divines call
justifying? viz. the Trusting to Christ for Pardon and Salvation only, without
taking him for their King and Prophet? If it be said that this last must be
present, though not justify: How can the bare presence of an idle Accident so
make, or mar the efficacy of the cause?

Quest. 25. If to be unwilling that Christ should reign over us, be part of the
directly condemning sin, Luke 19.27. why is not the willingness he should
reign, part of saving, justifying faith?

Quest. 26. Seeing resting in Christ is no Physical apprehension of him (who is
bodily in Heaven) nor of his Righteousness (which is not a being capable of
such an apprehension) How can that Resting justify more then any other Act,
but only as it is the condition to which the Promise is made? Resting on a
friend for a Benefit, makes it not yours, but his gift does that. As Perkins
(cited by me) To believe the Kingdom of France shall be mine, makes it not
mine: But to believe Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. (vid. loc. where
he says as much as I) vol. 1. p. 662. If God had not said [He that believes
shall be justified and saved,] would Believing have done it? And if he had
said, [He that repents, or loves, or calls on the name of the Lord, shall
be justified or saved] would not these have done it? if so; then does not faith
justify directly, as the condition of the Gift, Promise, or new Covenant? And
its apprehension is but its aptitude to be set apart for this Office: And if it
justify as a condition of the Promise: must not others do it so far as they
are parts of the Condition?

Sir, If you should deny me the favor I hope for in resolving these doubts,
yet let me hear whether I may expect it or not. And in the interim I shall
search in jealousy, and pray for direction: But till your Arguments shall
change my judgment, I remain confident that I can maintain most of the
Antinomian Dotages against any man that denies the principles of my Book: and
that which is accounted novelty in it, is but a more explicate, distinct,
necessary delivery of common Truths.

Yours, RICHARD BAXTER
April 5, 1650

Sir
I Am sorry that you are not in capacity for the motion I proffered: I thought
discourse would not so much infeeble you, especially when it would have been in
so loving a way: And I judged it the more seasable, because I had been informed
of a late solemn conference you had about Paedobaptism, which could not but
much spend you, I shall press no more for it, although this very letter does
abundantly confirm me, that letters are but a loss of time: for one word might
have prevented many large digressions. Is not that endeavor of yours in your
seventh question to prove out of my book, that Repentance is a necessary
condition, or qualification in the Subject to be pardoned, etc. a mere
impertinency? You earnestly desire satisfaction of your conscience, therefore I
cannot think you do wilfully mistake. For is that the state of the question
with us? Is it not this, whether the Gospel Righteousness be made ours,
otherwise then by believing? You say by believing, and Obedience. I say only
believing. I say faith is only the condition justifying, or instrument
receiving, you make a justifying Repentance, a justifying Patience: you make
other acts of grace justifying as well: so that whereas heretofore, we only had
justifying faith, now there are as many other qualities, and all justifying, as
there are Graces. So that I do firmly hold (and it needs a recantation) that
repentance and other exercises of Grace are antecedent qualifications, and are
media ordinata, in the use whereof only pardon can be had. But what is this to
you? Who expressly maintain the righteousness of the Covenant of Grace to be
made ours, upon our godly working, as well as believing. If therefore you had
spent your self to show that faith had no peculiar Instrumentality in our
Justification, but what other Graces have, then you had hit the mark. What is
more obvious, then that there are many conditions in justificato, which are not
in actu justificationis? The fastening of the head to the body is a necessary
condition in homine vidente, but it is not in actu videntis. You grant indeed
some precedence to faith, but you make Faith and Works aeque, though not
aequaliter, the conditions of Justification. I should say much more to the
state of the question, but I forbear. In other things you seem to come off; and
though I do not say you recede from your Assertions, yet you much mollify
them, that I need not therein contend with you. But here is the stick. Let it
be demonstrated, that whereas the Scripture in the current of it attributes
Justification to believing only: as through faith, and by Faith, and through
faith in his blood, that you can as truly say, its received by love, and its
through love of his blood shed for our sakes, etc. This is a little of that
much which might be said to the state of the question. This I judge new
Doctrine, justifying Repentance, justifying Charity. And in my Letter I laid
down an Argument, Romans 4. Concerning Abraham's, Justification, the Pattern of
all others. To this you reckon up many Answers, but I see not the Argument
shaken by it. First you say, you exclude a cooperation effective, but why do
we strive about words? You do not exclude works justifying, as well as faith,
let the expressions be what they will. Whereas Paul says, he would be found
having the Righteousness which is by faith, you will add, and which is by love,
by zeal. 2. You desire it to be proved, that Paul excludes all works under any
notion; I think its very easily done: First, because of the immediate
opposition between Faith and Works; now you will contradict Paul's Argument, and
give a tertium, works that are of Grace. But the Apostles opposition is so
immediate here and in other places, between faith and any thing of ours, that
he admits of no medium. 2. He instances in Abraham's works, and excludes them:
now were Abraham's works, works done by the mere strength of the Law? Did not
Abraham's Obedience, and other works flow from Grace? Were Abraham's works in
opposition to Christ? Yet even these are excluded. 3. He excludes all works
under any notion by the opposition, justifying, covering, all is wholly
attributed unto God. 4. The Assertion is universal: The Apostle says, without
works in general, ver. 6. And he works not, ver. 5. Lastly, By the testimony he
brings from the Psalmist, that blessedness is where sin is not imputed, whrere
it is forgiven; These reasons do evidence that he excludes works under all
notions in the act of Justification, though not from the person justified. 3.
You say, how then says James true? But I ask, if there be justifying works,
how says Paul true? But again, James says true: for this faith which in
respect of its act ad intra, does only justify, yet it works ad extra. The old
Assertion is fides quae viva, not quo viva. You speak of a seeming Antilogie
among the orthodox in this reconciliation, but though all go not eadem semi^a,
yet they do eadem via against works under any notion whatsoever in the act of
Justification. 4. You argue that faith as an Instrument is excluded. Thus
Bellarmine also, apprehendere est opus, therefore faith is excluded: But non
sequitur: Faith is passive in its Instrumentality; and although to believe, be
a Grammatical action, its verbum activum, yet its physic^n, or (...) passive. A
man by believing, does not operari, but recipere: As videre, audire, are
Grammatical actions, but Physical or natural passions: now you cannot say thus
of the exercises of other Graces: this is the seeming strength of your
Exceptions. For Repentance is not excluded as qualifying, but as recipient,
which is a fifth Exception.

As for your discourse, whether Paul disputes what is our Righteousness? or
upon what terms it is made over to us, it does not much matter: for indeed Paul
speaks to both those only inclusively or collaterally, as you say: but that
which he chiefly intends, is to show in what manner we are justified, whether
by believing or working, and these he makes two immediate opposites, not
granting any tertium. You speak of Faith taken relatively for Christ's
Righteousness; but how can you find out such a figure for faith in your sense,
unless you will acknowledge Love or Obedience relatively for Christ's
Righteousness? Indeed those that hold Faith instrumentally, receiving the whole
righteousness of Christ, and no other Grace, they often speak of faith taken
relatively, but so cannot you, who hold that not only seeing this brazen
Serpent, but any other actions of sense will as well heal the wounded
Christian. You say you acknowledge the Assemblies definition of resting or
receiving, you cannot take in that sense, as they declare it, as the Scripture
words which are Metaphorical, do imply: for its the resting of a burdened soul
upon Christ only for Righseousness, and by this Christ's Righteousness is made
over to us; and its a receiving of Christ, as the hand embraces any Object:
now you make the Righteousness of Christ made over to us in any other exercise
of Grace as well as this. So that although you would willingly seem not to
recede from others, yet you plainly do: and although you think your Assertions
are but more distinct explications, yet they are indeed destructive Assertions
to what our Divines do deliver: neither may you, while you intend to dispute,
exactly build upon some homiletical or popular expression in any man's book.

You reply to a second part in my Letter: whether a godly man dying, may be
affected according to your position, and thereupon you instance in Hezekiah,
Paul, and that no man can dye with comfort without the evidence of these works.
But is this the state of the question with us? Do you think that I deny a godly
life to be a comfortable testimony, and a necessary qualification of a man for
pardon? You cannot think that you speak to the point in this. But here is the
question, Can a godly man dying, think the Righteousness of Christ is made his
by working or believing? Is it repent, and Christ's Righteousness is by this
made yours, and rest in Christ? Certainly the dying Christian is in agonies
directed to this resting on Christ, to the eying of this brazen Serpent, not to
be found in any thing but the Righteousness by faith. Its an act of Dependence,
not of Obedience that interests us in Christ's Righteousness. Its that puts on
the robes of Christ, that our nakedness may not appear. And that is very harsh
still, which you express, to expect the Righteousness of the Covenant of Grace
upon the conditions fulfilled by your se;lf, through Gods workings. I am
unwilling to parallel this with some passages that might be quoted out of
unsound Authors; but that I am confident, howsoever your Pen-writes, you have a
tutissimum est to rest only upon Christ's Righteousness, and that by bare
resting, and beleiving you look for a Righteousness. As Philosophers say, we
see or hear intus recipiendo, not extra mittendo: otherwise Bellarmine argues
consonantly enough, that Love would justify as well as faith; but we say that
Faith does pati, Love does agere. Not but that faith is an active grace, only
in this act it is mere recipient.

Sir, I have not time, nor paper to answer those many questions, the most of
which I conceive impertinent to this business: and your Explication of your
self, how imperfections in our Graces are done away, and yet the conditions of
righteousness, is to me (...): but I cannot go any further. What I have written
with much love and respect to you, I should account it a great mercy to be
instrumental to bring you to the right way again: If there be so much Joy for
reducing a wandering sheep, be not offended if I say there will be much more for
an erring shepherd: though I hope at last your error may prove in words rather
then in sense: with heartly brotherly love I have written this, and so let it
be received from your fellow laborer, who honors Gods gifts in you, and is
also sensible of his own infirmities, and proneness to err.


Dear Sir,
IF you doubt of the truth of my bodily infirmity, it is because you neither
know my body nor mind. The dispute at Bewdley, as it was almost at home, so I
had the choice of the time, and such strength vouchsafed from God, which I
cannot again expect, much less promise my self. I told you I have some lucida
intervalla, perhaps a few hours in a month: but if upon such uncertainty I
should draw you to a journey, and then ten to one fail you, I should be
injurious. But seeing you so far and freely condescend, if God will show me so
much Mercy, as to enable this restless uncessantly-pained Sceleton to such a
work, I shall be bold to send you word, and claim the favor you offer. In the
mean time it is my duty to let you know, I have received your Letter, and to
return your hearty thanks for it, though it be not that which I hoped for, and
shall now cease to expect. I am convinced now as well as you that Letters are
but a loss of time: but your Arguments or direct answers to my Questions, would
have been for my advantage, a precious improvement of it: but seeing I may not
be so happy, I must rest content. It still seems to my weak understanding to
be no impertinency to prove that your self affirm Repentance, Confession,
Turning, Forgiveing others, etc, to be more then signs, i. e. to be conditions
to qualify the Subject to obtain forgiveness; and to tell you that I say no
more, and to tell you still, that you give more to faith (and so to man) then
I; but I give no more to works for ought I descern then you; I am sure then our
ordinary Divines do: And if I do mistake herein, you have little reason to
suspect me of willfulness; though of weakness as much as you please. As for the
state of the Question between us, which you speak of, I am a stranger to it,
and know not what you mean. I never came to the stating of a Question with you;
nor did you state any to me in your letters, but mentioned your vehement
dissent from several passages in my book, and therefore I had reason to think
that you fell upon the Questions as there they were stated; so that it is
intime and medullitus, pertinent to my question, which is impertinent to yours.
You say the question is, [ Whether the Gospel righteousness be made ours
otherwise then by believing?] and tell me that I say [by believing and
obedience] when I never stated such a question, nor ever gave such an answer. I
suppose by [Gospel Righteousness] you mean Christ's Righteousness given to
Believers: Now I have affirmed that [those only shall have part in Christ's
satisfaction, and so in him be legally righteous, who do believe and obey the
Gospel, and so are in themselves Evangelically righteous.] But your phrase
[made ours] does intimate that our first possession of Christ's Righteousness
should be upon Obedience as well as Faith; which I never affirmed: But Christ's
Righteousness is continued ours on condition of obeying him, though not made
ours so: and we shall be justified at Judgment also on that condition. As it
is not marriage duty, but Contract which is the condition of a woman's first
Interest in her Husband and his riches; but marriage duty and the performance
of that Covenant, is the condition of her Interest as continued. And indeed it
is much of my care in that Book to shun and avoid that question which you say
is stated between us: for I knew how much ambiguity is in the Word [By] which I
was loath to play with. I know we are justified By God the Father, By Christ's
satisfaction, By Christ's absolution, By the Gospel Covenant or Promise, By the
Sacraments, By Faith, By Works, (for I will never be ashamed to speak the words
of the Holy Ghost) By our words (for so says Christ) Therefore if you will
needs maintain in general, that Christ's Righteousness is made ours, no
otherwise then by beleiving, nor otherwise continued ours; you see how much you
must exclude. But to remove such Ambiguity, I distinguish between justifying
[By] as an efficient instrumental Cause, and [By] as by a condition: and I
still affirm that Works or Obedience do never justify as any cause, much less
such a cause; but that by them as by a condition appointed by the free Lawgiver
and Justifier we are finally justified. And truly Sir, it is past my reach at
present to understand what you say less in this then I, except you differ only
about the word [By], and not the sense; and think that it is improper to say
that Pardon or Justification is By that which is but a condition: You seem here
to drive all at this, and yet me thinks you should not. 1. Because you affirm
your self, that conditions have a moral efficiency: and then it seems when you
say Repentance, Confession, etc. are conditions, you mean they are morally
efficient; which is a giving more to works then ever I did. 2. Because you know
it is the phrase of Christ and his Spirit, that we are justified By our words
and works; and it is safe speaking in Scripture phrase. 3. Because you say
after that my Assertions are destructive of what Divines deliver: but the word
By, if we are agreed in the sense, cannot be destructive; and except the phrase
only By, etc. be the difference, where is it? When you say Repentance, etc. are
conditions, and I say they are no more: and I have nothing from you of any
disagreement about the sense of the word condition. Lest you should doubt of my
meaning in that, I understand it as in our usual speech it is taken, and as
Lawyers and Divines generally do, viz. Est Lex addita negotio, quae donec
praestetur, eventum suspendit. Vel est modus, vel causa quae suspendit id quod
agitur, quoad ex post facto confirmetur, ut Cujacius. And whereas Conditions
are usually distinguished into potestativas, causales and mixtas, seu communes,
I mean conditiones potestativas. Where you add that you say only faith is the
condition justifying. etc. but I make a justifying Repentance, etc. And whereas
heretofore we had only justifying faith, now, etc.] I answer, 1. If by
justifying Repentance, etc. you mean that which is (as you say Faith is) an
instrument or efficient Cause, I never dreamed of any such: If as a Condition;
you confess it your self. 2. If you speak against the sense, we are agreed in
that for ought I know: If against the phrase, then justifying Faith or
Repentance is no Scripture phrase: but to be justified By faith, and By works,
and By words, are all Scripture phrases. You say, you firmly hold that
Repentance and other Exercises of Grace are antecedent qualifications, and
media ordinat^, in the use whereof only Pardon can be had: but what is this to
me? etc. I answer. 1. Add conditions as you do in your Book, and you say as
much as I. 2. If by the other exercises of Grace you mean the particulars in
your book enumerated, or the like; and if by Pardon, you mean even the first
pardon (as the word Only shows you do) then you go quite beyond me, and give
far more to those exercises of grace then I dare do. For I say that Christ and
all his imputed Righteousness, is made ours, and we pardoned and justified at
first without any works or obedience more then bare faith, (and what is
precedent in its place or concomitant) and that bona opera sequuntur
justificatum non praecedunt justificandum, in regard of our first
justification. I dare not say, they are Antecedents or media ordinata. Where
you add, what is that to you that make the righteousness of the Covenant of
grace to be made ours upon our godly working. etc. I answer, 1. I have showed
it is as much as I say, if not more, [upon] intending but a condition or medium
ordinatum. 2. I never said what you say I maintain in phrase or sense (if the
word [made] intend either efficiency or any causality, or the first possession
of Righteousness. 3. You much use the harsh phrase of [working] as here [Godly
working] as mine; which I doubt whether ever I uttered or used; And the term
[works] I little use, but in the explication of James. For I told you that I
disclaim works in Paul's sense, Romans 4.4. which make the reward not of grace,
but of debt. You add [If therefore you had spent your self to show that faith
has no peculiar instrumentality in our justification but what other graces
have, then you had hit the mark.] Answ. I confess Sir you now come to the point
in difference. But do you not hereby confess that I give no more to works then
you, but only less to faith? Why then do you still harp upon the word [works]
as if I did give more to them? the task you now set me is to prove that faith
does no more, and not that works do so much: That faith is not an instrument,
and not that love or obedience are conditions. And to this I answer you: 1. I
have in my book said somewhat to prove faith no instrument of justifying, and
you said nothing against it. Why then should I aim at this mark? 2. I think I
have proved there that faith justifies primarily and properly as the condition
of the Covenant, and but remotely as A receiving justification, this which you
call the instrumentality, being but the very formal nature of the act, and so
the quasi materia or its aptitude to the office of Justifying. And because I
build much on this supposition, I put it in the Queries, which you judge
impertinent. 3. Yet if you will understand the word instrument laxely, I have
not any where denied faith to have such an instrumentality (that is, receiving
or apprehensiveness) above other graces: Only I deny and most confidently deny
that that is the formal, proper or nearest cause of faith's justifying: But the
formal reason is, because God has made it the condition of the Covenant,
promising justification to such receiving, which else would have no more
justified then any other act: And therefore so far as others are made
conditions, and the promise to us on them, they must needs have some such use
as well as faith: And that they are conditions, you confess as much as I. 4.
But what if I be mistaken in this point? what is the danger? If faith should
deserve the name of an instrument, when I think it is but a condition? 1. Is it
any danger to give less to faith then others, while I give no less to Christ?
(For if you should think I gave less to Christ then others, I should provoke
you again and again to show wherein) 2. I deny nothing that Scripture says: It
says not that faith is an instrument: (perhaps you will tell me Veronius
argues thus: But I mean it is neither in the letter nor plain sense; and then I
care not who speaks it, if true.) 3. You make man an efficient cause of
justifying himself. (For the instrument is an efficient cause): And what if I
dare not give so much to man? is there any danger in it? or should I be spoke
against for the Doctrine of obedience, as if I gave more to man then you, when
I give so much less? 4. Those that dissent from me do make the very natural act
of faith, which is most essential to it, and inseparable from it, as it from it
self, viz. Its apprehension of Christ's Righteousness, to be the proper primary
reason of its justifying. What if I dare not do so, but give that glory to God,
and not to the nature of our own act? and say, that Fides quae recipit
Justificat, sed non qua recipit primarily, but as it is the condition which the
free justifier has conferred this honor upon? is there any danger in this?
and will there be joy in heaven for reducing a man from such an opinion?

You say, [ What more obvious then that there are many conditions in
justificato, which are not in actu justificationis: The fastening the head to
the body, etc.] Answ. 1. You said before that they are Antecedents and Media
ordinata, and then they are sure conditions in justificando as well as in
justificato. 2. Your mention of the condition in homine vidente is besides our
business, and is only of a natural condition, or qualification in genere
naturae; When we are speaking only of an active condition in genere moris: The
former is improperly, the later properly called a condition. 3. If this be your
meaning, I confess there are many natural or passive qualifications necessary,
which are no active or proper moral conditions in a Law-sense; But this is
nothing to the matter. 4. The phrases of [Conditions in justificato, and in
actu justificationis] are ambiguous, and in the Moral sense improper. Our
question is whether they are conditions ad justificationem recipiendam: Which
yet in regard of time are in actu justificationis, but not conditiones vel
qualificationes ipsius actus. And if you did not think that repentance is a
condition ad justificationem recipiendam, and so in actu justificationis, how
can you say it is medium ordinatum? A medium, as such, essentially has some
tendency or conducibleness to its end. 5. As obvious therefore as you think
this is, it is past the reach of my dull apprehension to conceive of your
conditions in a judiciary sense, which are in justificato for the obtaining of
justification, and not be both ad actum and in actu justificationis: for I
suppose you are more accurate and serious then by the word condition to mean
modum vel affectionem entis Metaphysicam, vel subjecti alicujus adjunctum vel
qualificationem in sense Physico, when we are speaking only of conditions in
sensu forensi. And there are many thousand honest Christians as dull as I, and
therefore I do not think it can be any weighty point of faith which must be
supported by such subtilties which are past our reach, though obvious to yours:
God uses not to hang men's salvation on such School distinctions which few men
can understand. 6. And every such Tyro in Philosophy as I, cannot reach your
Phylosophical subtilty neither; to understand that the fastening of the head to
the body is not conditio in actu videntis; (though it be nothing to our
purpose); Indeed we may think it of more remote use then some other, and but
propter aliud, and quasi conditio conditionis; and if you say so of Repentance,
etc. we should not disagree.

You say [In other things I come off, and so mollify my assertions, that you
need not contend] Answ. 1. I would you had told me wherein I so come off: For I
know not of a word. If you mean in that I now say, obedience is no condition of
our first attaining justification, but only of the continuance of it, etc. I
said the same over and over in my book, and lest it should be over-lookt, I put
it in the Index of distinctions. If you mean not this, I know not what you
mean. 2. But if explication of my self will so mollify and prevent contending,
I shall be glad to explain my self yet further: Yea, and heartily to recant
where I see my error. For that which you desire, I demonstrate that its By
love, and Through love, etc. I have answered before by distinguishing of the
sense of By and Through: and in my sense I have brought you forty plain Texts
in my book for proof of it, which show it is no new Doctrine.

To your argument from Romans 4. Where you say that Abraham's justification is the
pattern of all others, I conceive that an uncouth speech, strange to Scripture
for phrase and proper sense, though in a large sense tolerable and true:
Certain I am that Paul brings Abraham's example to prove that we are justified
by faith without the works of the Law; but as certain that our faith must
differ from Abraham's, even in the essentials of it: We must believe that this
Jesus is he, or we shall dye in our sins; which Abraham was not required to
believe. Our faith is an explicit Assent and Consent to the Mediators Offices,
viz. that he be our Lord and Savior, and a Covenanting with him, and giving up
our selves to him accordingly: But whether Abraham's (and all recited in Heb.
11.) were such, is questionable. Too much looking on Abraham as a pattern,
seems to be it that occasioned Grotius to give that wretched definition of
faith, (Annot. in loc.) that [it is but a high estimation of Gods power and
wisdom, and faithfulness in keeping his promises, etc.] (yet I know he came
short also of describing that faith which he looked on as the pattern.)

My first answer was that I exclude also any effective cooperation; to which
you say, [ Why do we strive about words, etc.] I see that men's conceivings are
so various, that there is no hopes that we should be in all things of one mind.
Because I was loath to strive about words, therefore I distinguished between
causality, and conditionality, knowing that the word By was ambiguous (when we
are said to be justified By faith etc.) now you take this distinguishing to be
striving about words, to avoid which, you would bring we back to the ambiguous
term again. Whereas I cannot but be most confident, that as guile is most in
Generals, so there would be nothing else between us but striving about words,
if we dispute on an unexplained term, and without distinction. Do you indeed
think, that to be an efficient cause of our justification, and to be a bare
condition, is all one? or do you think the difference to be of no moment? You
say, I do not exclude works justifying as well as faith, let the expressions be
what they will.] Answ. 1. You should have said, [Let the sense, or way of
justifying be what it will*] for sure the difference between an efficient cause
and a condition is more then in the expression, or else I have been long
mistaken. 2. I do not exclude God justifying, Christ justifying, the Word
justifying, etc. and yet to distinguish between the way that these justify in,
and the way in which faith justifies, I take to be no striving about words, but
of as high concernment as my salvation is worth. 3. Either you mislike my
phrase, or my sense: if the phrase, then you mislike the word of God, which
says, a man is justified by works and not by faith only; If the sense, then
you should not fall upon the phrase: and then to distinguish and explain, is
not to strive about words. 4. If I do bring faith and obedience nearer in
justification then others, it is not by giving more to works then others, but
by giving less to faith; And if in that I err, you should have fallen on that
and showed it, and not speak still as if I gave more to works then you. I am
sure I give less to man, and therefore no less than you to Christ. I perceive
not the least disadvantage herein that I lie open to, but only the odium of the
phrase of justification by works, with men that are carried by prejudice and
custom. 5. I will not quarrel about such a word; but I like not your phrase of
[Faith justifying, and works justifying,] for it is fitter to introduce the
conceit of an efficiency in them, then to say, [We are justified by faith and
by works] which are only the Scripture phrase, and signify but a
conditionality.

To that you say out of Phil. 3.9. I believe Paul does most appositely oppose
the righteousness which is by faith to that which is by the Law. But then 1. He
means not [By faith as an instrument of justification] 2. Nor by faith which is
but a mere affiance on Christ for justification, or only as such. 3. Nor does
he exclude Knowledge, Repentance, Obedience, etc. 4. But to say that
righteousness or justification is by love, or by obedience, etc. Without adding
any more, is not a convenient speech, as it is to say that righteousness is by
faith. 1. Because the speech seems to be of the first receiving of
righteousness, wherein obedience or works have no hand. 2. Because faith having
most clear direct relation to Christ, does most plainly point out our
righteousness to be in him. 3. Because faith as it is taken in the Gospel, is a
most comprehensive grace, containing many acts, and implying or including many
others which relate to Christ as the object also. Even obedience to Christ is
employed as a necessary subsequent part of the condition, seeing faith is an
accepting of Christ as Lord and King, and Head, and Husband, as well as a
justifier. 5. Yet Scripture says as well as I, that Christ shall justify us
By his knowledge, and we shall be justified by our words, and by works; and me
thinks it should be no sin to speak the words of God, except it be showed that
I misunderstand them. It is not so fit a phrase, to say, that a poor ignoble
woman, was made rich and honorable by her Love, or Obedience, or Marriage,
faithfulness, and conjugal actions, as to say, it was by marriage with such a
Noble man, or consent to take him to be her husband: For the marriage consent
and Covenant does imply conjugal affection, action and faithfulness. Yet are
these last as flat conditions of her continuing her enjoyments as the marriage
Covenant was of first obtaining them.

To my second Answer, you show that Paul excludes works under any notion. 1.
From his opposition between faith and works, where you say I contradict Paul,
and give a tertium. To which I answer, to distinguish of Paul's terms, and
explain his meaning in his own words is not to give a tertium, or contradict;
but this is all that I do. I distinguish of the word Works; sometime it is
taken more largely for Acts or Actions, and so James takes it: sometimes more
strictly for only such Actions as a Labourer performs for his Wages, or which
make the Reward to be not of Grace, but of debt. So Paul tells you that he
understands or uses the term, Romans 4.4. usually therefore calling them Works
of the Law. Now he that excludes Works only under this notion, does not
therefore exclude them under every notion. Where you add that Paul's opposition
is between Faith and any thing of ours: I answer. 1. Is not Faith ours as much
Love, etc? 2. Are not Knowledge, Words, Works, ours, by all which God says, we
are justified? 3. There is no such Scripture where Paul makes any such
opposition: but only he renounceth his own Righteousness which is of the Law,
Phil. 3.8, 9. and any thing of our own that may be called Works in the stricter
sense.

Your second is, because Paul excludes Abraham's works, etc. Answer. 1. You make
my tertium to be [works that are of Grace] and here again, works that flow from
Grace, and say, Abraham's were not by mere strength of the Law: But these are no
words of mine; nor is it candid to feign them to be mine; but that I impute it
to your haste: I believe you remembered so well the words of Andradius,
Bellarmine, and other Papists, that they dropped from your pen in haste in
stead of mine; nor is my sense any whit like theirs; for I speak not of the
efficient cause of works, (Nature or Grace) nor the mere command requiring
them, when I speak of Law and Gospel: but the full entire Covenant or Law
consisting of all its parts, and so making our Acts the conditions of the
Punishment or Reward: as I have opened over and over in my Book. 2. You ask,
Were Abraham's works in opposition to that, etc? Answer. 1. Paul excludes also
works in co-ordination with Christ, and so do I. 2. Yea and works supposed to
be subordinate to Christ, which are not capable of a real subordination, 3. but
not such as are truly subordinate, from being such conditions as is before
said. 4. You seem to me to mistake Paul much, as if he took it for granted,
that Abraham had such works which Paul disputes against, but could not be
justified by them; Whereas I doubt not to say, that Paul contrarily supposes
that Abraham had no such Works, (which make the reward to be of Debt, and not
of Grace) and therefore could not be justified by them.

Your third Argument is, [because imputing, covering, all is wholly attributed
to God.] Answer, I doubt not but that God is the only Principal efficient
Cause, and his Promise or Covenant the Instrumental: therefore I cannot think
as others, that man is the efficient Instrumental by believing, or that Faith
is such: But what Is all therefore attributed to God? Even the performance of
the Conditions on man's part? Or are there no such conditions which man must
perform himself or perish? God only covers sin, imputes Righteousness, etc.
but to none who have not performed the Conditions. Is Believing attributed to
God, or is it an act of man? Or is it excluded? When will you prove the
Consequence of this Argument?

Your fifth Argument is, [because the Assertion is universal without works in
general] Answer, 1. Does not the Apostle contradict you by expounding himself
in the very next verse before those you cite? Romans 4.4. That by works he means
not simply good Actions, as James does, but such as make the reward to be of
debt and not of Grace? Indeed such works are universally excluded. 2. Therefore
he excludes the very presence of works, and says, to him that works not,
etc. ver. 5. But the presence of good actions you say is not excluded.

Your last Argument seems to me the same with the fourth, and it forces me to
admire that you should think the consequence good. Blessedness is when sin is
forgiven; therefore no work or good act performed by man is the condition of
forgiveness, either as begun or continued, or consummate] If this be not your
consequence, you say nothing against me: if it be, I assure you it is not in my
Power to believe it, nor to discern the least shadow of probability of truth
in it, nor to free it from the charge of being the grossest Antinomianism (si
pace tui ita dicam.) And here I must needs tell you also my utter disability to
reconcile you with your self; for you before say, they are media ordinata, and
here you say, They are excluded under any notion: As if to be a medium were no
notion; or the medium did nothing in or to the very justifying of the person.

To my next Answer. If works be excluded under any notion, then James his words
cannot be true, that we are justified by works. You reply, If there be
justifying works, how says Paul true? I answer. This is a most evident Petitio
principii. It is undeniable that James includes works under some notion: and
that Paul excludes them under some other notion: now therefore I might well
ask, How says James true else? Because my supposition cannot be denied: But
you suppose that Paul excludes works under any notion, (which is the very
Question, and is denied.) When you ask how says Paul true? Paul says true
because he speaks of works strictly taken, as is by himself explained: James
could not say true, if works under every notion (as you say) be excluded.

Next you come to reconcile them by expounding James; where you say, Faith
which in respect of its Act ad intra, only justifies, yet it works ad extra:
fides quae viva, non qua viva. I answer. What Is this to the Question? The
Question is not whether Faith work? Nor whether Faith justify? Nor what Faith
justifies? But in what sense James says, we are justified by works, and not
by Faith only? You answer by a direct contradiction to James, (if I can reach
the sense of your Answer) saying, It is by Faith only, and that not as it
lives, etc. So dare not I directly say, it is not by works, when God says it
is: but think I am bound to distinguish, and show in what sense works justify,
and in what not; and not to say flatly against God, that we are not justified
by works under any notion, but only by the Faith which works. A denial of
Gods Assertions is an ill expounding of them.

To what you say of the judgment of the Orthodox, [that they go eadem via et
si non eadem semita] I answer, you may understand your distinction as you
please, but I have showed the difference: some understand it of justification
before God; others before men, etc. And if you please to make the way wide
enough, you may take me among the Orthodox, that go eadem via: if not, I will
stand out with James.

When you say [they exclude works under any notion in the act of
justification.] I answer, 1. Your self include them as antecedents and
concomitants (thought I do not,) 2. I have showed before that [in the act,
etc.] is ambiguous. If you mean [as Agents of Causes], so do I exclude them. If
you mean [as conditions required by the new Law to the continuing and
consummating our justification] I have showed you that Divines do judge
otherwise.

My next answer was [If works under any notion be excluded, then faith is
excluded] You reply 1. [Thus Bellarmine, etc.] Answ. I knew indeed that
Bellarmine says so. But Sir, you speak to one that is very near Gods tribunal,
and therefore is resolved to look after naked truth, and not to be affrighted
from it by the name either of Bellarmine or Antichrist; and who is at last
brought to wink at prejudice. I am fully resolved by Gods grace to go on in the
way of God as he discovers it to me, and not to turn out of it when
Bellarmine stands in it. Though the Devils believe, I will (by Gods help)
believe too: and not deny Christ, because the Devils confess him. You say, Non
sequitur, I prove the consequence. If all works (or acts) be excluded under any
notion whatsoever, and if faith be a work or act then faith is excluded. But,
etc. Ergo, etc. By the reason of your denial I understand and nothing that you
deny, but [that faith is a work or act] which I never heard denied before, and
I hope never shall do again. The common answer to Bellarmine is, that faith
which is a work justifies, but not as it is a work: Which answer I confess to
be sound, and subscribe to it. But then according to that, faith which is a
work justifies under some notion (suppose it were under the notion of an
instrument) though not under the notion of a work. But you go another way, and
say, 1. Faith is passive in its instrumentality, and though to believe, be a
grammatical action, its verbum activum, yet its physice, or huper physice
passive. A man by believing does not operari, but recipere. As videre, audire,
are Grammatical actions, but physical or natural passions, etc. Answer. 1.
These are very sublime Assertions, quite past the reach of my capacity, and of
all theirs that I use to converse with; and I dare say it is no Heresy to deny
them, nor can that point be near the foundation that stands upon such props
which few men can apprehend. 2. What if Faith were passive in its
Instrumentality? Is it not at all an Act therefore? If it be; Then that which
is an Act or Work, is not excluded under the notion of a passive Instrument;
and so not under every notion (I speak on your grounds. But) because you told
me before that I should have spent my self against this Instrumentality of
Faith if I would hit the mark; I will speak the more largely to it now: And 1.
Enquire whether videre, audire, be only Grammatical Actions (as you call them)
and natural passions? 2. Whether Believing be so, only verbum activum, but
Physically passive? And so to Believe, is not agere, but pati or recipere? 3.
Whether faith be passive in its Instrumentality? 4. Whether the same may not be
said as truly of other Graces? 5. Whether Faith be any proper Instrument of our
Justification? 6. If it were, Whether that be the primary, formal Reason of its
justifying virtue? 7. Whether your Opinion or mine be the plainer or safer?

And for the first, I should not think it worth the looking after, but that I
perceive you lay much upon it, and that Philosophers generally suppose that the
Sense and Intellect in this are alike; and for ought I discern, it is such a
Passiveness of the Intellect that you intend: and therefore we may put all
together, and enquire whether videre and intelligere be only Passions? And here
you know how ill Philosophers are agreed among themselves, and therefore how
slippery a ground this is for a man to build his Faith upon in so high point as
this in hand: you know also that Hippocrates, Galen, Plato, Plotinus, with the
generality of the Platonists are directly contrary to you: you know also that
Albertus Magnus, and his followers judge sensation to be an action, though they
take the potentia to be passive. You know also that Aquinas with his followers
judge the very potentia to be active as well as passive; passive while it
receives the species; and active, Dum per ipsam agit and sensationem producit.
And Tolet says, that this is Scotus his sentence, 2. de Anima. q. 12. and
Capreol. and fere communis. I know Aquinas says, that intelligere est quoddam
pati; but he takes pati in his third wide improper sense, as omne qu d exit de
potentia in actum, potest dici pati: 1. q. 79 a. 2. C. And no doubt every
second cause may be said to suffer even in its acting, as it receives the
Influx from the first, which causes it to act; but it will not thence follow
that the (...) videre, intelligere est for maliter pati: I cannot think that
you deny the intellectum agentem: and you know that generally Philosophers
attribute Action to the possible Intellect: and that Jandun. Apollina, etc. do
accordingly make an Agent and patient sense: and if the reception of the
species were formaliter visio and intellectio (which I believe not) yet how
hardly is it proved that the Organ and Intellect are only passive in that
reception? Yea how great a controversy is it what the sensible and
intelligible species are? Yea and whether there be any such thing? Whether they
be an image or similitude begotten or caused by the Object, as Combacchius and
most? which yet Suarez, etc. denies. And whether they stick in the air, and
have all their Being first there, as Magyrus, and other Peripateticks? Or
whether their Being is only in the eye? as some later. Or whether it be Sir
Ken. Digbyes Atoms or number of small bodies which are in perpetual motion? I
doubt not you know that Ockam and Henricus quod. lib. 4. q. 4. reject all
species as vain, and make the Intellect the only active proper cause of
intellection. And Hobs of late in his book of humane Nature says, that visible
and intelligible species, is the greatest Paradox in the world, as being a
plain Impossibility. And indeed it is somewhat strange that every stone and
clod should be in perpetual Action, sending forth that which we call its
species; for doubtless it sends forth as much when we behold it not as when
we do. And more strange that a Rock or Mountain should be so active a creature,
and so forcible in action, as to send forth its species so many miles! Yea,
according to this Doctrine, many 1000 miles: for if our Organ were capable, we
should see it so far. Whether the Angels see these things on earth recipiendo
species, or not; sure according to this Doctrine, the species must reach as far
as Heaven. And why do not stones wast by such an uncessant emanation? And it is
strange to conceive how the Air is be painted with variety of species, if this
be true! that every Grass, Flower, Tree, Bird, Stone, etc. and other bodies,
have their several distinct species in the Air night and day? How strangely is
it painted? What room is there for them all, without confusion, If both color,
quantity, odor, and all be there? And its strange if we do not hear the sound
nor taste the sweetness, etc. but only the species of them! and beyond my
Capacity how we should discern Distance as well as the Object distant according
to the passive opinion! and more hard is it for me to believe this Doctrine,
when I consider how Cats and Owls see in the night: and how a man in a deep
study, or that steepeth with his eyes open, sees not any thing distinctly
(though I know the frivolous answers to these:) And yet more hardly do I
believe it when I feel quanto labor and conatu I must see to read a small
print, or discern a thing afar off: but above all when I feel the labor of my
studies, I hardly believe that my understanding is not active; though I easily
believe that I am also too passive. Why do I not understand with every dull
thought? To believe also that every stone is still active, and that the eye and
Intellect of the living Creature is but passive, is hard to me; because me
thinks Action better agrees to the living, then the inanimate. And yet the
less do I assent when I observe what stress they lay upon the similitude of a
looking-glass receiving the species, which I am very confident it did never
receive, when I see it moving as my eye moves, and withdrawing when I
withdraw, (though the Object be any stone or other immovable thing) I judge
that when I am gone, the glass receives no more species from the wall, then
the wall from the glass; nor that the water receives any more species of the
Moon that there appears, then the earth does; but that all is in mine eyes by
the help of that reflection. I doubt not but you have read D'Orbellis
arguments, ( Did. 3. in 1. sent. par. 3. q. 2.) against both extremes in point
of intellection: Against yours his reasons seem to me strong: Quia effectus
aequivocus non potest excellere in perfectione causam aequivocam totalem sed
deficit necessario ab ea; sed intellectio esset effectus aequivocus speciei
intelligibilis, si ab easola causaretur, and ita esset simpliciter imperfectior
specie intelligibili, quod non est verum. Tum etiam quia tunc non posset
salvari imago in mente, ut men's est: quia nihil ipsius mentis haberet rationem
parentis. Item quomodo causarentur relationes rationis, sive intentiones
logicae, quae sunt in actu collativo? cum illa intentio dicatur realis quae
causatur im^ediate a re vel specie representante rem in se. Even des Carts his
Doctrine of vibration seems to make the sensation and intellection to be
formally Action, though the Organ must first be passive to the producing it,
before it be Active. Zabarel, Combacchius, etc. say that in sensation there is
first a receiving the species. 2. A judging, etc. The first by the Organ which
is passive, and the later (which is the very sensation by the sensitive soul,
which is active. Therefore Combacchius says* Intellectio est operatio animae
rationalis, etc. but passio is not operatio. Schibler determines it ( Top. p.
232. that the object does but 1. Excitare potentiat Activas ad actus. 2.
Terminare actus Viguerius Institut. p. 261. besides the intellect Agent,
ascribes to the Possible three offices. 1. To draw and receive the species. 2.
Actually to understand. 3. To conserve the species. The same Viguerius, instit.
p. 17. and Aquin. 1. q. 18 a 3.1. Suarez Tim. 2. disp 48.. 6. Scaliger Exercit.
307. s. 2. as also Bradwardine, Scotus, Cajetani ambo, Albert: D'Orbellis,
Ruvio, Alstedius, Keckerman St^ierius, Zanchius, Burgersdicius, A.C. fascic.
log. Prideaux Hypomnem. with many more, have taught me to account vision,
intellection, and volition for Immanent Acts. And though there be a reception
of the species, and so somewhat of passion as well as of action, yet that of
passion is but a preparation or quasi materiale, and the formale is in action,
as Keckerman, Syst. log. p. 110 Physici nonnulli discernunt materiale and
formale: sic materiale in visu est receptio specierum visibilium in oculo, quae
est passio: est deinde dijudicatio rei visib. lis per illas species quae est
actio: hinc est quod Aristot. sensum modo ad actionem, modo ad passionem
refert. Zanchius says, Vol. 1. T. 3. p. 581. Vim omnem sensitivam esse partim
passivum, partim activum, diversis respectibus: Passiva est quatenus, percipit
objecta. Activa est quatenus ipsa ab objecto aff^cta, parit sensum, and rem
unam ab alio discernit, Patentia enim visiva postquam recepit coloris albi
speciem, discernit hans a nigro, etc. sic in rebus Divinis vis nostrae mentis
and voluntatis and passiva and activa est. Passiva quatenus recipit gratiam a
Deo i^ nobis operante: Activa vero quatenus affecta Dei gratia, ipsa Credit,
ipsa Amat; Acti enim Agimus. Res sua natura intelligib^les vis haec animae
Patiens intellectus appellata, efficit suo lum ne, suaque Action, ut res actu
intelligantur. Hoc lumen intellectus Agentis, hoc est, animae nostrae, non
minima pars est imaginis Det in qua creati sumus. Obscurata fuit lux nobis
communicata per peccatum Ade, sed illustratur denuo per Christum: unde hac nova
luce Deum Deique mysteria intelligimus, quae certe animalis homo percipere non
potest. Proinde cum essemus tenebrae, denuo facti sumus and vocantur lux in
Domino. Ex hac nova luce donata per Christum, intelligimus quid sit intellectus
Agens. Zanch. ibid. p. 596. You see how far Zanchius Philosophy and Divinity is
from yours so p. 594. Est autem manifesta ia nobis hec intellectus Actio,
nempet intelligere. Et page 638. He says the intellect has four operations.
1. Simplicium apprehensio. 2 Horum Compositio 3. Compostorum aestimatio, eoque
and verorum a falsis divisio. 4. Ex his raticcinatio. And you know that Tolet,
having formerly thought, with Aegid. Paul. Venet. and Cajet. that sensatio (and
ita intellectio) est formaliter passio, did change his judgment, and at last
conclude that Visio vel sensatio alia duos motus dicit: unum materialiter, and
hic est receptio speciei: alterum formaliter, and hic est Actio: Prior inest
Organo ratione materiae: posterior ratione potentiae, and a^imae: tamen uterque
eidem inest Organo. Prior quidem non est substantialiter and essenti^ liter
sensatio, sed concomitans and velut dispositio: posterior est essentialiter
sensatio.

But I have been too tedious on this, vid. ultra in l. 2. de Anima, p. 76, 77.
etc. and l. 3. q. 13. etc. You see my reasons in part why I may think my self
excusable, though I build not an Article of my faith on your Philosophical
assertion; [ that videee, audire, (and so to believe) are Grammatical actions
(only) (for you must say [only] or you say nothing) and but physical passions.

Quest. 2. Whether to Believe be only verbum activ^m? but phycally passive, and
a man by believing does not operari, but recipere.

This Question comes a little closer. By operari I know you mean agere: for if
you should mean such an operation as Operarius pro mercede ex debito
performs, then you should say nothing, but dispute against what I disavowed
even in the letter you answer (which I dare not impute to you) Now the reasons
that force me to differ vehemently from you (as you said to me) in this point,
are partly Philosophical, partly Theological. And 1. I would sain know what
that is which you here call Faith, and say its passive? Is it the Habit? No:
For 1. That cannot be passive. 2. That is not it that justifies. 3. That is
not a passion, as you say this is. 4. That is not a Grammatical Action, as you
say this is; What then! Is it the Act of Faith? No: For 1. That's it that you
are denying, and say its but verbum activum. 2. You say, it is passive. But how
an Action can be passive, is so far beyond the reach of my weak understanding,
that I could not believe it, though it were judged Heresy to deny it. P^ss^o
intrinsecum ordinem dicit ad subjectum, and repugnat dari passionem extra
subjectum, says Surrez. Tom. 2. disp. 49. p. 451. And that Action can be the
subject of Passion, is Philosophy that I never learned, and I think never shall
do. Especially if Schibler and most Philosophers say true that Actio and passio
non differunt realiter sed secundum inadaequato^ conceptus. For very many have
taught me, that to the Peripateticks it is absurd for the same to be both the
Action, Passion and Passum; yea to common reason it is --

Most certainly therefore it is neither Habit, nor Act of faith which you call
faith. What is it then? Is it a Passion? so you say your self, and therefore I
must take that to be your meaning: And I cannot imagine what else you should
call faith. But here you leave me at as great a loss as before. For, 1. You say
it is Passive: But I never heard or read before of a Passive Passion, any more
then of a Passive Action: And if I should set my understanding on the wrack, it
would not apprehend or acknowledge any such thing. I cannot imagine that it is
the soul it self which you say is passive. 1. Because you say it is faith. 2.
Because else your Argument must conclude that the soul only is the instrument:
But we are not questioning the instrumentality of the soul now, but of faith.
More I might urge to show that this cannot be your meaning, but that I will not
suppose that it is the soul it self which you call faith. It being therefore
neither the Soul, Habit, Act, nor Passion which you here say is Passive in its
instrumentality, I am forced to confess I know not what you mean: Yet if you
should mean any Potentia Passive. 1. Whether there be any such in the rational
soul distinct from the soul it self, is a great doubt. 2. If there were, I know
not how it can be called faith. 3. Nor is it such a Potentia that is the
instrument of justification. Yet afterward you say, It is an act of
dependence, which here you call a Passion.

2. But whether Act or Passion, it must belong either to the Understanding, or
Will, or both: And 1. If you should place it only in the understanding, you
would (besides Dr. Downam) have few but the Papists with you. 2. If in the Will
only, then (as Scripture is most plain against it, so) you would also go
against the generality of our Divines Melancthon J^. Crocius, Amesius,
Davenant, etc. make it the common Protestant Tenet, that it is in both. In actu
si^ei Justificantis tota an ma se convertit ad causam justificantem: Davenant,
Determ. Q. 38. page 174. Fides illa quam Scriptura justificantem agnoscit,
habet in se complicatum actum voluntatis and intellectus. idem. ibid. Q. 37.
page 166. And to them that think it absurd to have it in both faculties. I
answer with the same Author. 1. Quod philos^^kantur voluntatem and intellectum
esse duas potentias re ipsa distinctas, dogma philosophicum est ab omnibus haud
receptum, (not of Scotus and his followers, with many more) and Theologicis
dogmatibus firmandis aut infirmandis fundamentu^ minime id^neum. 2. Neque nobis
absurdum, sed valde consentaneum videtur, actum illum quo tota anima
purificatur and justificatur, ad totam animam pertinere: ita ut in nudo
intellectu habeat initium, in voluntate complementum. Idem. ibid.

3. If you say it is in both (as I doubt not but you will, it being the plain
Truth) then 1. It cannot possibly by any one single Act or Passion which you
call the passive Instrument: and do you think to find out many such? 2. For
that which belongs to the understanding, it must be either a simple
apprehension, a composition or division, or a ratiocination or Judgment. And
1. A simple Apprehension it cannot be: 1. For so the Intellect receives all
Objects alike. It receives sin, death, unrighteousness, Satan, hell in the
same kind as it receives Grace, Life, Righteousness, Christ, Heaven. For it
understands both in the same way, receiving them per modum objecti. 2. And
thus it receives not the very thing it self Essentially, (though it understand
the thing it self) but only as is said, the species or action of it, etc.
(except you will say as Sir Ken. Digby, and the Lord Brook, that the thing
understood is really in the understanding, and become one with it) Now
according to this sense, you would not make faith to receive Christ or his
Righteousness at all, but only the species or Idea of them. 3. And how often has
Bellarmine been called Sophister for supposing, we mean such an apprehension?
Therefore I will not dare to think that you mean this. 4. And if you did, yet I
have showed how uncertain it is, that this intelligere is only or formally
pati. 2. But if you mean not this simple apprehension (as sure you do not) then
how is it possible to imagine the understanding should be passive in it? Did
ever man that writ of Philosophy once think that the soul did componere,
dicidere, ratiocinari, judicare, patiendo and non agendo? I think no man. When
Tolet disputes utrum ixtelligere sit pati? he says, Advertendum est quod
sermo est de apprehensione; nam de compositione and Jud elo non est dubium apud
omnes. Tol de anima. p. 166. I will not therefore suppose you to differ in your
Philosophy from all men. What Act of the understanding you will make to be part
of Justifying faith, I know not: For I find Divines are very little agreed in
it: But the most make Assent to be the only Act of the understanding (though
some add notitia) and of them some make it Essential to justifying Faith: and
others but as a common prerequisite Act. Now if it were Assensus Noeticus, yet
it is impossible it should be formally a Passion: but much more impossible when
it is Assensus dianocticus vel discursivus, as is most evident it is, and our
judicious Rob. Baronius truly teaches, Philos. Theol. An^il. Exerc. 3. Art. 16.

Most Divines place the chief Essence of Faith in fiducia: but then they are as
ill agreed what to mean by fiducia. Pemble would fain persuade us that to
Believe the Truth of a particular Promise, is to trust on the performance of it
to me; and that the Assent of Faith which is given to such a Promise, is
properly called fiducia or Trust. But this is grounded on his singular opinion,
that Truth and Goodness are all one, etc. Baronius, page 232. tells us of a
fourfold fiducia: The first he makes to be but a confident Assent to the Truth
of the Promise, and a firm sure Persuasion of the Remission of my own sins and
of my Salvation. The second is a Resting on Gods Goodness alone, etc. He
places the justifying virtue only in the first, which yet contains but
partly Assent (which we plead against the Papists usually not to be the
justifying Act) and partly a particular Persuasion or Belief of Pardon, which
is properly no Faith, but that commonly called Assurance. Now this kind of
fiducia is but the Assent we have spoken of, and is beyond all dispute no mere
Passion, but an Act of the Understanding.

2. But most Divines make that fiducia which is an act of the Will to have the
chief hand in this work of justfiying: though Baronius is so confident that it
is not an act of Faith, but an Effect and Consequent, that he takes it for a
thing so manifest, that it needs no proof, p. 234. And Dr. Downam has
brought not a few, nor contemptible Arguments to the same purpose against
Pemble, Append. to Covennat of Gr. Yet though we have found it in the Will, yet
it is hard to find what act of the Will they mean. If it be an Elicit Act, it
must first either respect the End, and then it is either velle intendere vel
frui: But sure fiducia is none of these: and if it were, it is more sure that
at least the two first are not Passions; and I think not the last, though it be
nothing to the present point: Or else 2. It must respect the Means; and then it
must be Eligere, Consentire vel Vti (in which joined to Assent, I take
justifying Faith to consist): But it is both evident that none of these is
fiducia, and if they were, that none of these are passions or passive. So that
hitherto we are to seek for this Passive Faith.

Or else it is an Imparate Act; and then we are in a wood to seek among so many
that there is little hope of finding it. The Truth seems to me to be beyond
dispute, that fiducia is no one single Act (though one word) but a composition
of many implying or containing the Assent of the understanding, the Election of
the Will, especially much of Hope and Adventurousness in the Irascible of the
Sensitive, together with a suspension of some acts. And if we are justified by
this Recumbency or Fiducia, I shall believe we are justified as well by Hope as
any thing; for that takes up most here, as Dr. Downam ubi supra proves. And
who ever said that in all or any of these the Soul is Passive and not Active?
Indeed Hope and Venturousness are Passions, but in another sense (as Keckerm.
and Tolet ubi supra have well opened; its in respect of their quasi materiale.)
I am content to stand or fall by the vote of Philosophers, giving you 100 to
one, whether the Formality of these motions of the Will lie in Passion or
Action? And if they are Acts. whether they can be the Subjects of Passion; and
so be passive Acts? So that yet I cannot find out your passive Faith.

3. But yet further, if Faith be passive Physically, let us find out first what
is the Agent? 2. What the Action? 3. What the Patient or Object? 4. What is the
Terminus ad quem?

1. I doubt not but it is agreed that the Agent is God: for it is he that
justifies. 2. The terminus or res motu facta is twofold. 1. Justification in
sensu legis, commonly called constitutive Justification (passive.) 2. Public
Justification by plea and sentence at Judgment (passive) 3. The Action must be
therefore twofold, or two Actions according to the twofold Terminus. Yea in
the former we may (if we accurately consider it) find out a twofold Action and
Terminus, though the difference be narrow: In which we are to consider, 1. Of
the Instrument: 2. Add the nature of the Actions. 1. The Instrument is the word
of Promise or Grant in the Gospel (for if you know any other way of Gods
justifying, or any immediate Act of God herein which is Transient, I would it
were revealed what Act it is.) Herein I have Mr. Rutherford saying as I, over
and over against the Antinomians. 2. The Action therefore can be no other then
a moral Action, as a Lease or Bond, or written-Law may be said to act. Now the
Gospel performs to our first Justification a twofold Action. 1. It does as a
Deed of Gift bestow Christ and his Merits on men, so it be they will Believe.
This Action does not immediately and directly constitute them Righteous: for
Righteousness being a Relation, must have its Foundation first laid: This Act
therefore of Donation (which some call Imputation) does directly lay the
Fundamentum, whence the Relation of Righteous does immediately arise (when the
Condition is peformed) per nudam resultantiam without any other Act to produce
it. And this is most properly called Justificatio constitutiva activa. 2. When
the Gospel has by Gift constituted us Righteous then next in order it does
declare or pronounce us Righteous, and vertually acquit us from Condemnation.
This is by the like silent moral interpretative Action only as the other. (And
perhaps may be most fitly called the imputing of Righteousness, or esteeming us
Righteous, as Piscator.) And for the latter Justification at Judgment, the
Action is Christ's public pleading, and sentencing us Acquitt: which is an
Action both Physical and Moral in several respects. 4. Now if we enquire after
the Patient, or rather the Object of these several Acts, we shall quckly find
that the Man is that Object; but that Faith is any Patient here, is past my
apprehension. For the first Act of God by the Gospel [giving Christ and his
Merit to us,] it is only a moral Action: (Though the writting and speaking the
Word at first was a Physical action, yet the Word or Promise now does moraliter
tantum agere:) And therefore it is impossible that Faith should be Physically
passive from it. For Passion being an effect of Action, it must be a Physical
proper Action which produces a physical Passion. I will not stand to make your
Assertion odious here by enquiring what Physical effective Influx, Contact,
etc. here is, which should manifest Faith to be physically Passive. I know in
the Work of effectual vocation the Soul is first passive: but that is nothing
to our Question, whether Faith be passive in Justification. Do but tell me
plainly quid patitur fides, and you do the Business.

But what if you had only said that Faith is morally passive, and not
physically? I answer. It had been less harsh to me, though not fit, nor to the
point. For 1. Gods Justification nor Donation of Christ, is not properly of, or
to Faith; for then Faith should be made righteous and justified hereby; but to
the person, if he Believe. 2. Besides if you should confess only a moral
Passiveness (which is somewhat an odd phrase and notion, and is but to be the
Object of a moral Action) it would spoil all the common arguments drawn from
the physical nature of Faith, and its sole excellency herein in apprehending,
receiving, etc. and thereby justifying. And you would bring in all other Graces
to which the same Promise may as well be said to be made. 3. The Truth I have
and further shall manifest to be this; that as it is not to faith or any other
act that Righteousness is given, but to the person on condition he Believe; so
this condition is no passion but an action, or diverse actions. This will fully
appear in the Theological Reasons following. In the mean time I need not stand
on this, because you express your self that Faith is physically pas^ive. Indeed
you add [ or hyperphysically:] but though I meet with some Philosophers, that
use in such cases to give [hyperphysice] as a tertium to overthrow the
sufficiency of the ^istinction of physice and moraliter, yet I suppose that is
none of your meaning who know that even Intellectus dum efficit intellectionem,
and voluntas volitionem, sunt causae physicae, ut Suarez. 1. Tom. disp. 17.. 2.
p. 260. and so Schibler, and many more: yea and that our Divines conclude that
Gods action on our souls in conversion is first Physical: which yet may be as
truly and fully called hyperphysical as our Faith.

Now for the second action of the Gospel, [ declaring or pronouncing the
Believer righteous, and so de jure acquitting him;] It is much more beyond my
reach to conceive how faith can in respect of it be passive: For 1. Besides
that it is a moral action as the former, and so cannot of it self produce a
physical passion. 2. It does not therein speak of or to faith, pronouncing it
just, and acquitting it, but of and to the Believer. So that if Faith were
physically passive in the former, yet here it is impossible. 3. If you say that
it is physically (or morally) passive in regard of the latter full
Justification by sentence at Judgment, you would transcend my capacity most of
all. To say faith is the Patient of Christ's judiciary public sentence, is a
sentence that shall never be an article of my Faith: and is so gross, that I
conjecture you would take it ill if I should take it to be your meaning:
therefore I will say no more against it. Now you know that this is (as you say
in your Lect.) the most complete Justification; and which I most stand upon:
and therefore if your arguments fail in respect of this, they yield me almost
all I expect.

Next I will tell you my Reasons Theological why I believe not that justifying
faith, as such, is passive. 1. All Divines and the Scripture it self has
persuaded me, that Christ and the Promises are the Object of this Faith: but a
Passion has no Object, but a subject, etc. Therefore according to you Christ,
etc. is not the object of it; which is contrary to all that I have heard or
read.

2. I have read Divines long contending which is the Act of justifying faith,
qua talis. And some say one, and some another; but all say one, or other, or
many. Now you cut the knot, and contradict all, in making it (at least quatenus
Justificans) no Act at all, but a Passion: unless you will say it is a passive
act, which I dare not imagine. And doubtless these Divines show by their whole
speech that by Actus Fidei, they mean Actus secundus vel Actio, and not Actus
primus vel entetativus vel accidentalis, sive ut informans, sive ut operativus,
sed ipsa operatio.

3. I am truly afraid lest by entertaining this opinion I should strike in not
only with the Antinomians (who cannot endure to hear of any conditions of life
of our performing, but even with the Libertines, who tell me to my face, that
man is but Passive, and as the soul Acts the body, so Christ in them moves the
soul to Good, and Satan to evil, while they are merely Passive, and therefore
the Devil shall be damned for sin who commits it in them, and not they; for
who will bite the stone or beat the staff, or be angry at the sword? etc.

4. Else you must depress the excellent grace of faith below all other, in
making it merely Passive while others are active: For doubtless life and
excellency is more in Action then Passion.

5. If believing be only suffering, then all Infidels are damned only for not
suffering, which is horrid.

6. Scripture frequently condemns wicked men for Action, for Rebellion,
Refusing, Rejecting Christ, Luke 19.27. They hate him and say, we will not have
this man reign over us, etc. and this is their unbelief. If they resisted the
Holy Ghost only Passive and non Active, then it would be only an ineptitudo
materiei, which is in all alike at first, and so all should be alike rejecters.

7. If to believe be but Pati, then it is God and not man that should be
persuaded: For persuasion is either to Action or forbearing Action; and God is
the Agent: But it is in vain to persuade any to be Passive, except it be not to
strive against it. This therefore would overthrow much of the use of the
Ministry.

8. And then when Christ so extolleth doing the will of God, and doing his
Commandments, etc. you will exclude justifying faith, as being no doing.

9. Is it credible, that when Christ calls faith Obeying the Gospel, and says,
This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom the father has sent; and
calls it the work of faith, 2 These. 1.11. and says, God gives to will, (that
is, to believe) and to do, etc. that all this is meant of mere Passion? I
undertake to bring forty places of Scripture that show faith to be Action.

10. It seems to me so great a debasing of faith, as to make it to be no
virtue at all, nor to have any moral good in it. For though I have read of
Passio perfectiva in genere entis vel naturae, and conducible to virtue; Yet am
I not convinced yet that any Passion as such, has any moral virtue in it.
Indeed Passion may be the quasi materiale, but the virtue is in Action. Yea,
even in non-acting, (as silence) the virtue lies formally in the actual
exercise of the Authority of Reason, and so obeying God in causing that
silence. Sure if men shall be all judged according to their works, and
according to what they have done, etc. then it will not be because they did
either Pati vel non pati. And thus you have some of my reasons why I cannot
believe that Believing is passion, nor shall believe it I think, till Credere
be Pati, and then I may whether I will or no, because pati vel non pati are not
in my choice.

3. The third Question is, Whether faith be passive in its instrumentality?

And I think that is out of doubt, if my former arguing have proved that faith
is not passive at all: or if I next prove that faith is no physical instrument.
But yet if I should grant both that faith is passive, and that it is an
Instrument, yet must I have either more or less Logic before I can believe
that it is passive in its instrumentality.

My reasons against it are these. 1. Every Instrumental cause is an efficient
cause: but all true efficiency is by action: therefore all instrumentality is
by action. That causalitas efficientis est Actio; and haec est forma per quam
denominatur efficiens; quia agens and efficiens sunt idem, etc. I have been
taught so often and so confidently that I believe it. (For oportet discentem
credere): and that by Philosophers of no mean esteem, as Suarez Tom. 1. disp.
18.. 10. Javel. Metaph l. 9. q. 16. Conim. Colleg. Phys. l. 2. q. 6. art. 2.
and 7. Scaliger. Exerit. 254. Aquinas, Ruvio, Porrece, Melancth. Zanchius,
Zabarel, Pererius, Schibler, Stierius, Gu. Tempell. in Ram. with many more. And
if there be no such thing in rerum natura as a Passive instrument, then faith
is none such. I know Keckerm. Alsted. and Burgersdicius do talk of a Passive
instrument; but I think in proper speech it is a contradiction, in adjecto and
say as Schibler Metaphys. l. 1. cap. 22. Tit. 7. p. 319. Nisi Actionem propriam
haberet Instrumentum, efficiens non esset; and proinde passivum instrumentum
quod Keckerm. vocat, revera instrumentum non est. Et ut Idem, Topic. cap. 2.
number. 34. Instrumentum totum hoc habet quod ad causam efficientem adjuvantem (ad
quam referimus causam instrumentalem) requiritur. Ratio enim communis illarum
est haec. Deservire operationi principalis agentis per ulteriorem operationem.
Et Idem, Topic. cap. 2. number. 6. Quer. An efficientis Causalitas, Actio? Resp.
Ita ponitur in Theor. 36. and sentit it a h^die Maxima pars Logicorum and
Metaphysicorum. Vide ultra pro confirmatione ad nu. 9. Sic etiam cap. 3. number.
136. So that if most Logicians judge that there is no passive instrument, and
consequently that faith is no passive instrument, then who is more singular,
you or I? For sure, Nihil est falsum in Theologia, quod verum est in
Philosophia. I deny not but the soul in believing is both Passive and
instrumental, but in several respects: as if Camero's way should hold of
infusing grace into the will Mediante action intellectus, then the intellect
would be Passive or receiving grace into it self, and an instrument of
conveying it to the will: but then it would be no Passive but an Active
instrument: and the action of God on the Passive intellect and of the intellect
on the will, are two Actions with distinct effects.

2. Though there were such a thing in the world as a Passive instrument, yet
that faith should be such, and that physical, I dare say is either an unfit
assertion, or else I am of a stupid apprehension. For there must be found in it
(if it were such) these four requisites. 1. There must be a physical passion or
reception. 2. A physical efficiency. 3. This efficiency must be patiendo, non
agendo. 4. And it must be such an efficiency as is proper to instruments. I may
not stand to enquire exactly into all these. 1. The first I have confuted
already, and shall add this much more. 1. What does faith thus receive? 2. How
does it receive it? 3. Whence? Or from what Agent and Act? 1. Is it Christ
himself that is physically received by faith? 1. Who dare say so, but the
Vbiquitarians, and Transubstantiation men? and perhaps not they. Christ is in
Heaven, and we on earth. A multitude of blasphemers, Libertines, and Familists,
I lately meet with that dream of this but no sober man. 2. And indeed if
Christ's person were thus received, it would not make a man righteous, or
justify him. As all our Divines say, his being in the body of Mary would not
have justified her: Nor did the kissing of his lips justify Judas; nor eating
and drinking in his presence justify those that must depart from him for
working iniquity, Matthew 7. If we had so known Christ, we should know him no
more: It was necessary to his Disciples that he should go from them; we must
not have the Capernaites conceit of eating his flesh. Yea, to talk of a
physical receiving by faith, is far grosser: For the mouth was capable of that
physical contact, which faith is not. 3. And then this will not stand with
their Judgment, that blame me for making Christ himself the object of
justifying faith, and not the promise directly. 2. If you say that the thing
received is Christ's righteousness, (as most do that I read) I answer, 1.
Righteousness is but a relation: And therefore a thing which is naturally
incapable of being of it self physically apprehended. This is past doubt. 2. If
it be physically received, then either as a principle and quality, or as an
object. Not the former: For so we receive our first, (and after) grace in
sanctification; but none ever said so in justification: Nor indeed can that
righteousness which is formally but a relation, dwell in us as a principle or
quality* If we receive it as an object, then by an Act: Or if the soul were
granted to be passive in reception of an object, I have showed that, 1. It is
but in apprehensione simplici: None pleads for more: But faith is not such.
2. And so it would receive Christ no otherways then it receives any object
whatsoever it thus apprehends. 3. And this is not to receive Christ or his
righteousness, but the mere species of it according to your own Philosophers,
(and if righteousness be but a relation; and a relation, as Durandus, Dr.
Twiss, and many another thin be but Ens Rationis, then the species of an Ens
Rationis is a very curious Web) Knowledge (as D'Orbellis says in 2. sent. Dis.
3. q. 3.) is twofold, i. e. sensitive and intellective; and each of these
twofold, Intuitive and Abstractive. Intuitive knowledge is indeed de objecto ut
in se praesens; quando scilicet res in propria existentia est per se motiva:
Exemplum de sensitiva est, ut visus videt colorem: (yet this is but Recepiendo
speciem, non rem) and this is not it in question): Exemplum de intellectiva
est, ut visio Divinae essentiae a beatis: This is utterly denied to be at all
by Doctor Stoughton, Camer* and other solid Divines, against the School-mens
judgment: And if it be, yet doubtless as we know not how, so it is not such as
faiths apprehension, which we enquire after, Cognitio Abstractiva est quando
species rei movet ad cognoscendum rem ipsam, and hoc siveres sit in se
praesens, sive absens, sive existat sive non: Exemplum in sensitiva est, ut
phantasia imaginatur colorem: Exemplum in intellectiva est ut intellectus
cognoscit quidditatem coloris medicante ejus specie. So that if it be either of
these, it were at the utmost but a passive reaception of the species, and not
of Christ or his righteousness.

2. By what physical contact faith does receive this? might be enquired: and 3.
By what physical act of the Agent? to neither of which questions can I imagine
what tolerable answer can be given, in defense of this cause.

2. And if faith be a passive physical instrument, it must have a Physical
Efficiency? and what is that? to justify? why, even God himself in this life
does that but by a Moral Act (by his word) and not by a physical, (as to
particulars.)

3. But that which drives me to the greatest admiration is, How faith should
Efficere patiendo! If I should rip up this, or require a demonstration of it in
respect to the justification at judgment, yea, or in this life, yea or of any
effect, I should lay such an odium on it from its absurdities, that in dealing
with you, modesty does forbid me to insist on it. 4. The fourth requisite will
be enquired after in the next Question save one.

The fourth Question is, Whether other Graces may not be as properly called
physical passive Instruments as Faith, is your sense?

And I doubt not but they may, (though its true of neither) For 1. If there be
no physical reception of Christ's righteousness imaginable but that which is per
modum objecti, and if other gracious acts have Christ's righteousness for their
object, as well as that which you call faith: then other Acts do receive
Christ's righteousness as well as says: but both branches of the Antecedent are
true, therefore the consequence, the bare knowledge or simple apprehension of
Christ's righteousness per modum objecti may better pretend to this, then
recombency or affiance: Yea, and love it self more fitly then affiance may be
said to receive or embrace its object (which is not therefore false neither
because Bellarmine has it: and you know he brings Austines plain words,
affirming love to be the hand by which they received him, etc.) I confess if I
first renounce not the concurrent Judgment of Philosophers, I cannot approve
of the common Answer which our Divines give to Bellarmine in this, viz. [ That
Faith receives Christ's Righteousness first to make it ours, but Love only to
retain it, and embrace and enjoy it when first we know it to be ours:] For
though this say as much as I need to plead for, acknowledging Love to be as
properly a physical Reception for retention, as Faith is for first Possession,
yet if affiance be taken in any proper ordinary sense, it cannot thus hold good
neither: for so Affiance must signify some act of the will in order of nature
after love, or at least not before it. I acknowledge that so much of Faith as
lies in the understanding is before Love in order of nature; sicut ipse
intellectus est simpliciter prior voluntate, ut motivum mobili, and activum
passivo, ut Aquin. 1. q.. 2. a. 3.2. and 12. q. 13. a. 1. C. For as he,
Intellectus est primum motivum omnium potentiarium animae quoad determinationem
actus, voluntas vero quoad exercitium actus, Aquin, 12. q. 17. a. 1. C. But for
the acts of the will toward Christ, I could give you (but to avoid tediousness
I must forbear) at large the Testimony of Aquinas, Tolet, Gerson, Camero,
Amesius, Zanchius, Rob. Baronius, Bradwardine, Ravio, Viguerius, etc. That Love
is not only the first of all the Passions, but even the first motion of the
Will toward its Object, and little or not at all different from Volition,
diligere being but intensive velle. I have much more to say to this, which here
I must pretermit. But still I speak not of Love as a Passion, but a true
closure, as it were of the will with its Object as Good: and expect love to be
proper to the sensitive, and strange to the intellective soul; we must make it
the same with Velle: For Amor and ga^dium in quantum significant Actus
appetitus sensitivi, passiones sunt; non autem secundum quod significant Actus
appetitus intellectivi, inquit Aquinas. 1. q. 2. a. 1.1.

The fifth Question is, Whether Faith be any Instrument of our Justification?

Answer, Scotus gives many senses of the word Instrument, and so does Aquinas,
Schibler, and most Philosophers that meddle with it: and they give some so
large, as contain all causes in the world under God the first cause; In so
large a sense, if any will call faith an Instrument of Justification, I will
not contend with him; though yet I will not say so my self, as judging faith to
be no kind of cause of it at all; but in the proper ordinary sense, as an
Instrument, signifies Causam quae influit in effectum per virtutem inferioris
rationis, as Suarez, Stierius, Arnisaeus, etc. Vel Instrumentum est quod ex
directione alterius principalis agentis influit ad produce^dum effectum se
nobiliorem, ut Schibler, etc. So I utterly deny Faith to be an Instrument. But
I will first question whether it be a physical Instrument. 2. Whether a moral?
1. And for the first, I have done it already: for seeing our acute Divines have
ceased to lay any claim to it as an active Instrument, but only as a Passive;
therefore having disproved what they claim, I have done enough to that. 2. Yet
I will add some more: And 1. If it be a physical active Instrument, it must
have a physical active Influx to the producing of the Effect; but so has not
Faith to the producing of our Justification. Ergo etc. The Major is apparent
from the common definition of such Instruments: The Minor will be as evident,
if we consider but what Gods Act in Justification is, and then it would appear
impossible that any act of ours should be such an Instrument. 1. At the great
Justification at Judgment Christ's act is to sentence us acquit and discharged*
and does our Faith active, sixae influere ad hunc effectum? Does it intervene
between Christ and the effect? and so actively justify us? Who will say so? 2.
And the act by which God justifies us here, is by a Deed of Gift in his Gospel
(as I Judge) Now 1. That does immediately produce the effect (only supposing
Faith as a condition.) 2. And it is but a moral Instrumental cause it self, and
how faith can be a Physical, I know not. 3. Nay the act is but a moral act,
such as a Statute or Bond acts, and what need Faith to be a physical
Instrument?

2. My second Reason is this: It is generally concluded, that Tota instrumenti
causalit as est in usu and applicatione; It cease to be an Instrument, when
it cease to be used or acted by the principal cause: But faith does most
frequently cease its action, and is not used (physically) when we sleep or
wholly mind other things: Therefore according to this Doctrine, faith should
then cease its Instrumentality; and consequently either we should all that
while be unjustified and unpardoned, or else be justified and pardoned some
other way, and not by faith. All which is absurd; and easily avoided by
discerning faith to be but a Condition of our Justification, or a Causa sine
quae non.

3. If Faith be a physical Instrument, then it should justify from a reason
intrinsecal, natural and essential to it, and not from Gods mere ordination of
it to this office by his Word of Promise: but that were at least dangerous
Doctrine: and should not be entertained by them who (truly) acknowledge that it
justifies not as a work; much less then as a Physical reception which they call
its Instrumentality. The consequence of the Major is evident, in that nothing
can be more intrinsecal and essential to faith (this faith) then to be what it
is, viz. a Reception or acceptance of Christ or his Righteousness: therefore if
it justify directly as such, then it justifies of its own Nature.

4. It is to me a hard saying, that God and Faith do the same thing, that is,
Pardon and justify: and yet so they do if it be an Instrument of
Justification: For eadem est Actio Instrumenti and principalis causae, viz.
quoad determinationem ad hunc effectum, ut Aquinas, Schibler, etc. I dare not
say or think, that Faith does so properly, effectively justify and pardon us.

5. It seems to me needless to feign this Instrumentality, because frustra fit
per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.

6. Yea it derogateth from the work; for as Scotus says, (in 4. did. 45. q.
1. page (mihi) 239. D.) Actio sine instrumento est perfectior quam actio cum
instrumento.

7. And this Doctrine makes man to be the causa proxima, of his own Pardon and
Justification. For it is man that believes and not God: God is the causa prima,
but man the causa proxima credendi, and so of justifying, if Faith be an
Instrument Or at least man is a cause of his own Pardon and Justification. Yea
faith being by Divines acknowledged our own Instrument, it must needs follow
that we justify and forgive our selves. Dr. Amesius says, ( Bellar. Enervat.
To. 4. li 6. p. (mihi) 315.) Plurimum refert: quia sicut sacramenta quamvis
aliquo s^nsu possint dici Instrumenta nostra, etc. proprie tamen sunt
Jnstrumenta Dei: sic etiam fides quamvis possit vocari Instrumentum Dei, quia
Deus justificat nos ex fide and per fidem, proprie tamen est Instrumentum
nostrum. Deus nos baptizat and pascit, non nosmet ipsi: Nos credimus in
Christum, non Deus. Whether faith may be a moral Instrument, I shall enquire,
when I have answered the next question: which is, Q 6. If faith were such a
Physical Passive (or Active) Instrument, whether that be the formal direct
reason of its justifying? and whether (as it is) it do justify directly and
primarily, quatenus est apprehensio Christi, justitioe, vel Justificationis.
And this is it that I most confidently deny, and had rather you would stick to
in debate then all the rest: for I ground many other things on it. I affirm
therefore, 1. That faith justifies primarily and directly, as the condition on
which the free Donor has bestowed Christ, with all his benefits in the
Gospel-conveyance. 2. And that if it were a mere Physical apprehension it would
not justify; no nor do us any good. 3. And that the apprehension called the
receptivity which is truly its nature, is yet but its aptitude to its
justifying office, and so a remote, and not the direct proper formal cause.

These three I will prove in order. 1. And for the first it is proved. 1. From
the Tenor of the justifyn^g Promise, which still assures Justification on the
condition of Believing. [He that believeth] and [whosoever believeth] and [if
thou believe] do plainly and unquestionably express such a condition, upon
which we shall be justified, and without which we shall not. The Antinomians
most unreasonably deny this. 2. And the nature of Justification makes it
unquestioinable: for whether you make it a Law-act, or an act of Gods own
Judgment and Will determining of our state, yet nither will admit of any
intervening cause, (especially any act of ours,) but only a condition. 3.
Besides, Conditions depend on the will of him that bestows the Gift, and
according to his Will they succeed: but Instruments more according to their own
fitness: Now it is known well, that Justification is an act of Gods mere free
Grace and Will, and therefore nothing can further conduce to Gods free act as
on our part, but by way of Condition. 4. And I need not say more to this, it
being acknowledged generally by all our Divines, not one that I remember
excepted, besides Mr. Walker, that [faith justifies as the condition of the
Covenant] Mr. Wotton de Reconcil. part 1. l. 2. cap. 18. brings you the full
Testimony of the English Homilies, Fox, Perkins, Paraeus, Trelcatius, Dr. G.
Downam, Scharpius, Th. Matthews, Calvin, Aretius, Sadeel, Olevian, Melancth.
Beza: To which I could add many more: and I never spoke with any solid Divine
that denied it,

2. Now that a physical apprehension would not justify, as such, is evident.
1. Else Mary should be justified for having Christ in her womb, as I said
before. 2. Else justification, as I said, should be ascribed to the nature of
the act of faith it self. 3. You may see what is the primary, formal reason why
faith Justifies, by its inseparablility from the effect or event; and which is
the improper remote cause by its separability. Now such a physical apprehension
may be (as such) separated from the effect, and would still be if it had not
the further nature of a condition. We see it plainly in all worldly things.
Every man that takes in his hand a conveyance of land, shall not possess the
land. If you forcibly seize upon all a man's evidences and writings, you shall
not therefore possess his estate. If a traitor snatch a pardon by violence out
of another hand, he is not therefore pardoned. (But more of this under the
next). 4. And for your passive faith, I cannot conceive how it should (as
passive) have any Moral good in it (as is said,) much less justify us. And so
when God says that without faith it is impossible to please God we shall feign
that to be justifying faith, which has nothing in it self, that can please
God: and how it can justify that does not please, I know not. I know in genere
entis the Devils please God: They are his creatures; and naturally Good, as Ens
and bonum convertuntur: but in genere moris, I know not yet how pati quatenus
pati can please him. For it does not require so much as liberty of the will:
The reason of Passion is from the Agent: As Suarez dis. 17.. 2. Secundum
praecisas rations formales loquendo, Passio est ab Action: and non e
converso. Ideoque vera est and propria haec causalis locutio, Quia agens agit,
materia recipit. Now sure all Divines as well as the free-will-men, do
acknowledge, that there can be no pleasing worth or virtue, where there is not
liberty. And Suarez says truly in that ( T. 1. disp. 19 page (mihi) 340.)
Addimus vero hanc facultatem quatenus libera est, non posse esse nisi Activam:
seu e converso, facultatem non posse esse liberam, nisi sit activa, and
quatenus activa est. Probatur sic. Nam Paisso ut Passio non potest esse Libera
patienti: sed solum quatenus Actio a qua talis Passio provenit, illi est
libera: Ergo Libertas formaliter ac praecise non est in potentia patiente, ut
sic, sed in potentia Agente. (Vide ultra probationem.)

5. Yea I much fear lest this Passive Doctrine do lay all the blame of all men's
infidelity upon God, or most at least: For it makes the unbeliever no
otherwise faulty then a hard block for resisting the wedge, which is but by an
indisposition of the matter: and so Original indisposition is all the sin. For
as Aquinas says, Malum in Patiente est vel ab imperfectione, vel defectu
agentis, vel indispositione Materiae. 1. q. 49. a. 1. c.

3. My third proposition is, that the Receptivity or apprehension which is
truly of the nature of faith, is yet but its aptitude to its Justifying office,
and so a remote and not the direct proper formal reason: And this is the main
point that I insist on: And it is evident, in all that is said already: and
further thus, If faith had been of that apprehending nature as it is, and yet
had not been made the condition in the gift or promise of God, it would not
have justified: but if it had been made the condition, though it had been no
apprehending (but as any other duty,) yet it would have justified: therefore it
is evident that the nearest, proper reason of its power to justify is Gods
making it the condition of his gift, and its receptive nature is but a remote
reason: 1. If faith would have justified, though it had not been a condition,
then it must have justified against Gods will, which is impossible: It is God
that justifies, and therefore we cannot be a cause of his Action. 2. It is
evident also from the nature of this moral reception, which being but a
willingness and consent, cannot of its own nature make the thing our own, but
as it is by the mere will of the donor made the condition of his offer or gift.
If I am willing to be Lord of any Lands or Countries, it will not make me so:
but if the true owner say, I will give them thee if thou will accept them, then
it will be so: therefore it is not first and directly from the nature of the
reception, but first because that reception is made the condition of the gift.
If a condemned man be willing to be pardoned, he shall not therefore be
pardoned: but if a pardon be given on condition he be willing or accept it,
then he shall have it. If a poor woman consent to have a Prince for her
husband, and so to have his possessions, it shall not therefore be done, except
he give himself to her on condition of her consent. If it were a mere physical
reception, and we spoke of a possession de facto of somewhat that is so
apprehensible, then it would be otherwise: as he that gets gold or a pearl
in his hand, he has such a possession: But when it is but a moral improper
reception (though per actum physicum volendi vel consentiend^), and when we
speak of a possession in right of Law, and of a relation and Title, then it
must need; stand as aforesaid. Donation, (or Imputation) being the direct cause
of our first constitutive justification, therefore conditionality and not the
natural receptivity of faith, must needs be the proper reason of its
justifying. This is acknowledged by Divines: Amesius says, ( Bellarm. Enervat.
T. 4. p. (m^hi) 314. Apprehensio justificationis per veram fiduciam, non est
simpliciter per modum objecti, sed per modum objecti nobis donati: Quod enim
Deus donaverit fidelibus Christum and omni ^cum eo, Scriptura disertis verbis
testatur, Romans 8.32. 2. And that if any other sort or act of faith, as well as
this, or any other grace would have justified, if God had made it equally the
condition of his gift, is also past all doubt. 1. Because the whole work of
Justifying depends merely on Gods free Grace and will and thence it is that
faith is deputed to its office. 2. Who doubts but God could have bestowed
pardon and justification on other terms or conditions, if he would? 3. Yea who
doubts but he might have given them without any condition, even that of
acceptance? Yea though we had never known that there had been a Redeemer, yet
God might have justified us for his sake. I speak not what he may now do after
he resolved of a course in his Covenant: But doubtless he might have made the
Covenant to be an absolute promise without any condition on our part if he
would, even such as the Antinomians dream it to be. And me thinks those great
Divines, that say with Twisse, Ch^mier, Walaeus, etc. that God might have
pardoned us without a Redeemer, should not deny this especially. 4. And
doubtless that faith which the Israelites in the first ages were justified by,
did much differ from ours now, whatever that does which is required of poor
Indians now; that never heard of Christ. 5 And God pardons and justifies
Infants, without any actual reception of pardon by their faith.

2. And me thinks they that stand for the instrumentality of faith above all
should not deny this; for (according to my Logic) the formality of an
Instrument is in its actual subserviency to the principal cause: and therefore
it is no longer causa instrumentalis then it is used: and therefore whatsoever
is the materia of the instrument, or whatsoever is natural to it, cannot be its
form: Now to be a reception or apprehension of Christ, is most essentially
natural to this act of faith, and therefore cannot be the form of its
instrumentality. For as Scotus says ( ^n 4. sint. did. 1. q. 5. Fol. ( mihi
13. H.) ^^ru mentii^^n^it^s p^aeceda naturaliter usum ejus ut instrumentum. And
what is the (...) or Aptitude of faith but this? And as Scotus ibid. says,
Nullum instrumentum formaliter est ideo aptum ad usum, quia al quis utitur eo
ut instrumento: but it is an Instrument quia al quis utitur, etc.

3. And if the reception were the most direct, proper cause, (especially if the
physical reception) then it would follow, that justifying faith ^as such) is
the receiving of justification, or of Christ's righteousness, but for the
receiving of Christ himself, or that the receiving of Christ would be but a
preparatory act which is I dare say foul and false Doctrine, and contrary to
the scope of Scripture which makes Christ himself the object of this faith; and
the receiving of him ( John 1.11, 12.) and believing in him to be the condition
of justification; and the receiving of righteousness, but secondarily or
remotely. Amesius says (ubi supra) hic tamen observandum est accurate
loquendo, apprehensionem Christi and justitiae ejus esse fidem justificantem,
quia justificatio nostra exurgit ex apprehensione Christi, and apprehentio
justificationis ut possessionis nostrae praesentis, fructus est and effectum
apprehensionis prioris. So in his Medulla he makes Christ himself the object of
justifying faith.

4. Also if the said reception were the immediate proper reason why faith
justifyeth; then it would follow that it is one act of faith whereby we are
pardoned ( viz the reception of pardon) and another whereby we are justified (
viz. the Reception either of righteousness or justification:) and there must be
another act of faith for Adoption, and another for every other use according to
the variety of the Objects. But this is a vain fiction, it being the same
believing in Christ, to which the Promise of Remission, Justification,
Adoption, Glorification, and all is made.

Also it would contradict the Doctrine of our best Divines, who say, ^s Alste
dius, Distinct. Theol. C. 17. p. 73. that Christ is our Righteousness in sensu
causali, sed non in sensu formali. I conclude this with the plain Testimony of
our best Writers. Perkins vol. 1. page 662. In the true Gain, says: And lest
any should imagine that the very Act of faith in apprehending Christ
justifies: we are to understand that faith does not apprehend by Power from it
self, but by virtue of the Covenant. If a man believe the Kingdom of France to
be his, it is not therefore his: yet if he belive Christ and the Kingdom of
Heaven by Christ to be his, it is his indeed: not simply because he believes,
but because he believes upon Commandment and Promise. (that is not properly as
an Instrument, but as a condition) For in the tenor of the Covenant God
promises to impute the Obedience of Christ to us for our Righteousness if we
believe. Is not this as plain as may be? So Bullinger Decad. 1. Sermon. 6. p.
(mihi) 44. We say faith justifies for it self, not as it is a quality in our
mind, or our own work: but as faith is a gift of Gods grace, having the promise
of righteousness and life, etc. Therefore faith justifies for Christ, and from
the grace and Covenant of God.

This being therefore fully proved, that faith justifies properly and directly
as the condition on which God has made over Christ and all his benefits in the
Gospel, the two great points opposed in my Doctrine do hence arise unavoidably.
1. That this faith justifies as truly and directly as it is the receiving of
Christ for Lord, and King, and Head, and Husband, as for a justifier, for both
are equally the conditions in the Gospel. But if the physical Instrumental way
were sound, then it would justify only as it is a receiving of Justification
or Justice. This is the main conclusion I contest for. Yield me this, and I
will not so much stick at any of the rest. 2. And hence it follows, that
Repentance, forgiving others, love to Christ, Obedience Evangelical, do so far
justify as the Gospel-promise makes them conditions; and no further do I plead
for them.

7. My last Question was, Whether now your Doctrine or mine be the more
obscure, doubtful and dangerous? And which is the more clear, certain and safe?

And here I shall first show you yet more what my Judgment is, and therein
whether Faith be a moral Instrument.

I think that conditio sine qua non, non potest esse efficiens, quia hujus
nulla est actio; nec id ad cujus presentiam aliquid contigit c^tra illius
actionem: nec materialis dispositio est Instrumentum, etc. ut Schibler, Top. c.
3. page 102. Even the Gospel-Promise, which is far more properly called Gods
moral Instrument of justifying or pardoning, is yet but somewhat to the making
up that fundamentum, from whence the relation of justified does result. And the
Fundamentum is called a cause of the relation which arises from it without any
act, but what went to cause the foundation, even by a mere resultancy, as D'
Orbellis fully in 1. sent. did. 17. q. 1. But to call a condition in Law an
Instrument, is yet far more improper. The Law or Promise therefore I will call
a moral Instrument: the condition which we must perform, I will not call a
moral Instrument, either of the Act which God performs, or yet of the effect
which flows from that act immediately. Yet if any will say that it is
properly and principally a condition, and that it so justifies; and yet that
it may be called an Instrument moral in an improper sense, as it is a condition
first, or else in regard of its receiving use, will stretch the word Instrument
so wide, as to apply it to it; I will not contend for a word, when we agree in
sense. And thus Mr. Wotton yields as with an ill will to call it an
Instrument, proving it first to justify as a condition. But I am loath to give
it any proper causality in justifying.

And now let us see whose sense is, 1. More obscure. I avoid and abhor all vain
niceties in so fundamental a point as Justification is; therefore I say plainly
but [That faith is the condition on which God has bestowed Christ and all his
benefits in the Gospel] What woman cannot understand this at a word? But your
Doctrine, what Oedipus is able to unfold? for my part, it is quite past my
reach; and most that I converse with, are as silly as my self. Can every poor
man or woman reach to know what a passive Action, or a passive Passion, or a
Passive Instrument is? and how we receive Christ, as a man takes a gift in his
hand? or to see through all the difficulties that I have discovered here in
your Doctrine? Even they that raise questions, what one act of faith does
justify, whether of the Understanding or Will? Whether Assent or Affiance,
etc. Do seem vainly and hurtfully curious to me: much more those that reduce
all to an unconceivable pat^: I plainly therefore asfi^m, that faith is not any
physical receiving, (as the hand does receive money, as you would afterward
make me believe the Assembly m^^ns) but a Metaphorical moral receiving: and
that it is not by any one act of the soul (much less a Passion) but by the
whole soul, Understanding and Will: the former beginning, the later
consummating it, (as Dav^nant soundly.) And let us try by common speech, which
of these is the more plain and probable sense. Suppose a Prince will redeem a
Turkish condemed slave, and send him word [ I have bought thee, and if thou will receive (or take) me for thy Redeemer, Deliverer and Lord, and for the
future wilt serve me and be thankful, I will actually set thee free. Here it
would sure be a silly thing to fall a questioning, what the Prince means by the
word [Receive or take] Whether it be an act of this faculty, or that? Whether
this or that act? Or whether it is merely Pati? Though we are too wise to
understand this now, I warrant you the foolishest slave would soon understand
it: and know that to receive or take the Prince for his Redeemer, is to believe
him, and consent, and thankfully accept of him as he requires, and of
deliverance by him: And he that should ask him, Whether it were the bare act of
affiance, or whether gratitude or love were included in the term? would seem
but simple to him. If a Prince will deliver a condemned woman from death, and
offer with all to marry her, and give her himself, and all he has, on
condition she will receive or take him for her husband, (and accordingly be a
faithful wife to him till death) He that should here step in, and raise
profound Scruples, and enter difficult disputes, whether this receiving were an
act of the Understanding or Will? Whether Affiance, Recombency, Assurance, etc.
or whether a Passion? would be well judged rid^culous; when every man knows at
the first word what it is for the woman to receive or take a man for her
Husband, even gladly and lovingly to consent and accept the offer, and with all
her heart deliver up her self to him accordingly. So if a King of another
Nation, that has right also to this, but not possession, should send to us, to
charge us to receive him for our King; what a hard word is this to understand?
or does it signify any one act? or the act of any one single faculty that the
people of the land must perform? Oh how too learned Divines (or too unlearned)
have puzzled and amazed poor souls, and muddyed the clear streams of the
Doctrine of Christ, in this so weighty and plain a point of justification? In a
word, Sir, I know there is never a one of my Hearers can understand your
Doctrine of instrumentality Active or Passive, nor have they the Logic
necessary thereto, and therefore I will not speak to them in such a language.
Even while I untye your knots, I am thought a Barba^i^n, and not understood;
how much more if I spoke what I understand not my self nor am able, though I
set my wits on the tenter?

2. And then let us see which is the truer and certa^ner, your Doctrine or
mine. And 1. I have said somewhat already to weaken the credit of yours. 2. And
more from what is last said it is unlikely to me to be true because of the
obscurity; for I believe God has spoke plainer in fundamentals, and not laid
folks salvation upon that which none but Scholars of a better or worse
judgment then I can understand. I know there is that kind of difficulty in
Divine things which requires the spiritual illumination of the understanding:
but not such in foundation points that necessarily requires so much humane
learning. 3. Your way has not one word of Scripture for it: Where does
Scripture say (in phrase or sense) that faith Justifies as an instrument; or
that it is such? Active or Passive? Or that it is this or that only Act?

But now for the Doctrine I teach. 1. Neither your self nor any solid man
denies it (that faith is a condition and so justifies:) and that it is a
Moral receiving, and by the whole soul, esepcially the hearty consent, and
acceptance of the will, most Divines teach, as I could show but for wasting
time. 2. I prove it further, that it is but this plain Moral recep^ion, thus.
As Christ is offered, so he is received (therefore the Assembly say [as he is
offered in the Gosp^l]: But Christ is offered Morally in the Gospel, and not
Physically; therefore he must be so received. 3. Rejicere est no^le; Ergo,
reci^ere est velle. To reject Christ is the condemning sin of infidelity: but
that lies in an unwillingness to have him to be their Redeemer, Savior, and
especially Lord: therefore receiving Christ is a willingness, consent or
acceptance of him for Redeemer and Lord, Joh. 1.10. His own received him not;
What is that but they refused him? and not that they wree not Passive physical
receivers of Justice, Luke 19.27. These mine enemies that would not I should
reign over them, bring hither and destroy, etc. Then willingness of his reign
is part of that faith which justifies: Even willingness of his Reign, as well
as to be pardoned, justified and saved from Hell by him; (or else few among us
would perish; For I never met with the man that was unwilling of these.)

3. And then it will easily appear, Whether your Doctrine or mine be the more
safe. 1. Yours has the many inconveniences already mentioned. It makes man
his own justifier, or the causa proxima of his own Justification, and by his
own Act to help God to justify us: for so all instruments do help the
principal cause. And yet by a self-contradiction it makes faith to be of no
Moral worth, and so no virtue or grace. Yea, (I think) it lays the blame of
man's infidelity on God; Many such ways it seems to wrong the Father and the
Mediator. 2. And it seems also to wrong men's souls in point of safety, both
by drawing them so to wrong God, and also by laying grounds to encourage them
in presumption; For when they are taught that the receiving of Christ's
righteousness, or of Christ for justification, or the confident expectation of
pardon, or resting on Christ for it, or a particular persuasion of it, etc. Is
justifying faith, and when they find these in themselves (as undoubtedly they
may will this much, or else they cannot presume), Is it not easy then to think
they are safe when they are not? As I said, I never yet met with the man that
was not willing to be Justified and saved from Hell by Christ: and I dare say,
Really willing: and but with few that did not expect it from Christ, and trust
him for it. Now to place Justifying faith only in that which is so common, and
to tell the men that yet they believe not truly when they have all that is made
essential to faith, as Justifying, is strange. For knowing that the godly
themselves have fowly sinned, and that no man can perish that has Justifying
faith, how can they choose but presume when they find that which is called
Justifying faith undoubtedly in themselves? And to tell them it is not sincere
or true, because they receive not Christ also as King and Prophet, and yet that
such receiving is no part of justifying faith. This is to tell them that the
truth of their faith lies without it self (a strange Truth) in a signal
concomitant: and who will doubt of his faith for want of a concomitant sign,
when he certainly feels the thing it self? Will not such think they may sin
salva fide? When as if they were rightly taught, that justifying saving faith
(as such) is the receiving of Christ for Savior, and Lord, and so a giving up
themselves both to be saved and guided by him, then they would find that faith
in Christ and sincere obedience to Christ have a little nearer relation; and
then a man might say to such a presumer, as I remember Tertullian excellently
does, De poenitent. Operum page (mihi) 119. Caeterum non leviter in Domixum
peccat qui quum amulo ejus Diabolo poenitentia renunciasset, and hoc nomine
illum Domino subjecisset, rursus ^undem regressusuo erigit, and exultatione
ejus seipsum facit, ut denuo malus recuperata praeda sua, adversus Domin^m
gaudeat. Nonne quod dicere quoque periculosum est, sed ad adificationem
proferendum est, d^abolum Domino praeponit? Comparationem enim videtur egisse
qui utrumque cognoverit, and judicato pronunciasse ^um meliorem cujus se rursus
esse maluerit, etc. Sed aiunt quidam, satis Deum habere, si cord and animo
suspiciatur, licet actu minus fiat: itaque se salvo metu and Fide peccare: Hoc
est salva castitate Matrimonia violare: salva pietate parenti venenum
temperare; sic ergo and ipsi salva venia in Gehennans detrudentur, dum salvo
metu peccant.

Again, your Doctrine seems to me to overthrow the comfort of Believers
exceedingly. For how can they have any comfort that know not whether they are
justified and shall be saved? and how can they know that, who know not whether
they have faith? and how can they know that, when they know not what justifying
says is? and how can they know what it is, when it is by Divines involved in
such a cloud and maze of difficulties? some placing it in this, act and some in
that, and some in a Passive instrumentality, which few understand, (If any man
in the world do.) For the Habit of faith, that cannot be felt or known of it
self immediately, but by its acts (for so it is concluded of all Habits,
Suarez, Metap. T. 2. disp. 44. 1. page 332.) and instead of the act we are now
set to enquire after the passion? and so in the work of examination the
business is to enquire, how and when we did passively receive righteousness, or
justification, or Christ for these? which let him answer for himself that can,
for I cannot.

But now, on the other side, what inconvenience is there in the Doctrine of
faith and justification as I deliver it? As it is plain, and certain (saying no
more then is generally granted) so I think it is safe. Do I ascribe any of
Christ's honor in the work to man? No man yet has dared to charge me with
that, to my knowledge: and no considerate man I believe will do it. I conclude
that neither faith nor works is the least part of our legal righteousness: or
of that righteousness which we must plead against the accuser for our
justification: which is commonly called by Divines, the matter of our
justification. The Law which we have broken cannot be satisfied (nor God for
the breach of it) in the least measure by our faith or obedience, nor do they
concur as the least degree of that satisfaction: But we must turn the Law over
wholly to our Surety. Only whereas he has made a new Law or Covenant
containing the conditions on our part of the said justification and salvation*
I say, these conditions must needs be performed, and that by our selves: and
who dare deny this? and I say that the performance of these conditions is our
Evangelical righteousness (in reference to that Covenant,) as Christ's
satisfaction is our legal Righteousness (in reference to that first Covenant),
or as perfect obedience would have been our legal righteousness, if we had so
obeyed. And for them that speak of inherent Righteousness in any other sense,
viz. as it is an imperfect conformity to the Law of works, rather then as a
true conformity to the Law or Covenant of grace, I renounce their Doctrine,
both as contradictory to it self, and to the truth, and as that which would
make the same Law to curse and bless the same man, and which would set up the
desperate Doctrine of Justification by the works of the Law: For if men are
righteous in reference to that Law, then they may be so far justified by it.

Nor do I ascribe to works any part of the office or honor of faith (Though
that were not so dangerous as to derogate from Christ.) For I acknowledge faith
the only condition of our first Remission and justification: and the principal
part of the condition of our justification as continued and consummate. And if
faith be an instrumental cause, I do not give that honor from it to works, for
they are not so: Nay, I boldly again aver, that I give no more to obedience to
Christ, then Divines ordinarily do, that is, to be the secondary part of the
condition of continued and consummate justification. Only I give not so much as
others to faith, because I dare not ascribe so much to man. And yet men make
such a noise with the terrible name of Justification by works (the Lords own
phrase), as if I gave more then themselves to man, when I give so much less.

And thus Sir, I have according to your advice, spent my self (as you speak) in
aiming at that mark which you were pleased to set me. And now I shall proceed
to the rest of your exceptions.

My next answer to you was, that [ If works under every notion are excluded (as
you say they are) then repentance is excluded under the notion of a condition
or preparative: But repentance under that notion is not excluded: Therefore not
works under every notion. To this you reply, that [Repentance is not excluded
as qualifying, but as recipient,] which what is it but a plain yielding my
Minor, and so the cause: For this is as much as I say. If repentance be a work
or act of ours, and not excluded under the notion of a qualification, (or as
you elsewhere yield) a Medium ordinatum, and a condition, then works are not
under every notion excluded. And that repentance is not recipient, how easily
do I yield to you? But do you indeed think that when Paul excludes the works
of the Law, that he excludes them only as Recipient? and not as qualifying? If
so, (as this answer seems to import, seeing you will not have me here
distinguish between works of Law, and of Gospel, or New Covenant) then you give
abundance more to works of the Law then I do or dare: For I aver that Paul
excludes them even as qualifications, yea and the very presence of them: and
that the Jews never dreamt of their works being Recipient.

To my next you say, [Whether Paul dispute what is our righteousness, or upon
what terms it is made ours it does not much matter] But I think it of very
great moment; they being Questions so very much different, both in their sense,
and importance. And whereas you think Paul speaks chiefly of the manner, I
think he speaks of both, but primarily of the (quasi) materia; and of the
manner or means thereto, but secondarily in reference to that. So that I think
the chief Question which Paul does debate, was, Whether we are Justified by our
own works or merits, or by Another, viz. the satisfaction of a surety? which
yet because it is no way made ours but by believing, therefore he so puts the
Question, whether by works of the Law, or by faith? and so that he makes them
two immediate opposites not granting any tertium, I easily yield. (But of that
before.)

To the next you say, that [I cannot find such a figure for faith Relatively in
my sense.] Answ. And I conceive that faith in my sense may be taken Relatively
full as well as in yours* Doubtless acceptance of an offered Redeemer and all
his benefits does relate as properly to what is accepted ( viz. by the assent
of the understanding initially, and by the election and consent of the will
consummately) as a Physical Passive reception or instrumentality can do. And
also as it is a condition I make little doubt, but it relates to the thing
given on that condition: and that the very name of a condition is relative. So
that in my sense faith relates to Christ two ways: Whereof the former is but
its very nature, and so its aptitude to its office: The later is that proper
respect in which it immediately or directly justifies. Yet do I not mean as
you seem to do, as I gather by your phrase of [putting Love and Obedience for
Christ's Righteousness]: For I conceive it may be put relatively, and yet not
strictly (loco correlati) for the thing related to: when I say my hands or
teeth feed me, I do not put them instead of my Meat; and yet I use the words
relatively, meaning my Meat principally, and my teeth secondarily: Neither do I
mean that it relates to Christ's righteousness only or principally; but first
to himself. And I doubt not but Love to Christ and Obedience to him as
Redeemer, do relate to him: but not so fully, clearly and directly express him
as related to, as Faith: Faith being also so comprehensive a grace as to
include some others. It is a true saying, that a poor woman that is marryrd to
a Prince is made honorable by love, and continued so by duty to her husband:
But it is more obscure and improper then to say, she is made honorable by
Marriage, or taking such a man to her husband, which includes love, and
implies duty and faithfulness, as necessarily subsequent. I conceive with
Judicious Doctor Preston, that faith is truly and properly such a consent,
contract, or marriage with Christ.

Next to your similitude: you say [that I hold that not only seeing this brazen
Serpent, but any other Actions of sense, will as well heal the wounded
Christian.] To which I answer. Similitudes run not on all four. Thus far I
believe that this holds. 1. Christ was lift up on the Cross as the brazen
Serpent was lift up. 2. He was lift up for a cure to sin-stung souls, as the
brazen Serpent for the stung bodies. 3. That as every one that looked on the
Serpent was cured (an easy condition,) so every one that believes Christ to
be the appointed Redeemer, and heartily Accepts him on the terms he is
offered, and so trusts in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life.
4. That as the cure of their bodies came not from any natural reason drawn from
the eye, or from any natural excellency or efficacy of seeing, above hearing or
feeling, but merely from the free will and pleasure of God, who ordained that
looking should be the condition of their cure: So all those Acts (usually
comprised or employed in the word believing) which justify, do it not from any
natural excellency, efficacy or instrumentality, but merely from the good
pleasure of the Lawgiver: And therefore the natural Receptivity of Faith (that
is its very formal essence) must not be given as the proper direct cause of its
Justifying: But that is, its conditionality from the free appointment of God.

But on the other side, 1. It was only one Act of one sense which was the
condition of their cure: but you will not say I believe that it is only one act
of one faculty which justifies: however I will not. 2. It was the Act of
seeing which cured them, without touching, laying hold on, apprehending,
resting on, etc. But you will not say so of justifying faith. 3. The sight,
which was the condition of their cure, was no actual reception of the brazen
Serpent, but the species of that Serpent by the eye; and so the eye did no
otherwise receive the Serpent, then it received every Object it behold, even
the Serpent that stung them. But if you say, that our receiving Christ is but
per simplicem apprehensionem objecti, and that it is a receiving of his
species, and so that we receive Christ no otherwise then we receive Satan, or
any Object of Knowledge, I will not be of that opinion. 4. Their cure was simul
and semel: but our Justification is a continued Act; as really in doing all our
lives, as at first. 5 Therefore though one act finished their cure, and there
was no condition perscribed as requisite for the consummation or continuance:
yet when our Justification is begun, and we truly justified, there is further
conditions prescribed for its continuance and consummation. To conclude, I am
so far from saying, that any other Act will as well heal the wounded Christian,
besides what God has made the express condition of his cure, that I flatly
aver no other will do it. But whether he has made any one single act (or
Passion) to be the whole of that condition, I have elsewhere out of Scripture
showed you, and you do not deny what I say.

My two last Answers to your exposition of Paul's words, you are pleased to
overpass; the last of which (the ninth) being the main that I made use of: viz.
that Paul takes the word Work^ more strictly, for such working as makes the
Reward to be not of Grace but of debt: and in this sense I disclaim all works,
not only (as you do) from being receptive, or instrumental, or effective, but
from being concomitant: why you said nothing to this my chief Answer, I do not
know.

You next tell me that I cannot take the Assemblies definition in that sense as
they declare it, or the Scripture words, which are Metaphorical imply: for its
the resting of a burdened soul upon Christ only for Righteousness; and by this
Christ's Righteousness is made over to us; and its a receiving of Christ as the
hand embraces any Object, etc. Answer. That the word Receiving and Resting are
Metaphorical, I easily grant you; and wonder the more that you still insist on
them, and instead of reducing them to more proper expressions, do here add
Metaphor to Metaphor, till all your definition be a mere Allegory, when you
know how much Metaphors do seduce. But for the Assemblies Definition. I embrace
it unfeignedly in that sense as the words seem to me most evidently to import,
without using violence with them. But I perceive by this, that you will not
think it enough in a man to subscribe to national Confessions and Catechisms in
the obvious sense, or that which he judges the plain proper sense, except he
also agree with you in the explication. Some think it not enough that we
subscribe to the Scripture, because we may misunderstand it, and therefore we
must subscribe to national Confessions, as more explicate: (which I like well,
so we add nothing to Gods word, nor thrust our own Commentaries into the Text,
or obtrude out own Doctrines upon men as Articles of their faith, or at least,
as the Bishops did the Ceremonies, which they made indifferent in word, but
necessary indeed:) But now I perceive the matter comes all to one in the issue;
when you cannot make a definition of Faith in such Language as is any easier to
be understood then the Scripture: when you and I cannot both understand it: and
I find that many are of Bellarmines judgment ( Apol. c. 7. cited by Mr. Vines
in his Sermon against Haeres. page 50.) That a man may be an Haeretick though
he believe the Scriptures, the three Creeds, and the four great general
Councils. But for the sense of the Assemblies definition, 1 I know not what you
mean by the words [ as they declare it:] If any private declaration, I am not
to take notice of it, nor do I know what it means, and could wish they would
do, or might have done as Mr. Vines desired in his Sermon, J^^. 28. 1645. that
is, [ To second their conclusions with the Reasons and Grounds of them; which
will do much to make them pass for current: seeing (says he) the Gorgons head
which struck all dumb in former times, The Church, The Church, is not likely to
have the same operation row in this seeing and searching age; for though men be
willing to be subject to Authority, yet as they are men they will be slaves to
Reason.] So that if there were any private exposition, I would we had it. But
if you mean only what is declared in the words of the Definition, I am most
confident, though I never was in the Assembly, that I have hit on their sense
far nearer then you seem to have done: and I dare not think otherwise, lest I
be hainously censorious of so reverend an Assembly, which I am resolved not to
be. 1. Their very words are a receiving of Christ, and not immediately and
primarily his Righteousness, but himself; and in the confession they say as I
do, that it is an accepting, receiving and resting on Christ. 2. And as Christ
the anointed, which Name signifies the Offices which he is anointed to, viz.
King, Priest, etc. 3. It makes it to consist in no one act, but several,
expressed in two phrases: 1. Receiving Christ. 2. Resting on him alone for
salvation. 4. It expressly says, that it is a receiving of him, as he is
offered in the Gospel, and that is, not as a justifier only, but as a Lord and
Prophet, and that as immediately as the other, and conjunct with it: for he is
no where offered as a justifier alone; if he be, show where it is. 5. And hence
it is plain that they mean no Reception but moral, by Willing, Consenting,
Accepting (as they expressly say in the confession of Faith) For he is no
otherwise offered to us in the Gospel: He is not offered to our Physical
Reception. It is not his person in substance that is offered to the Contact of
our Spirits, much less of our flesh; but his person as clothed with his
Relations, of Mediator, Redeemer, Lord, Savior, etc. And can you receive a
King, as King, (who is personally distant or invisible) by any other Reception
then I have said? If we do receive a King into England, the only Acts of the
soul are hearty consenting, and what is therein and thereto employed: though
bodily Actions may follow: (which as to Christ we cannot perform.) I think
verily this is the plain sound sense of the Assembly, and shall believe so,
till the same Authority, that thus defined, do otherwise interpret their own
definition.

And for your phrase of [Resting a burdened soul on Christ for Righteousness] I
doubt not as it intends Affiance, but it is as Perkins, Dr. Downam, Rob.
Baronius, etc. say, a fruit Of faith strictly taken, rather then faith it self:
but if you take faith in a larger sense (as the Gospel not seldom does, and
against which I am no adversary) so Affiance is part of faith it self. But that
it is the whole of that faith, I shall never believe without stronger
Arguments; where you say, [Its the receiving Christ as the hand embraces any
Object.] I answer. 1. I am glad you here grant Christ himself to be the Object.
2. If you mean, [as verily as the hand, etc.] So I grant it, if a moral
receiving may be properly said to be as true as a physical. But if you mean By
a Physical Contact and Reception as the hand does, etc. then I am far from
believing that ever Christ or our Assembly so meant, or ever had so gross a
thought. Where you say, I take it not the in sense as the Scripture words
imply;] I answer. When I see that manifested I shall believe it. When it is
said John 1. He came to his own, and his own received him not: 1. Is it meant
they took him not in their hands, or received not his Person into their houses?
the later is true* But 1. Only in a second place; but their hearts were the
first Receptacle 2. Else those were no Unbelievers where Christ never came in
person; And that had no houses; 3. And that receiving cannot belong to us that
never saw him, nor to any since his Ascension. 2. Or is it the Intellective
Reception of his species? I trow not: I have said enough of that before. 3. Or
is it a moral Reception of him as thus and thus related, volendo, eligendo,
consentiendo, diligendo (pardon this last, it is but the qualification of the
rest) and consequenter fidendo? I think this is it. If you can find a fourth
way, you will do that which was never done (to my knowledge) and then you will
be a Novellist as well, as I.

For your next expressions, I answer to them, that you do truly apprehend that
I am loath to seem to recede from others, (and as loath to do it, but magis amica
veritas: And I cannot believe what my list, nor like those that can.) By which
you may truly know, that I do it not out of affectation of singularity (as he
knows that knows my heart), nor intend to be any instrument of division in
the Church. And if my assertions are destructive of what others deliver, it is
but what some men, and not what all deliver: Not against the Assembly, nor many
learned Divines who from several parts of the Land have signified to me their
Assent: besides all those great names that appear for me in print.

But you tell me that [I may not build on some Homilitical popular expressions
in any man's books.] Answer, Let me again name to you but the men I last named,
and try whether you will again so entitle their writings. The first and chief
is Dr. Preston, who was known to be a man of most choice notions, and so Judged
by those that put out his books, and his credit so great in England, that he
cracks his own that seeks to crack it. And his Sermons were preached before as
judicious an Auditory (at least) as your Lectures, and yet you defend your own
expressions. Yea it is not once nor twice, not five times only, but almost
through all his Books, that Dr. Preston harpeth upon this string, as if it were
the choicest notion that he intended to disclose. Yea it is in his very
Definition of faith as justifying; and Dr. Preston was no homiletical Definer.
I can produce the like Testimony of Dr. Stoughton: (two as great Divines in my
esteem as most ever England or the world bred.) Another is Mr. Wallis:
Doubtless, Sir, no homiletical popular man in Writing: nor could you have
quickly bethought you of an English Book that less deserves those attributes:
His words are these. I assent not to place the saving Act of faith, either with
Mr. Cotton (as his Lordship cites him) in the laying hold of, or assenting to
that Promise, etc. nor yet in a particular application of Christ to my self in
assurance, or a believing that Christ is mine, etc. But I choose rather to
place it in an act of the Will, then in either of these forenamed acts of the
Understanding. It is an Accepting of Christ offered, rather then an Assenting
to a proposition affirmed. To as many as received him, etc. that is, to them
that believe in his name. John 1. God makes an Offer of Christ to all (else
should not Reprobates be condemned for not accepting of him, as neither the
Devils are, because he was not offered to them.) Whosoever will, let him come
and take of the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. Whereupon the believing soul
replies, I will: and so takes him. When a Gift is offered to me, that which
makes it to be mine is my Acceptance, etc. If you call this taking of Christ
(or confenting that Christ shall be my Savior) a Depending, a Resting or
relying on Christ for salvation (if you speak of an act of the Will) it is all
one; for Taking of Christ to be my Savior, and committing my self to Christ to
be saved, is the same: Both of them being but a consenting to this Covenant, I
will be your God, and you shall be my People, etc. And if you make this the
saving Act of faith, then will Repentance (so far as it is distinct from Faith)
be a consequent of it: Confidence also, etc. Thus Mr. Wallis is clear, that the
Nature of Faith is the same that I have affirmed, and in no popular Sermon, but
in his Truth tried. page 94, 95. And on these grounds he well answers
Bellarmines Dilemma, which else will be but shiftingly answered. The next is
Mr. Norton of New England, a man judged one of their best Disputants, or else
they would not have chose him to encounter Apollonius: And will you call his
very Definition of Faith in an accurate Catechism, an homiletical popular
expression? What then in the whole world shall escape that censure? His Words
are: [Quest. What is justifying Faith? Answ. It is a saving grace of the
Spirit, flowing from Election, whereby the soul receives Jesus Christ, as its
Head and Savior, according as he is revealed in the Gospel.] I subscribe to
this Definition from my heart. The next cited was Mr. Culverwell, not in any
popular Sermon, but in a solid well approved Treatise of Faith, and not in
common passages, but his very definition of faith, page 13.17. and after all
concludes. page 19. [Thus we see that the very nature of faith, consists in
the true Acceptance of Christ proclaimed in the Gospel] The next I cited
(about the Definition of faith) was Mr. Throgmorton, who in his accurate
Treatise of Faith (and not in any popular Sermons) and that many times over,
does make Faith to be the receiving Christ for Prophet, and only Rabbi, to be
his Disciples, and as the only Way and Truth, and also as King, Head, Husband,
Priest, etc. and by this we are made Partakers of him and all his benefits.
page 6.29.31.82. etc. And for the great point that you stick at of
Justification, I will repeat the words of two of those Authors which I have
named: And 1. Of learned Conr. Bergius, in whom you shall have the Testimony of
the Augustane Confession, Luther, Meutzer, etc. included, both about the nature
and extent of Faith; about works Legal and Evangelical; about Justification as
begun, and as continued, and the distinct conditions, and about the concurrence
of Obedience, etc. Praxis Cathol. dissert. 7. page 973. etc.. 41. Nec tamen
negat quisquam fidem esse Obedientiam in sano sensu ex Romans 1.5. and 6.17. and
10.16, and 16 26. 2 Thessalonians. 1 8. Act. 5.3 2. Heb. 5.9. 1 Pet. 1.2, 14, 22. 1.
Fides est obedientia quatenus ejus actus proprius respondet praecepto
Evangelii, Creed in dominum Jesum, etc. Ideo enim, ut Calvinus a^t ad Romans 1.5.
nomine obedientiae insignitur, quod Dominus per Evangelium nos vocat, nos
vocanti per fidem respondemus. Et sic fides, ( ut loquitur Apol. August. Conf.
in resp. ad Arg. page 125.) est Obedientia erga Evangelium: quae cum Obedientia
mandatorum legis minime confundi debet. Nam ut recte Meutzerus ( in exeg August
Conf. ^ct. 4 cont. Phot. in. 15.) Quantum ab Evangelio Lex distat, tantum haec
obedientia ab illa disterminatur. 42. 2. Est etiam fides obed entia, quantenus
per Synecdochen Metonymicam significat totum cultum a fidelibus praesti^um;
radicem una cum fructibus, etc. Nota enim est consuetudo sermonis ( ut inquit
Apol. Conf. August. de impl. leg. page 87.) quod interdum eodem verbo causam
and effectus complectimur (...). Ita accipi potest fides, Heb. 13.7. and 12.1,
2. Romans 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. Ier. 7.28. 43. Nec dubium est cum dicitur, hoc est
mandatum ut credamus and Diligamus* 1 John 3.23. sicut in praecepto Diligendi
and habitus charitatis and fructus atque Opera, ad quae habitus ordinatur,
mandata sunt: it^ etiam in praecepto credendi and habitum fidei and fructus
ejus nobis mandatos esse. Vnde cum ipsa etiam charitas inter fructus sit fidei,
sit ut tota doctrina Christiana aliquando verbum vel pradieatio fidei, tota
Religio Christiana, tota oeconomia novi Testamenti fides praecipue appelletur,
Gal. 1.23. 1 Timothy 4.6. Gal. 5.6. and 3.23. So he proceeds and alleges Luther
taking faith in that large sense, including charity and obedience; and by
Works, meaning actiones factas cum opinione meriti, and cum expectatione
justificationis and vitae aeterne tanquam mercedis debitae Sermon. de mis. and
li. de libert. Christiana. Tom. 2. Wit. f. 4.5. and Tom. 5. com. in Zach. 2.8.
and aed Gal. c. 2. f. 300. Et ultra p. 977. Cum dicitur [sine operibus legis]
excluduntur, 1. Opera facta^n veritate obedientiae legalis, ac meriti proinde
per innocentiam, cui detur Merces citra remissionem peccati and imputationem
secundum gratiam. Romans 4.3. and s. Quia causatus est Apostolus toto capite 1
and 2. and s. Talem Obedientiam a nemine haberi, sed omnes sub peccato esse,
etc. 2. Excluduntur etiam opera facta cum opionione verae obedientia legalis ac
meriti per innocentiam; quia haec ipsa sunt etiam peccata and mendacia merentia
poenam, Phil. 3.7

3. Excluduntur etiam opera facta cum opinione meriti sine obedientia, and
innocentia legals aut ex qualicunque imperfecta aut particulari obedientia cui
aliqualiter detur Merces citra imputationem secundum gratiam, etc. So that this
is all the exclusion of Works, that he acknowledges: and shows that Bellarmine
is driven to this, which he approves.. 44. Ex dictis hisce tribus modis, primo
modo excluduntur vera opera legis, ita ut non adsint, licet diberent adesse
primo creationis jure; posterioribus autem duobus modis excluduntur praesumpta
pera ita ut non debeant adesse sed caveri potius; Et omnibus hisce modis
opponitur inter se Lex operum, per quam relinquitur gloriatio homini, and Lex
Fidei, per quam excluditur Gloriatio, Romans 3.27.

Afterward, one sense in which he says Fides sola justificat, is this, sola
est fides quaten us opponitur legis operum obedientiae; cujus veritas in nullo
est hominum, opinio autem in nullo debet esse; and significat contra
obedientiam legis Fidei, sen praecepti, non de operando and expectando vitam ut
mercedem debitam citra imputationem secundum gratiam; sed de credendo in
Christum and accipiendo and Retinendo vitam gratiae, and expectando vitam
gloriae, ut donum mere gratuitum per imputationem secundum gratiam in Christo,
quem praepos^it Deus placamentum in sanguine ipsius.

And afterward, Ex dictis facile intelligitur nibil his repugnare Augustinum,
(qui praecipue nobis opponitur) cum docet, excludi tantum ab Apostolo opera
facta sine fide and spiritu Christi: (hoc est, sine viva fide promissionis, and
abnegatione meriti proprii, sicut and Bellarm. supradocebat, excludi opera
quibus id quod redditur est merces non gratia) opera vero facta cum fide and
Spiritu Christi ad illam movente non excludi. Number neque nos ea excludimus, ne
sint, aut debeant esse; sed distinguit etiam Lutherus opera legis and opera
Christi in nobis per fidem operantis and viventis per omnia. Additque haec non
posse magis omitti, quam ipsam fidem, nec esse minus necessaria quam fides; in
li. de vot. mon. ^. 2. Wit. f. 281.

But the chief thing I intend is in the next words. At quemadmodum caeterae
actiones significatae per fidem quasi materiaiiter and Synecdochice per se and
direct non ordinantur ad amicitiam Dei and salutem proprie Efficiendam (as he
mistakingly thinks faith is) sed vel ad fidem cui quequo modo prosunt, vel ad
amicitiam Dei and salutem saltem non amittendam: ita neque Justificabunt and
salvabunt proprie and direct. Proderunt tamen ad utrumque quatenus sunt, 1.
vel dispositiones ad fidem, ut Pareus. 2. Effectus, etc. 3. Quatenus per illa
excludimus and cavemus peccata and ingratitudinem, quae omnino vera causa
amittendae Justitiae and salutis futura essent: qualem causam removentem
probibeus appellare, and ad causas per accidens refer solent. Omnis enim
arbor quae non, etc. (Here he speaks only of the natural conducibility of
works, and omitteth the moral conditionality; and so gives a causality per
accidens to them, which is more then I do.). 54. and in hac fructuum
comparatione, sub notione proprie causae finalis (it was not then considered
that justification is a continued Act) pertinentis ad non amittendum sed
retinendum gratuito data, ordo and respectus operum ad salutem simplicissime,
and commodissime ad Scripturae filum explicari potest. 2 Pet. 1.10. 2 John 8.

Accordingly before in this Type he makes the conditions to be 1. Acceptance:
(that faith) 2. and retention: (this he shows is also by Gospel works) among
diverse allegations of his out of the Apol. Vrsin. Davenant, etc. I will add one
out of Gualther in 1 Cor. hom. 28. Vt filius etsi haeres natus sit, abdicatur
tamen, and ab bereditate excidit, si se inobedientem and contumaciorem
praebeat: ita nos quoque regni caelorum bereditatem, quae ex adoptionis gratia
nobis debetur, minime quidem nostris operibus meremur tandem vero nostra
contumacia amittimus, and nostro magno merito abdicamur, si tantae gratiae
iniqui simus aestimatores.

And he reconcileth Paul and James thus, s. 56. Deinque notandum est: alium
esse loquendi and docendi modum contra Judaismum and contemptum gratiae: alium
contra securitatem and abusum gratiae cum disputatur praeciput contra Judaismum
sive Justitiam operum, uti Paulus in ep. ad Romans and alibi facit; tunc docemur
sola fide Justistcare, hoc est; nihil in nobis placere Deo nisi per
abnegationem meriti and acceptationem contra doni Evangelici. At cum disputatur
contra securitatem, and docetur quid respectu amicitiae Divinae nobis agendum
sit (prout Jacobus in Epis. sua fecit, and body, vel maxim necesse est (we
may truly say so) ut Dr. Tossanus in sua Cont. Psendevangelicos disputatione et
alii pre ac prudenter j^msridem monuerunt) tunc negatur solam fidem sufficere,
and praecipiuntur omnia quae quoquo modo prosunt: sive disponant ad filem, sive
in iis consummetur fides, (sicut quaevis res fine and effictibus suis
consummatur: arbor fructibus, potentia animae motibus corporis, non quod ad
essentiam sed quod ad usum) sive praesens jam amicitia per illa firmetur ne
dissiliat, vel etiam augeatur quod ad effectus aliquos, and hoc modo quasi
impleatur.

And he concludes thus. 58. Vno verbo: sola fide justificamur: hoc est: Nullo
nostro merito, sive ipsius fidei, sive alterius actionis praeter fidem.
Probetur evidenter and catholice meritum quale a nostris negatur, tunc etiam
illud praeter solam fidem admissuri sumus.

Lud. Crocius says, ( Syntag. l. 4. page 1123.) Fides etiam sola justificat
quatenus notat obedientiam quandam expectantem promissionem ut donum gratuitum;
quomodo formaliter quidem consistit in applicatione promissionis, quam tamen
and pracedunt dispositiones aliquae ad hunc ipsum fidei actum, and sequuntur
fructus: unde plures virtutes vel actus tum antecedentes tum consequentes
connotat; and opponitur illi obedientia quae non expectat promissionem tanquam
donum omnino gratuitum, sed ut mercedem propositam sub condition operis
alicujus praeter acceptationem and gratitudinem debitam quae sua natura in omni
donatione quamvis gratuita requiri solet. Et hujusmodi obedientia peculiariter
Opus ab Apostolo, and Latinis propr e meritum dicitur. Et qui hac condition
obediunt operantes vocantur, Romans 4.4. and 11.6. Atque si it a hac propositio
exponatur, ea quidem opera quae cum fide consistere nequeant, id est, que fiunt
cum fiducia and opinione meriti, prorsus excluduntur, ita ut non solum negentur
justifica^e, sed and adesse tam in justificate, quam in justificando.

Joh. Crocius de justifi. disp. 13. page 67^ Credenti facta est promissio, fide
accepturum remissionem peccatorum: mendico and aegro non est facta promissio,
si ille manum extendat, datum iri elcemosynam; fi iste pharmacum manu capiat
convaliturum, etc.

Mr. Gataker against Saltmarsh shadows, etc. page 26.40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46,
47, 48, 49, 53, 64. does fully give as much to Faith, Repentance, Obedience as
I do. Nor know I any reason why, (John's) Baptism for the substance of it,
should not be an example to us also in these times, being the Baptism of
Repentance unto Remission of sins, that is, if I mistake not, Baptism obsigning
remission of sins upon condition of Repentance. page 40. and page 41. He says,
[that pardon of sin and salvation are propounded and preached upon condition of
Faith, Repentance, and Newness of life, which are the conditions of the Gospel:
and yet may obey also be so termed as conditions of peace upon agreement unto,
and performance whereof peace may be had, which otherwise cannot be obtained.]
And he evinceth this by an Argument drawn from the definition or nature of a
condition, thus, [That which is so propounded, as that being performed, life
and salvation may undoubtedly be attained, and without which it cannot be had,
may well be termed a condition: but such are the things before mentioned;
therefore they may justly be termed conditions] vid. ult. and p. 48. Suppose a
King be content at the suit either of the parties themselves, or any friend, to
grant his gracious pardon to a company of notorious Rebels that had risen up
against him, etc. upon condition that they acknowledge their offense, and their
sorrow for it, with purpose and promise of living loyally for time to come;
whether would you deem this to be free grace or no? etc. Were he not a most
ungracious wretch, that having his pardon on such terms granted and signed him*
should in regard of those conditions deny it to be of free Grace? and whether
they do not blaspheme Gods free Grace, that deny it to be free Grace, if it be
propounded on terms of Relief, Repentance and Amendment of life. Sir,
Whatsoever you say to us, take heed how you tell Christ, that he does not
freely save you, if he will not save you unless you believe, etc.] In many more
places, and more fully Mr. Gataker shows that Faith, Repentance, Obedience, are
jointly conditions of Pardon, etc. Only he gives Faith a peculiar Receptivity,
which I never denied: And he yields to call it an Instrument, which so largely
taken, I will not contend against. But still I say that this Receptivity is but
the aptitude of Faith in a special manner to this work of justifying: and the
rest are apt to be conditions in their place, or else God would not have made
them conditions. Even in regard of its natural aptitude and use [ Humiliation,
(as Mr. Vines says, Sermon. on James 4.8. page.12.) though it do not properly
cleanse the hands, yet it plucks off the Gloves, and makes them bare for
washing: and Godly sorrow with its seven Daughters, 2 Cor. 7.11. are clensing
things.

Dr. Stoughton, Righteous man's plea for Happ. Sermon. 6. page 32. Faith
comprehends not only the Act of the Understanding, but the Act of the Will too,
so as the Will does embrace and adhere, and cleave to those Truths which the
understanding conceives: and not only embracing merely by Assent to the Truth
of it, but by closing with the Good of it: (What is that but loving?) tasting
and relishing it. As faith in Christ is not only the Assenting of a man's mind
that Christ is the Savior, but a resultancy of the Will on Christ as a
Savior, embracing of him, and loving, esteeming and honoring him as a
Savior. The Scripture comprehends both these together, and there is a rule for
it, which the Rabbis give for the opening of the Scripture, viz. Verba sensus
etiam denotant affectus, as Jo. 17.3. This is eternal life to know thee, etc.
It is not bare Knowledge the Scripture means, but Knowledge joined with
affections.] You see Dr. Stoughton took Love to be full as near Kin to Faith as
I do. Many the like and more full in him I pass. I cited in my Append.
Alstedius, Junius, Paraeus, Scharpius, Aretius, Ball, etc. making Faith, and
Obedience, and Gratitude Conditions of the new Covenant (and who says not the
same?) If all these be homiletical and popular, I much mistake them; which yet
I cite not as if no words might be found in any of these Authors that seem to
speak otherwise; but to show that I am not wholly singular, (Though if I were,
I cannot help it when I will.)

On the next Q. Whether a dying man may look on his Faith and Obedience, and
Duty as the condition of the N. Cov. by him performed? You would persuade me
that I cannot think that I speak to the point in this: but you are mistaken in
me: for I can mistake more then that comes to: and indeed I yet think I spoke
as directly to the question in your terms laid down, as was possible: for I
changed not one of your terms, but mentioned the Affirmative as your self
expressed it: If you did mean otherwise then you spoke, I knew not that, nor
can yet any better understand you. Only I can feel that all the difference
between you and me must be decided by distinguishing of [Conditions:] but you
never yet go about it so as I can understand you. You here ask me, [Whether I
think you deny a godly life to be a comfortable Testimony, or necessary
qualification of a man for pardon?] Answer. 1. But the Question is not of the
significancy or Testimony, nor yet of all kind of qualification; that is an
ambiguous term, and was not in the Question, but of the conditionality. 2. You
yield to the term Condition your self elsewhere, and therefore need not shun
it. 3. Qualifications and Conditions are either physical and remote, of which I
raise no question: so the Essence of the soul is a condition, and so hearing
the Gospel is a natural Condition of him that will understand it; and
understanding is a natural Qualification of him that will believe it: For
ignoti nulla fides. But it is another sort of conditions you know that we are
in speech of, which I have defined, and Mr. Gataker before cited: viz. Moral
legal conditions so called in sensu forensi vel legali: when the Law of Christ
hangs our actual Justification and salvation on the doing or not doing such a
thing. Yet do I very much distinguish between the Nature and Uses of the
several Graces or Duties contained in the conditions; for though they are all
conditions, yet they were not all for the same reason, or to the same use
ordained to be conditions: but repentance in one sense as preparatory to faith:
and Faith. 1. Because it honors Christ, and debaseth our selves. 2. Because
it being in the full an Acceptance of the thing offered, is the most
convenient means to make us Possessors without any contempt of the Gift; with
other reasons that might be found: So I might assign the reasons (as they
appear to us) why God has assigned Love to Christ, and sincere Obedience, and
forgiving others, their several parts and places in this conditionality; (but I
have done it in my Aphorisms;) but then all these are drawn from the distinct
nature and use of these duties Essentially in themselves considered, which is
but their Aptitude for the place or conditionality which they are appointed to,
and would of themselves have done nothing without such appointment. So that it
is one question to ask, Why does Faith or Works of Obedience to Christ
Justify? (To which I answer; Because it was the pleasure of God to make them
the conditions of the Covenant, and not because of their own nature directly:)
and its another Question, Why did God choose Faith to the Precedence in this
work? To which I answer. 1. Properly there is no cause of Gods actions without
himself. 2. But speaking of him after the manner of men, as we must do, it is
because Faith is fitter then any other Grace for this Honor and Office, as
being both a high honoring of God, by believing him (that's as for Assent) and
in its own Essential nature, a hearty thankful Acceptance of his Son, both to
be our Lord (which is both for the Honor of God and our own good) and our
Savior to deliver and glorify us: and so is the most rational way that man
can imagine to make us partakers of the procured happiness, without either our
own danger (if a heavier condition had been laid upon us) or the dishonor of
the Mediator: either by diminishing the estimation of the favor (if we had
done any more to the procuring it our selves) or by contempt of the Gift, (if
we had not been required and conditioned with so much as thankfully and
lovingly to accept it.) And then if the Question be, Why God has assigned
sincere. Obedience and Perseverance therein to that place of secondary
Conditionality for the continuance and consummation of Justification, and for
the attaining of salvation? I answer. Not because they have any such Receptive
nature as faith, but because Faith being an Acceptance of Christ as Lord also,
and delivering and resigning up the soul to him accordingly in Covenant, this
Duty is therefore necessarily employed, as the thing promised by us in that
Covenant, and so in some sense greater then the covenanting it self, or the end
of it: and Christ never intended to turn man out of his service, and discharge
him from Obedience; but to lay on him an easier and lighter yoke and burden, to
learn of him, etc. and therefore well may he make this the condition of their
finding Ease and Rest to their souls, Mat. 11.28, 29. For, for this end he
dyed, that he might be Lord, Romans 14.9. And therefore when we are freely
pardoned, and bought from hell, it is equal that Christ should rule us, who
bought us, and that his Covenant hang till the continuance of our Legal title
to pardon justification, and glory, and so the full possession of them upon
this perseverance in sincere loving grateful subjection to him that bought us,
and by him to the Father. And thus Sir, I have digressed and used many words on
this, (which to you I think needless) not only because I perceive that you
acknowledge the conditionality of obedience in some sense, but tell me not in
what sense, but lest you should not discern my sense, who desire to speak as
plain as I can, that you may truly see wherein we differ: And that I also may
see it when you have as clearly opened your meaning of your term,
[Qualifications.]

And for your Question [Whether a godly man can think the Righteousness of
Christ made his by working, or only believing.] I answer, causally and
efficiently by neither, I think, (though you think otherwise); I dare not so
advance faith, and so advance man. I remember good, old, learned, solid
Gatakers words to Saltmarsh (page 53,) It is your self rather then any of us
that trip at this stone, when you would have faith so much pressed in the
Doctrine of salvation, in regard of the gloriousness and eminency of the grace
it self; which to assert, is not sound: (sic in Animadv in Lucium part. 1.. 9.
v. 7.) The righteousness of Christ is made ours by Gods free gift; but faith
and true subjection are conditions of our participation; and what interest each
has in the conditionality, and on what grounds, I have showed. I fear you give
too much to faith and man.

You ask [Is it repent, and Christ's righteousness by this is made yours?]
Answer, It is oftimes, Repent and be forgiven; and repent and be baptized; and
repent and believe, and be forgiven: but not efficiently by repenting nor
believing: but on condition of both: though in ordaining them conditions God
might intend one but as preparative or subservient to the other; and not one
equal terms, or to equal use immediately.

And when you say, [that the dying Christian is directed to the Resting on
Christ, and e^ing the brazen Serpent, not to be found in any thing but a
righteousness by faith,] I never durst entertain any doubt of this; it is no
question between us: only in what sense it is called a Righteousness by faith,
I have showed, even in opposition to Works in Paul's sense, which make the
reward to be of debt and not of Grace, Romans 4.4. where you say [It is an Act
Dependence not of Obedience that interests us in Christ's Righteousness] I
answer* It is no one Act but many; It is an act of Assent first (and thence the
whole has the name of faith, it being so hard a thing to believe supernatural
things, as it would have been to us to believe Christ to have been God when we
had seen him in the shape of man, had we lived in those times, when the
Doctrine of faith came not with those advantages as now it does.) And then it
is an act of willing, consenting, electing, affecting (which three are but a
velle Respectivum, and so in the act all one): in this in order of nature goes
before any act which you can in any reasonable propriety call Dependence: and I
doubt not are far more essential to justifying faith: yet I am heartily willing
to take your acts of dependence (for those also are more then one) in the next
place. But it confounds and abuses us and the Church in this controversy,
that many learned Divines will needs shun the strict Philosophical names of the
several Acts of the soul, and overlook also the natural order of the souls
motions, and they will use, and still use the Metaphorical expressions, as
apprehension (improper) dependence, relying, resting, recombency, adherence,
embracing, with more the like. I know Scripture uses some of these: but then
it is not in strict disputing, as Joh. Crocius tells Bellarm. We may use
apprehend figuratively, because Scripture says, apprehendite disciplinans, and
lay hold on eternal life: But this would quickly end disputation, or else make
it endless. Yet in the places cited, who knows not the same word has different
senses? in the former being used for to accept and stoop to: in the later for
an earnest pressing on, and endeavoring after as a runner to catch the prize.
And they will be loath to say, these are all and each of them the justifying
acts.

And where you add that its not an act of obedience. I answer, 1. I would you
had first answered the many Scriptures to the contrary produced in my Aphor. 2.
Its true of the first interest in Christ, (further then faith is called
obedience) but not of the further continued and consummate interest. 3. Does
not Christ say, Take my yoke learn of me to be meek and lowly, that they may
have ease and rest? Ease and Rest? From what? Why from what they came burdened
with? and that was sure guile and curse, and what ever is opposed to pardon and
justification, Mat. 11. And Blessed are they that do his commandments, that
they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in, etc. Rev. 21.14. And
he is the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. And
Mat. 25. is who'ly and convincingly against you. And so is the second Psalm
wholly, which makes subjection to Christ as King, the great part of the Gospel
condition. [Kiss the son] contains more then Recombency, in my judgment: and
yet no more then that true faith which is the condition of justification.

But no word in your paper brings me to such a stand as your next, where you
say, And that is very harsh still which you express, to expect the
Righteousness of the Covenant of Grace upon the conditions fulfilled by your
self, through Gods workings.] Answ. Truly it is quite beyond my shallow
capacity to reach what you here mean to be so harsh: what should I imagine?
That there are conditions upon which the Tenor of the Gospel gives Christ
Righteousness, you acknowldge: And that he that performs them not, the Gospel
gives him none of it: I know you confess these; And that we must needs perform
them our selves, through Gods workings ( i. e. both enablement and excitation,
and cooperation:) I know you doubt of none of these; for you have wrote
against the Antinomians: and Mr. Gataker has evinced the sottish ignorance or
impudency of Saltmarsh, in denying Faith, Repentance and Obedience to be the
conditions on which, performed by us, we must enjoy the things promised,
Pardon, etc. or else not. Yea in this paper you yield to this conditionality.
What then is the matter? Is it harsh when yet you never once show the fault of
the Speech? It must be either the falsehood, or the unfitness; but you have yet
accused it of neither: and yet say it is harsh.

But the reason you intimate, because Bellarmine has some such phrase: which I
never remembered or observed in him: and little do I care whether he have or no:
If the Papists be nearer to us then I take them to be, it is cause of joy and
not sorrow: But sure I am that Protestant Writers generally use the word
Condition; and Wendeline says, The Papists abuse us in feigning us to say the
Gospel is absolute; and says, the Gospel in each sense is conditional. In one
sense Faith is the Condition; in another, Faith and Obedience, etc.

But here you come again to the Labyrinth and transcendent Mystery of passive
Faith: nay you enlarge the Mystery yet more: 1. You say again, [ Faith does
pati. 2. And yet Love does agere. 3. Else you would yield that Bellarmine
argues consonantly enough, that Love would justify as well as Faith. 4. Yet
you acknowledge Faith an Active Grace: but only in this Act its meerrecipient.

Answer. I confess my reason utterly at a loss in this; but yet if it were in
my Bible (to me Intelligible) I would believe it as I do the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and cease enquiring. But I cannot so do by any Creature, to make him
the Lord of my faith and Reason. 1. Whether Faith does Pati, I have enquired
already. 2. That Love does Agere, I verily believe: and yet I have ofter heard
Love called a Passion, then Faith: And as Keckeram says, the Affections are
more Passive then the immanent Elicit Acts of the Intellect and Will. And
though as it is in the Rational soul, Love, (says Aquin.) is no Passion, but a
Willing (which causes me to judge it so near Kin to Faith) yet as it is in the
sensitive, it is a Passion. So that I am quite beyond doubt that physically
love is more properly called a Passion then Faith. 3. Therefore for ought I
know, it is no wonder if Bellarmine bear the Bell, and Papists be unconvinced,
if you have no better Arguments then this; especially if no body else had
better. 4. But yet the Mystery is far more unsearchable to me, that faith
should be Active in all other, save only this Act. What is this thing called
Faith, which you make such a Proteus, to be Active and Passive as to several
Objects? Yea when it is acknowledged the same Faith, which receives Christ and
Righteousness, and the several promises, and rests on Christ for the Pardon
of each sin, for hearing each Prayer, for Assurance, Peace, Comfort,
Deliverance from temptations, and dangers and sin, and is thus useful through
all our lives, for the fetching of help from Christ in every straight, yet that
this same Faith should be Active in all the Rest, and Passive only in One
justifying Act. Oh, For the face of an Argument to prove this! Sure its natural
Reception of one Object and another is in point of Passiveness alike: and its
assigned Conditionality in Scripture, is of like nature as to each branch of
the good on that condition promised. 5. And here also I perceive by your speech
you make it consist in some single act. And yet you never tell what that is;
and how then can it be in several faculties, as Davenant, Amesius, Joh.
Crocius, Melancth. with most do affirm? 6. But yet the depth of the mystery to
me lies in understanding and reconciling your words, [Only in this Act its
merely Recipient.] Is this an Act too? and yet merely Recipient? (which you
make a mere Pas^ive reception.) A merely Passive Act is such a contradiction in
adjecto to my understanding, that I cannot welcome the notion thither; yea if
you had said less, that it is an Act in any Part or Degree Passive. I never
knew that an Act could Pati; yet am I more conscious of mine own insufficiency
then to contend with one of your knowledge in matter of Philosophy; but I must
needs say that your notions are yet so far beyond my reach, that possibly I
might take the words as true upon the credit of one whom I so highly value, yet
am I not able to apprehend the sense.

The Joy in Heaven which you mention for a wandering sheep, I think is meant of
the first, or some eminent recovery to Christ, and not of every Philosophical
notion: sure, Sir, if salvation hang on this Doctrine, as thus by you
explained, I am out of hope that either I or ever a one in all this country
should ever come to heaven; except by believing as that part of the Church
believes which is of your opinion: When I am yet apt to think, that siding with
any party in such opinions will not conduce to any man's salvation: For I am of
Bergius his mind, that as it is not the Jew, the Pagan, or the Mohammedan, or
any Infidel, (privative,) that shall be saved, but the Christian: so it is not
the Papist, the Lutheran, the Calvinist, the Arminian, that shall be saved (qua
talis) but the Catholic. However I am in strong hopes that a man may be saved,
though he cannot understand how an Act can be a passive instrument; nor do I
think that my subscribing to that notion, would make any great rejoicing in
Heaven.

I am sorry you had not leisure to answer the Questions, which were very
pertinent to the business of my satisfaction, though not to your business.

That my explication of that plain, weighty, necessary point, how imperfect
graces or duties can yet be the conditions of the New Covenant, should seem a
Paradox to you, I say, to you, makes me yet more possessed with admiration; When
you know that such conditions there are (suppose it were but faith alone:) and
you know your self that this faith is imperfect. But I perceive we know but in
part, and therefore must differ in part. He shall see whom God will enlighten.
I had far rather you had fallen upon that point then on the term of
Justification by works. If you would but grant me, that Justifying faith, as
such, is an Accepting of Christ for King, and Prophet as well as for a
Justifier, and consequently that it is a resigning our selves to be ruled by
him, as well as to be saved by him, I shall then be content for peace sake to
lay by the phrase of Justification by work^* though it be Gods own phrase, if
the Church were offended with it, and required this at my hands: (So they will
be satisfied with my silencing it, without a renouncing it.) I have written
thus largely, that I might not be obscure, and to let you see, that though I
have scarce time to eat or sleeep, yet I have time and paper for this work,
and that I make not light of your dissent. The Love and Respect which you
mention to me I do as little doubt of, as I do whether I have a heart in my
breast: and your desires of my reducing I know do proceed from your zeal and
sincere affections. That which I take worst is, that you should so desire me
not to take it ill to be called an erring shepherd: As if I did not know my
Proneness to err, and were not conscious of the weakness of my understanding:
or as if the expressions of so sincere love did need excuse; or as if I were so
tender and brittle as not to endure so gentle a touch: as if my confidence of
your love were Plumea, non Plumbea, and would be blown away with such a
friendly breath! Certainly Sir, your sharper smiting would be precious Balm, so
it light not on the Truth, but me! I am not so unctuous, nitrous, or
sulfureous, as to be kindled with such a grateful warmth. My Intellect were
too much active, and my affections too passive, if by the reception of the
beams of such favorable expressions, my soul as by a Burning-Glass should be
set on fire. I am often ashamed and amazed to think of the horrid intolerable
Pride of many learned Pious Divines, who though they have no worse Titles then
Viri docti, reverendi, celeberrimi: yet think themselves abused and
unsufferably vilified, if any word do but acrius pungere, or any Argument do
faucibus premere (witness Rivet and Spanhemius late angry censure of Amyraldus)
Can we be fit Preachers and Patterns of meekness and humility to our people,
who are so notoriously proud, that we can scarce be spoke to? My knowledge of
your eminent humility and gentelness has made me also the freer in my speeches
here to you: which therefore do need more excuse then yours: And I accordingly
entreat you, if any thing have passed that is unmannerly, according to the
natural eagerness and vehemence of my temper, that you will be pleased to
excuse what may be excused, and the rest to remit and cover with love, assuring
your self it proceeds not from any diminution of his high esteem of you, and
love to you, who acknowledges himself unfeignedly so very much below you, as
to be unworthy to be called

Your fellow servants RICHARD BAXTER.
June 28. 1650. Kederminster. Postscript.
DEar Sir, while I was waiting for a messenger to send this by, Master Brooksby
acquaints me, that you wished him to tell me, that I must expect no more in
writing from you. My request is, that whereas you intimated in your first, a
purpose of writing somewhat against me on this subject hereafter, you would be
pleased to do it in my life time, that I may have the benefit of it, if you do
it satisfactorily; and if not, may have opportunity to acquaint you with the
reasons of my dissent. Scribunt Asinium Pollionem dixisse aliquando se parasse
orationes contra Plancum, quas non nisi post mortem esset editurus; and Plancum
respondisse, cum mortuis non nisi larvas luctari: ut Lud. Vives ex Plinio, and
Dr. Humfred. ex illo Jesuit. 2. p. 640.

Also I request that if possible you would proceed on such terms as your
Divinity may not wholly depend upon mere niceties of Philosophy: For I cannot
think such points to be near the foundation: Or at least that you will clearly
and fully confirm your Philosophical grounds: For as I find that your Doctrine
of a Passive Instrumentality of the Act of faith (and that in a Moral reception
of righteousness which is but a relation, yet calling it Physical) is the very
bottom of the great distance between us in the point of justification: So I am
of opinion that I may more freely dissent from a brother in such tricis
philosophicis then in an Article of faith: Especially having the greatest
Philosophers on my side; and also seeing how little accord there is among
themselves, that they are almost so many men, so many minds: and when I find
them professing as Combacchius in praef^ad Phys. that they write against their
own sense to please others, (and quod maximam opinionum in lib. contentarum
partem non jam probaret) and Aristotelem non esse normam veritates, and wishing
ut tandem aliquando exurgat aliquis qui perfectiora nobis principia monstret:
and to conclude as he, salsitatem opinionum and sententiarum and scientiarum
imperfectionem^jam pridem video, sed in veritate docenda deficio. Et Nulli aut
paucis certe minus me satisfacturum ac mihi ipsi sat scio. And how many new
Methods and Doctrines of Philosophy this one age has produced? And I am so far
skeptical my self herein, as to think with Scaliger (ibid. cit.) Nos instar
vulpis a Ciconia delusae vitreum vas lambere, pultem haud attingere. But I
believe not that in any Master point in Divinity, God has left his Church at
such an utter loss, nor hanged the faith and salvation of every honest ordinary
Christian, upon mere uncertain Philosophical speculations. I do not think that
Paul knew what a Passive instrument was; much less [an act that was physically
passive in its instrumentality in a moral causation.] You must give me leave to
remain confident that Paul built not his Doctrine of justification on such a
philosophical foundation, till you have brought one Scripture to prove that
faith is an instrument, and such an instrument; which can neither be done.
Especially when the same Paul professes that he came not to declare the
Testimony of God, (...): and that he determined not to know any thing among
them save Jesus Christ and him crucified; and that his speech and preaching was
not (...)) that so their faith might not stand (...): and that he spoke the
mysteries of the Gospel (...), 1 Cor. 2. I am past doubt therefore that to
thrust such Philosophical dictates into our Creed or Confession, and make them
the very touchstone of Orthodoxness in others, is a dangerous presumptuous
adding to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and a making of a new Doctrine of
justification and salvation, to the great wrong of the Prophet and Lawgiver of
the Church.

I was even now reading learned Zanchius proof that believers before Christ did
by their faith receive Christ's flesh, or humane nature (as promised and future)
as well as the Divine, and his heavy censure of the contrary Doctrine, as vile
and unsufferable; which occasioneth me to add this Quere, Whether that
believing was a physical reception, when the object had no real being or did
not exist? Or whether mere morral reception (by Accepting, Choosing,
Consenting) as a people receiving the Kings Heirs for their future Governors
before they are born; or as we receive a man for our King, who dwells far out of
our sight; Or as Princes wives do use to take them both for their Husbands and
Sovereign Lords, even in their own Native Country, before they come to sight
of the man; the match being both driven on and made, and the marriage or
contract performed and imperfectly solemnized at that distance by an Ambassador
or Delegate? just so do we receive Christ, (whose humane nature is far off, and
his Divine out of our sight) to be our Savior, Sovereign (by redemption) and
Husband; even here in our native Country; the match being moved to us by his
Ambassadors, and imperfectly solemnized upon our cordial consent, and giving up
our selves to him by our Covenant: (but it shall be perfectly solemnized at the
great Marriage of the Lamb.) This is my faith of the nature of true justifying
faith; and the manner of its receiving Christ.




THE Reader must understand that after this, I had a personal conference with
this Dear and Reverend Brother, wherein he still owned and insisted on the
passiveness of Justifying faith, viz. That it is but a Grammatical action, (or
nominal) and a physical, or hyperpyhsical passion; which also he gives us
again in the Treatise of Imputation of righteousness.

FINIS.
A DISPVTATION, Proving the Necessity of a twofold Righteousness to
Justification and Salvation.

And defending this and many other Truths about Justifying Faith, its Object
and Office, against the confident, but dark Assaults of Mr. John Warner.

By Richard Baxter.

Acts 5.31. Him has Gad axalted with his right hand, a Prince and a Savior,
to give Repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

Romans 4.22, 23* 24, 25. And therefore it was imputed to him for Righteousness:
Now it was not written for his sake alone that it was Imputed to him; but for
us also, to whom it shall be Imputed, if we Believe on him that raised up Jesus
our Lord from the dead; who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised
again for our Justification.

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons, Book seller in Kederminster, and
are to be sold by him there, and by Nathaniel Ekins, at the Gun in Paul's
Churchyard, 1658.

Question. Whether Besides the Righteousness of Christ Imputed, there be a
Personal Evangelical Righteousness necessary to Justification and Salvation?
Affirm.
THough it has pleased a late Opponent (Mr. Warner) to make the Defense of
this Proposition necessary to me; yet I shall suppose that I may be allowed to
be brief, both because of what I have formerly said of it, and because the
Question is so easily decided, and Christians are so commonly agreed on it.

For the right understanding of what we here maintain, its necessary that I
explain the Terms, and remove confusion by some necessary distinctions, and lay
down my sense in some Propositions that make to the opening of this.

To trouble you with the Etymologies of the words in several Languages that
signify Righteousness or Justification would be a needless loss of time, it
being done to our hands by so many, and we being so far agreed on it, that here
lies no part of our present controversy.

The Form of Righteousness, signified by the name is Relative, as strait or
crooked is. (For it is not the Habit of Justice, by which we give every man his
own, that is the Subject of our Question but Righteousness in a Judicial or
Legal sense) 1. Righteousness is either of the cause, or of the person. Not
that these are subjects actually separated but distinct, the one being
subordinate to the other. The cause is the nearest subject, and so far as it is
just and justifiable, so far the person is just and justifiable. Yet the person
may otherwise be just and justified, when one or many causes are unjustifyable.

2. Righteousness is denominated either from a Relation to the Precept of the
Law, or to the Sanction. To be righteous in Relation to the Precept, is to be
conform to that Precept; An Action or Disposition conform to the Precept, is
called a Righteous Action or Disposition: and from thence the person being so
far conform, is called a Righteous person: And so this Righteousness, as to the
positive precept, is his obeying it; and as to the prohibition, it is his
Innocence, contrary to that guilt, which we call Reatus culpae.

Righteousness as a Relation to the Sanction, is either a Relation to the
Commination and penal Act of the Law, or to the promissory or Premiant Act. As
to the former, Righteousness is nothing, but the Not-dueness of the punishment,
contrary to the Reatus poenae, as it respects the execution; and so A not being
liable to condemnation, as it respects the sentence. This is sometime founded
in the persons Innocence last mentioned: sometime on a free pardon or
acquittance: sometime on satisfaction made by himself: And sometime on
satisfaction by another, conjunct with free pardon (which is our case.)

Righteousness as a Relation to the Promise, or Premiant part of the Sanction,
is nothing but our Right to the Reward, Gift, or Benefit, as pleadable and
justifyable in foro. Which sometime is founded in merit of our own; sometime in
a free Gift: sometime in the merit of another, conjunct with free Gift, which
is our case, (other cases concern us not) This last mentioned, is Righteousness
as a Relation to the substance of the Promise or Gift: But when the Promise, or
Gift, or Testament, or Premiant Law is conditional, as in our case it is, then
there is another sort of Righteousness necessary, which is Related to the Modus
promissionis, and that is, The performance of the condition: which if it be not
properly called Righteousness Ethically, yet civilly in a Judiciary sense it
is, when it comes to be the cause to be tried and Judged, whether the person
have performed the condition, then his cause is just or unjust, and he just or
unjust in that respect.

3. Righteousness is either Universal, as to all causes that the person can be
concerned in: or it is only particular, as to some causes only, and so but
secundum quid to the person.

4. A particular Righteousness may either be such as the total welfare of a man
depends on; or it may be of less and inconsiderable moment.

5. When a cause subordinate to the main cause is Righteous, this may be called
a subordinate Righteousness. But if it be part of the main cause, it is a
partial righteousness coordinate.

I will not trouble you with so exact a disquisition of the Nature of
Righteousness and Justification as I judge fit in it self, both because I have
a little heretofore attempted it, and because I find it blamed as puzling
curiosity or needless distinguishing: Though I am not of that mind, yet I have
no mind to be troublesome.

As for the term Justification, 1. It either may signify the Act of the Law or
Promise: or the sentence of the Judge: or the Execution of that sentence; For
to one of these three senses the word may still be reduced, as we shall have to
do with it; that is, to constitutive, or sentential, or Executive
Justification; though the sentence is most properly so called. To these,
Justification by Plea, Witness, etc. are subservient.

2. Justification is either opposed to a false Accusation, or to a true.

3. In our case, Justification is either according to the Law of works, or to
the Law of Grace.

I think we shall at this time have no great need to use any more distinctions
then these few, and therefore I will add no more about this Term.

As to the term [Evangelical] Righteousness may be so called in a fourfold
sense. 1. Either because it is that righteousness which the Covenant or Law of
Grace requires as its Condition; Or 2. Because its a Righteousness revealed by
the Gospel; Or 3. Because it is Given by the Gospel; 4. Or because it (...) ^
perfect fulfilling of the Precepts of the Gospel.

By [a personal] Righteousness, we mean here, not that which is ours by mere
Imputation, but that which is founded in somewhat Inherent in us, or performed
by us.

[Necessity] is 1. of a mere Antecedent. 2. Or of a Means: We mean the last.
Means are either causes, or conditions.

I shall now by the help of these few distinctions give you the plain truth in
some Propositions, both Negatively and Affirmatively, as follows.

Proposition 1. It is confessed by all that know themselves, or man and the
Law, that none of us have a Personal universal Righteousness. For then there
were no sin, nor place for confession, or pardon, or Christ.

Prop. 2. And therefore we must all confess, that in regard of the Preceptive
part of the Law of works we are all unjust, and cannot be justified by the
deeds of the Law, or by our works.

Prop. 3. And in regard of the Commination of that Law, we are all under guilt
and the Curse, and are the children of wrath, and therefore cannot be justified
by that Law, or by our works. Both these are proved by Paul at large, so that
none have a personal Legal Righteousness.

Prop. 4. No man can plead any proper satisfaction of his own for the pardon of
sin, and escaping the curse of the Law: But only Christ's Satisfaction, that
fulfilled the Law, and became a curse for us.

Prop. 5. No man can plead any merit of his own for procuring the Reward (
unless as actions, that have the promise of a Reward, are under Christ
improperly called merits) But our righteousness of this sort is only the merit
and purchase of Christ, and the free gift of the Gospel in him.

Prop. 6. We have no one work that is perfectly justifiable by the perfect
precepts of the Law of works: And therefore we have no legal personal
Righteousness at all that can properly be so called; but are all corrupt and
become abominable, there being none that does good, no not one; Imperfect legal
righteousness, is an improper speech; it is properly no legal righteousness at
all, but a less degree of unrighteousness (The more to blame they that call
sanctification so)

Prop. 7. No man can say that he is a Coordinate Con-cause with Christ in his
Justification; or that he has the least degree of a satisfactory or
Meritorious Righteousness, which may bear any part in co-ordination with
Christ's righteousness, for his justification or salvation.

Prop. 8. We have not any personal Evangelical Righteousness of perfect
obedience to the Precepts of Christ himself: whether it be the Law of Nature as
in his hand, or the Gospel positives.

Prop. 9. Even the Gospel personal Righteousness of outward works, though but
in sincerity, and not perfection, is not necessary* (no not as an antecedent)
to our Justification at the first.

Prop. 10. External works of Holiness are not of absolute necessity to
Salvation: for it is possible that death may suddenly after Conversion, prevent
opportunity: and then the inward faith and repentance will suffice: Though I
think no man can give us one instance of such a man de facto: not the thief on
the cross: for he confessed prayed, reproved the other, etc.

Prop. 11. Where sincere Obedience is Necessary to Salvation, it is not all the
same Acts of obedience that are of Necessity to all men, or at all times: for
the Matter may vary, and yet the sinecerity of obedience continue. But some
special Acts are of Necessity to the sincerity.

Prop. 12. If Righteousness be denominated from the Precept, Christ's Obedience
was a perfect legal Righteousness, as having a perfect conformity to the Law:
But not so an Evangelical Righteousness: for he gave us in many Laws for the
application of his Merits, that he was neither obliged to fulfill, nor capable
of it. If Righteousness be denominated from the Promise or premiant part of the
Law, Christ's righteousness was in some sort the righteousness of the Law of
works, (for he merited all the reward of that Law;) But it was principally the
righteousness of the special Covenant of Redemption (between the Father and
him*) but not of the Covenant of Grace made with man (he did not repent or obey
for pardon and salvation to himself as a Believer;) If Righteousness be
denominated from the Comminatory or penal part of the Law then Christ's
sufferings were neither a strictly legal* or an Evangelical righteousness. For
the Law required the supplicium ipsius delinquentis, and knew no Surety or
Substitute. But thus Christ's sufferings were a Pro-Legal-righteousness, as
being not the fulfilling of the Threatening, but a full Satisfaction to the
Lawgiver, (which was equivalent) and so a valuable consideration, why the Law
should not be fulfilled (by our damnation) but dispensed with (by our pardon)
So that the Commination was the cause of Christ's sufferings; and he suffered
materially the same sort of Death which the Law threatened. But most strictly
his sufferings were a Righteous fulfilling his part of the Covenant of
Redemption with the Father: But in no propriety were they the fulfilling of the
Commination of the Law of Grace, against the Despisers or neglecters of Grace.
I mean that proper to the Gospel.

Prop. 13. Christ's righteousness is well called our Evangelical Righteousness,
both as it is Revealed by the Gospel, and conferred by it, and opposed to the
legal way of Justification by perfect personal Righteousness. So that by
calling our own personal righteousness, Evangelical, we deny not that Title to
Christ's, but give it that in a higher respect, and much more.

Prop. 14. No personal righteousness of ours, our faith or repentance, is any
proper cause of our first Justification, or of our entering into a justified
state: Though as they remove Impediments, or are Conditions, they may
improperly be called causes; So much for the Negative Propositions.

Affirm. Prop. 1. That a Godly man has a particular righteousness, or may be
Just in a particular cause, there is no man can deny: unless he will make him
worse then the Devil: for if the Devil may be falsely accused or belyed, he is
just in that particular cause.

Prop. 2. All Christians that I know do confess an Inherent Righteousness in
the Saints, and the necessity of this righteousness to Salvation. So that this
can be no part of our Controversy.

Prop. 3. Consequently all must confess that Christ's righteousness imputed, is
not our only righteousness. Yea, that the righteousness of Pardon and
Justification from sin, is no further necessary then men are sinners; and
therefore the less need any man has of it, the better he pleases Christ, that
is, he had rather we would beware of sin as far as may be, then sin and fly to
him for Pardon.

Prop. 4. And we are agreed I think that the personal Righteousness of the
Saints is so much the end of Christ's Redemption and Pardoning Grace, that the
perfection of this is that blessed state to which he will bring them; so that
when he has done his work, Sanctification shall be perfect; but Justification
by Pardon of further sins, shall be no more: Heaven cannot bear so imperfect a
state.

Prop. 5. We are agreed therefore that our Righteousness of Sanctification, or
the Doctrine thereof is so far from being any derogation or dishonor to
Christ, that it is the high honor which he intended in his work of Redemption,
that the Glory of God the Father, and of the Redeemer may everlastingly shine
forth in the Saints, and they may be fit to love, and serve, and praise him,
Tit. 2.14.

Prop. 6. It is past all doubt that this Inherent Righteousness consists in a
true fulfilling of the Conditions of the Gospel-Promise, and a sincere
Obedience to the Precepts of Christ. And so has a double respect: one to the
Promise; and so it is conditio praestita: the other to the Precept; and so it
is Officium praestitum. All Conditions here are Duties: but all Duties are not
the Condition.

Prop. 7. I think we are agreed, that Justification by Christ as Judge at the
great day, has the very same Conditions as Salvation has, it being an
adjudging us to Salvation. And therefore that this personal Evangelical
Righteousness is of necessity to our Justification at that Judgment.

Prop. 8. And I think we are agreed that no man can continue in a state of
Justification, that continues not in a state of Faith, Sanctification, and
sincere Obedience.

Prop. 9 We are agreed I am sure that no man at age is justified before he
Repent and Believe.

Prop. 10 And we are agreed that this Repenting and Believing is both the
matter of the Gospel-Precept, and the Condition of the Promise. Christ has
made over to us himself with his imputed Righteousness and Kingdom, on
condition that we repent and believe in him.

Prop. 11. It cannot then be denied that Faith and Repentance being both the
Duty commanded* and the Condition required and performed, are truly a
particular special Righteousness, subordinate to Christ and his Righteousness,
in order to our further participation of him, and from him.

Prop. 12. And lastly its past dispute that this personal Righteousness of
Faith and Repentance, is not to be called a Legal, but an Evangelical
Righteousness, because it is the Gospel that both commands them, and
promises life to those that perform them.

Thus methinks all that I desire is granted already: what Adversary could a man
dream of among Protestants in such a Cause? Agreement seems to prevent the
necessity of a further Dispute.

To be yet briefer, and bring it nearer an Issue: If any thing of the main
Thesis here be denied, it must be one of these three things. 1. That there is
any such thing as Faith, Repentance or Sanctification. 2. Or that they should
be called an Evangelical personal Righteousness. 3. Or that they are necessary
to Justification and Salvtaion: The first is de existentia rei: The second is
de nomine: The third is de usu and fine.

The first no man but a Heathen or Infidel will deny.

And for the second, that this name is fit for it, I prove by parts. 1. It may
and must be called A Righteousness. 2. A Personal Righteousness. 3. An
Evangelical Righteousness.

1. As Righteousness signifies the Habit by which we give to all their own, so
this is Righteousness. For in Regeneration the soul is habituated to give up it
self to God as his own, and to give up all we have to him, and to love and
serve all where his love and service does require it. No true habit is so
excellent as that which is given in Regeneration.

2. The sincere performance of the Duties required of us by the Evangelical
Precept, is a sincere Evangelical Righteousness: But our first turning to God
in Christ by Faith and Repentance, is the sincere performance of the duties
required of us by the Evangelical Precept. Ergo. -- Object. The Gospel
requires actual external Obedience and perseverance also. Answ. Not at the
first instant of Conversion: For that instant, he that Believes and Repents,
does sincerely do the Duty required by it: and afterward, he that continues
herein with Expressive Obedience, which is then part of this Righteousness.

3. The true Performance of the Conditions of Justification and Salvation,
imposed in the Gospel-Promise, is a true Gospel Righteousness: But Faith and
Repentance at the first, and sincere Obedience added afterward, are the true
performance of these Conditions. Ergo. --

4. It is commonly called by the name of Inherent Righteousness, by all Divines
with one Consent: therefore the name of [Righteousness] is past controversy
here.

5. That which in Judgment must be his justitia causae, the Righteousness of
his cause, is so far the Righteousness of his person: (for the person must
needs be righteous quoad hanc causam, as to that cause) But our Faith and
Repentance will be much of the Righteousness of our cause at that day (for the
Trial of us will be, whether we are true Believers, and penitent or not; and
that being much of the cause of the day, we must needs be righteous or
unrighteous as to that cause:) therefore our Faith and Repentance is much of
the Righteousness of our persons* denominated in respect to the Trial and
Judgment of that day.

6. The holy Scripture frequently calls it Righteousness, and calls all true
penitent Believers, and all that sincerely obey Christ, [righteous] because of
these qualifications (supposing pardon of sin, and merit of Glory by Christ for
us:) therefore we may and must so call them, Mat. 25.37, 46. Then shall the
righteous answer -- but the righteous into life eternal, Mat. 10.41. He that
receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a
righteous man's reward. Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered, -- by which he
obtained witnest that he was righteous, God testifying of his Gifts. 1 Pet.
3.12. For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous. -- 1 John 3.7. He that
does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. Isa. 3.10. Say ^o the
righteous it shall be well with him. Psalm. 1.5, 6. Mat. 5.6, ^0. An enemy to
the faith, is called an enemy of righteousness. Acts 13.10. 2 Pet. 2.21. 1 John
2.29. and 3.10. Genesis 15.6. And he believed in the Lord, and he counted it to
him for righteousness. Psalm. 106.31. Romans 43.5. His faith is counted for
righteousness. ver. 9. Faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. ver 22,
24. Therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now it was not written
for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him, but for us also to whom it
shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the
dead. So Jam. 2.23. Gal. 3.6. If any say that by [Faith] in all these Texts is
meant Christ's righteousness, and not Faith, I will believe them when I take
Scripture to be intelligible only by them, and that God did not write it to
have it understood. But that Faith is imputed or accounted to us for
Righteousness in a sense merely subordinate to Christ's righteousness, by which
we are justified, I easily grant. As to Satisfaction and Merit we have no
righteousness but Christ's, but a Covenant and Law we are still under, and not
redeemed to be lawless: and this Covenant is ordained as the way of making over
Christ and his meritorious righteousness, and life to us: and therefore they
being given or made over on Covenant-terms, there is a personal performance of
the conditions necessary: and so that personal performance is all the
righteousness inherent or propiae actionis, that God requires of us now,
whereas by the first Covenant perfect Obedience was required as necessary to
life. So that in point of mere personal performance our own Faith is accepted,
and imputed or accounted to us for Righteousness, that is, God will require no
more as necessary to Justification at our own hands, but that we believe in the
righteousness of another, and accept a Redeemer (though once he required more:)
But as to the satisfying of the Justice of the offended Majesty, and the
meriting of life with pardon, etc. So the Righteousness of Christ is our only
Righteousness. But nothing in Scripture is more plain then that Faith it self
is said to be accounted to us for Righteousness; and not only Christ's own
righteousness: He that will not take this for proof, must expect no Scripture
proof of any thing from me.

Ephesians. 4.24. The new man after God is created in righteousness. Many other Texts
do call our first Conversion, or state of Grace, our faith and repentance, and
our sincere obedience by the name of Righteousness.

2. And then that it may, and that most fitly be called an Evangelical
righteousness, I will not trouble the Reader to prove, lest I seem to censure
his understanding as too stupid. Its easy to try whether our Faith and
Repentance, our Inherent Righteousness, do more answer the Precepts and Promise
of Christ in the Gospel, or those of the Law of works.

3. And that this is a personal righteousness, I have less need to prove:
Though it is Christ that purchased it (and so it may be called the
righteousness of Christ) and the Spirit that works it in us, yet its we that
are the Subjects and the Agents as to the act.

It being therefore past doubt that, 1. The thing it self is existent and
necessary. 2. That righteousness is a fit name for it. 3. All that remains to
be proved is the Use of it, Whether it be necessary to Justification and
Salvation. And here the common agreement of Divines, (except the Antinomians)
does save us the labor of proving this: for they all agree that Faith and
Repentance are necessary to our first Justification; and that sincere obedience
also is necessary to our Justification at Judgment, and to our Salvation. So
that here being no conteoversie, I will not make my self needless work.

Obejct. 1. But faith and repentance are not necessary to Justification qua
justitia quaedam Evangelica, under the notion of a righteousness, but faith as
an Instrument, and repentance as a qualifying condition.

Answ. 1. We are not now upon the question under what notion these are
necessary. It suffices to the proof of our present Thesis, that a personal
Evangelical Righteousness is necessary, whether qua talis or not.

2. But the plain truth is, 1. Remotely, in respect of its natural Aptitude to
its office, faith is necessary because it is a Receiving Act, and therefore
fitted to a free Gift, and an Assenting Act, and therefore fitted to a
supernatural Revelation: And hence Divines say, It justifies as an Instrument,
calling its Receptive nature, Metaphorically an Instrument: which in this sense
is true. And Repentance is necessary, because it is that Return to God, and
recovery of the soul which is the end of Redemption, without which the
following ends cannot be attained. The Receptive nature of Faith, and the
dispositive use of Repentance, may be assigned as Reasons, Why God made them
conditions of the Promise: as being their aptitude thereto. 2. But the nearest
reason of their Interest and Necessity, is because by the free constitution of
God* they are made conditions in that Promise that conferreth Justification and
Salvation, determining that without these they shall not be had, and that
whoever believes shall not perish, and if we repent, our sins shall be
forgiven us. So that this is the formal or nearest Reason of their necessity
and interest, that they are the conditions of the Covenant, so made by the free
Donor, Promimiser, Testator. Now this which in the first instant and
consideration is a condition, is in the next instant or consideration, a true
Evangelical Righteousness, as that Condition is a Duty in respect to the
Precept; and as it is our Title to the benefit of the Promise, and so is the
Covenant-performance, and as it has respect to the sentence of Judgment,
where this will be the cause of the day, Whether this Condition was performed
or not. It is not the Condition as imposed, but as performed, on which we
become justified: And therefore as sentential Justification is past upon the
proof of this personal Righteousness, which is our performance of the
condition, on which we have Title to Christ and Pardon, and eternal life; even
so our Justification in the sense of the Law or Covenant, is on supposition of
this same performance of the Condition, as such: which is a certain
Righteousness. If at the last Judgment we are sententially justified by it as
it is quaedam justitia, a Righteousness subordinate to Christ's Righteousness,
(which is certain,) then in Law-sense we are justifiable by it on the same
account. For to be justified in point of law, is nothing else then to be
justifiable, or justificandus, by sentence and execution according to that Law:
so that its clear that a personal Righteousness, qua talis, is necessary to
Justification, and not only quo talis; though this be beyond our Quest on in
hand, and therefore I add it but for elucidation and ex abundanti.

Object. 2. If this be so, then men are righteous before God does justify them.

Answ. 1. Not with that Righteousness by which he justifies them. 2. Not
Righteousness simply, absolutely or universally, but only secundum quid, with a
particular Righteousness. 3. This particular Righteousness is but the means to
possess them of Christ's Righteousness, by which they are materially and fully
justified. 4. There is not a moments distance of time between them: For as soon
as we believe and repent we are made partakers of Christ and his Righteousness,
by a mere resultancy from the Promise of the Gospel. 5. Who denies that we
have Faith and Repentance before Justification?

Object. 3. But according to this Doctrine we are justified before we are
justified: For he that is Righteous is constituted just, and so is justifiable
in Judgment, which is to be justified in Law.

Answ. Very true: But we are as is said, made just or justified but with a
particular, and not an universal Righteousness; which will not donominate the
person simply a Righteous or justified person: we are so far cured of our
former Infidelity and Impenitency, that we are true penitent Believers before
our sins are pardoned by the Promise: and so we are in order of nature (not of
time) first justifiable against the false Accusation, that we are impenitent
Unbelievers, before we are justifiable against the true accusation of all our
sins, and desert of Hell. He that by inherent Faith and Repentance is not first
justifiable against the former false charge, cannot by the blood and merits of
Christ be justifiable against the latter true accusation. For Christ and Pardon
are given by the Covenant of Grace, to none but penitent Believers.

Object. 4. By this you confound Justification and Sanctification: for inherent
Righteousness belongs not to Justification, but to Sanctification.

Answ. Your Affirmation is no proof, and my distinguishing them is not
confounding them. Inherent Righteousness in its first seed and acts belongs to
Sanctification, as its Beginning, or first part, or root: And to Justification
and Pardon as a Means or Condition: But Inherent Righteousness, in its strength
and progress, belongs to Sanctification as the Matter of it, and to our final
Justification in Judgment as part of the means or condition: but no otherwise
to our first Justification, then as a necessary fruit or consequent of it.

Object. 5. By this means you make Sanctification to go before Justification,
as a Condition or means to it: when Divines commonly put it after.

Answ. 1. Mr. Pemble, and those that follow him, put Sanctification before all
true Justification, (though they call Gods immanent eternal Act, a precedent
Justification.) 2. The case is easy, if you will not confound the verbal part
of the controversy with the Real. What is it that you call Sanctification? 1.
If it be the first special Grace in Act or Habit, so you will confess, that
Sanctification goes first: For we repent and believe before we are pardoned or
justified. 2. If it be any further degrees or fruits, or exercise of Grace,
then we are agreed that Justification goes before it. 3. If it be both
beginning and progress, faith and obedience that you call Sanctification, then
part of it is before Justification, and part after. All this is plain; and that
which I think we are agreed in.

But here I am invited to a consideration of some Arguments of a new Opponent,
Mr. Warner in a book of the Object and Office of Faith. What he thought it his
Duty to oppose, I take it to be my Duty to defend: which of us is guided by the
light of God, I must leave to the illuminated to judge, when they have compared
our Evidence.

Mr. W. I now come to show that both these kinds of Righteousness, Legal and
Evangelical, are not absolutely necessary to Justification. -- I do not
undertake the Negative, and will endeavor to prove it by these demonstrations.
Argument 1. If things in themselves contradictory cannot be ascribed to the sme
person or action, then both these kinds of Righteousness are not absolutely
necessary to make up our Justification: But things in themselves contradictory
cannot be ascribed to the same person or actions, Therefore -- The sequel is
thus proved by Paul. If it be of works, it is no more of Grace: if of Grace,
then it is no more of works. What are therefore these two kinds of
Righteousness, but contradictory to each other? And therefore it seems
illogical Theology to predicate them of the same person or act, c. 12. page
154.


Answ. Reader, I crave thy pardon for troubling thee with the Confutation of
such Impertinencies, that are called Demonstrations: It is I that have the
bigger part of the trouble: But how should I avoid it without wrong to the
Truth? Seeing (would you think it!) there are some Readers that cannot discern
the vanity of such Arguings without Assistance.

1. What a gross abuse is this to begin with, to conclude that these two sorts
of Righteousness are not necessary [to make up] our Justification, when the
Question was only whether they are necessary [to] our Justification. [Making
up] expresses the proper causality of the constitutive causes, (matter and
form,) and not of the efficient or final; much less the Interest of all other
means, such as a condition is. So that I grant him his conclusion, taking
Justification as we now do Our Faith or Repentance goes not to make it up.

And yet on the by, I shall add, that if any man will needs take Justification
for Sanctification, or as the Papists do comprehensively for Sanctification and
Pardon both (as some Protestant Divines think it is used in some few Texts) in
that large sense our Faith and Repentance are part of our justifying
Righteousness. But I do not so use the word, (Though Philip Codurcus have writ
at large for it.)

2. I deny his Consequence: And how is it proved? By reciting Paul's words, Romans
116. Which contain not any of the terms in the question. Paul speaks of
Election: we of Justification (though that difference I regard not.) Paul
speaks of works, and we speak of Evangelical Faith and Repentance. In a word
therefore I answer. The works that Paul speaks of are inconsistent with Grace
in Justification (though not contradictory, but contrary, what ever Mr. W.
say:) but Faith and Repentance are not those works; and therefore no
contrariety is hence proved. Here is nothing therefore but a rash Assertion of
Mr. W. to prove these two sorts of Righteousness contradictory.

Be judge all Divines and Christians upon earth: Did you ever hear before from
a Divine or Christian, that imputed and inherent Righteousness, or
Justification and Sanctification, or Christ's fulfilling the Law for us, and our
believing the Gospel and repenting were contradictory in themselves? Do not all
that believe the Scripture, believe that we have a personal Righteousness, a
true Faith and Repentance, and must fulfill the Conditions of the Promise; and
that in respect to these the Scripture calls us Righteous? (as is before
proved.)


Mr. W. 2. If the person justified is of himself ungodly, then Legal and
Evangelical Righteousness are not both absolutely necessary to our
Justification: But the person justified (considering him in the act of
justifying) is so, therefore. -- The Sequel is undeniable; because he who is
ungodly is not Legally Righteous, and that the person now to be justified is
ungodly, is express Scripture, Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but
believes in him that just fieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness.


Answ. 1. I suppose the Reader understands that the Legal or rather Pro-legal
Righteousness, that I plead for, is Christ's Merits and Satisfaction made over
to us, for the effects; and that the personal Evangelical Righteousness is our
believing and repenting. Now that these are both necessary, this very Text
proves, which he cites against it. For the necessity of Christ's meritorious
Righteousness he will not deny that it is here employed: and the necessity of
our own faith is twice expressed, [To him that believes, his faith is counted
for righteousness.] If it be the Being of Faith that this Brother would exclude
it is here twice expressed: If it be only the naming it [a righteousness] That
name also is here expressed. How could he have brought a plainer evidence against
himself?

2. To his Argument, I distinguish of Vngodliness] If it be taken for an
unregenerate impenitent unbeliever, then I deny the M^nor, at least in sensu
composito; A person in the instant of Justification is not an unbeliever: This
Text shameth him that will affirm it. But if by [Vngodly] be meant [ Sinners,
or persons unjustifyable by the works of the Law, who are legally impious] then
I deny the consequence of the Major. Do I need to tell a Divine that a man may
be a sinner and a penitent Believer at once. The Syriack and Ethiopick
translating the word [sinners] do thus expound the Text; and its the common
Exposition of most judicious Divines. It is not of the Apostles meaning to tell
you that God justifies impenitent Infidels, or haters of God: but that he
justifies sinners, legally condemned and unworthy, yet true Believers, as the
Text expresses.

3. If any reject this Exposition, and will take [ungodly] here for [the
Impenitent,] then the other Exposition solveth his Objection, viz. They were
Impenitent and Unbelievers, in the instant next foregoing, but not in the
instant of Justification: For faith and Justification are in the same instant
of time.

4. Rather then believe that God justifies Infidels contrary to the text, I
would interpret this Text as Beza does some other, as speaking of Justification
as comprehending both Conversion and Forgiveness, even the conferring of
Inherent and Imputed Righteousness both: and so God justifies Infidels
themselves; that is, gives them first faith and Repentance, and then
forgiveness and eternal life in Christ.

5. But I wonder at his proof of his Sequel [Because he who is ungodly is not
legally righteous] what is that to the Question? It is Legal righteousness in
Christ that Justification gives him: Therefore we all suppose he has it not
before: But he is personally Evangelically Righteous as soon as he Believes, so
far as to be a true performer of the Condition of Justification; and then in
the same instant he receives by Justification that Righteousness of Christ
which answers the Law.


Mr. W. If nothing ought to be asserted by us which ever-throws Apostolical
writings, then the necessity of a twofold righteousness ought not to be
asserted; But -- Ergo. -- The Sequel is proved by this Dilemma. Apostolical
writings are utterly against a twofold Righteousness in this work; therefore
to assert both these kinds is to overthrow their writings. For to what purpose
did Paul dispute against Justification by works of the Law, if the
righteousness of Faith were not sufficient? And certainly if both were required
as absolutely necessary, it would argue extreme ignorance in Paul if he should
not have known it, and as great unfaithfulness if, etc. --


Answ. Either this Writer owns the twofold Righteousness that he disputes
against, or not: If he did not, he were an Infidel or wretched Heretic,
directly denying Christ or Faith; For Christ is the one Righteousness, and
faith the other. If he do own them (as I doubt not at all but he does) is it
not good service to the Church to pour out this opposition against words not
understood, and to make men believe that the difference is so material as to
overthrow the Scriptures? But to his Argument, I deny the consequence of the
Major; and how is it proved? forsooth by a Dilemma (which other folks call an
Enthymeme) Of which the Antecedent (That Apostolical writings are against a
twofold righteousness) is proved by this Writers word. A learned proof I into
which this Disputations are ultimately resolved. It is the very work of Paul's
Epistles to prove the necessity of this Twofold Righteousness (unless you will
with the Papists call it rather two parts of one Righteousness,) Christ's merits
and man's faith, one in our surety, the other wrought by him in our selves.

But, says he, to what purpose did Paul dispute against Justification by the
works of the Law, If the Righteousness of faith were not sufficient? -- I
answer you, 1. Because no man has a personal legal Righteousness: But Paul
never disputed against a legal Righteousness in Christ, or his fulfilling the
Law, or being made a curse for us. Do you think he did? 2. A Righteousness of
faith is sufficient: for it signifies this twofold righteousness. 1. That
righteousness which faith accepts, which is [of Faith] because proclaimed in
the Gospel and is the object of Faith; and yet it is legal, in that it was a
Conformity to the Law, and satisfaction to the Lawgiver. 2. Faith it self,
which is a particular subservient Evangelical Rigeteousness, for the
application and possession of the former.

And now was here a fit occasion to speak reproach fully of Paul, as extreme
ignorant, or unfaithful, or immanis sophista? and all because he would not deny
either Christ or Faith? Sure Paul has let us see by revealing both, that he
was neither ignorant, unfaithful nor a Sophister.


Mr. W. 4. If both Legal and Evangelical righteousness were thus required to
the purpose of justifying, then it must be because the Evangelical is of it
self insufficient. But -- For if Christ's righteousness be insufficient to
Salvation, he were not a sufficient Savior, and if the Righteousness of Faith
in him were of it self insuffient.


Answ. By this time I am tempted to repent that I meddled with this Brother. If
he live to read over a reply or two, he may possibly understand them that he
writes against. He will prove that a Legal Righteousness is not necessary,
because Christ's righteousness (which is it that I called legal) is sufficient.
Its sufficient alone: therefore not Necessary. Am not I like to have a fair
hand think you of this Disputer? To his Argument once more I distinguish:
Evangelical righteousness it twofold. 1. That which the Gospel reveals and
offers: and this is Christ's righteousness, therefore called Evangelical: but
also Legal, because it answered the rule of the Law of works, and its ends. 2.
That which the Gospel has made the Condition of our part in Christ and his
righteousness: and this is Faith it self. Both these are sufficient to
Justification: but Faith is neither sufficient, nor is Faith without Christ's
legal righteousness: And Christ is sufficient Hypothetically, but will not be
effectual to our Justification without Faith (and repentance.)

But perhaps this Writer means only to show his offense against my naming
Christ's righteousness legal. If that be so, 1. I have given in my reasons,
because there can be no better reason of a name then from the form: and the
form of Christ's righteousness being relative, even a conformity to the Law of
works (and to the peculiar Covenant of redemption,) I thought did sufficiently
warrant this name. 2. The rather when I find not only that he is said to
fulfill the Law and all righteousness, and be made a curse for us, but also to
be righteous with that righteousness, which is denied of us; which can be none
but a legal or prolegal righteousness. 3. But yet if the name [Legal] be all, I
could easily have given this Brother leave to differ from me about a name
without contention, and methinks he might have done the like by me.


Mr. W. Object. But what if works and faith were both of them applied to
procure our Justification?


Answ. This Objection yet further shows, that the Author understands me not (if
it be me, as I have reason to judge that he writes against) for he supposes
that its works that I call a legal Righteousness, when I still tell him it is
Christ's satisfaction and fulfilling the Law, of which our faith or works are no
part, but a subordinate, particular, Evangelical Righteousness.


Mr. W. 5. If both these kinds of Righteousness were absolutely necessary, then
where one of them is wanting in a person, there can be no Justification of that
person. But -- Ergo. -- For where was any Legal Righteousness of the good thief
on the Cross, condemned for legal unrighteousness?


Answ. I deny your minor. The converted thief had a legal righteousness hanging
on the next Cross to him; even Christ that then was made a curse for him, and
was obedient to the death of the Cross. I begin to be a weary in writing so
much only to tell men that you understand me not.


Mr. W. 6. If legal Righteousness be thus necessarily to be joined with our
Evangelical Righteousness to Justification, then there must be two formal
causes of Justification.


Answ. I deny your consequence. If the formal cause consist in remission and
imputation as you say, then Christ's meritorious righteousness is none of the
Form, but the Matter. And if besides that Matter a subservient particular
righteousness (of faith) be necessary as the condition of our Title to Christ;
this makes not two forms of this Justification. 2. And yet I grant you that it
infers a subservient Justification that has another form, when you are made a
Believer, or justified against the false charge of being no Believer (or
penitent) this is not remission of sin, but another form and thing.


Mr. W. 7. That which makes void Christ's death, cannot be absolutely necessary
to Justification. But legal righteousness makes void his Death, Gal. 2.21.


Answ. Its a sad case that we must be charged with making void Christ's Death,
for saying that he is legally Righteous, by satisfying and fulfilling the Law;
and that this is all the legal righteousness that we have. I am bold therefore
to deny the Minor: yea and to reverse it on you, and tell you, that he that
denies Christ's legal Righteousness, denies both his death and obedience. The
Text Gal. 2.21. speaks not of the Law, as fulfilled by Christ, but by us.
Righteousness comes not by our keeping the Law, but it came by Christ's keeping
it: yet so, that the Gospel only gives us that righteousness of his.


Mr. W. 8. That which concurs with another efficient, must have both an
aptitude and Confluence to produce the effect: but the Law, and consequently
Legal righteousness has no aptitude to give life, Gal. 3.2


Answ. This is Disputing enough to make one tremble, and loath Disputing. Is
there no aptitude in Christ's legal Righteousness to give us life? The Law does
not give us righteousness, but it denominateth Christ righteous for fulfilling
it (and the Lawgiver for satisfying) and to that it had a sufficient aptitude.
The Text Gal. 3.2. says truly that the Law gives not life: but first it
speaks of the Law as obeyed by us, and not by Christ, that fulfilled it.
Secondly, And indeed its speaks of Moses Law; and not directly of that made
with Adam. Thirdly, And it denies not that Christ fulfilling it may give us
life, though the Law it self give us none, so that all this is besides the
business.


Mr. W. 9. That Doctrine which does most exalt the Grace of God, ought to be
admitted before that which does least exalt it: But the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone, as our Gospel-righteousness does most exalt his
Grace, and the other less. Ergo.


Answ. Still misunderstanding! Does the Doctrine of faith alone without Christ
advance Grace? That's no faith. You do not think so: that which denies Christ
or faith denies Grace.


Mr. W. 10. That opinion which considers a person under a twofold Covenant
at the same time, ought not to be admitted: But to require both Legal and
Evangelical Righteousness, is to consider him under the Covenant of works and
Grace: I conclude therefore that two sorts of righteousness are not necessarily
required to our Justification.


Answ. How far we are, or are not under the Covenant of works, I will not here
trouble you by digressing, in this rambling Dispute to enquire. But to your
Minor I say, this opinion considers man only under the curse of the Law till
Christ take it off him, by being made a curse for us, and making over the fruit
of his merits and suffering to us.


Mr. W. 2. As for the Subjects of these kinds of Righteousness, I thus declare.
1. That Jesus Christ and he alone who was truly endued with Legal
righteousness, who as he was made under the Law, so he did not destroy but
fulfill it; and if he had not been the subject of Legal righteousness in
himself, he could not have been the Author of Evangelical Righteousness to us.


Answ. Here after all these Arguments, I have all that granted me that I
contend for (supposing the Imputation or Donation of Christ's Righteousness to
us, whether in se or in ^ffectis, I now dispute not.) You have here his full
confession that Christ had a legal Righteousness: Let him but grant the
imputation of this, and then its ours: And then I have granted him that it may
be also called Evangelical in another respect.


Mr. W. page 166. I think it to be no incongruity in speech, or Paradox in
Divinity, to say that Christ's Legal righteousness is our Evangelical
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. Jer. 23.8.


Answ. Sure we shall agree anon, for all the ten Arguments. Here Is all granted
but the name as to us. Many and many a time I have said, that Christ's
Righteousness made ours is Legal in respect to the Law that it was a conformity
to, and which it answers for us; but Evangelical as declared, and given by
the Gospel. But the thing in question you now fully confess.


Mr. W. page 171. That we our selves are not the subjects of Evangelical
righteousness, I shall endeavor to prove by these Arguments. 1. If our
Evangelical righteousness be out of us in Christ, then it is not in ^^,
consisting in the habit or Acts of faith and Gospel obedience, but it is out of
us in Christ.


Answ. We shall have such another piece of work with this point as the former,
to defend the truth against a man that lays about him in the dark. 1. I have
often enough distinguished of Evangelical righteousness. The righteousness conform
to the Law, and revealed and given by the Gospel is meritoriously and
materially out of us in Christ. The righteousness conform to the Gospel, as
constituting the condition of life, [He that believes shall not perish: Repent
and be converted that your sins may be blotted out,] This is in our selves
materially, and not out of us in Christ.


Mr. W. 2. If satisfaction to Divine Justice were not given or caused by any
thing in us, but by Christ alone, then Evangelical righteousness is in Christ
alone. But -- Ergo -- without blood no remission.


Answ. Your proof of the consequence is none; but worse then silence. Besides
the satisfaction of Justice and remission of sin thereby; there is a
subservient Gospel righteousness, as is proved, and is undeniable.


Mr. W. 3. If Evangelical righteousness be in our selves, then perfect
righteousness is in our selves. But that's not so. Ergo.


Answ. Still you play with the ambiguity of a word, and deny that which beseems
you not to deny, that the fulfilling of the condition [Believe and Live] is a
Gospel-righteousness, particular and subservient and imperfect. The Saints have
an Inherent righteousness, which is not Legal: therefore it is Evangelical. If
you say, its no righteousness, you renounce the constant voice of Scripture. If
you say, it is a Legal righteousness imperfect, then you set up Justification
by the works of the Law, (the unhappv fate of blind opposition, to do what they
intend to undo.) For there is no righteousness which does not justify or make
righteous in tantum: and so you would make men justified partly by Christ, and
partly by a Legal righteousness of their own by a perverse denying the
subservient Evangelical righteousness, without any cause in the world, but
darkness, jealousy, and humorous contentious zeal. Yea more then so, we have
no worKs but what the Law would damn us for, were we judged by it. And yet will
you say that faith or inherent righteousness is Legal and not Evangelical?


Mr. W. 4. If Evangelical righteousness were in ourselves, and did consist
either in the habit or act of faith and new obedience, then upon the
intercision of those acts, our Justification would discontinue. But,


Answ. If you thought not your word must go for proof, you would never sure
expect that we should believe your Consequence. For 1. What show is there of
reason that the intercision of the act should cause the cessation of that
Justification which is the consequent of the Habit (which you put in your
Antecedent?) The Habit continues in our sleep, when the acts do not.

2. As long as the cause continues (which is Christ's Merits and the
Gospel-Grant) Justification will continue, if the condition be but sincerely
performed (For the Condition is not the cause, much less a Physical cause) But
the condition is sincerely performed, though we believe not in our sleep. I
dare not instance in your payment of Rent, left a Carper be upon m^ back; but
suppose you give a man a lease of Lands on condition he come once a month, or
week, or day, and say, I thank you, or in general, on condition he be thankful.
Does his Title cease as often as he shuts his lips from saying, I thank you?
These are strange Doctrines.


Mr. W. 5. If Evangelical righteousness were in our selves, and faith with our
Gospel obedience were that righteousness, then he who has more or less faith
or obedience were more or less justified, and more or less Evangelically
righteous, according to the degrees of faith and obedience.


Answ. I deny your Consequence, considering faith and repentance as the
Condition of the Promise; because it is the sincerity of Faith and Repentance
that is the Condition, and not the degree: and therefore he that has the least
degree of sincere faith, has the same title to Christ as he that has the
strongest.

2. But as faith and obedience respect the Precept of the Gospel, and not the
Promise; so it is a certain truth, that he that has most of them, has most
Inherent Righteousness.


Mr. W. 6. That opinion which derogates from the Glory and Excellency of Christ
above all Graces, and from the excellency of Faith in its Office of justifying
above other Graces, ought not to be admitted: But this opinion placing our
Evangelical Righteousness in the habit, act, or Grace of faith and Gospel
obedience derogates from both Christ and Faith.


Answ. Your Minor is false, and your proof is no proof, but your word. Your
similitude should have run thus. If an Act of Oblivion by the Princes purchase,
do pardon all that will thankfully accept it and come in and lay down arms of
Rebellion; it is no derogating from the Prince or pardon to say, I accept it, I
stand out no longer, and therefore it is mine. If you offer to heal a deadly
sore on condition you be accepted for the Chyrurgion; does it derogate from
your honor if your Patient say, I do consent and take you for my Chyrurgion,
and will take your Medicines?

Your proof is as vain and null, that it derogates from faith. What, that Faith
should be this subservient Righteousness? Does that dishonor it? Or is it that
Repentance is conjoined as to our first Justification, and obedience as to that
at Judgment? When you prove either of these dishonorable to faith, we will
believe you: but it must be a proof that is stronger then the Gospel that is
against you. We confess faith to be the receiving Condition, and repentance but
the disposing Condition: but both are Conditions. As for Phil. 3.9. Do you not
see that it is against you? I profess with Paul, not to have a righteousness of
my own which is of the Law, (which made me loath to call faith and repentance a
legal righteousness) but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith:] Faith you see is the means of our
Title to Christ's Righteousness: And if you deny faith it self to be any
particular Righteousness, you must make it a sin, or indifferent, and
contradict the Scriptures. And presently contradicting what you have been
arguing for (that Evangelical Righteousness is not in us, and we are not the
Subjects of it:) You profess page 178. That Inherent Righteousness is in us. It
seems then either Inherent righteousness is not righteousness, or it is not
Evangelical but Legal, or it is in us, and not in us.

Had you only pleaded that we are not justified by it as a Righteousness, I
should have answered you as before on that point. Not as a Legal Righteousness;
nor an Evangelical Righteousness coordinate with Christ's; but as a fulfilling
of the Condition of that Promise, which gives us Christ, and Pardon, and Life;
by which performance of the Condition, the Benefit becomes ours by the Will and
Grant of the free Donor; and we are no longer impenitent Infidels, but just,
and justifiable from the false charge of being such; and so of not having part
in Christ. Its one thing to be accused of sin as sin: And another thing to be
accused of the special sin of not accepting the Remedy: and so of having no
part in Christ and his Righteousness. From the later we must have a real Faith
and Title to Christ, which must materially justify us: but from the former,
even from all sin that ever we are guilty of Christ's Righteousness only
justifies us materially and meritoriously, and our faith is but a bare
condition.


A Confutation of the Error of Mr. Warners 13th Chapter about Justification,
and the interest of Obedience therein.
HE begins with a false Intimation, that we revive the Papists first and second
Justification: and he that will believe him, may take his course for me: I
crave only liberty for my self to believe that it is not all one to have
Justification begun and continued; and that Justification by the sentence of
the Judge, is not of the same kind with Justification Legal by the Donation of
the Gospel. If I may not have this Reverend Brothers leave to believe these
matters, I will believe them without his leave. And that the Papists have such
friends among us, as those that make the world believe that such things as
these are Popery, I will also lament, though such Disputers give not their
consent.

His Endeavors to overthrow that Doctrine of mine which he names of [second
Justification] begin page 223. where he argues, 1. from Romans 5. 1* 2, 3. That
the beginning and end is ascribed to faith. Answer. Its all granted: faith is
it that we are justified by to the last. We are agreed of this inclusively: But
the Question is, what is the Exclusion: Not believing in Christ as Lord and
Master, nor loving him; but the works that make or are supposed to make that
Reward to be of debt, and not of Grace.

His second proof is from Phil. 3.7, 8. To which I answer. We are of Paul's
mind, but not of yours. 1. He counted all as loss and dung that stood in
opposition to, or competition with Christ: and so would I do by faith and love
it self, should they be so arrogant. 2. Paul expressly names the works that he
excludes, that is, the Righteousness which is of the Law, or in Legal works.
And do we make any doubt of this? No, nor of those works that materially are
Evangelical: for if they are formally Evangelical they cannot be set up against
Christ, their very nature being to subserve him.

Once for all, remember this Argument. Those works that are commanded by God in
the Gospel, are not excluded by God in the Gospel in that nature and to the use
for which they are commanded. But faith in Christ Jesus the Lord and Savior,
(an entire faith) and Repentance toward God and love to him are commanded by
God in the Gospel in order to the pardon of sin; and the continuance of these
with sincere Obedience, are commanded as means of our continued pardon, and as
a means of our final Justification at Judgment. Therefore none of these are
excluded by the Gospel from any of these uses or ends.

He cites also, Act. 15. and Heb. 2.9. and Romans 1.17. to as much purpose as
the rest.

Page 228. He begins his Arguments. The first is [Because in vain are additions
of numbers, without which any thing may be done: But without addition of works
the act of justifying is perfect, Ergo.] Answer. 1. As if the Question were of
the [Act of justifying,] and not of Justification passively taken. Gods act
has no imperfection, when yet it makes not a perfect work. 2. Its but spleen
and partiality to harp upon the term [works] still to seduce your Readers to
believe that I am for such works as Paul denies. I use not the phrase of
[Justification by works] nor think it fit to be used, unless rarely, or to
explain such texts of Scripture as do use it, or terms equipollent. 3.
Justification is neither perfect nor real, without a faith in Christ as Head
and Husband, and Lord, and Teacher, and Intercessor, as well as a Sacrifice for
sin. Nor is it perfect or true, without repenting and loving Christ. 4.
Justification is so far perfect at first, as that no sin past or existent is
unpardoned. But it is not so perfect, but that, 1. Many future sins must have
renewed pardon. 2. And means is to be used by us, (believing again at least)
for that end. 3. And the continuance of pardon is given us but conditionally,
(though we shall certainly perform the condition.) 4. And the most perfect sort
of Justification (by sentence at Judgment) is still behind. Are these things
doubtful among Divines or Christians? That the Church must be thus molested by
such disputing volumes against it, to make the Papists and other enemies
believe we hold I know not what? Read the many Arguments of learned Sandford
and Parker de Descensu, and Bp. Usher de Descensu (to the Jesuit) by which
they prove that all separated souls, as separated, are under penalty, and that
Christ's soul as separated was so: and then tell us whether your fancy of
absolutely perfect Justification at the first will hold or not. I wonder that
men should so little know the difference betwixt Earth and Heaven; a sinner in
flesh, and a Saint that is equal to the Angels of God? and should dream of such
perfection short of heaven, the place of our perfection?

His second Argument is, [Faith and works are here contrary: If of Faith, then
not of works] Answer. Its true of the works that Paul excludes: but not of the
works that you exclude: For Faith in Christ is [Works] with such as you, save
only that act that rests on his satisfaction for righteousness: And
repentance and love to Christ, and denying our own righteousness, are works
with you. And all these are necessarily subservient to Christ and Grace, and
therefore not contrary. Augustine, and after him the Schoolmen, put it into
their most common definition of Grace, that its a thing [qua nemo male utitur.]
And as to efficiency its certainly true: Grace does not do any harm: And if I
may presume to tell Augustine that [objectively] Grace may be ill used, yet
perhaps he might reply, [not qua talis, without contradiction] In good sadness,
Is it not a strange thing for a man in his wits, to expect to be justified in
co-ordination with Christ's merits, by denying that he has any merits of his
own that can so justify him, and by repenting of those sins that have
condemned him, and by desiring, loving, hoping in Christ alone for his
Justification: or by Thankfulness to God for justifying him by the sole merits
of Christ? And is it not a strange Exposition that feigneth Paul to mean and
exclude such acts as these under the name of works. But yet really if such a
man be to be found, that does think to merit Justification by denying such
merit, I am against him as well as you.

His third Argument is, [ If faith justify only as the beginning of our
Justification then there are degrees of Justification: but there are no
degrees. Ergo.] Answer. 1. Faith is neither the Beginning nor End of
Justification, but a means of it. 2. If you would insinuate that I deny faith
to be the means of our continued, as well as begun Justification, you deal
deceitfully. 3. I deny your Consequence. It may prove more necessary to the
Continuance of our Justification, then to its beginning, and yet prove no
degrees. 4. But how Justification has or has not Degrees, I have told you
before; and fuller in other writings.

His fourth Argument is, [Because good works do not precede, but follow
Justification.] Answer. 1. Repentance, and the Love of God in Christ, and faith
in Christ as Lord, and Head, and Teacher, do go before the pardon of sin, and
so before Justification. 2. External obedience goes before Justification at
Judgment and Justification as continued here. Did you doubt of these?

His fifth Argument is, that [These two Justifications overthrow each other: If
by one we have peace with God, what need the other? How can good works perfect
our Justification, being themselves imperfect?] Answer. All this is answered in
the second Disputation. 1. Its no contradiction to be justified by God, by
Christ, by Faith, by Words, by Works, if God be to be believed, that affirms
all. 2. As imperfect faith may be the condition of pardon, so may imperfect
Repentance, and imperfect Obedience of our sentential Absolution.

Page 233. He answers the Objection. [Blessedness is ascribed to other
Graces,] thus [ Not as if Happiness were in them, per se, but only as they are
signs.] Answer. Promising is more then Ascrbing: Its a great advantage for you
to have the forming of your Objections. 2. Happiness per se is as much in Love,
as in Faith, and more. 3. Other, Graces are media, means, which is more then
only works.

Page 241. He proves that works justify not subordinate to Faith] thus
[Argument 1. No good works were found till faith had done its Works] Answer. 1.
Faith has not done its work till death; we are not justified only by the first
act of faith: but by after-acts to the Death. 2. Faith in Christ as Head, and
Lord, and Teacher, and Desire and Repentance were found before Faith had
justified us. 3. Obedience is found before the sentential Justification, or the
continuation of our first received Righteousness.

His second Argument is, [Because good works are the effects of Faith and
Justification, and therefore cannot be the cause.] Answer 1. They are none of
the cause at all. Its not well to intimate that we hold them the cause, as in
despite of all our own denyals. 2. They are not so much as Means or
Antecedents of that part of Justification, of which they are the effect. The
act of faith which you will exercise before your death, is as true a condition
(or Instrument, if you will needs call it so) of your Justification as
continued, as your first act of faith was of your Justification as begun. And
yet that act of faith is but fruit of your first Justification, as well as
Obedience is.

His third Argument is, that [If Gospel Obedience, and good works do
subordinately act with faith to the effecting of Justification, then the
Justification which proceeds from both, must be of a different kind and
nature.] Answer 1. Neither faith nor work effect Justification. 2.
Justification by Promise and Gift, and Justification by Sentence, Plea, etc.
are much different. 3. But your consequence is nothing worth. For these are not
causes, but conditions. And if they were, yet different causes may concur to
the same effect, which never man before you denied, that I know of. Our case
is, as if to a Rebel that has forfeited Life and Estate, the King (upon a
Ransom) grant him both, on condition that he thankfully accept them as the
fruits of that gift and Ransom, and to hold them on condition, that he often do
his Homage to the King, and return not to Rebellion. Does the first acceptance
here serve turn for continuance of what is first received, without the
following Homage and Fidelity? or do the different parts of the condition make
such a difference in the benefit, as you here take the [Monstrous
Justification] to be (as you rashly call it?)

Another Argument is. [If faith be a total cause or condition of producing the
effect of Justification, then there is no want of obedience for its assistance.]
Answer 1. Faith or obedience are no causes of pardon. 2. I will not trouble the
Reader to open the shame of that Philosophy which you make such ostentation of.
Only I would remember you, that causes total in suo genere, may have others
under them. And that it follows not, that the sun shines not, or the fire
heateth not, or that you understand not, and wrote not these words, though I
suppose you will say that God is Causa totalis of all these act: nor yet that
God does use his creatures because of an insufficiency in himself. 3. Faith
taken for our [becoming Believers, Disciples, Christians] is the total
condition of our first Receiving Justification. 2. Faith taken more narrowly
for our accepting Christ's Righteousness, is not the total Condition of our
first Receiving of Justification. 3. Obedience is part of the condition of the
continuance of it, and of our sentential Justification. And whereas you talk
over and over of [Total causes, and particular causes.] I tell you again they
are no causes.

He adds that then [ Obedience does nihil agere, or actum agere.] Answer. It
does nihil efficere. But besides, [nihil] and [factum] there is two things often
mentioned, Justification at Judgment, and the non-amission of it here.

3. He insipidly gain disputes that [If an effect does totally proceed from any
cause, then it totally depends on it.] And what then? Therefore it solely
depends on it: And if these things were true, what are they to our question?
But says he, [When good works, the fruit of faith are interrupted, yet our
Justification abides by the single influence of faith only as a total cause of
its being and conservation.] Answer. 1. Alas! What would such Disputants do
with the Church, if Gods mercy did not hinder them! By your own Argument now,
neither God, nor Christ, nor the Gospel are any causes of our Justification.
For you say Faith is a Total cause, and there can be but one Total Cause,
unless you lose the honor of your Philosophy. 2. Faith is no proper cause at
all. 3. Did you not see what must needs be answered you. That Faith is
interrupted as well as Obedience, and yet no intercision of our Justification.
When we sleep we do not (at least always) act faith no more then obedience (if
so much.) And the habit of both continues together sleeping and waking: And if
you should give over love and sincerity of obedience, you would cease to be
justified.

His last Argument is, [Because for sins after Conversion, we must have
recourse only by faith to Christ, as our Advocate.] Answer. 1. That speaks only
of renewed pardon for particular sins, but not of our Justification at
Judgment, nor the non-omission here. 2. We must have recourse to Christ with
Repentance, and esteem, and self-denial, and desire, etc. as well as that act
of faith which you plead for, as the total cause. And when you would set Zanchy
against Zanchy, you do but mis-understand him. He says truly with Paul, that
neither in whole or part are our own works (such as Paul speaks of) our
Righteousness, that is, to answer the Law as Paul mentions, or any way to
merit or satisfy, or stand in co-ordination with Christ. But Zanchy never
thought that Repentance and Faith in Christ as Head, and Lord, and Desire and
Gratitude, etc. might be no means or Conditions of any sort of Justification,
or of that which we assert them to be means of.

I would answer much more of this Disputation; but I am persuaded the judicious
Reader will think I have done him wrong, in troubling him with this much. See
page 298, 299. how he answers the Objection, that pardon is promised to
Repentance, etc. I will not disparage the Readers understanding so much as to
offer him a Confutation of that, and much more of the Book. Only his many
Arguments on the Question of my first Disputation, I must crave your Patience,
while I examine briefly, and I will tire you with no more.

Mr. W. page 411, 412. I will rally up my Arguments against the foresaid
Definition of Faith to be an accepting of Christ as Lord and Savior: proving
that Christ only as Savior and Priest, offering himself up to the death of the
Cross for our sins, is the proper Object of justifying Faith, as justifying.
Argument 1. If the Faith of the Fathers under the old Testament was directed to
Christ as dying Priest and Savior; then also the Faith of Believers now ought
so to be directed. But. -- Ergo. --


Answ. 1. I grant the whole, and never made question of it. But what kin is the
conclusion of this Argument to that which you had to prove, unless [Only] had
been added. Did we ever deny that Faith must be directed to Christ as Priest?
2. A Savior is a term respecting our whole Salvation, and so Christ saves by
Teaching, Ruling, and judicial justifying as well as dying. 3. The Fathers
faith did not respect Christ as dying or satisfying only, which you should
prove but cannot.


Mr. W. Argument 2. If Christ as dying, and as Savior do satisfy Gods
Justice, and pacify a sinners conscience, then as dying and Savior he is the
Object of justifying Faith. But -- Ergo. --


Answ. The same answer serves to this as to the last. The conclusion is
granted, but nothing to the Question, unless [Only] had been in. 2. Christ as
obeying actively, and Christ as Rising, and as interceding, and as judging, as
King, does also justify us, Romans 5.19. Romans 4 24, 25. Romans 8.33.34. Mat.
12.37. and 25.34, 40. Peruse these Texts impartially, and be ignorant of this
if you can. 3. And yet the Argument will not hold, that no act of faith is the
condition of Justification, but those whose object is considered only as
justifying. The accepting of Christ to sanctify us, is a real part of the
condition of Justification.


Mr. W. Argument 3. If Christ as Lord be properly the Object of fear, then he
is not properly the Object of Faith as justifying: But -- Ergo. --


Answ. 1. If [Properly] be spoken de proprio quarto modo, then is Christ
properly the Object of neither, that is, he is not the object of either of
these Only. 2. But if [properly] be opposed to a tropical, analogical, or any
such improper speech, then he is the Object as Lord, both of fear, and faith,
and obedience, etc. 3. The deceit that still misleads most men in this point,
is in the terms of reduplication, [faith as justifying,] which men that look
not through the bark, do swallow without sufficient chewing, and so wrong
themselves and others by mere words. Once more therefore understand, that when
men distinguish between fides quae justificans, and qua justificans, and say,
[Faith which justifies, accepts Christ as Head and Lord; but faith as
justifying, takes him only as a Priest.] The very distinction in the later
branch of it, [qua justificans.] Is 1. Either palpable false Doctrine. 2. And a
mere begging of the Question. 3. Or else co-incident with the other branch, and
so contradictory to their assertion. For 1. The common Intent and meaning is,
that [ Fides quae credit in Christum justificat: And so they suppose that Faith
is to be denominated formally [justificans] ab objecto qua objectum: And if
this be true, then fides qua fides justificat: For the object is essential to
faith in specie. And so in their sense, [fides quae justificans] is but the
implication of this false Doctrine, that haec fides in Christum crucifixum qua
talis justificat. Which I never yet met with sober Divine that would own when
he saw it opened. For the nature and essence of faith, is but its aptitude to
the office of justifying, and it is the Covenant or free Gift of God in modo
promittendi, that assigns it its office. The nature of faith is but the
Dispositio materiae; but its nearest interest in the effect is as a condition
of the Promise performed. 2. But if by the [qua justificans] any should intend
no more then to define the nature materially of that faith which is the
condition of Justification, then the qua and the qua is all one: and then they
contradict their own Assertion, that [fides qua justificans non recipit
Christum ut Dominum.] 3. If the [qua] should relate to the effect, then it
would only express a distinction between Justification and other Benefits, and
not between faith and faith. For then [qua justistcans] should be
contradistinct only from [qua sanctificans] or the like. And if so, it is one
and the same Faith and the same acts of faith, that sanctify and justify. As
if a King put into a gracious act, to a company of Rebels, that they shall be
pardoned, honored, enriched, and all upon condition of their thankful
acceptance of him, and of this act of Grace: Here there is no room to
distinguish of their Acceptance, as if the acceptance of pardon were the
condition of pardon, and the acceptance of riches were the condition of their
Riches, etc. But it is the same acceptance of their Prince and his Act of
Grace, that has relation to the several consequent benefits, and may be called
pardoning, honoring and enriching in several respects. It is the same marriage
of a Prince that makes a woman rich, honorable, etc. So it is the same faith
in whole Christ, as Christ, that is sanctifying and justifying, as it relates
to the several Benefits: that is, it is the condition of both, so that their
[qua justifi^ans] does either intimate this untruth, that haec fides quae
talis, id est, qua fides in Christum crucifixum justificat] (which is true,
neither of one act, nor other,) and so begs the Question, or else it says
nothing. So that I shall never admit this quae justificans, without an
Exposition; and better then yet I have seen from any that use it.


Mr. W. Argument 4. That which is the sum and substance of Evangelical
preaching, is the object of Justifying Faith. But Christ as crucified, is the
substance of Evangelical preaching. Ergo.


Answ. 1. When I come to look for the conclusion which excluded Christ as Lord,
Teacher, etc. from being the object, I can find no such thing in any Argument
that yet I see. They have the same fate as Mr. Blakes Arguments had, to
conclude no more then what I grant, that is, that Christ as crucified, is the
object of justifying faith. But where is the [Only,] or any exclusive of the
rest. 2. But if it be employed, then 1. I say of the term crucified, that Christ
crucified to purchase sanctification and salvation, is the object of that faith
which is the condition of Justification, and not only Christ crucified to
procure Justification. 2. I deny the Minor, if by [sum and substance] you
exclude Christ as Lord, Teacher, Judge* Head, etc. Surely Evangelical preaching
contains Christ's Resurrection, Lord-ship, Intercession, etc. as well as his
death, or else the Apostles preached not the Gospel. This needs no proof with
them that have read the Bible.


Mr. W. Argum. 5. That which we should desire to know above all things, is that
Object of justifying faith: But that is Christ crucified. -- Ergo.


Answ. 1. Still the Question wanting in the conclusion: Who denies that Christ
crucified is the object of justifying faith? 2. But if [only] be here
understood, really does not this Brother desire to know Christ obeying, Christ
risen, Christ teaching, ruling, interceding, etc? I do.


Mr. W. Argument 6. That in Christ is the object of faith, as justifying which
being apprehended does justify us: But the death, suffering, blood, obedience
of Christ to death is that. -- Therefore it is the proper object of faith, as
justifying.


Answ. 1. I distinguish of the term [as justifying] and answer as before. No
act of Faith effects our Justification: and whole faith is the condition: The
being or Nature of no act is the formal or nearest reason of faiths Interest in
Justification It justifies not [as this act, nor as that.] 2. If [only] or
some exclusive be not employed in the conclusion, I grant it still: But if it
be, then both Major and Minor are false. 1. The Major is false, for it is not
only the matter of our Justification, that is the object of justifying faith.
To affirm this, is but to beg the question: we expect your proof. 2. The Minor
is false: for besides the sufferings mentioned, the very person of Christ, and
the active obedience of Christ, and the Title to pardon given us in the Gospel,
etc. apprehended by faith do justify. But the question is not what justifies
ex parts Christi, but ex part nostri.


Mr. W. Argument 7. That which the Gospel does first present us with, is the
Object of faith as justifying: But Christ is in the Gospel first presented as a
Savior: therefore he is therein the object of faith as justifying.


Answ. 1. Distinguishing as before of the [as justifying] I still grant the
whole; the exclusive and so the question is still wanting in the conclusion. 2.
But if he mean only, then both Mayor and Minor are false. The Mayor is false;
for that which the Gospel does first present us with, is but part of the object
of justifying Faith. For it presents us with the Articles to which we must
Assent, and to the Good which we must Accept by degrees, and not all in a
sentence or word. The Minor is false, because in order of nature, the
Description of Christ's Person goes first, and of his Office afterward. 3. The
word Savior, comprehends both his Prophetical and Kingly Office, by which he
saves us from sin and Hell; as also his Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession,
etc. And in this large sense I easily grant the Conclusion. 4. If by a Savior,
he mean only (as his cause imports) a sacrifice for sin, then (as this is a
strangely limited sense of the word Savior, so) certainly the Incarnation,
Baptism, Temptation, Miracles, Obedience of Christ are all expressed before this;
And if it were otherwise, yet the consequence of the Mayor is utterly
groundless and vain. Priority or Posteriority of any point delivered in the
Gospel, is a poor Argument to prove it the Object (much less it alone) of
justifying faith.


Mr. W. Argument 8. That which the Lords Supper does as a seal present to
justifying faith, that is the object of faith as justifying: But the Lords
Supper does present us with Christ as dying. -- Ego.


Answ. 1. Still the question is wanting in the conclusion. What a pack of
Arguments are here? 2. Do you believe in your conscience, that Christ is
presented and represented in the Supper only as dying?


Mr. W. Argument 9. If we have Redemption and remission of sins through faith
in his blood, then faith as justifying should only look upon that: But we have
redemption and remission of sins by his blood, Col. 1.


Answ. Here Is one Argument that has the question in the conclusion. But 1. I
deny the consequence of the Major, as not by Christians to be endured. The
[only] follows not. Though we must be justified by his blood, I have proved
before, that we are also justified by his Resurrection, Obedience,
Intercession, Judgment, etc. 2. Moreover the consequence is false on another
account: Justifying faith, that is, Faith the condition of Justification, must
look at more in Christ, then that which purchases Redemption. It justifies
not efficiently, nor of its own nature, but the Promise justifies without
faiths co-efficiency; only it makes the condition sine qua non: and this it may
do by another Act of faith, as well as that which apprehends the Ransom. 3.
The [qua justificans] I have spoke to: Qua cannot here properly refer to the
nature of the faith, but to the Benefit. And so faith qua justificans, is
neither this act, nor that act, nor any act; but [qua justificans] notes only
its respect to Justification rather then to Sanctification, or other benefits.
As when I kindle a fire, I thereby occasion both Light and Heat, by putting to
the fuel. And if you speak of that act of mine [ qua calefaciens: or qua
illuminans] this does not distinguish of the nature of the act, but of the
Respect that the same Act has to several effects or consequents.


Mr. W. Argument 10. If Christ only as crucified be the Meritorious Cause of
our Redemption and Justification, then Christ crucified is the only object of
faith as Justifying. But -- Ergo.


Answ. 1. The consequence of the Major is vain and an proved. More then the
Meritorious Cause of our Redemption is the object of justifying faith. 2. The
Minor is no small error in the Judgment of most Protestants, who maintain
that Christ's active Obedience, and suffering life, are also the Meritorious
cause of our Justification, and not only his Crucifixion.


Mr. W. Argument 11. If Christ as a servant did satisfy Gods Justice, then he
is so to be believed on to Justification. But as a servant he did satisfy Gods
Justice. -- Ergo.


Answ. 1. I grant the conclusion. Christ as a servant is to be believed in. 2.
But if [only] was again forgotten, I further answer. 1. I deny the consequence
of the Major, because Christ is to be believed on for Justification in other
respects, even in all essential to his Office, and not only as satisfying. I
instanced before in Obeying, Rising, Judging, from express Scripture. 2. If the
conclusion were granted, its against you and not for you. For 1. Active
obedience is as proper to a servant as suffering. 2. Christ Taught the Church
as a servant to his Father, and is expressly called A Minister of the
Circumcision. So that these you yield the objects of this faith.


Mr. W. Argument 12. If none can call Christ [Lord] before he be justified by
faith, then faith as justifying is not an Accepting him as Lord. The Minor is
true, because none can call him Lord, but by the Spirit: and the Spirit is
received by the hearing of faith, after we believe.


Answ. Any thing must serve. 1. Both Major and Minor are such as are not to be
swallowed in the lump. If by [Call] you mean the call of the voice, then the
consequence of the Major is vain and groundless. For a man may believe in
Christ with the heart as Lord and Savior, before he call him so with the
mouth. But if by [Call] you mean [Believe] then the Minor is false and so
confessed by all Protestants and Christians that ever I heard from of this
point, till now: For they all confess that faith in Christ as Lord and Teacher,
and Head, etc. is the fides quae justificat, or is of necessity to be present
with the believing in his blood, that a man may be justified. Never did I hear
till now that we first believe in Christ as dying only, and so are justified
before we believe in him as Lord, (and it seems before we are his Subjects or
Disciples, and that is, before we are Christians.) 2. To your proof of the
Minor I answer, 1. It is no proof because the Text says only that, [No man can
call him Lord but by the Spirit] but our question is of Believing, and not of
Calling which is Confessing. 2. Many Expositors take it but for a common gift
of the Spirit that's there spoken of: and do you think Justification must needs
precede such common gifts? 3. But if it had been [ Believe in stead of Call]
its nothing for you: For I easily grant that no man can believe in Christ as
Lord but by the Spirit: but I deny that this gift of the Spirit is never
received, till after that we believe and are justified. And because it seems
you judge that Believing in Christ to Justification is without the Spirit, I
pray answer first what we have said against the Arminians, and Augustine
against the Pelagians, for the contrary. Who would have thought that you had
held such a point? 4. How could you wink so hard as not to see that your
Argument is as much against your self as me, if you do but turn it thus? [ If
none can call Christ Jesus, or the Savior, or believe in him to Justification,
before he be justified by faith, then faith as justifying is not the accepting
him as a Savior: The Minor is proved, because none can call him Jesus, or
believe to Justification but by the Spirit] This is as wise and strong an
Argument as the other, and all one. See 1 Job. 4.15. and 5.5. Believing in
Christ as Savior is as much of the Spirit, is believing in him as Lord. 5. The
Text makes against you (1 Cor 12.3.) For there when Paul would denominate the
true Christian faith or Confession, he makes Christ as Lord the Object.


Mr. W. Argument 13. If the promise of Salvation be the proper object of
justifying faith, then not the commands of Christ as Lord and Lawgiver. But --
Ergo


Answ. 1. The conclusion is nothing to our Question, which is not of Commands,
but of Christ as Lord. It may be you know no difference between the Relation
and subsequent Duties, between the Authority and the Command, between
subjection and obedience. 2. The Minor is false, If by proper, you mean Only
(and if not, the consequence is vain and null.) For the Person of Christ, and
his Office, and the fruits of his Office, even Pardon, yea and Glory, are the
true Objects of justifying Faith.


Mr. W. Argument 14. If we are not justified both by Righteousness Inherent and
Imputed, then not by obeying Christ as Lord and Lawgiver. But -- Ergo.


Answ. What Is this to the Question? 1. About Justification by Righteousness
Imputed or Inherent we spoke before. 2. The conclusion never was acquainted
with our Question? Again it seems you cannot or will not distinguish between
Relative subjection and actual obedience. A man may become your servant and so
have the Privileges of a servant, by covenant, before he obey you. A woman in
Marriage may subject her self to you, and have Interest in your estate even by
that Marriage which promises subjection as well as Love (without excluding the
first from being any condition of her Interest;) and all this before she obey
you, 3. Your consequence would follow as much against your self as me. For
Believing in Christ as a Ransom, is as truly a particular Inherent
Righteousness, as believing in him as Lord. 4. We are justified by
Righteousness Inherent as a particular righteousness, though not as a
Universal: as subordinate to Christ's Righteousness that it may be ours, though
not in co-ordination with it.


Mr. W. Argument 15. If our accepting of Christ as Lord and Lawgiver be not
properly or formally faith, nor properly to be called obedience, then we are
not formally justified by faith in him as Lord, nor by our obedience to him as
Lord. But such an accepting of him is not properly* or in the account of God,
or in it self Faith or obedience. Ergo. -- The Minor I prove: if purposes,
intentions, or verbal professions to believe or obey are not properly faith
obedience, then such an accepting is not faith or obedience. The Minor proved.
That which is or may be found in Hypocrites or Reprobates is not true faith or
obedience. Bu -- Ergo.


Answ. The Lord pardon the hardness of my heart that has no more compassionate
sense of the miseries of that poor Church, and the dishonor of God which such
Disputes as this proclaim; by Arguments as fit to be answered by Tears as by
words. 1. A little before he was proving ( Argument 12.) that none could call
Christ Lord but by the Spirit, and therefore this act was after Justification:
And now he proves that its common to Hypocrites, and Reprobates. 2. Here he
delivers me from all the trouble and fallacy that the distinction of fides
quae Justificat and fides qua Justificat, has been guilty of. For if the act
that we dispute about, be no faith at all, then it is not the fides quae. And
yet he often is upon the Qua Justificans himself, forgetting this.


3. Had I but delivered such a Doctrine as this, what should I have heard?
Justifying faith has three Parts, ASSENT, CONSENT, and AFFIANCE, (which also
have several acts or parts, according to the diverse essential parts of the
Object.) ASSENT is but Initial and introductory to the rest, as all acts of the
Intellect are to those of the Will. CONSENT is the same which we here call
ACCEPTING, which is but the mere VOLITION denominated from its respect to the
offer and thing offered. This, as it is in the will, the commanding Faculty, so
is it as it were the Heart of Faith; the first act being but to lead in this,
and AFFIANCE the third, being commanded much by this, or depending on it: For
as it is seated in the Affections, so far it is distinct from this Velle or
CONSENT. Now when ever we name Faith by any one of these three acts (as the
Scripture does from every one) we include them all, though to avoid tediousness
we stand not to name all the parts, when ever by one word we express the whole.
And all these Acts have whole Christ in all the essentials of his Person and
office for their object. Now that this faith in Christ as Lord, or accepting
him, should be said, and that by a Christian Divine, and that in the Reformed
Church, to be no faith at all, (to say nothing of his denying it to be
obedience;) is no matter of honor or comfort to us. How often does the Scripture
expressly mention faith in our Lord Jesus Christ? Receiving Christ Jesus the
Lord, Col 2.6. with other equipollent terms. But I will not offer to trouble
any Christian Reader with Arguments for such a Truth.

4. But yet the man would be thought to have Reason for what he says; and to
his proof I further answer. 1. Purposes, Intentions, and verbal Professions
were none of the terms or things in question: but Accepting or Believing in
Christ as Lord, Teacher, etc. These are but concomitants (the two first) and
(the last) a consequent. 2. Is it the Act [Accepting] that this Brother
disputes against, or is it the Object [Christ as Lord] as being none of the
faith by which we are justified? If it be the former, 1. What Agreement then
has this Argument with all the rest, or with his question? 2. What Agreement
has his Judgment with the holy Scripture, that calls Faith a Receiving of
Christ, and makes it equipollent with [Believing in his Name] John 1.11.12.
Col. 2.6. 3. What Agreement has his Judgment with the Protestant Faith, that
makes Christ himself as Good to be the Object of faith; to be embraced, or
chosen, or accepted by the will, as well as the word as True, to be Assented to
by the understanding. But if it be the Object that he means, then what force
or sense is there in his Argument, from the terms, [Purposing, Intending,
Confessing?] Let him name what Act he please, so it respect this Object; and if
it be an Act of faith indeed, its all one as to our present Controversy. If he
take Consent, willing, or Accepting of Christ to be no act of Faith, let him
name any other that he will own (for I would quarrel as little as may be about
words, or impertinent things,) and let that be it.

4. And how could he choose but see, that his Argument is as much against
[Accepting Christ as Priest] as against [Accepting him as Lord] to
Justification? No doubt but a man that had the common Reason to write but such
a book as this, must needs see this if he regard what he said. And therefore I
must take it for granted that his Argument is against both alike: even to prove
that Accepting of Christ as Lord, or as Savior, is no faith or obedience at
all. But the Reader will hardly believe till he weighs it, that a waking man
would reason thus upon such a Question as this in hand.

5. Consenting that Christ shall be my Lord and Teacher, and Head, does imply a
consent, and so a Purpose of future obeying, learning and receiving from him;
And so consenting that Christ shall be my Righteousness, Intercessor, and
Justifier, does imply a Purpose of Trusting in him for the future. And yet this
consent in both cases is Justifying faith.

6. And its doleful Doctrine (were he a true Prophet) to all Gods Church, that
Purposes and Intentions to believe and obey, are no more then may be found in
Hypocrites or Reprobates. For though there are superficial uneffectual purposes
and Intentions in them, as there is an uneffectual faith in them; yet if no
Purposes and Intentions will prove men Saints, then nothing in this world will
prove them Saints; For the Evidences of Grace are more certain to him that has
them, in the Heart then in the outward Actions. And in the Heart, the very new
Creature lies much in these two. Desires themselves will prove true Grace:
Much more when they rise to settled Purposes. Why else did Barnabas exhort the
young beginners* that [with purpose of Heart they should cleave unto the Lord]
as intimating that their stability lay in this; And Intentions are the very
Heart of the New man. For Intention is that act that is exercised about the
End, which is God himself. Intendere finem, is no more then Velle vel Amare
Deum; It is the Love of God above all. And if this be common to Hypocrites and
Reprobates, what a case are we in then?

I hope I have given you a sufficient account of the Impertinency and vanity of
Mr. Warners fifteen Arguments. To which he adjoyneth a rabble of the words of
Socinians, Arminians, and I know not who, to assure you that we his new
Adversaries, do join with that company and plead their cause: And he that will
believe him, shall no further be disturbed by me in his belief.

I doubt I have wearied the Reader already, and therefore I shall only add a
few words about a few more of the most considerable passages in his Book.

Some other of Mr. Warners passages of most importance considered.
Page 385. MR. W. says [ It Is worth the observing how to evade the Distinction
of the Acts of faith, he says that faith is one act in a moral sense, as
Taking a man to be my Prince, Teacher, Physician, etc. and not in a physical
sense; for so it is many acts, etc.] And he confuteth me thus: [Here, Reader,
see the wit or forgetfulness of the man, who to maintain his own ground, does
often consider faith as Physically seated in the understanding and will; but
when we assault him, will not allow us, any Physical, but a moral Acception of
it.]

Answer A most gross untruth! (and that's an Arguing that Faith needs not)
Your forgery is not only without ground, and contrary to my plain and frequent
words, but contrary to the express words that you draw your Observation from. I
say faith Physically taken, is many acts; but morally taken it is one work:
Hence you call out to the Reader to observe, that I will not allow you any
Physical but a Moral Acception of it.] Is it fit to Dispute with such dealing
as this? Do you think that I or any man of brains does doubt whether faith be a
Physical Act (except them of late that take it to be but a Passion and a
Nominal action?) Surely all know that it is an Act in order of Nature, before
it is a moral act. Actus moralis, is first actus Physicus. Though Moraliter
actus, i. e. actus Reputativus, may be but a non-acting Physically: He that
wilfully famisheth his own child, does kill him morally or reputatively, and so
is moraliter agens, that is, Reputative. But he that cherishes him is an Agent
natural and moral, that is, Ethical or Virtuous. I wonder what made you think
me of such an opinion that I have so much wrote against?

He next says, that [Though by one moral act we receive diverse benefits, yet
we receive them to diverse purposes.] Answer, True! But many such passages of
yours are to no purpose; and such is this: impertinent to the business.

Page 391. He comes to my Distinction, where I say, that ex part Christi he
satisfies Justice as a Ransom, and Teaches us as our Master, and Rules us as
our King, yet ex part nostri, it is but one and the same entire faith that is
the condition of our Title to his several benefits: From hence he ingeniously
gathers that I say, [That faith has but one respect to those benefits, and
is not diversified by several acts; and deny the necessity of these distinct
acts in reference to the several benefits of Christ.] Whereas I only
maintained, that though the acts be Physically distinct, yet they are not
distinct conditions of our Interest in the benefits, but the same entire faith
is the one condition of them all. Hereupon he learnedly addresseth himself to
prove that faith has several acts. And he that thinks it worth his time to
transcribe and confute his Arguments, let him do it, for I do not.

Page 401. He thinks [We need not dispute whether the Reception of Christ by
faith, be moral or Physical: however it is not an improper, but proper
reception.] Answ. 1. It seems then we need not dispute whether Christ's body be
every where, and whether man's faith do touch him and receive him naturally as
the mouth does the meat? 2. And whereas Recipere, in its first and proper
signification was wont to be pati, now it is agere: And whereas consent or
Acceptance was wont to be called Receiving but Metonymically, now it is becoma
a proper Reception.

Page 303.304. Reasoning against me, he says, [The nearest formal Reason of a
Believers Interest, is not Gods making it a condition, which is the remote
reason thereof, but a Believers fulfilling the condition, etc.] Answ. 1. Here
he changes the question, from [What is the nearest reason of saiths Interest]
to [What is the nearest reason of the Believers Interest.] To the first I say,
[Its being made the condition of the Promise.] To the second I say, [The
Promise or grant it self.] 2. He finds a learned Confutation for me, viz.
That it is not Gods making, but the fulfilling the condition that is the formal
Reason. Answ. Performance, that is, Believing makes faith to be faith, and
exist: but the Promise makes that the condition. I spoke de esse, and he de
existere: And yet I usually say, that [The nearest Reason of faiths interest in
Justification, i^, as it is the condition of the Promises fulfilled] that I
might join both. 3. Note that in this his Assertion he grants me the sum of
all that I desire. For if this be true, then it is not the Nature or the
Instrumentality of faith that is the nearest reason, as is usually said.

Page 200. He does as solemnly call his Adversary ad parts, as if he were in
good sadness to tell him what is the causality of works is Justification: And
falling to his enumeration, he tells us that [The particle A or Ab notes the
peculiar causality of the efficient: the particle Ex notes the material cause:
the particle P^r or By, the formal cause: the particle Propter, the final
cause.] Answ. I must erave pardon of the Reader while I suppose all this to be
current, that I may answer ad homin^m. And then 1. It seems faith is not the
efficient cause, and therefore not the Instrumental cause: For A or ab is not
affixed to it, in this business. 2. It seems then that faith is the formal
cause of Justification, because we are said to be Justified (...) Romans 3.22,
25, 30, and passim [By Faith] So that faith is come to higher promotion then to
be an Instrumental efficient cause. 3. Hence it seems also that faith, even the
same faith is [the material cause] too: For most certainly we are said to be
justified ex fide: (...): Romans 3.26, 30. Romans 5.1 Gal. 2.16. and 3.8, 7, 5, 9,
22, 24. and 5.5. Jam. 2.24 Whether ex fide (...) do indeed express an
Instrumental efficient, I leave to consideration: But sure I am it fitly
expresses the Interest of a condition. And if Mr. W. will needs advance faith
hereby to be the matter of our Righteousness, it must be but of our subordinate
particular Evangelical righteousness, which consists in fulfilling the
condition of Justification.

Chap. 5. page 29.30, 31. He spends a Chapter to open to us the meaning of
[fides qua Justificat.] And prosesseth that it is the Carad controversia; yea
it was the remembrance of this distinction and the light he received by it that
induced him to enter on this Discourse; and that it is the basis of his
following exercitation. And what think you is the happy Light that deserves
all this ostentation? Why 1. On the Negative we are satisfied that he means not
[ What fides qua fides can do:] And then we are secure that he means nothing
that can hurt his Adversaries cause. 2. The Light then is all but this [ That
qua here is not taken Reduplicative, but specificative, when by the particle
qua or quatenus, there is some new or singular kind of Denomination added to
the subject of the Proposition: as when we say, man as a reasonable creature
feels: In this latter sense (says he) I believe the particle qua or quatenus
is taken, when we do not say, faith as faith, but faith as Justifying, viz. as
a Grace designed to this act or operation of Justifying, looks on Christ as
Savior.]

Answ. This Chapter was worth the observing. For if this be the Basis of all
the Exercitation, and the Light that Generated all the rest, the dispatch of
this may serve for all. It seems by his words he had looked into Reebe's
Distinctions in the end of Castaneus, and meeing with Reduplicative and
specificative, admired the distinction as some rare Discovery: and this
pregnant fruitful Distinction begot a Volume, before it was half understood it
self. Had he but read the large Schemes for explaining Qua or Quatenus in
others, its like it would have either begot a larger Volume, or by informing or
confounding him, have prevented this. First, he disowneth the Reduplicative
sense; and then owneth the specificative. But 1. He sees not, it seems, the
insufficiency of this distinction; 2. Nor the meaning of it; 3. Nor could well
apply it to the subject in hand. Of the first I shall speak anon. The second
appears by his Description, his Instance, and his Application. He describes
it to be [When there is some new or singular kind of Denomination added to the
subject of the Proposition.] 1. And why may it not be added also to the
Predicate, as well as it may Reduplicatively? as Motus est actus mobilis
quatenus est mobile.

2. There are many new kinds of Denominations that will not serve for your
specificative Quatenus. The instance you give is, [as when we say man as a
Reasonable creature faileth]. This was but an unhappy Translation of [Homo
quatenus animal est sensibilis] and its true in the Latin* how false soever in
the English. For the Application, 1. You say [you [Believe] its thus taken. As
if you did but Believe, and not know your own meaning in the Basis of your
Exercitation. 2. Your Specificative Quatenus is Causal, or signifies the
Reason of the thing, either of the Predication or the thing predicate: But so
cannot your Basis hold good. For faith does not look on Christ as a Savior (as
you please Metaphorically to speak) because it Justifies: for its Nature is
before the effect, and therefore cannot the effect be given as the cause of it;
(unless it were the final cause, of which anon.)

Qua or quatenus properly and according to the common use signifies the proper
reason of the thing or predication; and is appliable only to that which is
spoken (...). As to the terms, sometimes there is a Reduplication of the same
term, sometimes that reduplication is of the matter, but in other terms, as in
a definition, or synominal words, or it is employed: sometimes it is the terms
of the Predicate or Attribute that is Reduplicate; sometimes it is without a
Reduplication: And then sometimes it gives a Reason from an Essential Part:
sometime from the Generical Nature; sometime from the Specific Nature:
sometime from an Accident: and those are diverse: sometime from a Quality:
sometime from Quantity: sometime from Relation; and that is multifarious: If we
should run into all the senses of this Term which Mr. W. does lap up in the
word [Specificative] the words might exceed the profit. And its to be noted
that usually the term is respective as to some other thing excluded which is
contradistinct: and so we give sometimes a more Remote and General, and
sometime a nearer and more special Reason by Qua or quatenus. As if you mix a
purging Electuary in your Drink, I say that Purges quatenus medicated, which
is to exclude the Drink from being Purgative. If I speak of the Electuary, I
may say that it purges quatenus Diagridiate, to exclude many other Ingredients
from being Purgative. But if I speak of the Diagridium, I may say that it
Purges as having an Elective faculty, etc. to exclude other Reasons of its
operation.

Now for the opening of the matter in hand, let us try certain Propositions
that may be supposed to be laid down concerning Faith.

[1. Faith as faith justifieth] This is True, taken laxely, for the excluding
of [ faith as a mere Physical act, or meritorious etc.] but it is false
strictly taken, as signifying the formal or nearest reason.

So [2. Fades in Christum qua talis Justificat] that is, haec sides in specie]
is true, taken Laxely and materially to exclude all other Faith: q. d. It is
not faith in Peter or Paul, but faith in Christ as such that is the matter
deputed, to be the condition of Justification. But its false taken strictly,
deratione formali.

3. So [This faith as it is an Apprehension or Acceptance of Christ,
justifies.] Its true, Materialiter and Remotius, Laxly: but false formaliter
and stricte de ratione proxima. For this is the same in other terms with the
second.

So [4. Faith justifies as an Instrumental effitient cause of our
Justification.] Its false in every tolerable sense.

So [5. Faith justifies as an Instrument of receiving Christ.] Its true, 1.
taking the word [Instrument] Metaphorically, and meaning only the Nature of
this faith, which is [to Believe in and Accept Christ.] 2. and taking Quatenus
remotely, laxely and materially only, q.d. Faith is the Elected matter of the
condition (or is chosen to be the condition of Justification) for this
Aptitude, as, or because it is a Reception or Acceptance of Christ. But its
false, 1. Taking an [Instrument] strictly and Logically. 2. and speaking de
ratione formali.

So [6. Faith as a believing in Christ's sacrifice, justifies.] Its true,
Laxly, Materialiter and partialiter: that is, This act of faith is part of the
matter of the condition. But its false, formaliter de ratione proxima.

So [7. Faith justifies only as it is a Believing in Christ's sacrifice or
Righteousness.] Its false both de materia and de ratione formali.

So [8. Faith as Justifying is only a Believing in, or Accepting Christ as our
Ransom] Here is darkness, and either nonsense or false doctrine. 1. [As
Justifying] signifies either [as a justifying efficient cause] 2. Or [as the
merit or matter of our Righteousness.] 3. Or [as the means i. e. condition of
our Righteousness, of which Justification is a consequent and final cause.] In
the first sense it is every way false. In the second sense it is every way
false, speaking of our Universal Righteousness. In the third sense, if spoken
laxely de materia, its false, because of the exclusive [Only.] And if spoken de
ratione formalivel proxima, 1. Its preposterous to put the Consequent before
the Antecedent, if you speak de ordine exequendi: 2. And it is false: For [qua
Justificans] speaks of Justification as the consequent, or as an act, and not
of the Nature of Faith it self. And therefore [qua Justificans] faith is
nothing (much less that act alone.) For it is not de esse fidei that the term
speaks, but of the consequent; So that the [Fides qua justificans est] what
ever act you mention, is absurd and unsound: For as non justificat quatenus
est, it a non est quatenus Justificat, its Essence being pre-supposed. But if
you speak de ordine Intentionis, viz. [ Faith as elected a means or condition
of Justification is only a Believing in Christ's sacrifice.] then Laxely and
Materially it would be True, if it were not for the [ only.] But because of
that it is false, both de materia and de ratione formali. The nature of it is
before its Office.

So [9. Faith as designed to this act or operation of Justifying, looks on
Christ as a Savior.] This is Mr. Ws. Assertion. But 1. justifying is not an
act or operation of faith; but of God on the Believer. 2. But if you mean but
constituting it the condition of Justification, then 1. the wrong end is set
first: For it does not look at Christ, as its made the condition; but its made
the condition, because being an Accepting of Christ, its Apt for that Office.
So that Materially and Laxely, its thus true; (a Savior, comprehends Christ's
Kingly and Prophetical Offices, and everlasting Priesthood in Heaven) But this
is nothing to the formal Reason of its Interest in Justification.

But lest you think that [qua Justificans] has no proper place, I further
instance [9. Faith as justifying is distinst from faith as entitling to Heaven,
or other promised mercies.] This is true (supposing Justification and the said
Title to Glory to differ.) But this is but a denomination of the same faith
from its diverse consequents. As my lighting a candle being one action is
Actioilluminans (ut causa moralis,) and calefaciens; and quailluminans non est
calefaciens. So a woman's marrying a Prince, is an Honoring, enriching act: and
qua honoring, it is not enriching. But its the same entire undivided act or
Antecedent Means, or Condition, that is thus variously denominated from several
Benefits. And thus Relations may give diverse denominations to the same person;
the same man may, be considered as a Father, as a Physician, as a Subject, etc.

So 10. FAITH WHICH IS AN EFFECTUAL ACCEPTANCE OF and AFFIANCE IN CHRIST AS
CHRIST, was CHOSEN and ORDAINED by God the Condition of Justification and Life,
because his Wisdom saw it fit for that Office, and that fitness lies in its
respect to the Object and Gods ends (supposing we may assign Reasons or causes
of Gods Will.) By this faith (so constituted the Condition) we are actually
JUSTIFIED AS IT IS THE PERFORMED CONDITION OF GODS PROMISE.] This is the plain
Truth in few and easy words.

By what is said you may see that when they say [faith as Justifying] is this
or that, it is both preposterous, and the [qua] as distinct from the [quae] de
ratione formali, causally spoken, is plainly false: But in other cases, Laxely
and Materially, the [qua] signifies the same as the [quae] with the exclusion
of other matter. And when they have raised never so great a dust, the Question
is but this: Whether we are justified by Believing in Christ as Christ, or only
in Christ as a Ransom] (and yet as a Ransom and as dying he purchases
Sanctification as well as Justification.) Or. [Whether faith in Christ as
Christ, or only faith in Christ as Purchasing Justification, be the condition
of our Justification.]

Reader, Having showed the darkness of that Light that caused Mr. Ws.
Exercitation, and overthrown its Basis, I shall put thee to no further trouble.

To my Reverend Brother Mr. John Warner, Preacher of the Gospel at Christ's
Church in Hantshire.
Sir,
THough (through the privacy of my habitation) I never so much as heard of your
name, before your Book of the Object and Office of faith was in the Press; yet
upon tht perusal of it I confidently conclude, that a zeal for God, and that
which you verily think to be his Truth, has moved you to this undertaking; and
doubtless you think that you have done God service by it. I love your zeal: and
your indignation against Error; and your tendernese of so great a point as that
of Justification. And could I find your Light to be answerable to your heat, I
hope I should also love and honor it: Had you not taken me (with the two
Reverened Brethren whom you oppose) to be the enemies of the person and Grace
of the Lord Jesus, or the followers of them (as you say, Epist. page 6.) I am
persuaded you would not have either called us so, or thought your self called
to this assault. And if I love Christ, I must love that man that hates me*
though mistakingly, for the sake of Christ. That principle within you that has
made Christ and Truth so dear to you, that you rise up for that which seems
to you to be Truth, I hope will grow till you attain perfection in that world
of Light that will end our differences, I shall not go about to deprecate your
indignation for my plain expressions in this Defense, when the nature of your
matter did require them: For I am not so unresonable as to expect that fair
words should reconcile a good man to those that he takes to be enemies to
Christ, or to their followers. But as I can truly say if I know what is in my
heart, that the Reading of your Book has bred no enmity to you in my breast,
but only kindled a love to your zeal, with a compassion of your darkness, and a
dislike of your so much confidence in the dark; so it shall be my care as it is
my duty, to love you as a mistaken servant of Christ, though you should take me
for his greatest enemy. And therefore being conscious of no worse affections to
you, I desire that Justice of you, as to impute the ungrateful passages that
you meet with, to my apprehension of the badness of your cause and Arguments,
and a compassion to the poor Church that must be troubled and tempted, and
endangered by such gross mistakes, and not to any contempt of your person, with
which I meddle not, but as you are the Author of those Arguments.

In your Preface I find a Law imposed by you on your Answerer, which I have not
fully observed: 1. Because I had written my Reply to your Arguments a
considerable time before I saw your Preface; For it fell out that I first saw
your Book without the Epistle and Preface. 2. Because I thought it fittest to
follow the Method that my Subject and the Readers ^^dification did require. 3.
Yet did I once purpose to have answered all that was of moment in your Book
against the Truth: but upon trial I found your Reasons so inconsiderable, that
weariness interrupted me and put an end to my Reply, and withal I grew
confident that my labor would be to little purpose. For I dare venture any
Judicious Divine upon your Book without the help of a Reply: And for the rest,
it is not replying that will serve turn: but either prejudice will hold them to
the side that they have taken, or else they will think him in the right that
has the last word: when they have read mine, they will think that I am in the
right; and when they have again read yours, they will think that you carry the
cause: and when they read my Reply again they will say, you were mistaken; but
usually they will go with the party that is in greatest credit, or has most
interest in them, or advantage on them. But yet I think you will find that none
of your strength against me is neglected: For I can truly say, that when I
think not meet to Answer all that a man has said, I never pass by that which I
take to be his strength, but purposely call out that, and leave that which I
think is so grossly weak as to need no answer: So much of your ten Demands or
Laws as I apprehended necessary, I have here answered; supposing what I had
said of the same points in my first Disputation, which I saw no Reason too
often to Repeat.

I am none of those that blame you for too much of the Metaphysics, but rather
mervail that you feared not lest your Metaphysical Reader will wrong you by
mis-applying your cited Schegkius contrary to your better opinion of your self,
and take both your Schegkius and your Scaliger for Prophets that could speak as
if they had read your Book, and been acquainted with your arguings. But it
seems you are not the first of that way.

By your Arguments in your Preface, I perceive you think it a matter of very
great moment to your cause, to prove that there are diverse acts of Faith,
whereas I am so far from denying it, that I am ready to demonstrate, that even
the faith by which we are Justified, is liker to have twenty acts then one
only, but many certainly it has. Your first Argument is, from the different
objects because the Objects specify the Acts. A sufficient Argument which no
man can confute. But 1. This is no proof, that one act only is it that we are
justified by. 2. Where you add that Justifying Faith has not respect to Christ
as Lord formaliter, you beg the Question, and assert no light mistake. But
where you add [in its act of Justifying] you do but obtrude upon us your
fundamental Error (which leads you to the rest) by naked affirmations. Faith
has properly no justifying act: Justificare est efficere, Faith does not
effect our Justification: we are justified by faith indeed, but not as by an
efficient cause unless you will take Justification for Sanctification; For real
qualitative Mutations it does effect; but the Jus or Title to any mercy in the
world it cannot Effect, but Accept when offered. If you ^^n^ see so plain a
Truth in its Evidence, yet observe by the words of the Reverend Brother that is
my Opponent in the second Disputation, and by your Prefacers Dr. Kendals course
that its a passive instrumentality that the Defenders of your cause at last are
driven to; and therefore talk not of its act of Justifying unless you will mean
Gods act of Justifying which faith is the Condition of. And whereas you make
unbelief to be formally a slighting and neglecting Christ as a Savior and
effectively (you must mean only effective and non formaliter) a denying
subjection to him as Lord. You err so great but so rare an error, that I
suppose it needless to confute it. All Christians as far as I can learn have
been till now agreed, that Believing in Christ as Prophet and King is a real
part of faith, and that unbelief or rejecting him as Prophet and King is a real
part of unbelief.

Your second Argument is from the different subjects; where you give us two
such palpable Fictions, that its a wonder you can make your self believe them,
much more that you should lay so great a stress on such absurdities. The first
is that the Act of Faith is in several faculties: and you elsewhere give us to
understand that it is one Physical Act that you mean. And do you think in good
sadness that one single Physical act can be the act of both the faculties? The
second is that the fear, love and obedience to Christ as King is but in the
Will. But 1. That Readers do you expect, that will take an Assertion of
Fear-Love, and Obedience, in stead of an assertion concerning Faith? Were you
not comparing faith in Christ as King, with faith in Christ as Priest only? And
why speak you not of faith in one part of your comparison, as well as in the
other? Your conclusion now is nothing to the Question? 2. Or if you mean that
Faith in Christ as King is not in both faculties, as well as Faith in Christ as
Priest or sacrifice, did you think that any man of ordinary understanding would
ever believe you without any proof? or that ever such a thing can be proved?

Your third Argument is, [Because they are in a different time exerted; the
one, that is, Faith as Justifying being precedaneous to the other, (and to
other Graces)] Answ. Wonderful! Is that man justified that believes not in
Christ as the King and Prophet of the Church? Do you believe this your self?
why then an Infidel is justified by Faith. The 'Belief in Christ as a Sacrifice
or Priest only, is not the Christian faith; it is not faith in Christ properly,
because it is not faith in Christ as Christ. For Christ as Priest only is not
Christ. A Heart only is not Corpus humanum: A Body only is not a Man; where
there are three essential parts, one of them is not the Thing, without the
rest. The name [Jesus Christ] signifies the office as well as the person. It
is essential to that Office, that he be Prophet and King. And hereby you show
that you do not only distinguish but divide. For where there is a distance of
time between the Acts, there is a division. Do you think that we are Christ's
enemies, or followers of them, unless we will believe you that a man is
Justified by Believing in Christ only as a Priest or Ransom, or in his
Righteousness, before ever be believe in him as King and Lord (and so as
Teacher, etc.) If I had said that you are Christ's enemy for such Doctrine,
which* think you, had had the fairer pretense for his censure? But I am far
from saying so, or thinking it. I know that the Assent to the essential
Articles of Christianity, contains many Acts, and that our Consent and
Affiance are many Physical Acts, as the parts of Christ's Office are many
Objects. But yet I (do not think but) am certain that all these physical Acts
concur to make up that Moral A^ which is called Christian, or saving, or
Justifying Faith; and that he that believes not in Christ as to all that is
essential to Christ, is no Christian. And a man is not justified by Faith
before he is a Christian. And truly Sir, men that are loath to fly from the
Light, and that love the Truth, and diligently seek it (as heartily, if not as
happily as you) must yet needs tell you, that if you produce your Mormolucks an
hundred times, and cant over and over [a Papist, a Socinian, an Arminian; and
an Arminian, a Socinian and a Papist] their understandings, will never the more
be persuaded to embrace your Delusions, though you should say that the Kingdom
of God does consist in them.

Your fourth Argument is that, [There is a difference in Nature, Efficacy,
Energy, and Operation; therefore the Acts are not the same.] Answ 1. I
maintained the conclusion (that faith has different Acts) before ever I heard
of your name; and have no reason now to deny it. 2. The difference of Nature,
I grant you between many Acts of faith; but what you mean by the Efficacy,
Energy, and Operation, be that knows can tell; for I cannot.

But still desire you to know that I deny faith to have any efficient operation
in justifying us, or that it is an efficient cause of our Justification;
especially its no Physical efficient; you add a strange proof of your
Assertion, [viz. For faith as Justifying makes a mystical Union and relative
change on the person; but faith as working and sanctifying produces a moral
union with Christ. etc.] Answ. 1. Faith as justifying does only Justify, and
produce no V^ion; the same faith as uniting is the means of Union. 2. The
question is of [Faith in Christ as Priest, and faith in Christ as Prophet and
King also.] And you talk of [faith as justifying, and as working and
sanctifying] A small alteration. 3. What Mystical Relative Union is that which
is not a Moral Union? 4. Faith in Christ as Christ, and not as a Ransom only,
is the means of our Justification; And you give us nothing like a proof of the
contrary restriction.

In the same Preface you tell the world of as threefold Artifice that we use;
the first is [to set up a second Justification] Ans. Is it the Name or the
Thing that you mean? If the name, 1. cite the words where we use that Name. 2.
If it answer the subject, you may bear with the name. If it be the Thing, then
tell us what Religion that it that denies 1. a Justification by sentence at
Judgment. 2. Gods continual justifying us to the Death. 3. And his particular
pardoning or justifying us from the guilt of renewed particular sins. 4. And
that faith is not only in the first act, but through all our lives, the means
of our Justification; Or, justifying faith is more then one instantaneous Act;
or a man cease not to have justifying faith after the first Act or moment.
Tell us who those be, and what Religion they are of that deny all these, that
Christians may be acquainted with them, if they be worthy their acquaintance.

Our second Artifice is, [to require Works only as Gospel-Conditions.] Answ.
Would you have us say more of them, or less? If less, I have said enough of it
in the second Disputation.

Our third Artifice is, [To include works in the Definition of Justifying
faith, making it a receiving of Christ as Savior, Lord and Lawgiver to
Justification; as also confounding our consummate Salvation or Glorification
with our Justification.] Ans. Gross untruths! contrary to large and plain
expressions of my mind in several Volumes (if you mean me, as you know I have
reason to judge) 1. I ever took works to be a fruit of faith, and no part of
it, unless you take the word Faith improperly and laxely; unless by [Works] you
mean [Acts] And you take faith for such a work your self, that is, an Act. 2. I
expressly distiguished what you say I confound; Consummate Sanctification or
Glorification, and consummate Justification. But yet as I do in the Definition
include Consent to Christ's Lordship, though not Obedience (that's only employed
to be a necessary consequent,) so I still say that much of your Justitication
is yet to come; And if your Religion teach you to say, that you will be
beholding to Christ for no more Justification, so does not mine.

And whereas you cite some that say, that all our sins are pardoned in our
first believing, as if I had questioned any such thing, I must tell you that I
easily grant it, that every sin is then forgiven, and so far as that
Justification is perfect; but what have you yet said to prove, 1. That we are
never justified be faith, but in that one instant. 2. That we need no
particular Justification from particular sins that after shall be committed. 3.
Nor no sentential Justification at Judgment, which Mr. Burgess will tell you,
is the chief. You and others use to say, that, that at Judgment, is but
Declarative. But 1. It is no common Declaration, but a Declaration by the
Judge. 2. And the Sentence does more then merely declare; for it does finally
decide, acquit and adjudge to Glory. 3. And methinks this Declarative should be
no term of Diminution, but of Aggravation, with those that still use to say
that Justification is a judicial^ Term. Alas! That these matters among the
friends of Christ and Truth, should need so many words.

Some more I had to say to you, but you may find it in the Preface to these
Disputations. I only add, that if indeed it be true which you write to that
Honorable person, to whom you dedicate your Labors, viz. That the Subject of
your Discourse is so excellent and necessary to be known; and that He who is
Ignorant of the Object and Office of Faith, does neither know what he
believes, nor how he is justified; I should think it is high time, that you
call your Understanding once more to an account, and review the Fabric that
you have built on a qua justificans not understood, or upon a specificative
quatenus, where there is no such thing: And if you think me unfit to be
hearkened to in this, (as being one of the men of perverse minds that there you
mention,) its more worthy your industry, to seek the advice of the learned
Oxford Divines herein, then that they should be sought to approve and midwife
such a Book into the world: and its likely that their Charity will provoke them
to be serviceable to you in this: though I hear that their Discretion forbad
them the other, For all men are not so easily whistled into a Christs-Church
contention against the Truth and Church of Christ, as 'Dr. K. and one or two
Confidents, that living in a cold and s^eril Country, are less substantive, and
more adjective, then Innocents and Independents use to be.

None's here so fruitful as the Leaning Vine:
And what though some be drunken with the Wine?
They Will fight the better, if they can but hit:
And lay about them without fear or --) But stay!
See What Example is! As the name of D^. K. and the remembrance of his
differtatiuncula (an Appendant to fax pro Tribunali, that could salva fide,
fidem solvere) began to tice me into a jocound vein; so your concluding Poetry
had almost tempted me in an Apish imitation to Poetize, when weariness made me
think of a conclusion. But I had rather conclude with this serious motion to
you (that my end may meet your beginning,) that before you next write on this
Subject, you will better consider of the question that your qua justificans
concerns: And instead of telling us, that fides qua justificans respicit
Christum Salvatorem, that is, fides qua justificans est fides, as if it were
justifying in order of Nature before it is Faith: you will be pleased to tell
us, sub qua ratione fides justificat (vel fide justificamut?) Whether you will
say, that fides qua justificans, justificat, or fides qua fides justificat,
(which I think you disown,) or fides qua respicit, apprehendit, recipit
Christum, which is all one, as fides qua fides, or fides qua Instrumentum
apprehendens, which Metaphorical expression still signifies no more then [ qua
credit in Christum, or qua fides?] Or whether you will stand to what you have
affirmed. chap. 9. page 67. that its Gods assignation of it to the office, who
therefore does it, because he wills it: and to what you said, page, 304. The
meerest formal reason of a Believers Interest to pardon, is -- a Believers
fulfilling the condition. And if you will stand to this that you have said, and
understand that the Doctrine of us whom you assault is the same (more carefully
expressed,) be entreated then to let your next bolt be shot at the right mark:
which is all that's now requested of you, by

Your Christian Brother (whether you will or no) RICHARD BAXTER*
December. 25. 1657.
Richard Baxters DISCVSSION OF Mr John Tombs his Friendly, Acceptable
ANIMADVERSIONS ON HIS Aphorisms, and other Writings.

About the Nature of Justification, and of justifying Faith.

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in Kederminster, and
are to be sold by him there, and by Nathaniel Ekins, at the Gun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

Sir,
UPON reading of the Postscript in your late Book, I have sent you these
Animadversions. You say Aphor. of Justification. ^ag. 184. [ All those
Scriptures which speak of Justification as done in this life, I understand of
Justification in Title of Law. So Romans 5.1. and 4 2. and 5.9. Jam. 2.21, 25,
etc.] I conceive Justification, being Gods Act, Romans 3.30. Romans 8.33.
consequent upon Faith, and calling, and importing a sentence opposite to
Condemnation; Romans 8.30, 33, 34. and 5.1. terminated on particular persons,
Romans 4.2, 3 Romans 8.30. it must be more then the Vertual Justification in
Law-Title; which is only an act of God prescribing or promisig a way of
Justification, not the sentence it self, and is general, and indeterminate to
particular persons, and is performed before the person justified believes: Yea
is the same, though none were actually justified: and therefore in my
apprehension, that Act of Gods Covenanting or promising, in which I conceive
you place the Justification by Law-Title. These. 38. Is not the Justification by
faith meant, Romans 5.1, etc.

Besides, to be justified notes a Passion, which presupposes an Action; an Act
Transient, not Immanent; or only Gods purpose to justify: nor can it be Gods
Promise to justify: For the Act, though it be Transient, yet it is only a
Declaration what he will do; his promise to justify upon condition, is not
Justifying, and therefore a man is not by the Covenant, without a further Act,
Denominated Justified, though he be made justifyable by it. I conceive
Justification is a Court term, Importing an Act of God as Judge, whereas his
promising is not his Act as Judge, but Rector, these. 42. you mention the Angels
judging us Righteous, and Rejoicing therein; which whence it should be, but by
a sentence passed in Heaven, I know not. Constitutive Justification, different
from Declarative by sentence, I do not find expressed under the term
[Justification] It would be considered whether any other Act besides the
sentence, does make a man just, but giving of faith; notwithstanding Christ's
Death, and the conditional Covenant before faith, a person is only justifyable;
Conditionalis nihil ponit in esse. A person is upon giving of Faith justified;
but not by giving of faith (that's an act of Sanctification) but by a sentence
of God, These. 59. You make justification a continued act; now it being a
transient act, I suppose it may not be well called a continued Act, which
imports a successive motion between the terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem;
whereas the act, whether by sentence, or Covenant, is not such a Motion. Its
not to be denied, that the Benefit and Virtue of it is continued, but I think
not the Act. If it be not s^mel, but saepe, yet it should be rather called
Actus Renovatus, Repetitus, Iteratus, then continued I incline to think there
is but one Justification of a person in this life, though there be frequent
remissions of sin. Of this you may Consider.

In the Saints Everlasting Rest, page 11. Doubtless the Gospel takes faith for
our obedience to All Gospel Precepts. Believing does not produce subjection to
Christ as King, as a finite, but contains it as an Essential part, etc. Aphor.
p. 25.5. Faith does as Really and Immediately Receive Christ as King (as
Savior, or Priest) and so Justify, These. 65. Scripture does not take the word
[Faith] for any one single Act; nor yet for various Acts of one only faculty;
but for a complete entire motion of the whole soul to Christ its Object, These.
57. It is the Act of faith which justifies men at Age, and not the Habit.

Against this I object; 1. Faith works by Love, Gal. 5.16. If one be an
essential part of the other, and faith a complete entire motion of the soul,
then when it is said, Faith works by Love, it might be said, it works by
Faith.

2. Gospel Precepts are many, if not all, the same with the Moral Law; if
Justified then by obedience to them, are we not justified by the works of the
Law? You conceive the Justification, Jam. 2. to be by works in a proper sense,
and that before God; and Rahabs act was a work of Hospitality, ver. 25.
commanded in the Law; and Abraham's work was a sacrificing, or offering a work
of the Ceremonial Law, ver. 21.

3. Repentance is obedience to one Gospel Precept, yet Faith and Repentance are
distinguished, Mar. 1.15.6, 1. Love, Faith, Hope, are three, 1 Cor. 13.13. 1.
Tim. 1.5. 2 These. 1.3. faith and Love have different Objects, Col. 1.4. Phil.
5. 1 These. 1.^. Therefore not the same; nor one an Essential part of the other.

4. Obedience is a sign to prove faith, Jam. 2.18. and therefore not an
Essential part.

5. If Faith include obedience to all Gospel Precepts as an Essential part,
then actual faith includes actual obedience to all Gospel Precepts as an
essential part; and if the Act of faith Justify men at Age, not the Habit; and
receiving Christ as King, as immediately Justify, as believing in Christ as
Savior, then a person of Age is not Justified without actual obedience to all
Gospel Precepts, and this may be not till Death; if then, and so, no
Justification in this Life.

6. If Faith justify as immediately by receiving Christ as King, as by
receiving him as Savior, then it justifies by receiving Christ as Judge,
Matthew. 25.34. as Lawgiver, Avenger of his enemies, and so a man is justified
By receiving Christ's Judging, Punishing, Condemning, Commanding, Avenging, as
well as saving by his Death; which is contrary to Romans 3.25. and 5.9

7. The Scripture makes the object of justifying faith Christ's Death,
Resurrection, Blood, Romans 3.25. and 10.9. Gal. 2.20, 21. Nowhere Christ's
dominion. Ergo. Subjection to Christ as King is not an essential part.

8. The object of Faith is nowhere made to be a Gospel Precept, such as
forgiving others, using Sacraments, etc. nor Christ as commanding; but the
Declaration of the Accomplishments of Christ, and the counsel of God in him, 1
Cor. 15.1. etc. Romans 1 16, 17. Gal. 3.8. Ergo Obedience is not an Essential
part.

9. If it be an essential part, then either Genus or Difference; for no other
Essential parts belong to a quality or Action: not the Genus, that is Assent.
Aph. p. 254.274. when the object is a Proposition: when it is an Incomplex
term, Trust is the Genus: not the Difference, that's chiefly taken from the
object. Keker. syst. Logic. l. 1. sect. 2. c. 2. can. Defin. Accid. 5.7.
Obedience may make known Faith as a sign, but not as a part, its at least in
order of Nature after; the cause is before the effect: the Antecedent before the
Consequent; and faith is such, Heb. 11.8. etc.

10. If Faith be a complete entire motion of the whole soul to Christ, then it
should be Love, Joy, Hope, Understanding, Will, Memory, Fear; But this is not
to be said. Ergo.

It is alleged, 1. Faith must be the Act of the whole soul; else part should
receive him, part not.

Answ. Faith is expressed by the Metaphor of Receiving, Joh. 1.12. Col. 2.6.
And he is Received by the Receiving of his Word, Joh. 12.48. 1 These. 2.13.
which is Received by Assent. 2. The whole soul receives Christ, though by other
Graces besides faith.

2. Acts 8.37 Romans 10.10. Answ. The term [Whole] notes not every inward
faculty; but (as after) sincerely, not feignedly, as Simon Magus. So Illyricus.

3. Faith is called Obeying the Gospel, Romans 10.16. 1 Pet. 1.22. and 4.17. 2
These. 1.8. Gal. 3.1. and 5.7. Heb. 5.9. But the Gospel commands All thus to
obey Christ as Lord, forgive others, love his people, bear what sufferings are
Imposed, diligently use his Means and Ordinances, confessing, bewailing sins,
praying for pardon sincerely and to the end.

Answ. Heb. 5.9. speaks of obeyng Christ, but does not call faith obeying
Christ: but be it granted, Faith is called obeying of Christ, or the Gospel;
does it follow that it is obedience in doing those named Acts? It may be
obedience by Assent to the Doctrine of Christ, that he is the Messiah, died for
sins, etc. commanded 1 Cor. 15.3. 1 John 3.23. which the terms (...) and (...)
do rather Import, then the other Acts mentioned. The Gospel and Truth are
restrained to the Doctrine of Christ's coming, dying, etc, nowhere applied, that
I know, to the Precepts of forgiving others, suffering death, receiving the
Lords Supper, etc.

4. The fulfilling the condition of the new Covenant is called faith, Gal.
3.12, 23, 25.

Answer. Neither of these places make faith the fulfilling of the Condition of
the New Covenant, nor any place else In Gal. 3.12. Its said, the Law, that is
the Covenant of the Law, is not of Faith. i. e. does not assign Life to Faith
in Christ* Faith Gal. 3, 23, 25. is put, says Piscat. for the time of the
Gospel, or Christ, say others, or the Doctrine of Faith. By Faith only the
condition of the Covenant concerning Justification in this life is fulfilled,
not concerning every Benefit of the new Covenant. Repentance is the condition
of Remission of sins; forgiving others, doing good to the Saints, of entering
into Life.

5. The Gospel reveals not Christ's offices as separate. Ergo. They mnst be so
believed.

Answ. The conclusion is granted, but proves not faith to justify in receiving
Christ as King.

6. It offers Christ as King, and so must be received. Answer the same.

7. Scripture nowhere tieth Justification to the receipt of him as priest only.
Ar. The contrary is proved from Romans 3.25. and 5.9.

8. Commonly Christ is called our Lord and Savior. Answ. True; But we are
justified by his blood.

9. If we receive him not as a King, then not as an entire Savior. Answ. True;
Yet Justification is by his death, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 2.21. Romans 3 25 and 59.

10. Christ is not received truly, if not entirely as King. Answ. True; But
this proves not that obedience is an essential part of faith; or that
subjection to Christ as King, justifies as immediatety, as receiving him as
Savior.

11. The exalting of his proper Kingly office, is a Principal End of Christ's
dying. Psalm. 2. Romans 14.9.

Answ. True; But it follows not that either Obedience is an Essential part of
faith* or subjection to Christ as King justifies as immediately as receiving
him as Savior or Priest.

Yours in the Truth I.T.

Sir,
ITs to be considered, 1. Whether these words answer to Valedict* orat at B.
page 191. [Nothing but the satisfaction of Christ, is that which our Divines
call the matter of our Justification, or the Righteousness which we must plead
to Acquit us in Judgment.] And it is said Romans 3.25. through faith in his
Blood, and Romans 5.9. by his Blood, Do not prove Christ's Death either the sole
or chief Object of faith as Justifying; and how this stands with Aphorism of
Justification, These. 66. and its Explication.

2. Whether the words, Luke 12.14. import not a disclaiming or denial of a
Title to judge, and so your answer be not insufficient, page 276. which seems
to suppose a Title, and only a Suspension of Exercise in that state of
Humiliation.

3. Whether if Magistrates be Officers of Christ as King, by Office they be not
in his Kingdom, and so Infidel Magistrates in Christ's Kingdom, contrary to Col.
1.14.

4. If it be maintained, That Christ died for every Child of Adam
conditionally, It would be well proved from Scripture, that the procuring of
such a conditional Law or Covenant, was the End or Effect of Christ's death; and
whether the so Interpreting Texts that speak of his dying for all, will not
serve for Evasions to put by the Arguments drawn from them to prove Christ's
Satisfaction aad Merit, proper to the Elect. For if they may be Interpreted so,
He died to procure the conditional Covenant for every one, this may be alleged
justly; then you can prove no more thence, for that is the sense; and then we
cannot prove thence, he died loco nostro, etc. It is a matter of much moment,
and needs great Circumspection.

Yours.

Sir,
BEsides what has been formerly suggested to you, these words in your
Scripture proofs, page 323. And where he next says, that in the aged several
dispositions are required to fit a man to receive pardon, (and so
justification) viz Catholic faith, hope of pardon, fear of punishment, grief
for sin, a purpose against sining hereafter, and a purpose of a new life, all
which dispose the Receiver; and I agree to him, though all do not] are so like
the Doctrine of the Trent Council. sess. 6. c. 6. that it will be expected you
declare, whether by avowing that speech of Dr. Ward, you do not join with the
Papists, contrary to Bishop Downam of Justification. l. 6. c. 7.. 1.2. Mr.
Pemble vindict. fidei.. 2. c. 3.

And when you make Justification a continued Act upon condition of obedience,
its to be considered how you will avoid Tompsons opinion of the Intercifion of
Justification, upon the committing of a sin that wastes the conscience, refuted
by Dr. Rob. Abbot. but vented after by Moutague in his appeal, and opposed by
Dr. Preston, and others.

As for Justification by Law-Title, by the Covenant upon actual Believing,
without any other act of God, consequent on Faith; if it were so; 1. Then it
should be by necessary Resultancy; But Justification is an Act of Will, and no
act of Will is by necessary Resultancy.

2. If the Covenant justify without any other Act of God, then it Adops,
Glorifies, Sanctifies, etc. without any other Act, which is not to be said. The
reason of the Sequel is, because the Covenant of it self does in the same
manner produce the one as well as the other.

3. The Justification of the Covenant is only conditional, therefore not
Actual; Actual Justification is not till Faith be put: and then Posit a
condition, it is Actual: A conditional, is only a possible Justification; its
only in potentia, till the Condition be in act; Now the Covenant does only
assure it on condition, as a future thing, not therefore as actual, or present.

4 The Covenant is an Act past, Tit. 1.2. Gal. 3.7, 8. so not continued; and
consequently, the Justification barely by it, without any other Act, must be
past long since, and not continued; and he neither Justification Actual, and in
purpopse; or virtual, will be confounded, or an effect shall be continued,
without the cause.

Jan. 17, 1651. Yours. I.T.

Reverend Sir,
I AM more thankful to you for these free, candid, rational Animadversions,
then I can now express to you: yet being still constrained to dissent from you,
by the evidence of Truth, I give you these Reasons of my dissent.

1. First, You think that [the Scriptures cited, are not to be intepreted of
Justification in Title of Law, because this is only an Act of God prescribing
or promising a way of Justification; not the Sentence it self; and is general,
and indeterminate to particular persons, etc.] To which I answer. 1. That I am
past doubt that you build all this on a great mistake about the nature of Gods
Law or Covenant, and Promise, and the moral action thereof. For you must know
that this Promise of God, 1. is not a bare Assertio explicans de futuro animum
qui nunc est; (as Grotius speaks:) Nor yet that which he calls Pollicitatio,
cum voluntas seipsam pro futuro tempore determinat, cum signo sufficient ad
judicandam perseverandi necessitatem. But it is Perfecta Promissio, ubi ad
determinationem talem accedit signum volendi jus proprium alteri confer, quae
similem babet effectum qualem alienatio Domin^i. Est enim aut via ad
aliena^ionem rei, aut alienatio particulae cujusdam nostrae libertatis. etc.
Vid. ultra Grot. de jure Bellili. 2. c. 11. 2.3, 4.

2. This Promise or Covenant of God, is also his Testament: and who knows not
that a Testament is an Instrctment of proper Donation, and not only a
Prediction? 3. Moreover this same which in one respect is a Covenant and
Promise, and in another a Testament, is also truly part of Gods Law, even the
New constitution of Christ, the Lawgiver and King. But ^ndoubtedly a Law which
conferreth. Right either absolutely or conditionally, is the true and proper
Instrument of that Effect, and not only [the presenting or promising away
thereto] The proper Effect or Product of every Law, is Debitum aliquod; Et de
hoc debito determinare is its proper Act. Now therefore this Promise being part
of Christ's Law, does determine of and confer on us, the Debitum, or Right to
sentential Justification, having first given us an Interest in Christ, and so
to the Benefit of his satisfaction; and this is Justificatio constitutiva. You
know a Deed of Gift (though but conditional) is a most proper Instrument of
conferring the Benefits therein contained. And is not the Promise undoubtedly
Gods Deed of Gift? And does he not thereby make over, as it were under his
hand, the Lord Jesus, and all his Benefits to them that will receive him? So
that when you say, that [his Promise to justify upon condition, is not
justifying] You may see it is otherwise by all the forementioned considerations
of the nature of the Promise. You may as well say, a Testament, or deed of Gift
conditional, does not give, or a Law does not confer Right and Title. And in
these Relative benefits, to give Right to the thing, and to give the thing it
self, or right in it, is all one: (still allowing the distance of time limited
for both in the Instrument) It is all one to give full right to sonship, and
to make one a Son: or at least they are inseparable. Yea, (which weighs most
of all with me) it being the proper work of Gods Laws to give Duness of, or
Right to Benefits, it cannot be any other way accomplished that is within our
Knowledge (I think) For Decree, Purpose, and so Predestination cannot do it,
they being Determinations de eventu, and not de debito, as such: And the
sentential declaration presupposes this Debitum, or true Righteousness an
therefore does not give it. No wonder therefore while you deny this Legal,
Testamentary, Moral Donation, that you are forced also to deny Justification
constitutive; (but very inconveniently and unsafely.) By what way does God give
a father Authority over his Children, and a Husband over his Wife, and a
Magistrate over the people, and a Minister over the Church or Flock, but only
by this Moral Legal Action? And even so does he give Power to them that receive
him, to become his Sons. And it is the same Instrument which performs this,
which is called a Promise, Covenant, Testament, Disposition or Law; the name
being taken from different respects or accidental considerations.

Again, If the word of Christ do judge us, then that word does justify and
condemn: (For judging in general contains these special Actions.) But the
word does judge us, (and shall do at the last day:) therefore the word does
justify and condemn.

Again: It is a Rule in the Civil Law (as Vlpian) that By the same way as an
Obligation is induced or caused, it must be removed or destroyed: But by the
curse of the Law, or the Threatening of Penalty, was our obligation to
punishment, and condemnation induced or caused: therefore by the way of Law
dissolving that cause, must it be taken off. Now as Reatus est obligatio ad
Poenam, so pardon is the dissolving of that Obligation, or discharge from it;
(Venia and Poena sunt adversa:) And therefore the Law of Christ, or this his
Promise or Grant, is the Instrument of Pardoning. And methinks, when you are
convinced, that God pardons by Law or moral Action, you should easily yield,
that in the like way he justifies. For if you be not of the Judgment, that
Remission and Justification are all one: yet you must needs yield, that they
are of so near a nature, that the difference is exceeding small, and rather
notional and respective, then real. I might to these Arguments add somewhat
from the Issue, and different tendency of this my opinion and the contrary. As
that this does give Gods Laws their honor and dignity, by ascribing to them
that higher and more noble and effective Action; which the contrary opinion
denying it, does very injuriously debase the Scriptures or Laws of God. Also
that this opinion is the only expedient left, (that I can find) to avoid the
Antinomian fancy of an Eternal Justification, which all they must assert, that
say it is an Immanent Act (which you justly and truly deny.) For your way lying
in the other extreme, 1. Overthrows all constitutive Justification; which is
not to be born. (Whether All Pardon by the Covenant, I yet know not your mind)

2. And it Intepreteth all Scriptures (that speak of a Justification in this
life) of a strange feigned Justification, which for ought I find has no ground
in Scripture at all; and is wholly aliene to our condition; and at least
utterly unknown to us, if not known to be untrue. What does it concern a sinner
to be justified or condemned now before a Court of Angels, where he is not
present, nor knows any thing of it? nor do we know what Angels have to do in
such a business. And what Transient Act is it that God then and there puts
forth or performs? Can you tell? or does Scripture tell you? God speaks not
to Angels by voice. If you think (as the Schoolmen, some) that they see our
Justification, as other things in the face of God; then it is no Transient Act.
Else why may not they see it in it self? And then either our Justification is
Gods Essence, and they see it in him as his Eternal Being, or else God must be
mutable, as having something to be seen in him de novo, which was not in him
from Eternity. If you say that this Transient Act is Gods Illuminating the
Angelical understanding to know us to be justified; then this supposes that we
are justified already by some former Act (which can be nothing that I know but
the moral Act of his Laws:) For their knowing us to be justified is not a
justifying us, but presupposes us to be what they know us to be. I can think
of nothing else that you can say, except this, that Christ as man may Vocally
(or by some equivalent Transient Act) pronounce us Justified, as he will do at
Judgment. But 1. this is without Scripture. 2. and it is God that justifies.
3. And then how were all the faithful justified before Christ's Incarnation and
Ascension? Or do you think none were justified before?

But I will return to your Exceptions.

You say, [This is but Virtual Justification] which is in Law Title. Answ. 1.
It is Actual Constitutive Justification, and not Virtual only 2. But it is
indeed but Virtual sentential justification. But yet it is of the highest kind
of Virtuality. It is that which makes us rectos in curia, (which I take to be
the nature of our Justification in this life.) And taken divisi^, it seems
more excellent in some respect, then the sentence or declaration it self; for
he that by Purchase first, and Pardon (written) after, makes Offenders just in
Law,) i. e. (non obligatos ad poenam,) seems to do more for them by that act,
then after by pronouncing them just. Though yet this last I know is the most
perfect Justification, taken conjunctim with the rest, as the end to which they
tend, and as that which gives them their full effect.

Your next Objection is, that this Gospel Justification, [is general and
indeterminate to particular persons] Answer. It cannot be more certain or
effectual. For when it is to all, no man has reason to think himself excepted
(who excludes not himself by nonperformance of the conditions.) Every
particular man is comprised in All. And for the determination, the Description
of the person is as certain a way as the naming of him. To give Christ and his
Righteousness to All that will receive him, is as effectual a determinate Gift
to each particular Receiver, as to give him to Peter, Paul, John by name. If a
Pardon be proclaimed, or given in the Laws, to all Offenders that perform such
a condition; is it not as effectual to each person, as if he were named? If a
Father bequeath such Lands or Moneys to all his Children (or a man to all the
poor in the town) on condition that they come by such a day to such a place,
and signify their acceptance and gratitude: is not this as sure and good, as
if they were all named?

Next, You object, [This is performed, before the person justified believes.]
Answer. I have said enough to you of this already. (of Bapt. page 100.) I add
this much: you must distinguish between the Physical act of making this Law,
Promise, Covenant, Grant or Testament: and the Moral Agency of this Law, Grant
or Testament once made. The former was before we Believed: but the later was
not (properly and fully) till after. Do not all Philosophers and Divines in the
world that meddle with it, tell you that this is usual with moral causes, that
they may have all their absolute Entity and vim agendi, long before they produe
their effects? and may be Actu primo, etsi non secundo effectum producente, in
being long before. The Law that determines of your right to your Possession,
or that does give a Reward to every man that kills a wild hurtful beast, or
that condemns every man that murdereth or commits Felony, etc. was in
Being before those persons were born perhaps: And yet it did not hoc agere; it
did not Praemiare, Punire, Praecipere, etc. as to this man before. A pardon
from a Prince to a Traitor, on condition, does not perform the moral act of his
discharge, till he perform the condition, though it were in being before. The
like I may say of a Testament or Deed of Gift: But what need many words in a
case where the Truth is so obvious? If some moral causes may be causes, and
Agere moraliter, or produce their effects, even before they are naturally in
Being, much more may they suspend it, and so produce it long after they are in
Being: Causae enim moralis ea ratio est, ut etiam cum non est actu, sit
efficax, modo habe at (ut loquuntur in scholis) esse cognitums: inquit Rivetus
Disput. 13. de satisfact. Christi. page 282.

Next you say, [Yea it is the same, though none were actually justified.]
Answer. This requires no other answer, then what is given to the former. It is
the same Physice considerata, vel in Entitate naturali: But the moral action of
pardoning and justifying is not the same, nor is at all: A conditional Pardon,
Deed of Gift, Testament, etc. does not at all pardon, or Give, till you perform
the condition. For it is the proper nature of a condition to suspend the act of
the Grant: so that till it be absolute or equal to Absolute, it is not Actual
Remission, Justification, etc.) The reason of all this is, because these Laws,
Testaments or Promises, are but the Lawmakers, Testators or Donors Instruments,
and therefore act when and how he pleases: and it is his pleasure that they
should act no otherwise then as is aforesaid, and as in the Tenor of them he
shall express.

Next you add [To be justified, notes a passion* which presupposes an Action
transient, not immanent, or only Gods purpose to justify:] Answer 1. So far as
the Reception of a Relation may be called a Passion, this is true: And no doubt
you are in the right, that it is not Actus immanens. But now, What transient
Act it is, I remember very few Divines that once tell us; but only in general
say, It is a Transient Act. Now you and I that have adventured to enquire, do
happen to be both singular from others, and differing between our selves, (only
Mr. Rutherford, and some few others I find saying often, that we are pardoned and
justified by the Gospel: by which they seem to mean as I) But for your way of
Justification by a sentence before the Angels, as I never met with any that
judged that to be our Justification by Faith, so as I have said, it seems to me
very groundless and strange. And then, if yours stand not, mine only must, for
any thing that is yet discovered, that I have seen, for I know of none that
tells us of any third,

Your next Objection is the same before answered, that [Gods Promise to
justify, is only a declaration what he will do, and therefore a man is not by
Covenant without a further Act justified, but justifiable.] Answer. Grotius de
satisfact. will tell you, that Promises give right to him to whom they are
made: and that therefore they cannot be reclaimed, though threatenings may. But
if these were only Promises that God will by another Act do this or that for
us, then it were to the purpose that you say: but that you cannot prove. Nor
needs there any other Act, but the moral Action of the Instrument it self to
change our Relations here: Et frustra fit pro plura, etc. Indeed an Act of ours
[Believing] must come in before the effect: but you and I are agreed, that this
is but conditional, and not effective. These Promises therefore being also Gods
Law, Testament (of Christ) Deed of Gift, Covenant, etc. they do not only
foretell an Event to come to pass by some other Action; but they do confer a
Right or make due the benefit or relation, and so effect it; only the Author is
pleased to suspend the effect of his Instrument, till we perform the Condition.
As if by a Lease, or Deed of Sale, there be some Office or Dignity made over to
you: or some command in Army or Court, or Country: or by a Law a Foraigner be
Naturalized or Enfranchized, on such or such a Condition; This Lease or Deed,
or Law does not only foretell, but effect the thing.

You add that [Justification is a Court-term, importing an Act of God as Judge,
whereas his promising is not his Act as Judge, but Rector.] Answer 1. If by a
Court-term, you also mean a Law-term, ( verbum forense or judiciarium in the
full sense) I agree with you. But if you confine it to the sentence as
pronounced, I require Proof; as also proof of any such sentence before
Judgment, particular or general. A Rector is either Supremus or Subaliernus: A
Judge is either supreme above all Laws, as being the Lawgiver, or sub lege.
God is both Rector and Judge, only in the first senses: and by judging, he
Rules; and Rector is but the Genus, whereof Judex is a species. As Rector
supremus* God is the Legislator, and so acts (and justifies by his Laws,
Grants, etc.) as Judge he sentenceth and absolveth those that were first made
just. A man is accused for killing another in fight, at the command of the
Sovereign Power. Is it not as fit and proper a saying, to say [The Law does
justify this man for so doing against all Accusers,] as to say, [The Judge
will justify him*] Nay, Is it not more ordinary? And in a sort, the Supreme or
Sovereign may be said to be (though in a different sense) justified, as well as
an Inferior; when yet the said person in Supremacy has no Judge, nor is to
have any by Law, and so cannot be justified by sentence. God will be justified
in his sayings, etc. as he has in a sort bound himself by his own Laws, that
is, signified his Resolution to observe them; so in the sense of these Laws,
his works are now just, and shall be hereafter so be manifested: but not by any
sentence of a Superior. But this I confess differs from our Justification.

Next you say, [You know not whence it should be that Angels should judge us
righteous, and rejoice therein, but by a sentence passed in Heaven.] Answer. If
you think (and prove) that Angels cannot know us to be righteous, then I will
not affirm that they judge us so. For I presuppose that that they know us to be
so made by some Act before, and therefore they judge us to be as we are. And if
they may know that we are Believers, and know that the New Law justifies all
such, then they may judge us to be justified without any sentence in Heaven,
even as they know when a sinner is converted, and rejoice in it; which
doubtless they may know without a sentence in Heaven pronouncing us converted;
and Gods making them Instruments in conferring his Mercies may make them know.

You say that [ Constitutive Justification, different from Declarative by
sentence, I do not find expressed under the term (Justification:) it would be
considered, whether any other Act beside the sentence, does make a man just,
but giving of faith.] Answer. These two things I shall prove to convince you:
(because this is of some moment.) 1. That some Act there must be to constitute
us just, before or besides the sentence. 2. That neither the sentence nor the
giving of Faith does first and properly constitute us Just.

1. If we be not just before we are judged as just, then Gods Judgment should
not be according to Truth. But Gods Judgment is according to Truth: therefore
we are just before we are so judged. 2. He that has Christ, and the Benefits
of his satisfactory Righteousness given him by the New Law, Covenant, Testament
or Grant of Christ, is hereby constituted righteous. But every Believer has
Christ and the said benefits Given him in and by the Law or Covenant: therefore
he is thereby made or constituted Righteous.

And here by the way take notice, that the New Law or Covenant has two
Offices; the one to Bestow Right to the Benefit: and hereby it makes Righteous:
The other to Declare and manifest openly, and to be the Rule of public
Judgment: and so it does both action morali proclaim believers righteous, and
Virtually sentence them so. And therefore in Romans 10.5. it is called [the
Righteousness which is of the Law] And if the Old Law had a power of making
Righteous, if man could have performed the condition, so also has the New.

2. And that the sentence does not constitute us Just, needs no proof: It is
the work of a Judge by sentence to clear the Guiltless, and not to make them
Guiltless. Pardon indeed may do somewhat to it: but that is not the action of a
Judge as a Judge, but (as you before distinguished) of a Rector (in case of
transgressing Laws.) A Judge pronounces men to be what they first are
according to Law; and not makes them to be righteous who are not. He that says
to the wicked, thou art Righteous, Nations shall curse him; people shall bhor
him: Pro. 24.24. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the
Just, even they both are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. If this were not
so, then we must believe that no man is justified before the day of (particular
or general) Judgment, till you have proved that God sentenceth at a Court of
Angels.

And that the Giving of Faith does not make Righteous (that is, according to
the Law of works) effective, I think you confess. If I thought you did not, it
were very easily proved: Faith being but the condition of our universal
righteousness (which the old Law requires in its stead) cannot be that
Righteousness it self: and some other efficient there must be of our
Justification here.

Next you say [Notwithstanding Christ's Death and the Conditional Covenant before
faith, a person is only justifyable: Conditionalis nihil ponit esse.] Answ. All
this is very true: but not any thing against me. I like well what you say of
Christ's death, because it is (as Aquinas and our Davenant, Usher, etc. say,)
but Causa universalis, vel Remedium omnibus applicabile. It is to prepare for
and merit, and not directly to effect our Justification, (whatsoever the
Antinomians dream:) But the Covenant or Testament is the very efficient
Instrumental cause of Justification: and its Action is Gods Action. Yet its
true that Conditionalis nihil ponit in esse: that is, till the condition be
performed: but then it becomes of equal force to an Absolute Gift and does
ponere in esse: even the same Instrument does it, whose Action till then was
(by the Authors will) suspended.

YOu next pass to another Point (about These. 59.) whether Justification be a
continued Act. And you say that [ being a Transient Act, it cannot be well
called a continued Act, which imports a successive motion between the Terminus
a quo and ad quem, whereas this Act, whether by sentence or Covenant, is not
such a motion, etc.] Answ. 1. All this may be true of a proper natural Action:
but you know that it is only a moral Action which I affirm to be continued, and
of this you know your Rule de motu holds not, except you take Motus largely and
improperly. As passive Justification, or the effect of the Justifying Act is
but a Relation, which is the weakest of Entities; so does it per nudam
resultantiam arise, which is by the weakest of Causalities; The Act of God
giving out and enacting this Law or Covenant at first, was indeed a proper
transient Act, and is ceased: but the moral Action of the Law thus enacted is
continual. The Law of the land, which condemns Delinquents, and justifies
the obedient, does both by a continued moral Act. The Lease of your House or
Lands gives you Title thereto by a continued moral Act. So that this which I
assert, is not Actus repetitus vel renovatus.

You add that [You incline to think that there is but one Justification of a
Person in this life, though frequent Remission of sin.] Answ. In that you judge
as most of the Orthodox do: And I have said nothing to the contrary. I think
also, that as Scripture uses the phrase of oft-forgiving, but seldom of
oft-justifying, so it is safest to speak as Scripture does. Yet as to the
thing, me thinks, that as Remission and Justification do but respectively or
very narrowly differ; so in this case, one may as truly be said to be repeated,
as the other: that is, As there is an universal Remission of all sin past, upon
our first true Believing; which universal Remission is never iterated, but
continued: so is there an Universal Justification of the person at the same
time, by which he is made just, (and in Law so esteemed, pronounced or judged)
by being acquit from the condemning Power of the Law, which (for his sins past
only) was before in force against him. And so if you look to such a Remission
or Justification as wholly changes the state of the person, making him
Pardoned who was before wholly unpardoned, and fully under guilt of all former
sins; or making him justified who was before unjustified, and condemned (in
Law;) neither of these I think, are iterated. But then, as you confess a
frequently renewed pardon for following sins, so I know no reason, but in the
same sense there must be a frequent Justifying: For as our Divines well
conclude, that sin cannot be pardoned before it be committed (for then there
should be pardon without Guilt; for no man is Guilty of sin to come formally;)
so is it as necessary to conclude, that no man is justified from sin before it
be committed; that is, from that which is not; and so is not sin: For then
Justification should go before and without Legal Accusation and Condemnation:
For the Law accuses and condemns no man for a sin which is not committed,
and so is no sin. It is said Acts 13.^9. that (by Christ) we are Justified from
all things, from which we could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Where, as
I desire you to observe that phrase of being Justified by the ^aw, to show it
is an Act of the Law (though sin makes transgressors incapable.) so you see it
is a Scripture phrase to say* we are Justified from sin: And then either there
must be some kind of particular Justification from particular sins after faith,
of the nature of our renewed particular Pardon; or else what will become of us
for them? For sure if the Law be so far in force against the actions of
Believers as to make and conclude them Guilty and Obliged to Punishment (as
much as in it lies) and so to need a frequent pardon (for pardon is a
discharge from Guilt, which is an Obligation to punishment;) then it must needs
be in force to Judge them worthy condemnation, and so to Accuse (and as much as
in it lies to condemn) them; and so they must need also a particular
Justification. But then according to my Judgment, 1. There is a sure Ground
said of both in the Gospel or new Law or Covenant. 2. And the said New Law does
perform it, by the same Power by which it did universally justify and pardon
them at the first. There needs no addition to the Law. The change is in them:
And the Law is said Moraliter ager^ quod antea non actum erat, because of their
new Capacity, necessity and Relation. As if your Fathers Testament do give you
a thousand pound at his Death, and twenty shillings a week as long as you live
after, and so much at your marriage, etc. here this Testament gives you these
new sums (after the first) without any change in it; and yet by new moral Act;
for it was not a proper gift, till the Term expressed, or the condition
performed: and if that term had never come, nor the condition been performed,
you had never had right to it: so I concieve, Gods Gospel Grant or Testament
does renew both our Remission and particular Justification. If Satan say, This
man both deserved death by sining since he Believed (as David) must we not be
justified from that Accusation?

And here let me ask you one Question, which I forgot before about the first
Point. Seeing you think (truly) that Pardon is iterated as often as we sin, by
what Transient Act of God is this done? Does God every moment at a Court of
Angels Declare each sinner in the world, remitted of his particular sin? (for
every moment we commit them.) If you once-see a necessity of judging the New
Covenant or Promise Gods Pardoning Instrument, I doubt not but you will soon
acknowledge as much about Justification. And sure a Legal or written Instrument
is so proper for this work, that we use to call it [A Pardon,] which a Prince
writes for the acquitting of an offender.

Besides, the Gospel daily justifies by continuing our Justification, as your
Lease still gives you Title to your Land.

( Mat. 12.37. is of more then the continuance of Justification, even of
Justification at Judgment.)

THe next Point you come to about the Nature and Object of Faith, you are
larger upon, through a mistake of my words and meaning. I know not therefore
how to Answer your Arguments till I have first told you my sense, and better
stated the Question.

Indeed that in page 11. of Rest, I apprehended my self, so obvious to
misconstruction, that I have corrected it in the second Edition (which is now
printed.) Yet 1. I spoke not of faith as Justifying, but as the condition of
Salvation, which contains more then that which is the condition of our first
justification. 2. I never termed those Gospel-Precepts, which are not in some
way proper to the Gospel. And for the next words [That subjection to Christ is
an Essential part of faith.] I confess I do not only take it for a certain
Truth, but also of so great moment, that I am glad you have bent your strength
against it, and thereby occasioned me to search more thoroughly. But then, if
you think (as you seem to do) that by [Subjection] I mean [Actual Obedience]
you quite mistake me: for I have fully opened my mind to you about this in my
Aphoris. that speak only of the subjection of the Heart; and not of the Actual
Obedience, which is the practice of it. I speak but of the Acceptance of
Christ for our Lord, or the Consent thereto* and so giving up our selves to be
his Disciples, Servants or Subjects. This I maintain to be an Essential part of
justifying Faith, in the strict and proper sense of that word.

Its true that de jure Christ is King of Unbelievers, and so of them that
acknowledge him not to be their King. But in order of nature, the acknowledging
of his Dominion, and consent thereto, and so receiving him to be our King, does
go before our obeying him as our King. As a woman in marriage-Covenant, takes
her Husband, as one whom she must obey add be faithful to: But that taking or
consenting, goes before the said Obedience, as every Covenant before the
performance of it. Yea though the same act should be both an acknowledgement
of, and consent to the Authority, and also an obeying of it; yet it is Quatenus
a consent and acceptance of that Authority, and not as it is an obeying of it,
that I speak of it when I ascribe Justification to it: as faith in the common
sense is certainly an act of Obedience to God: and yet Divines say, it
justify; not as it is Obedience, but as an Instrument. So that by
Heart-subjection to Christ, I mean that act by which we give up our selves to
Christ as his Subjects to be ruled by him; and by which we take him for our
Sovereign on his Redemption-title. But when I judge the word Faith to be taken
yet in a larger sense, comprehending obedience, I never said or thought that so
it is the condition of our first Justification, nor will I contend with any
that thinks the word is never taken so largely, it being to me a matter of small
moment. Now to your Objections.

1. YOU say, [Faith works by Love, etc.] Answ. 1. Faith is sometime taken
strictly for a Belief of Gods word, or an Assent to its Truth. 2. Sometime more
largely for the wills embracing also of the objec as an offered good, besides
the understandings Assent to the Truth of the word which offers it. The
former is by the Apostle often distinguished from Love, and is said to work by
Love; as the lively acts of the understanding produce answerable motions in the
will. But the later is that faith which justifies; to wit, The Receiving of an
offered Christ. And this comprizeth both the Act of the Understanding and Will
(as almost all Protestant Divines affirm.) But both these acts together are
called Faith from the former, which is most strictly so called: because the
great difficulty then lay in Believing the Truth of the Gospel* (and would do
still, if it were not for the advantages of Credit, Education, Custom, etc.)
therefore the whole work is thence denominated: though yet the completing of
the work be in the Will, and the Understandings Act but preparatory thereto. 2.
You must also distinguish between Love to Christ the Mediator, and the Grace of
Charity in general, as it is extended al;so to God as Creator, to Saints, to
all men, etc. And between that first act of Love, which is in our first
receiving of Christ, and the love which we afterward exercise on him: and so I
answer you. 1. That as the Apostle distinguishes between Faith, Hope and Love,
So do I. 2. Faith taken strictly for assent to Divine Testimony, produces love
in every one of the forementioned senses (of the word Love:) 3. Justifying
faith (comprizing the wills acceptance) produces both the grace of Charity, as
it is exercised on other objects, and also the following acts of it toward
Christ the Mediator: And so I acknowledge that Faith works by Love, and that
Love is not faith. But yet whether Love be not in some sense essential to
justifying faith, if you speak only of Love to Christ, and that not as a
distinct grace, but as it is comprised in our Acceptance of him at first, I
shall leave to your consideration, when you have first resolved these things.
1. Whether justifying faith be not an act of the Will as well as the
Understanding? Few but Papists deny it, and not all of them. 2. Whether Christ
himself be not the object of it? Few Protestants will deny it. 3. Whether Good
be not the object of the Will, and so Christ be not willed as Good? None doubts
of it. 4. Whether this willing be not the same as Loving, as love is found in
the rational appetite? Sure Aquinas says so, no man that I know contradicting
it. 5. Whether you can call Affiance, or any other act of the will justifying
faith, excluding this willing, or not principally including it? For 1. This is
the Wills first act toward it object; and will you say that Love goes before
justifying faith, and so before Justification? and such a Love as is distinct
from justifying faith as being no part of it? How then is Love the fruit of
faith, and as Divines say, a consequent of Justification? Yet it is beyond all
doubt, that this Velle or Love to Christ goes before Affiance on him, or any
other act of the Will. vide Aquin. 1.2. Q. 23. a. 33. Et. 1. Q. 20. a. 1 Et
Tolet de anima, l. 3. cap. 9. Q. ^7, 28 Et Ames. contra Gravinchou. page 16. 2.
And can it be imagined that preceding assent, and subsequent Affiance, in
Christ should be conditions of our Justification; and yet the Velle Christum
oblatum, that Willing which we call Consent, Election or Acceptance, which
goes between assent and Affiance, should be excluded as no part of this
condition? 3. Especially considering that Affiance contains diverse acts,
whereof one is of the Irascible of the sensitive, and so is but an imperate act
of the Will, and less noble then that elicite Act (which I plead for,) as well
as Posterior to it: and if Aquin. be not out in his Philosophy, when he so often
says, that fiducia is spes roborata, then our Divines make Hope to justify.

Yet for all this, I have not espoused this saying, that Love to Christ is
Essential to justifying faith: nor will contend with any man that thinks it
unmeet: if we agree in the things of moment* I hate to quarrel about words.

Nor do I think it a meet phrase to say, we are justified by Love, (though in
the sense before mentioned, I think it true,) because it is but a part, or
affection as it were of that reception, by which we are justified, and stands
not in so full a relation to the object received.

And yet, if I had said none of all this, I see not that I need any more then
to deny your consequence, as being wholly ungrounded: For it follows not,
that if it be an essential part, that therefore it must have the Denomination
of the whole: yea, though the whole be said to work by that part. The Brain and
Heart are essential parts of the Body: and yet not to be called the Body; and
it is more proper to say that the body works by the Brain or Heart; or that the
vegetative soul does work by the natural heat and Spirits; then to say, the
Body works by the Body, or the vegetative soul by it self. I will explain all
together in my usual Similitude, which is Dr. Prestons (or rather Paul's) A
condemned Beggar is offered a Pardon, and also to be made a Queen, if she will
but take the Prince for her Husband. Now here put your Questions. 1. Is Love
any part of the Condition of her Pardon and Dignity? Answer, Yes: An essential
part; for Consent is of the Essence of it: and Love is essential to true
consent, to receive any offered good: Not love as it is a Passion, but as it is
an act of the rational Appetite; which is but Velle; And Eligere, Consentire,
Acceptare are nothing else but a respective Willing. 2. But it is not Love as a
Virtue in general, or as exercised on any other object, which is this essential
part of the Condition: but only love to him whom she marries: And so her first
love is necessary to her Pardon and Dignity as begun; and her continued love
(and marriage-faithfulness) is necessary to them* as they are to be continued:
(supposing the Prince to know the heart as Christ does.) Qu. 2. Is it then a
meet phrase to say, that she is pardoned and dignified by loving such a Prince?
Answ. It has some Truth in it, but it is not a fit speech; but rather that it
is by marrying him, because Love is but a part, or as it were an Affection of
that Marriage Covenant or consent, which indeed does dignifie her: Love may be
without marriage, but not Marriage (cordially) without Love. So in our present
case, justifying faith is the very Marriage Consent or Covenant with Christ; It
is therefore fitter to say, we are justified by it, then by love; because the
former expresses the full condition: the latter not: Qu. 3. If love be an
essential part of the Marriage-consent, then may we not as well say, Marriage
causes Marriage, as to say, Marriage causes Love. Answer No. For 1. That Love
which it causes, is the following acts of Love. 2. And the name of Love is
most usually given only to the Passion which is in the sensitive; but not
usually to the mere Velle, the elicite act of the rational appetite. I have
been the more prolix on this, because it serves also for answer to other of
your Objections, especially the third.

2. You object [ Gospel-Precepts are many, if not all, the same with the moral
Law: if justified then by obedience to them; are we not justified by the works
of the Law? etc. Answer. 1. James yields the whole. 2. If you speak of our
Justification at first, by which, of guilty and liable to condemnation, we
become recti in curia, or are acquit, I then yield all that you seek here, viz.
that we are not justified by works. 3. This objection is grounded on your
formentioned mistake of my meaning, as if I thought that justifying faith
contained essentially such obedience or works. 4. We are not justified by works
of the Law, if you mean the Law of works, or by any works which make the reward
to be not of Grace, but of Debt, which are the works that Paul speaks of. 5.
That which you call the moral Law, viz. the bare Precepts of the Decalogue,
taken Division, without the sanction, viz: the Promise or the Commination, is
not the Law, but one part of the Law: and the other part, viz. the sanction
adjoined, if diversified, makes it two distinct Laws, though the Duty commanded
be the same. The Law that commands Socrates to drink Cicutam, is not the same
with that which should command a sick man to drink some for a cure. 6. That our
Justification is continued, on condition of our sincere obedience, added to our
faith, I maintain with James. 7. Will you answer your own objection, and you
tell me what to answer: Faith is a duty of the moral Law: if we are justified
by faith, then we are justified by a work of the Law. I know you will not evade
as those that say, Faith is not a work, but a Passion: nor as those that say,
we are justified by it not as a work; but as an Instrument: for I have heard
you disclaim that. If you say it is not as a work, but as a condition by the
free Lawgiver appointed to this end, then you say as I do, both of faith, and
secondarily of works. For what Divine denies works to be a condition of
Salvation, or of the final Justification? or of our present Justification as
continued, vel nor amittendi Justificationem jam recaptam, as Conr. Bergius
says; I know but one other evasion left in the world which I once thought none
would have adventured on; but lately an acute Disputant (with me) maintains,
that faith is not conditio moralis, vel ex voluntate constituentis, but
Conditio physica vel ex natura rei. But I think I shall easily and quickly
disprove this opinion.

Rababs and Abraham's works were works of the New Law of Grace, and not of the
old Law of works.

In a word, As there is a two fold Law, so there is a two fold Accusation and
Justification: when we are accused as breakers of the Law of works, that is, as
sinners in common sort, and so as liable to the penalty thereof, then we plead
only Christ's satisfaction as our Righteousness, and no work of our own: But when
we are Accused of final nonperformance of the conditions of the New Law, that
is of being Rejectors of Christ the Mediator, we are justified by producing our
faith and sincere obedience to him. The former Paul speaks of; and James of the
latter. You may see Divines of great Name saying as I in this, as Mead, Deodate
on James the 2. but most fully Placaus in These. Salmuriens. These. de Justific.
etc.

To your third Objection, That Faith, Repentance, Hope and Love (as before
explained) are distinguished, I easily yield you. But where you say (Faith and
Love have different Objects, therefore one is no essential part of the other) I
answer, That faith in Christ, and Love to the Saints (which your Texts mention)
have different Objects, I soon confess. But faith in Christ (as it is the first
Act of the Will) and love to Christ, have one and the same Object, beyond all
doubt.

Your fourth I wholly yield, if you speak of faith strictly, or as it
Justifies, and not in a large improper sense.

Your fifth is grounded on the forementioned mistake of my meaning. And there
needs no further answer, but only to tell you, that though sincere obedience to
all Christ's Laws be a part of the condition of our Justification as continued
and consummate at Judgment; yet it follows not that every particular duty must
be done* no more then that Adam must obey every particular Law before he were
actually just. It is sufficient that there be no other defect in our Obedience,
but what may stand with sincerity. The same Precept may command, or make Duty
to one, and not to another, and so be no Precept as to him. A man that lives
but an hour after his conversion is, bound sincerely to obey Christ according
to his Law: but he is not bound to build Churches, nor to do the work of twenty
years. Christ may be received as King, (and is) in the same moment in which he
is received as Justifier; and in that reception we covenant to obey him, and
take him for our Lord to the death; but not to obey him on earth when we are
dead; for we are then freed from these Laws, and come under the Laws of the
Glorified.

To your sixth I answer, The Texts alleged have no show of contradicting the
Point you oppos;se. One says, we are justified by his Blood: But does it
thence follow, (therefore not by Believing in him or receiving him as King, are
we made partakers of it.) His Blood is the Purchasing cause, but we enquire
after the condition on our part. The other Text says, (through faith in his
Blood.) But 1. it says not only in his Blood. 2. And his blood is the Ground
of his Dominion as well as of his Justifying us: for by his blood he bought all
into his own hands: For to this end he Died, Rose and Revived, that he might be
Lord of Dead and Living. Romans 14.9. It may be therefore through faith in his
Blood, as the chief part of the satisfaction, and yet necessarily also through
faith in himself, or the Reception of himself as the Christ. 3. Yet does the
Apostle most conveniently say, (through faith in his blood) rather then
(through faith in his Dominion or Government,) because when he speaks of Faith,
he speaks Relatively: not (as some understand it) by Faith meaning Christ, but
using the name of that Act which fitliest and fulliest relates to its Object;
and so intending the Object more principally then the Act. And as it is fitter
to say, that (we are Justified by Christ's blood,) then that (we are Justified
by his Kingly Power,) therefore the Apostle rather speaks of faith in his
blood, as neerliest relating to the Object. Yet, as he excludes not Christ's
obedience, (for by his obedience many are made Righteous) nor faith in his
obedience, and in his whole humiliation as well as his blood; and in his
Resurrection, and Intercession and Exaltation; so not in his Kingly Office.
Look back on the former Example to make this plain. A poor condemned woman is
delivered and Dignified by marrying a Prince that has redeemed her on that
condition. When she speaks of her Deliverance, she will say, [I am delivered by
the Bounty, Goodness or Redemption of my Prince, and so by marrying him that in
mercy Redeemed me.] rather then [I am delivered by marrying a Prince to Rule
me.] Because in the former she more fitly and fully expresses more of the
cause of her Deliverance: Much less will she think it a fit speech to say, I am
delivered by marrying an Avenger of his enemies, a Condemner, a Punisher, etc.)
as you are pleased to speak in this our case. And yet who doubts, but her
marrying or taking him for her Husband hereafter to Rule her, as well as
presently to Deliver her, is the very true Condition on her part of her
Deliverance? Yea, and if you speak not only of her Deliverance, but of her
Dignity (being enriched, Honored and made a Queen,) it is the fittest phrase
to say ( it was by her marrying a Prince.) And so if you speak not only of
Pardon and Justification (which import our Deliverance in statum quo prius,)
but also of our Adoption to be sons, and Kings, and Heirs with Christ, it is no
unfit phrase to say, This is by our marrying King Jesus; or by receiving Christ
as the King by Redemption.

All the Benefits which we Receive from Christ (which follow Union) such as are
Pardon, Justification and Adoption, do flow from our Union with himself which
precedes them. This Union is by Faith: We are united to him as to a Head,
Husband and Prince, and not only as a Justifier? therefore from him received as
a Head, Husband and Prince, do these Benefits of Justification and Adoption
flow.

To your seventh Objection I answer, by denying the latter part of your
Antecedent [ that Scripture nowhere makes (Christ's Dominion you say, but)
Christum Dominum (you should say,) the Object of justifying Faith.] I never
thought that Christ's Dominion, nor yet his Redemption was the proper Object of
the chiefest act of Justifying Faith. But Christ himself as Lord and as
Redeemer is. I prove it, 1. Christ is the proper Object of justifying Faith (as
I shall anon prove.) But the name Christ signifies as directly and fully his
Kingly Office as his Justifying. If you include not his being King, you Receive
him not as Christ.

2. To Receive him as Redeemer is to Receive him as King* For his very
Redeeming was a Purchasing them into his own hands, ( Joh. 13.3. Matthew. 28.18
Joh. 17.2. and 3.35. Luke 10.22. Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Joh. 5.26, 27. Romans 14.9
etc.) though not only so.

3. Psalm 2. Kiss the Son left he be angry, etc. Kissing, or submitting to, and
Receiving the Son as King (for so the whole Psalm expounds it) is the condition
of escaping wrath; therefore of Pardon (for Poena and Venia sunt aduersa:)
therefore of our Justification.

4. Matthew. 11.27. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, (Guilt
is the great load:) But under what Notion will Christ be come to? Take my yoke
and burden, etc. Learn of me, etc. and ye shall find rest to your souls. Rest!
from what? from that they were burdened with: and that was Guilt, among other
things: and to remove the burden of the Guilt of sin or curse of the Law, is to
Pardon and Justify. (I hope you will not say, that the only Burden that Christ
offers here to ease them of, was the pharisees rigorous Interpretation of the
Law, as I was told you expound it.)

5. Luke 19.27. These mine enemies that would not I should Reign over them,
etc. If Rejecting Christ as King be the condemning sin according to the tenor
of the New Law; then Accepting him as King is part of the condition of
Justification. The Consequence is plain, because the said Rejection condemns,
as it is the nonperformance of that condition which must be performed to the
avoiding of condemnation. More Scriptures might be brought; but the first
Argument alone is suficient, if there were no more.

To your eighth Objection I answer. The Object of justifying Faith is Christ
himself principally; and the word as both Revealing, Offering him, Promising,
Threatening: but it is not Christ commanding, first, but Christ as King to
Command. This is answered in the former.

To your ninth Objection I answer; when I say that [Receiving Christ as Lord is
one part of Justifying Faith,] I speak not of the Act morally, as if it had two
parts where it is entire: It is but one moral Act to Accept of whole Christ (if
you speak simply of Accepting, as distinct from preceding Assent and subsequent
Affiance.) But I call it (part) in reference to the Object, whence you say
arises the Difference: Though Christ's Office of Mediator be but one; yet from
the works of that office we look on his Governing, and Pardoning or Justifying
as distinct parts: and thence I call this act of faith (a part.) For that you
say of obedience following faith and as an effect and sign, I easily yield it.

But where you say, that [Trust is the Genus where the Object is an incomplex
term] I answer; if you take faith as it is justifying (or the condition of our
Justification) and not in the strictest sense, so it has more Acts then one
about the incomplex term. And Affiance is the Genus of one only. To accept (an
offered Savior,) is an Act precedent in order of Nature before any other act
of the Will; that is, the elicite Acts are before the Imperate: and Trust is
not the Genus of this. Besides, Trust is no one act, but many, and that of both
faculties, and a Negation of several acts besides. A certain Argument that it
is no one single Act that justifies, even in their Judgment that say Affiance
is the justifying Act; when the Scripture speaks of faith as Affiance, it
includes Acceptance or consent, which go before Affiance in order of nature;
Yea some of our most Learned, Accurate Divines, when they say Affiance is the
justifying faith, do either by Affiance mean only that elicite act of the Will,
which I call Acceptance, Consent or Election, or else (rather) they mean
several acts, whereof this is one. So Amesius Medul. l. 1. cap. 3.. 13. Fides
is it a qua credimus non tantum Deum, aut Deo, sed in Deum, est vera ac propia
fiducia: non qua hac voca notatur certa and absoluta persuasio de bono futuro,
sed qua significat Electionem and Apprehensionem sufficientis ac idonei medi^,
ac in qou persausio and expectatio talis fundatur. Quo sensu dicuntur homines
fiduciam habere in sapientia, potentia, Amicis ac opibus suis, Psalm. 78.22. If
therefore you understand by Affiance many Acts, of which velle Christum
oblatum, (called Acceptance, quia volumus objectum ut oblatum; and Election,
quia volumus medium h^s, rejectis aliis; or Consent, quia volumnus ex alterius
Promotione qui prius volui^,) is the first and chief, (of those of the Will) as
Amesius does, then I am of your mind. If you say that Velle vel Acceptare is
not credere vel fidem babere in the common notation of the word: I answer 1. It
includes Velle as its principal Act in the common use of the word, when its
object is an Incompelx term: but indeed it includes more also. 2. Words of
Knowledge in Scripture do imply Affection we say: but Will much more. 3. I
answer in the words of Amesius, Medul. l. 1. c. 3.. 2, 3 Credere vulgo
significat actum intellectus Assensum testimonio praebentis: sed quoniam
consequenter volunt as moveri solet, and extendere sese ad amplectendu^ bonum
it a probatum, ideirco fides ^tiam hunc Voluntatis actum designat satis apt,
quomodo hoc in loco necessario intelligitur. Est enim receptio bond sub ratione
boni, and intima unio cum code^, John 1.12. Hinc fides fertur in bonum; qoud
per istam fit nostrum, est actus Electionis: est actus Totius hominis; qua
actui Intellectus nullo modo convenient. John 6.35.

Yea further, I doubt not but where this act of the Will is in sincerity, there
is Justification certainly consequent: but the term Affiance contains some acts
which Divines say, do only follow Justification: which also Amesi. seems to
acknowledge, ibid. 21. Quod vero fiducia dicitur fructus fidei, verum est de
fiducia prout respicit Deum in futurum, and est spes f^rma, sed prout respicit
Deum in Christo in praesentia se offerentem, est ipsa fides.

Yea the same Amesius tells us Medul. lib 2. cap. 5. That five things concur
even to that Belief which we call fides Divina; viz. 1. Notitia rei a Deo
testatae. 2. ^ffectio pia erga Deum quae facit ut maxim valeat apud nos ipsius
Testimonium. 3. Assersus qui praebetur veritati test atae propter hanc
affectionem erga Deum qui est ejus testis. 4. Aquiescentia in Deum ad illud
quod prop^nitur consequendum. 5. Electio vel apprehensio rei ipsius, quae in
Testimonio nobis exhibetur. So that even this faith has many acts. Yea, and he
adds, Primum horum est in intellectu: sed non constituit fidem, etc. secundum,
quartum and quintum sunt in voluntate, and constituunt fidem, prout est virtus
and actus religionis. T^rtium (viz. assensus) est in intellectu, sed prout
movetur, a voluntate; neque est proprie fidei virtus, s^d effectum. So that
this Doctrine which 1. makes three acts of faith in the very will, 2. and makes
the intellectual acts (even assent) to be but an effect of faith, and not the
virtue, is far from yours (though I scruple not to take in assent with the
rest, for all it is in the Intellect,) and if these be all in that faith which
is a holy virtue, much more must that which justifies contain as much. And
indeed to place justifying faith only in the intellect, is somewhat strange for
those that make it the principal Grace, when Philosophers will not give it the
name of a moral Virtue. For in the understanding are only intellectual Habits;
but moral virtues are all placed in the Will, or sensitive appetite (for that
quarrel I will pass by, whether they be only in the sensitive as Burgers^icius,
etc.) If any therefore wonder that I place faith in so many acts, and yet make
one the chief compleative Act, I have yet further this most accurate Divine
saying the very same as I. Perfectio autom fidei est in Electione aut
apprehensione illa, qua bonum Propositum fit nostrum. Hinc fidei natura ^ptime
explicatur in Scriptura cum fideles di^untur adhaerer^ D^o, Jos. 23.6. Act.
11.23. and vi^^ veritatis ^ligere, Psalm. 119.30, 31. Where you see also that by
Affiance and Adhaesion, Amesius principally means the very Elicit act of the
Will as Election is. And indeed he that observes but how the Scripture
throughout does hang man's salvation or damnation on his Will mainly, (so far as
it may be said to depend on our own acts,) rather then on any acts of the
understanding (but only as they refer and lead to those of the Will) might well
wonder, that justifying saving faith, the great needful act, should be only
intellectual, and not chiefly in or by the Will, as well as all the rest. Ye
will not come to me that ye may have life: How often would I, and ye would not?
These mine enemies that would not I should reign over them, etc. Whoever will,
let him take or buy freely, etc. Still almost all is laid on the Will: and yet
is not Faith in the Will? Assent may be compelled by evidence of Truth, and so
be unvoluntary. And so a man may be a Believer thus against his Will: and if
this will serve, men may be saved against their Wills. I know some think it
enough that the Will commands the understanding to believe. But even thus says
Amesius, Medul. l. 2. c. they place the first principle in the Will. Qui fidem
collocant iu intellectu, necessariam tamen fatentur esse aliquam motion^^
vol^ntatis ad assensum illum praebendum: quemadmodum i^ fide humana voluntarium
esse dicitur adhibere fidem alicui; si vero a voluntate pend^at fides, necesse
est ut primu^ principium fidei sit in voluntate, ^. 20 But this is only
commanding the performance, and so it is thus no elicit act (for Aquinas and
others conclude, that Voluntas est Principium determinans actus humanos quo ad
exercitium actus; intellectus autem quo ad actus specificationem.) But it is
moreover the Wills Elicite Act that I assert. And as I said, this imperium
voluntatis may possibly be wanting, and belief be involuntary for the main. Let
me add but one more consideration, (for I perceive my tediousness) If
Infidelity as it is a Privation of saving faith, and so is the condemning sin,
be in the Will as well as in the Intellect, then faith must be in the Will too:
But Infidelity is in both. Ergo. etc. That Infidelity which is the Privation of
mere assent, is rather said to be willing, then in the Will; but that which is
opposite to justifying faith, is in the Will. Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies
that would not I should reign over them, bring them hither, etc. says Amesius
Medul. l. 2. cap. 5.. 48. Opponuntur ista (Infidelitas etc. fidei, non tantum
qua tollunt Assensum illum Intellectus qui est ad fidem necessarius: sed etiam
qua inferunt and includunt privationem illius Elections and apprehensionis
fidei quae est in Voluntate.

Surely an unwillingness to accept Christ for our Lord and Savior, is no small
part of the condemning sin, which we therefore call the rejecting of Christ;
The treading him under foot; Neglecting so great Salvation; Not willing to come
to Christ for life; Making light of him, when they are invited to the marriage,
( Mat. 22.) and making excuses: Not-kissiing the son, ( Psalm. 2.) with many the
like, which import the Wills refusal of Christ himself, and not only its
unwillingness to believe the Truth of the Promise or Declaration of the Gospel.

To your tenth Objection I answer by denying the consequence; we speak of the
soul as rational, and not as sensitive or vegetative. When the understanding
and Will receive Christ, the whole soul does it: that is, every faculty, or the
soul by a full entire motion in its several Actings to the Object presented,
both as true and good. Your Joy, Hope, Fear, are in the sensitive: And Love as
a Passion, and as commonly taken. And for Memory, take it for an act of the
Understanding; or of Understanding and Imagination conjunct; or for a third
faculty as please your self, it will not breed any difficulty in the case. But
whether Fear be properly a Receiving of Christ, or any Object as Good, I much
question. I take it rather for the shunning of an evil, then the Reception of
Good. So much for your Objections.

I will next, as impartially as I can, consider your Answers to what I laid
down for the proof of the Point in Question. But first I must acknowledge* that
I have given you and others great advantage against the Doctrine of that Book,
by the immethodicalness, and neglect of Art, and not giving the Arguments in
form, which I then thought not so necessary as now I perceive it is: (for I was
ready to yield wholly to Gibeeufs reasons against formal arguing, Praefat. ante
lib. 2. de Liberate.) The present expectation of death caused me to make that
haste, which I now repent: yet, though I see some oversights in the manner of
expression, I see no cause to change my mind in the Doctrine of it.

Also I must desire you to remember here, that the proof lies on your part,
and not on mine: Affirmanti incumbit probatio. It is acknowledged by almost
all, that fides qua Justificat, Justifying faith is a Receiving of Christ as
Lord, and not only as Savior or Justifier: And you and I are agreed on it,
that Faith justifies not as an Instrument, but as a Condition: so that they
who will go further here, and maintain that yet Faith justifies only As it
Receives Christ as Justifier, or as Savior, and not as King, must prove what
they say. If I prove 1. that Faith justifies as the Condition, on performance
whereof the Gift is conferred. 2. And that this Faith which is the Condition,
is the Accepting of Christ as Christ, or the Anointed King and Savior: (both
which are yielded me;) I must needs think that I have proved that the Receiving
Christ as King, does as truly Justify, as the Receiving him as Priest or
Justifier: (Yet I had rather not say that either Justifies, (because 1. it is
no Scripture phrase, 2. and seems to import an Efficiency*) but rather, that
[we are justified by it,] which imports here but a conditionality, and is the
Scripture phrase.) Till you have proved your exclusion of faith in one respect
from the Justifying Office, and your confinement of it to the other, my proof
stands good: I give you the entire condition: and ubi Lex non distinguit, non
est distinguendum; multo minus dividendum. And though those that assert the
proper Instrumentality of faith in Justifying, or else the mere natural
conditionality, may have something to say for their Division; (though with foul
absurdities) Yet what you can say, (who have escaped those conceits) I cannot
imagine. Me thinks, if faith Justify, as the condition of the Grant or
Covenant, and this condition be the Receiving of Christ as Lord and Savior, it
should be impossible to exclude the receiving Christ as King, from Justifying,
till you first exclude it from the said conditionality. A Quatenus ad omne
valet consequentia. To Justify therefore As the condition (on which the
Promise gives Christ, and with him Justification,) must needs infer that we are
justified by all whatsoever has such a conditionality. Yet (as I said before)
when we intend to express, not only or principally the Act of the Receiver, but
also, or principally, the Grace of the Giver, then it is a fitter phrase to
say, we are Justified by faith in his Blood, or by Receiving Christ the Savior
and Justifier: because it fulliest and fitliest expresses that Grace which we
intend, (and thus Paul often does.) So that they who distinguish between Fides
quae Justificat, and Fides qua Justificat and admit that Act into the former,
which they exclude from the latter, must prove what they say. (Fides qua
justificat, non Recipit Christum vel ut Regem vel sacerdotem, sed tantum
Justificat. i. e. Qua est Conditio, non est Receptio: Nec qua Recipit
Justificat; i. e. Qua Receptio, non est Conditio: Materia and forma non sunt
confundenda. Actus fidei est quasi materia, vel Aptitudo tantum ad officium
conditionalitatis: Distinctio igitur ipsa est inepta.) Now to your Answers:
(Pardon this prolixity.)

First I must tell you, that by that phrase [the whole soul] I mean the entire
motion of the soul by Understanding and Willing, to its Object both as True and
Good: For I know the whole soul may be said to understand in every Intellectual
Action, and to will in every act of willing. But when it only understands or
Assents, and not wills, it does not Act fully according to its Power, nor
according to the nature of its Object, when the Goodness is neglected, and the
Truth only apprehended. And it is not a complete motion, seeing the Acts of the
understanding are but introductory or preparatory to those of the Will, where
the motion of the Rational soul is complete. And so my Argument stands thus: If
Justifying faith be the Act both of the understanding and the Will, then it is
not one single act only: But etc. Ergo, etc. Prob. Anteced. Justifying faith is
the Receiving of Christ: but Christ is Received by the Understanding and Will;
(by the former incompleatly, by the latter completely:) therefore Justifying
faith is the Acting both of the Understanding and Will. Probatur Minor. Christ
must be Received as Good, and not only his Word (or himself) as true: therefore
he must be Received by the Will as well as the Understanding: for Goodness is
the object of the Will.

Here you answer 1. by confessing, that Faith is called a Receiving of Christ:
2. by interpreting that speech [He is Received by the receiving his Word, which
is received by Assent.] This is worth a fuller enquiry, because the discovery
of the proper Object of Faith, will show the proper Act. The Intellectual Act
[Assent) has for its Objectum formale the Veracity of God, or the Authority of
Gods Revealing or Testifying: This is not it that we enquire after. The
material Object (for we must use the Schools terms in this distinction, though
perhaps fitter might be found,) is 1. Proximius; that is, the moral Verity of
the Testimony or Word. 2. Vlterius, the Metaphysical Verity of the Things
signified (as Christ's Person, Godhead, Incarnation, Resurrection, etc.) The
former is but the means to the latter, and for its sake, and not for its self.
In regard of this act of Assent, you may say as you do, that Christ is Received
by receiving his Word: because the Belief of the Truth of the Enuntiation is
the means of our apprehending the truth of the Thing propounded. But then 1.
These are yet two distinct Acts as the Objects are distinct. 2. And this
Intellectual Act is called a Receiving of the Truth Believed but imperfectly
because it leads to that Act of the Will which (in morality) is more fitly and
fully called a Receiving: and therefore if Assent produce not that Acceptance
or consent of the Will, it cannot fitly it self be called a Receiving of
Christ. (For of the Intellects Reception of the Intelligible Species, I suppose
we neither of us speak.) The material Object of Justifying faith as it is in
the Will, is 1. Principal, and Adaequate, which is Christ himself. 2.
Subservient or Instrumental, which is the Covenant, Promise, or testamentary
Gift, in and by which Christ is offered and Given. These are two distinct Acts,
as the Accepting of a Testament, and of the Legacy: of a Pardon written, and
the real Pardon thereby signified: or of the Oath of Allegiance, and of the
Prince to whom we swear. But because of the Relation between the one and the
other, Faith may be called a receiving of Christ, or a receiving of the Gospel.
Yet so, as still the proper principal Object is Christ, and the Gospel but
^ediate, as to him. These are my thoughts. Now (if I am able to understand you)
your words import, that in your Judgment, Christ is received two ways: 1. by
Faith, and that is only by Assent: and this is only by receiving his Word: that
is, in Believing it to be True. 2. By other Graces; and those I think, you
refer to the Wills receiving. Against this opinion I further allege, 1. Almost
all Protestant Divines acknowledge faith to be the Act (or rather Acts) of both
faculties, even Dr. Downame not excepted (and Ca^^ro himself speaks sometime
darkly) insomuch that Melancthon, Joan* Cr^cius and many more make it the
judgment of Protestants in opposition to Popery. And so does Amesius in
Bellarm. Enerv. though he judge it (as Camero) not accurate, in M^dul. l. 1. c.
3. sect 22. Yea he that though it must be but in one faculty, chooses to place
it only in the Will, and excludes Assent, as being called faith quia parit
fidem. Excellent Davenant says, Insactu fidei justifit antis Totu Anima se
convertit ad causam justificantem. Determine. Q. 38. page 174. And again, Fides
illa quam scriptura justificantem agnoscit, habet in se complicatum actum
Voluntatis and Intellectus. Determine. Q. 37. page 166* Again, Neque nobis
absurdum sed valde consentaneum videtur, actum illum quo tota anima purificatur
and Justificatur, ad Totam animam pertinere: ita ut in nudo intellectu habeat
initium; in Voluntate complementum ibidem. Again, Quod Philosophantur
Voluntatem and Intellectum esse duas potentias reipsa distinctas, dogma
philosophicum est, ab omnibus haud receptum; and Theologicis dogmatibus
firmandis aut infirmandis fundamentum minime idoneum* Idem ibid.

2. Assent is not any full moral Receiving of Christ: But faith (which
Justifies) is a full moral Receiving of Christ, ( Job 1.12.) therefore Assent
alone is not the faith that justifies. I know there is a Metonymie in the word
Receive (because in strict speech in Physics, Recipere est pati) But it is so
usual and near, that in morality it is taken for a proper speech, to call the
Acceptance of an offered good [A Receiving.]

3. There is such a thing as the proper accepting of Christ, required as of
flat necessity to Justification and Salvation: But this acceptance is not in
Scripture called by the name of any other Grace: therefore it is taken for an
Act of faith. The Maj. I hope no Christian will deny. For when Christ is
offered to the world as their Savior, Redeemer, Teacher, King-Husband; who can
think that the accepting of him is not required, yea even in the offer? Not a
physical Reception which some absurdly and dangerously dream of, but a moral;
as when a people take a man for their King or Teacher; or a woman takes a man
for her Husband. And for the Minor: Receiving Christ offered is not usually
expressed in the term, Hope, Joy, Charity, Repentance; therefore it is included
in the word Faith (unless you can name some other Grace which it is usually
expressed by.)

4. The Grace by which we are united to Christ is Faith: But it is receiving
Christ by which we are so united to him; therefore it is faith which is the
receiving of Christ. I suppose none will deny that it is Christ himself that we
must be united to by believing, and not the Word or Promise; and that it is
receiving Christ which unites us to him, is obvious both from the language of
Scripture, and the nature of the thing. A People is united to their Prince, as
the head of the Republique, and a Church to their Teacher, and a woman to her
Husband, by the Wills consent or acceptance, and not properly* (but only
initially, preparatorily, imperfectly and improperly, and if it be alone, not
at all) by believing the Truth of their words. Amesius says, Medul. l. 1. c.
3.. 18 Fides etiam cum sit primus actus vitae nostrae, qua Deo in Christo
vivimus, consistat necesse est in unione cum Deo, quam nullo modo facere potest
Assensus adhibitus veritati quae est de Deo.

5. By faith it is that we give up our selves to be Christ's Disciples,
Subjects, Members; (For Scripture ascribes not this to other Graces usually or
chiefly. And to take him for our Savior and Head, and give up our selves as
his redeemed and Members, is all one work.) But it is not by Assent only,
chiefly or fully at all, that we give up our selves to Christ as Disciples,
Members, etc. Therefore it is not by Assent properly or fully that we receive
Christ. So Amesius ubi supra,. 19. Crediturus etiam porro cum ex miseriae
sensu, and omnimo^ae liberationis, cum in se, tum in aliis defectu, necesse
habeat se dedere Deo in Christo tanquam Servatori sufficienti and fideli,
Deditionem istam facere non potest ullo modo per Assensum Intellectus, sed per
Consensum Voluntatis. And indeed I think this Dedition or self-delivery to be
part of Faith: and that the covenanting in heart with God in Christ, is the
very justifying faith, taking him for ours, and giving up our selves to him as
his: and the external Covenanting is the profession of Faith: and that Baptism
is the marriage-solemnization, and engaging sign and means.

6. That Act which cannot be discerned in a Saint (in it self) from what may be
in the wicked, is not the receiving of Christ (fully or properly) which
justifies: But the Act of Assent to the Truth of the Gospel, as it is in a
Saint, cannot in it self be discerned from what may be in the wicked. Therefore
the Act of Assent is not the Receiving of Christ which justifies.

The Major is hence evident: In that justifying faith being the condition of
our Justification, must needs be the great Mark to know by, whether we are
justified or no: But if it could not be known to be sincere it self, in vain is
it made a Mark to know our state by: yea or a Condition, almost, when a man can
never tell when he performs it. The Minor I have endeavored to prove in an
Additional Chap. to the third part of my Book of Rest, to which for brevity, I
refer you. Dr. Stoughton, I have there showed you, says as I: A^esius says,
Medul. l. 1. c. ^.. 4. qua^vis fides praesuppmat semper notitia^ Evangelii,
nulla tamen datur in quoqua^ cognitio salutifera, and ab illa quo in quibusdam
non salvandis reperitur, diversa, nif^ consequenter ad actum istu^ voluntatis,
and ab ipso dependens. Job. 7.17. and 8.31.32. 1 John. 2.3. I doubt not but (in
the Intensness of Degree) there is a difference between the Intellectual acts
(as Knowledge and Assent) in a Saint and a wicked man: but if any think that
they are in themselves discernable, I would he would tell me one Mark of the
difference. In their different Effects on the Will, I know they are discernable.

7. If you acknowledge that other Graces receive Christ as well as Faith, and
receiving of Christ does make him ours, and so justify; then you must
acknowledge that other Graces justify as well as faith; (yea not secondarily
only, but as Principally as Faith:) But that you will be loath to do. The
consequence will not be avoided, but by showing that there is a twofold
receiving of Christ, and that one justifies, and the other not: which when you
have proved from Scripture, I will yield: but then at least I shall gain this,
that receiving Christ justifies not properly ex natura actus, sed ex voluntate
Ordinantis: and if I get that, I get the main part of the cause in controversy.

8. Affiance is judged by Divines to be an Act of the Will: But Affiance is
judged by the same Divines to be the justifying Act: Therefore they judge that
the justifying Act (and consequently the Reception of Christ) belongs to the
Will.

9. The Velle or Elicite act of the Will which I insist on, is the very first
Act, and goes before Affiance (as it denotes any other Act of the Will:)
Therefore either this Velle must be the justifying Faith and Reception of
Christ, or else they must say that there is a saving reception of Christ that
goes before the justifying or Reception: which sure they will not grant, that
make that Faith the actus primas vitae spiritualis.

10. Lastly, The opinion seems to me so Improbable, without and against reason,
and so dangerous [that God does assign one only Act of the soul to the Office
of justifying, especially the act of assent] that I dare not entertain it
without proof It is improbable that in a Moral, Political, Theological Matter,
the Holy Ghost should speak, as if it were in the strictest discourse of
Physics. It is improbable that God should speak to man in such a Moral
discourse, so as no men use to speak, and therefore so as men could not,
without a further explication understand. Does he that speaks of receiving a
man to be our Husband, King, Master, etc. mean it of one only Act? (though I
know Consent is the chief.) Or he that gives any great matter on Condition of
such Receiving, Does he mean that any one single Act is that Condition? Much
less Assent.

Or is there any likelihood, that when other Acts do receive the same Object,
Christ, in a way of as high honoring him, that yet God should confine
Justification to one Act, setting by all the rest? Yea when the rest are
acknowledged to be part of the Condition? (and Receiving as Lord, to be the
fides quae?) I know God is not bound to give man a Reason of his Laws: but yet
he usually does it: and we must take heed of asserting that to be Gods Law,
which appears unreasonable, till we can prove what we say. Yea what a dangerous
loss will Christians then be at, who will hardly ever be able to find out this
single Act, what it is and when they have it? And he that knows how quick
Spirits are in their actings, and withal how little able we are to observe and
discern them, perhaps many doubt, whether you can find a name for any single
act of a soul, or know when it is one Act, and when many. In the forementioned
Instance, A woman is condemned for Treason; the Prince writes to her, that he
has dearly paid her Ransom and will not only deliver her, but also make her
his Queen, if she will Believe this, and Receive him accordingly; If now the
Lawyers should dispute the case, what single act it was that she was Delivered
and Dignified by, whether an act of the Intellect only, or of the Will only?
whether Assent only, or Affiance? Yea whether agendo vel patiendo (as many here
do.) would not men think that learning made them dote? And I would entreat you
to consider, whether it were Gods Design in the Gospel, to advance any one Act
of man's soul above the rest, and so to honor it? or rather to advance the Lord
Jesus whom faith Receives? as Mr. Gataker tells Sal^marsh, Many speak
dangerously in over-magnifying their own faith, when they should magnify
Christ whom it relates to. I know the great thing that sticks with some, is
that the Scripture often seems to describe faith by the Act of Assenting. But
consider, so it does in other places by Trusting, Resting, Taking, Receiving,
Coming, Eating and Drinking, (which Metaphors must needs signify acts of the
Will,) etc. which show that it is not any single Act. Again, as I said, the
whole is denominated from the first leading and most difficult Act: the
Language of Scripture is much fitted to the times and temper of the persons to
whom it was spoken. Now the Jews did generally and gladly acknowledge that the
Messiah or Mediator must be Received, Welcomed, Honored, Loved, submitted to:
but they could not Believe that Christ was he; And this was foolishness to the
Gentiles also, as well as a stumbling block to the Jews; that one that lived
and walked among them, and seemed a poor contemptible man, and at last was
crucified, should be God and the great Redeemer and Lord of the world. I
tremble sometimes to think, if we had lived our selves in those times, how hard
it would have been even to us to believe; so that when the great Difficult act
is named, the other (Consent and Affiance) are still employed, and included. I
will end with Amesius true observation to this purpose, Medul. l. 1. c. 3.
Quamvis in scripturis aliquando Ascensus veritati quae est de Deo and Christo,
Joh. 1.50. habetur pro vera fide; includitur tamen semper specialis fiducia:
atque adeo omnibus in locis ubi sermo est de salutari fide, vel praesupponitur
fiducia in Messiam, and indicatur tantum determinatio, vel applicatio ejus ad
personam Christi; vel per Assensum illum designatur, tanquam effectum per suam
causam, Joh. 11.25, 26, 27. ( 20.)

The second Argument which you answer, lies thus. If Faith be the work of the
Heart and the whole Heart, then it is not only in the Understanding, but in the
Will also. But the former is the words of Scripture, Act. 8.37. Romans 10.10.
Ergo, etc.

Here you answer that [ the whole heart notes not every inward faculty, but (as
often) sincerity.] To which I Reply, 1. The word [whole] I yield to Illyricus
signifies the sincerity, which is usually expressed by Integrity, but the word
[Heart] signifies the subject; and is commonly taken for the Will, and often for
the whole soul, Understanding and Will, (as most Fathers, Schoolmen and Divines
judge in the Point, though the two former placed too much of it in the Assent:)
but where and how often do you find the word [Heart] used for the sole Intellect?
I pray show the place. 2. The proverbial speech [with all the Heart] is not
used in Romans 10.10. but only subject barely expressed: with the Heart man
believes to Righteousness.

My third Argument (as you place it) was to another use, which is of less
moment. As I judge Faith to be taken, 1. sometimes more strictly for mere
Assent to a Testimony: (so James takes it when he says, the Devils believe.)
2. And sometimes more fully for Assent and Acceptance, or Consent: (so Paul
takes it; and so it Justifies.) So 3. I suppose it is sometime taken most
largely and improperly, for the full performance of the conditions of the New
Covenant. If any deny this, I have no mind to contend for it, because it is but
about a word, and not the thing. Your answer is twofold: 1. that Heb. 5.9.
speaks of obeying Christ, but does not call faith obeying Christ. I Reply. That
Obedience which contains the Condition of salvation by Christ (whereof
Justification is a part) must needs include Faith: But the word Obedience Heb.
5 9 contains the condition of salvation by Christ; therefore it includes
faith. He is become the Author of Eternal salvation to all them that obey him.

Your second answer is, [ It may be obedience by Assent, that Christ is the
Messiah, died, rose, etc.] Repl. 1. If Obedience of mere Assent be not made the
condition of Eternal salvation in Scripture, then it is not that obedience
which is here mentioned: But the former is true: therefore the latter. 2. The
first Assent to these Gospel Truths is not in a full proper sense called
Obedience to Christ at all: therefore not here to be so understood. As
subjection, so obedience is a term of Relation on supposing the Authority of a
Superior, the acknowledgement of that Authority, A command from that Superior,
and that the action be therefore done because so commanded. Now the first
Assent to, or acknowledgement of the Redeemers Office and Sovereignty, must
needs in order of Nature precede all obedience to him as a Sovereign. I confess
improperly a man may be said to obey, when he yields to the Reason and
persuasion of another; but this wants the very form of obedience properly so
called. If it be true that the first Acceptance of Christ for our Sovereign as
Redeemer, by the Wills consent, may be both the Reception of him for King, and
Obedience to him: Yet in order of Nature it is respectively a Reception first;
though in time it is both at once. But the first Assent to Christ's Sovereignty
cannot be an obeying him as Sovereign. And for the understanding the Text, when
I find Christ give the world, a systeme of Precepts, and tell them that he is
become the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, I dare not
without Reason restrain that obedience (in the sense of it) to some one or two
acts: Especially when I find that he has made the like promise on condition of
other acts of ours besides Believing: as in many Text I have showed in those
Aphor. Take my yoke and burden, etc. Learn of me to be meek and lowly, etc. and
I will ease you, and ye shall find rest: Forgive and ye shall be forgiven. He
that confesses and forsakes his sin shall have mercy, with multitudes of the
like. And Romans 10. that is called Faith, ver. 14, 17. which is called obeying
the Gospel, ver. 16. And if the Gospel do as directly and urgently command
Consent as Assent; yea if it command love to Christ as of equal necessity with
both, I have reason to think that in this large sense, Faith includes it. Why
should obeying the Gospel, and obeying the Truth, be made Synonima's with
Believing as it is one single Act, when the Gospel commands many other Acts as
of aequal necessity and excellency? Let me argue thus ex concessis, from your
self and others. Most Divines affirm that the proper Reason why Faith
justifies, is its Relation to Christ; because it is a Receiving of him (it
justifies Relative i.e. A Christ received Justifies:) but Mr. Tomb^s confesses
that other Graces receive Christ as well as Faith: therefore other Graces
justify as well as Faith. The Consequence is a Quatenus ad Omne.

What (...) and (...) import in their first signification, is not to our
business so much as in what sense they are commonly used: No doubt they may
signify properly our yielding to persuasion, improperly called Obeying: but
that they are put for proper Obeying usually in Scripture, most Interpreters
affirm. You may therefore as well draw to your purpose the Latin Obedire,
because it is but quasi ob-audire. Indeed the Obedience to a Teacher (as to
Christ and his Ministers, and of Scholars to their Master) who uses both
Argument and Authority, is fully and fitly expressed in those words. The word
[Gospel] is principally spoken of the Doctrine of Good tidings or Mercy by
Christ (but sure not only of the Historical or Declaratory part, but also, yea
principally of the Promise or Offer:) but the whole New Covenant or Law of
Christ (for so it is, and so the Ancients unaminously call it) containing
Precepts and Threatenings also, is called his Testament, Covenant, Gospel, being
so denominated from the more excellent part. Heb. 7.18.19, 22. The Testament of
Jesus is opposed to the Commandments of the Law, and called Better: therefore
it comprizeth Christ's Commands, proper to him. And is it not Christ's whole Law
which is of force when he is dead, and called his Testament? Heb. 9.17. And
when the Apostle says, They were made able Ministers of the New Testament,
does he mean only of the History, or the Precept of faith, and not of Love,
Hope, Repentance, etc. Let his preaching witness, as the Expositors, (2 Cor.
3.6.) Or let Christ in giving them their Commission tell you what that New
Testament is, Mat. 28. Go Disciple all Nations, etc. teaching them to observe
all things what ever I command. And not to strive about words, you know that
New Law of Christ, which is called his Testament, Covenant, Gospels, etc. has
all the Precepts in it which you mention. Is it not Precepts as well as
Narrations which Mark calls the Gospel, Mar. 1.1.? Was it not the Gospel which
Christ and the Apostles preached? And they preached Repentance and Faith* and
so commanded Duty: If a man loose his Life for publishing or obeying Christ's
Precepts, does not the Promise belong to him, Mar. 8.35. and 10 29? Or is that
Promise to them only that suffer for the Declarative part only? Is the Gospel
that must be published among all Nations, the History only? Mar. 13.10 Was the
Precept of Accepting Christ, loving him in sincerity and obeying him etc. no
part of that Gospel* to which Paul was separated? Romans 1.1. in which he served
in Spirit, ver. 9. of which he was not ashamed, ver. 16. and which he was put
in trust With, 1 Thessalonians 2.2, 4. Was it only the Declaration of Christ's Death,
Resurrection, etc. which is the Gospel according to which men's secrets must be
judged? Romans 2.16. or according to which the Jews are enemies, Romans 11.28.
compared with Luke 19.27. Is not it larglyer taken, 2 Cor. 8.18? And subjection
to the Gospel implies it preceptive, 2 Cor. 9.13. Peter's withdrawing and
separating from the uncircumcision, and fearing the Jews, and dissembling, and
Barnabas with him, was A not walking according to the Truth of the Gospel, Gal.
2.14. The false Apostles preached another Gospel, and the Galathians turned to
another Gospel, when the former preached, and the later received the Doctrine
of the Necessity of being circumcised, and keeping Moses Law, Gal. 1.6, 7. so
that the word [Testament] and [Gospel] includes Laws or Precepts of Duty.

4. To that of the sense of Gal. 3.12.23. about the largest extent of the word
Faith, it being as I said, of so small moment, I intend not to insist on it. My
meaning is but this; that some other Graces are intended reductively, and the
chief named for all. But by your answer I understand, 1. That you take not
faith to be the whole fulfilling of the condition of the New Covenant: which
concession shall satisfy me, what ever you think of the sense of the Word, of
these Texts. 2. but the rest of your Ans. I am unsatisfied in. You say [by
Faith only the condition of the Covenant concerning Justificaiion in this Life
is fulfilled: not concerning every benefit of the New Covenant: Repentance is
the condition of Remission of sins: forgiveing others, doing good to the
Saints, of entering into Life.] Repl. 1. You know that not Wotton and many
great Divines of England only, but of the most famous Transmarine, do take
Justification and Remission to be one and the same thing. I have received
Animadversions from diverse learned Divines lately on these Aphorisms, and three
or four of them blame me for making any difference between Justification and
Remission; though I make as little as may be. And can you think then that
Remission and Justification have several conditions? If they are not wholly the
same, yet doubtless the difference is exceeding small, and rather notional then
real. The same Commination of the Law does both condemn and oblige to
punishment. Remission is a discharge from the Obligation to Punishment; and
Justification is a discharge from the condemnation. So much then as that
Obligation to Punishment, differs from the Laws condemnation, (which is
nothing, or so little as it is not obvious to be discerned,) so much does
Remission differ from Justification. Yea even those Divines that in pleading
for the interest of the active Righteousness to Justification, do to that end
make Justification to have two parts; yet one of them, they say, is Remission
of sin; as the other is the Imputation of Righteousness. And I pray how then
can these two parts of the same Justification have two diverse conditions, so as
one is appropriated to one, and excluded from the other? I remember no reformed
Divines, but they either make Justification and Remission to be all one; or
Remission to be part of Justification, or else to be two Relations (or other
effects) immediately and at once (in order of time, if not of nature) resulting
or proceeding from the same foundation (materially) or other cause. Though
Gataker and Bradshaw make them to differ, it is but in this narrow (and almost
unconceivable way) but in time to concur. I must therefore differ from you in
this, that they have diverse conditions: and wait for your proof of it. But it
seems you will give us leave to say, A man is not pardoned by faith only; And
yet he is justified by faith only! and that as a condition! Faith then it seems
can do the whole, but not one half (as some judge) or can do, and not do the
same thing (as others.)

2. But do you think that Repentance is not necessarily Antecedent to
Justification, as well as to Remission? If you say No; the current of the
Gospel Doctrine will confute you: which usually puts Repentance before
Faith: and those Divines that say it follows after it, do yet make them
concur in order of time. But if Repentance do necessarily precede
Justification, (as I doubt not but you will yield) then let me know to what
purpose, or under what notion or respect, if not as a Condition? Can you find
any lower place to give it? 3. But if you should mean that Faith and Repentance
are the condition of our first Justification and Remission, but afterward only
of our Remission. I Answer, 1. According to your Judgment (who take
Justification to be one act transient, once only performed, and neither a
continued Act, nor renewed, or repeated,) neither Faith nor Repentance
afterward performed, are any conditions of our Justification in this Life.
This may seem a heavy charge, but it is a plain Truth. For that Justification
which we receive upon our first believing has only that first Act of faith for
its condition (or as others speak, its Instrumental cause) We are not justified
to day by that act of Faith, which we shall perform to Morrow, or a Twelvemonth
hence; so that according to your opinion, and all that go that way, it is only
one (the first) Act of Faith which justifies; and all the following Acts
through our whole life, do no more to our Justification, then the works of the
Law do. I would many other Divines that go your way (for it is common as to the
dispatching of Justification by one Act) would think of this foul absurdity.
(You may add this also to what is said before, against your opinion herein,)
Where then is the Old Doctrine of the just living by faith, as to
Justification? I may bear with these men (or at least, need not wonder,) for
not admitting Obedience or other Graces to be conditions of Justification as
continued, when they will not admit faith it self. Who speaks more against
faith, they or I? When I admit as necessary that first act, and maintain the
necessity of repeated acts, to our continued Justification; and they exclude
all save one Instantaneous act? 2. And what reason can any man give, why
Repentance should be admitted as a condition of our first Justification, and
yet be no condition of the continuance of it? or what proof is there from
Scripture for this? I shall prove that the continuance of our Justification
has more to its condition then the beginning; (though learned men, I know
gainsay it:) but surely less it cannot have.

4. But why do you say only of Repentance that [it is the condition of
Remision] and of forgiving others, that [it is the condition of entering into
life?] Have you not Christ's express words, that forgiving others is a condition
of our Remission? if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
forgive you; but if you forgive not men, etc. Nay, is not Reformation and
Obedience ordinarily made a condition of forgiveness? I refer you to the Texts
cited in my Aphorisms: Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings, etc. then if your sins be as crimson, etc. He that confesses and
forsakes his sin, shall have mercy. And I would have it considered, if
Remission and Justification be either the same, or so near as all Divines make
them, whether it be possible, that forgiving others, and Reformat on or new
Obedience should be a condition of the continuance or renewal of a pardoning
Act, and not of Justification? Doubtless, the general Justification must be
continued, as well as the general pardon: and a particular Justification I
think after particular sins, is needful as well as particular pardon: or if
the name should be thought improper, the thing cannot be denied. Judicious Ball
says as much as I (yet men were not so angry with him,) Treat. of Covenant.
page 20.21. [ A disposition to good works is necessary to Justification, being
the qualification of an active lively faith. Good works of all sorts are
necessary to our continuance in the state of Justification, and so to our final
Absolution, if God give opportunity: but they are not the cause of, but only a
precedent qualification or condition to final forgiveness and Eternal bliss.]
And page 21. [This walking in the light as he is in the light, is that
qualification whereby we become immediately capable of Christ's Righteousness, or
actual participants of his propitiation, which is the sole immediate cause of
our Justification, taken for Remission of sins or actual approbation with God.]
And page 73. [Works then, or a purpose to walk with God, justify as the
passive qualification of the subject capable of Justification, or as the
qualification of that faith which justifies.] So he.

5. How will you ever prove, that our Entering into Life, and our continued
remission or Justification have not the same conditions? that those Graces are
excluded from one which belong to the other. Indeed the men that are for
Faiths* Instrumentality, say somewhat to it; but what you can say, I know not.
And for them, if they could prove Faith Instrumental in justifying co nomine,
because it receives Christ by whom we are justified; they would also prove it
the Instrument of Glorifying, because it Receives Christ by and for whom we are
saved and Glorified. And so if the Instrumentality of Faith must exclude
obedience from justifying us, it must also exclude it from Glorifying us. And I
marvel that they are so loose and easy in admitting obedience into the work of
saving, and yet not of continuing or consummating Justification, when the
Apostle says, By Grace ye are saved, by Faith, etc; and so excludes obedience
from Salvation in the general as much as he any where does from Justification
in particular.

6. But lastly, I take what you grant me in this Section, and profess that I
think in effect you grant me the main of the cause that I stand upon. For, as
you grant, 1. That faith is not the whole condition of the Covenant. 2. That
Repentance also is the condition of Remission (which is near the same with
Justification.) 3. That obedience is the condition of Glorification (which has
the same conditions with final and continued Justification.) 4. So you seem to
yield all this, as to our full justification at Judgment. For you purposely
limit the conditionality of mere faith to our Justification in this Life. But
if you yield all that I desire (as you do, if I understand you) as to the last
justification at Judgment, then we are not much differing in this business.
For I take (as Mr. Burges does, Lect. of Justification 29*) our compleatest and
most perfect Justification to be that at Judgment. Yea, and that it is so
eminent and considerable here, that I think all other Justification is so
called chiefly as referring to that. And me thinks above all men, you should
say so too, who make Justification to lie only in sententi^ judicis, and not in
sententia Legis: And so all that go your way (as many that I meet with do.) If
then we are justified at Gods great Tribunal at Judgment, by obedience as the
secondary part of the condition of the Covenant (which you seem to yield.) 1.
We are agreed in the main. 2. I cannot yet believe that our Justification at
that Bar has one condition, and our Justification in Law (or in this Life, as
continued) another. He that dies justified, was so justified in the hour of
dying, on the same conditions as he must be at Judgment. For 1. There are no
conditions to be performed after death. 2. Sententia Legis and sententia
judicis do justify on the same terms. Add to all this what I grant to you,
[that our Justification when first begun here, is by faith (supposing
Repentance) before and without the practice of obedience,] and then see how
near we are.

The fifth Argument which you mention is grounded on the common Maxim, Non est
distinguendum ubi Lex non distinguit, and runs thus: If the Scripture in
propounding to man the adaequate Object of justifying Faith, (Christ) do not
divide Christ, and say, [In believing him to be a Priest, your faith is
justifying, but not in believing him to be King, or Prophet, or Head,] but
propounds Christ undivided as this Object; then must not we distinguish or
divide, but take Christ entirely for the object of justifying Faith. But the
Scripture does not divide or distinguish in this case; therefore we must not.
It is Christ that must be Received, and believed in: but a Savior and not a
King, is not Christ. It is Christ as Christ. His very Name signifies as
directly his Kingly office at least, as his Priestly. And if you confess that
the same act of Faith at the same instant Receives Christ both as Priest and
King, then I shall stay my assent to your opinion till you bring me the
Scripture that says, it is faith in this notion; and not in that which
justifies. God speaks plainly that whosoever believes shall be justified from
all things, etc. And you confess this Believing is the Receiving Christ for
King and Priest; and that it justifies as a condition; and does not your
(unproved) distinction overthrow this again?

The sixth Argument which you mention, runs thus: If Scripture particularly
propound Christ as King, as the Object of justifying Faith, then Christ as King
is the object of it: But Scripture does so: Ergo, etc. I have named you some
places where it so does, a little before.

The seventh is to the same purpose with the fifth. You name two Texts as
proving that Scripture tyeth Justification to the Receipt of Christ as Priest
only: But there is not a word in the Texts to that end. Rom 3.25. speaks of
Faith in Christ's blood, but not a word for excluding Faith in his Obedience,
Resurrection, Intercession, or Power, much less excluding our consent to his
full Authority or Office. The word [Only] is not in the Text. You may as well
say, that it is [only] by faith in his Name, and so not in his blood, because
other Texts say, it is by faith in his Name. See Acts 13.16. The other Text,
Romans 5.9. speaks neither a word of Faith, nor excludes Christ's obedience (by
which many are made Righteous) nor Resurrection (for he Rose again for our
Justification.) nor his Intercession, ( for who shall condemn us? it is Christ
that died, yea rather that Rose again, and is even at the right hand of God,
who also makes Intercession for us, Romans 8.34.) And all these parts of Christ's
Priestly Office must be excluded, if you will affix the word [Only] to the
Text, which says, we are justified by his blood. Indeed you make so a quick
dispatch in the Controversy about the active and passive Righteousness.

The same answer serves to what you say in the eighth, and ninth, and tenth,
being the same with that you say here. I marvail how you would form an Argument
from 2 Cor. 5 21. Gal. 2.21 I Where you say, Obedience is not an essential part
of Faith, I yield it willingly, taking Faith properly and strictly, and not in
the largest improper sense. But that it justifies as immediately as it Receives
him as King, as it does in Receiving him as Priest, I shall take for proved,
till you prove the lawfulness here of dividing Christ, and Faith, or
distinguishing, and appropriating justifying to one respect, and excluding
another in the same act of Believing, and the same Object Christ. And to what
is said before, let me yet add this, 1. If Christ be not received as a true
complete Savior, except he be Received as King, then Faith justifies not as it
Receives him for Priest only: (for you here confess that he justifies as he is
Received as a Savior.) But the Antecedent is evident: for as King he saves
his people from sin and Satan, and all their enemies, Ergo, etc.

2. If Christ as King do justify us, then he must be Received as King to
Justification. But the former is undeniable, Mat. 25. etc. Ergo. etc. The
Consequence is raised on your own Grounds.

The eleventh Argument (as you number) does suppose several points (very
weighty with me, which I undertake to make good) which do overthrow the unsound
grounds which the contrary minded go upon. 1. I suppose that Faith justifies
principally ex Voluntate ordinantis, and not ex natura actus; though it have
Aptioudinem ad officium in ipsa rei natura. 2. I suppose Christ is first
received by Faith, and his Benefits come with him, and in order of nature are
after the Receiving of him. These things being supposed, it strongly persuades
me, that the entertainment of Christ as King, was never intended by God to be
excluded from the conditional Interest in Justification, when I find in
Scripture that his own Dominion was an end of his Death, Resurrection and
Reviving, and that God does so insist on this point, to bring the world to
subjection to Christ, Psalm 2. etc. And that the honoring and advancing of God
the Father, and the Mediator God-man, is the most Noble excellent use of our
faith. Is it then any whit probable that it is Gods meaning to exclude this
respect of the act from any conditionality herein? Shall I again tell you the
true ground of men's mistake (as I think) in this Point? They look on Faith as
if it were a natural Reception, and did make the thing received theirs
immediately and formally, as it is such a Receiving ex natura rei, and not as it
is Receptio moralis whose effect depends wholly on, and its efficacy or
Interest is derived directly from the Will, Constitution or Ordination of the
Legislator and Donor, and so does what it does as a condition in Law-sence. And
I pray search, whether in this Question, you do not confound your Notions ex
part objecti, and ex part Actus? Let me conclude all by the Illustration of
my former similitude. A woman condemned for Treason, is Ransomed by the Prince,
who Decrees, that if she will Believe that he is her Redeemer, and will take
him as her Master, Redeemer and Husband, she shall be Delivered and made his
Princess; else not. Now the question is, what is the condition of this woman's
deliverance and Dignity? Is the condition of her Deliverance and Pardon, the
taking him only under the Notion of a Pardoner or Deliverer? And is the
condition of her Dignity, only the Taking him as a Prince who is Rich and
Honorable? No. The condition on her part, is the Taking him entirely to all
these uses, or in all these Respects, and more: even the marrying him, and
covenanting to be his, as a faithful spouse and Subject; and first
acknowledging what he has done for her freedom and advancement, then to take
him for her Husband and Lord, that has done this to advance and free her. And
while she is faithful to this marriage covenant, in the performance, she shall
enjoy these Benefits: but if she forsake him and choose another, as with him
she received her Dignity, so with him she shall lose them all. So that ex part
actus here is no room for your quatenus and distinguishing. But now if the
Question be intended not ex part Actus, or, what is the condition on her part,
but only what is it in him that she receives for her Husband, which does
deliver her? Why then we say, it is his Ransom, his love and free mercy, etc.
And if the Question be, what is it in him that dignifieth her? Why I say, it is
his Dignity and Riches of which she participateth; together with the same his
free mercy as the Impulsive cause. And so she is Dignified by Receiving or
marrying him quatenus a Prince, rich and Honorable, and not quatenus a
Redeemer only: and she is delivered by taking him as a Deliverer or Redeemer,
and not as an honorable Prince. The meaning of all this is no more, but that
he does not redeem her as a Prince, nor dignifie her under the notion of a
Redeemer: and so on his part you may distinguish. But yet as to the
conditionality on her part, there is no room for distinguishing at all. For is
not this all that Paul ayms at in speaking so often of Faith in Relation to
Christ's death and Righteousness, rather then to his Government? to note [what
in Christ received does justifie] rather then [what respect of our act of faith
is the condition?] And may not this tend to an accommodation between us in this
Point? especially with those Divines that say, Faith is taken Relatively, when
we are said to be Justified by it; and it is said, to be Imputed to us for
Righteousness? The Lord enlighten our dark understandings, and give us love to
the Truth and one another.

HAving done with this, I proceed to your Additional Paper, which I lately
received, and for which I am also really thankful to you. But the Answer needs
not be long. 1. You think the 66. These. hardly reconcilable with the words
cited out of page, 191 of that of Baptism, Romans 3.25 and 5.9. But I see not the
least appearance of a contradiction Christ whom justifying Faith receives, does
Redeem us by his blood, and not chiefly by his Principality; and he saves us as
a Savior, and rules us as a Ruler, etc. But that faith which on our part is
the condition of our interest in him and his Benefits, is the Believing in, or
receiving Christ as Christ, or as he is offered to us in the Gospel (as the
Assembly in their Catechism well express it. Davenant, Culverwell, Throgmorton,
Mr. Norton of New England (Catech* page 29.) and many more say as I in this:
but I will not weary you with citations having been so tedious already. But I
am glad to feel you yielding to the Truth, (for it is a weighty Point) as you
seem in the next words, where you say that Christ's Death is the sole or chief
object of Faith as Justifying. If you yield once that it and his Priestly
Office is not the sole Object, I will never contend with you about their
Precedence, which is chief. I have confessed to you, that it is a fuller (and
ordinarily fitter) phrase, to say, we are justified by faith in his blood, then
to say, we are justified by faith in his Government, because it points out
Relatively the causality in the Object, and not only the conditionality in the
Act. But I think when you respect the said condition especially, that then it
is the fittest speech to say, we are justified by faith in Christ.

2. YOur next are all of other Subjects. The second is, whether Luke 12.24
import not a denial of Title in Christ to Judge. The answer is obvious, 1. He
had not that derived Title from men, which was necessary to him that should
exercise the place of a Magistrate. 2. Christ speaks not of Sovereignty (that
he had:) but Magistracy (which is distinct from Sovereignty, as being the
Executioner of Laws, which Sovereignty makes, and being under the Law, when
the Sovereign qua talis is above them.) 3. His Interrogation may perhaps be no
Negation. 4. But the plain answer which I stick to is this. Christ had not then
a Title or Right to the actual exercise of his power, as to divide
Inheritances. The General of an Army to ransom a Soldier that should dye for
Treason, does agree with the King, that he will put himself in the place of
that common soldier for a months time, and will do all his duty, and will
venture his life in some desperate service. Now during this time while he is in
the soldiers place, the General has not title to the Actual Rule, etc. as
before he had: not because he has lost it, but because it will not stand with
the state and duty of a soldier which he has voluntarily put himself in. Yet
at the same time, his Lieutenant General and other Officers that have their
Commissions all from him do Govern. So here: will it follow that because Christ
had not Title by himself to exercise the place of a Ruler and Judge being then
in the state of a servant, that therefore now he has not the Sovereignty?

3. YOur third is from Col. 1.14. I suppose you mean the thirteenth. But little
know I how you would thence argue with any seeming strength. Christ has a
threefold Kingdom. The first (where he most fully Rules) is the souls of
Believers. It follows not, that a man that is not of this Kingdom, is not of
Christ's Kingdom at all. The Kingdom of God is thus within us. The second is,
The Church Visible. This the Apostle here speaks of, and of this Heathens are
no members. The third is, The whole world of mankind, whom he has bought under
his Dominion, and to be at his Disposal ( Romans 14.9. etc.) who are delivered
into his hands, and over-rued by him, and he is their Rightful King, and will
Judge them as their King* and give them the reward of Rebellious Subjects that
would not consent to his actual Rule, ( Luke 19.27, etc.) and not only as
Rebels against God as Creator. If he be not their King, they cannot be judged
Rebels against him. Yea the Law of Nature is now his Law, by which he in part
Rules them though they know him not, (many know not the true God, who yet are
partly Ruled by that his Law:). The Jews crucified their King, though they were
Infidels, and knew him not to be their King. To conclude this Subject, I desire
you but to consider, whether there be any inconvenience appearing in the
acknowledgement of Christ's General Dominion? and whether it be not the plain
and frequent speech of Scripture? And on the other side, whether it may not be
of dangerous consequence, as injurious to Christ, to deny so great a part of
his Dominion? and excuse not Infidels from the guilt of Rebellion against the
Redeemer? And whether it be not introduced by Pious Divines merely in heat of
Disputation, which usually carries men into extremes? especially least they
should yield to universal Redemption in any kind? and least they should yield
to the Magistrates power in Religion.

4. Your last Question is about Universal Redemption. [ If it be affirmed that
Christ dyed for every child of Adam conditionally, it would be well proved from
Scripture that the procuring of such a conditional Law or Covenant, was the end
or effect of Christ's death: and whether the so interpreting Texts that speak of
his dying for all, will not serve for evasions to put by the Arguments drawn
from them to prove Christ's satisfaction and merit proper to the Elect? etc.]
Answer. 1. Though I do not doubt much of the point, yet I have no mind to
meddle with the question, as it concerns those Pagans that never heard of
Christ. Not for fear of any disadvantage thence to the cause, but 1. Because I
find God speaks sparingly of those to whom he speaks not: it concerns not us so
much to know his Counsel concerning others. 2. Because it is an ill way of
arguing to lay the stress of all on the most obscure point; (as men do, that
study more how to silence an adversary, then to see the Truth) and to prove
obscurum per obscurius. 2. This is a point that I cannot give you my thoughts
of in a few words; there needs so much for Explication: and therefore being but
here touched, I shall forbear. 3. I doubt not but to prove abundantly from
Scripture with much evidence, what I assert in this. 4. It was not the only,
nor the first effect of his Death, that Christ was [Satisfaction to Gods
Justice for the Violation of the Law.] 5. That such a conditional Law or
Covenant is granted, and exstant in Scripture, is as plain as most points in
the Gospel: and sure no such thing can be but upon Christ's death as the
meritorious cause. 6. So interpreting these Texts which are so to be
interpreted, is no evasion: And no Text will prove Christ's satisfaction and
Merit wholly proper to the Elect. Much less those which say, He died for all
men, That God intends only the Elect to be certainly saved by Christ's death,
I can easily prove from many other Texts: But if I should prove it by these, it
were strange. It is an ill consequence [Christ died for all men; therefore his
satisfaction is proper to the Elect.] 7. In point of Law the Elect have no more
Title to Christ and his Benefits, then any others (as Elect before they
believe.) But Gods Decree has from Eternity appropriated Salvation by Christ
only to the Elect in point of Event. He that determined de eventu, that only
the Elect should be saved by Christ, did yet ^hink it the fittest way to his
glorious ends to make Christ's Death a sufficient satisfaction for all, and to
make in his new Law a free deed of Gift of Christ, and all his Benefits to all
that will receive him as he is offered: yet not engaging himself to publish
this Law to every particular man; though it be of universal extent in the
Tenor. The Promise names none as included; nor excludes any, but who do
wilfully exclude themselves. But these things require fuller opening.

8. Lastly, [Christ dying loco nostro] as you say, is a term that needs as
great caution for the true understanding it, as most that we make use of. The
right understanding of it, is the main Ground of our safety and comfort: The
wrong understanding it, is the very turning point to Antinomi^nism, and the
very Primum vivens and ultimum moriens, the Heart of the whole System of their
Doctrine. That Christ in the person of Mediator, did suffer upon his voluntary
undertaking what we should have else suffered, and thereby made satisfaction to
Gods Justice for the breach of his Law, both Father and Son (whose Will is one)
agreeing or resolving, that yet no man should have actual Remission or
Salvation hereby, but on condition of receiving the Redeemer for their Lord and
Savior: and thus Christ died loco omnium: this is sound Doctrine. That at the
same time it was the secret Will or Eternal Decree of the Father; and the Will
of the Mediator de eventu, to give effectually Grace to believe to his Chosen
only; and consequently that they only should be actually saved, and thus he
died only loco Electorum, is also sound Doctrine. But that Christ in dying did
strictly represent the person of the sinner, so as either naturally, or morally
in Law-sense we may be said to have satisfied then, in or by him, as the Law
calls that the action of the Principal, which is done per Delegatum, D^puta^um,
Vicarium, etc. this is the soul of Antinomianism, and directly and unavoidably
introduces Justifican. before Faith, or before we are born; the non-necessity
of any other Justification, but in foro conscientiae, it certainly overthrowrth
all pardon of sin at all, and so all Petition for Pardon, and all thanksgiving
for it, with the rest of their errors: yea makes man his own Redeemer. But I
have been too long already. I sensibly acknowledge the truth of what you say
That this is a matter of great moment, and needs great consideration. I have
bestowed more consideration about it, then about any other point in Divinity.

YOUR unfeigned Friend and Brother (who doubts not ere long to meet you in our
Center and Rest, where all our Difference in Judgment and Affection will be
healed.) RICHARD BAXTER.
Kederminster, June 9. 1651.
Sir, The multitude of my Employments caused me to delay the returning you my
thoughts of your favorable Animadversions, til I received your Additional
paper, which made me so very sensible of your Kindness, that I could not but
snatch the next opportunity, thus truly to give you my further Thoughts, as an
account of the acceptance and success of your Pains.
June 20.
Sir,
YEsterday I received your third Paper dated June 17. to which I thought best
to give you this short Answer together, seeing the former were not gone out of
my hands.

You here touch (very easily) on two Subjects. I will begin with the later,
viz. Your four Arguments against my Doctrine of Justification by the Gospel
Grant or New Law. Your first is, that This is per resultantiam; but
Justification is an act of Will; but no Act of Will is by necessary Resultancy]
Answer. As it proceeds from the Instrument or Foundation, it is by
Resultancy: As by that Instrument it is the Act of the Legislator or Principal
Agent, so it is an Act of Will. It was his Will at the enacting of the Grant,
and still is his Will, that this his Grant, or Deed of Gift should mora^iter
agere and ^ffecius hos vel illos producore, at such a distance upon such and
such conditions. The Act and Effect of the Law, or Testament, is the Act and
Effect of the Legislator and Testator, whose Instrument it is: But the said Law
or Testament does not efficaciter agere, or produce these effects, t^^ the time
that the conditions are performed: (for it is the Nature of a Moral condition
to be added for the suspension of the Effect or event of the ^rant, etc. till
it be performed.) Therefore the Rector, Donor or Testator does not efficaciter
agere till then. And therefore he acts by that his Instrument then, or not at
all If you give by Deed or by Will^ such and such portions to some Children at
such a term of Age, and to others when they marry; The full actual Right is by
a mere Resultancy, as from the Instrument* but by an Act of Will, as from you,
but really from neither before the Term, or condition performed. This is a most
obvious Truth.

2. And as easy is the Answer to your second. [If the Covenant justify
without any other Act, then it adopts, sanctifies, Glorifieth, without any
other.] Answer. In the Propositions against Mr. Bedford, you might have seen
this dispelled. For Adoption, I yield the whole. But know you not that as there
is great difference between changes Relative and Qualitative; so the later
results not from a mee^ Fundamentum, etc. but is effected by a Physical
Operation? It is Jus ad rem, it is Right or Duness, which is the proper
immediate product, or (quasi) effect resulting from, and given by the Law, or
the like Instrument; and not the natural thing it self. Now in these Relations,
either the Right and the thing it self are the same; or else the difference so
small, that it is next to undiscernable, and must needs both in e^dem instanti
result, as before said. But in Physical changes, thete is a greater difference
between the Right and the Benefit: The Benefit cannot, as the Right does,
proceed per ^ndam resultanti^^. If you give your Son 100. l. by a Deed of Gift,
this gives him the Right immediately, but not the Thing. There must be a
Physical Act to that. But Pardon to a Malefactor is given by a written Pardon
or Grant, from whence the Right to it, and the Benefit it self, do immediately
result (being indeed but one thing, except my understanding be too gross to
distinguish them.) If therefore you had said as you should, that Right to Glory
and to Sanctity (so far as that Covenant gives it) are bestowed without any
other Act, (except final Judgment* which is necessary to full Justification
as well as Glory) I should yield you all.

3. To your third, [That the Covenant justifies but conditionally, therefore
not actually.] I answered before: for it was one of your former Arguments.
Conditio est Lex addita negotio quae donec praestetur eventum suspendit, says
Cujacius. And as Mynsinger says, Neque actio, neque obligatio ulla est
antequam conditio eveniat: quia quod est in condition, non est in obligatione:
(Schol. in Justit. p, 52^.) So that it is the Nature of the condition to
suspend the effect, but not to make the cause to be no cause. Indeed if the
Condition be never performed, then it destroys or prevents the effect, and so
the Instrument does not agere: And why? but because it was the Will of the
Agent that it should act so, and on such terms, or else not: so that the
nonperformance does not undo what the Instrument did, nor does it disoblige
the Author, but it manifests that he was never obliged: (they are Grotius
words.) I conclude therefore that when the condition is performed, then the
Instrument or conditional Grant does begin vere agere and donar^; and the Agent
by it: but till then it does not properly act or effect at all. Is not your
Testament that gives your Legacy, because it gives conditionally? Or must there
be some other Act, to make it an absolute proper Gift.

4. Your fourth also is one of those which you have in the Beginning, where I
have answered it. The Covenant you say, is an Act past; and so not continued,
and so the Justification by it past, and not continued, etc.] Answer. The
Physical Act of Legislation or Covenant granting is past but this only makes it
an Instrument, able and fit to produce such and such effects, and not actually
to produce them at that present, when it is conditional. But the Moral action
of this Law or Covenant is not past, but continued. The Law or Covenant is not
out of Date. And therefore it continues still to justify. The making of our
Laws, are Acts past by Parliaments long ago, and so not continued. Will you
therefore conclude that the Moral Agency or Efficiency of these Laws is past,
and therefore they do not condemn or justify? I know no ground that can bear
your conclusions, except with Rishworth (Dialog) and such other of the more
impudent Papists, one should vilify the Scripture, and say, that they were
only Miscellaneous occasional writings, and never intended to be Gods Law, or
our Rule of Faith and Life: but I believe you will never come to that. Surely
David frequently styles the old Scriptures that were in his Times Gods Law:
And why many Divines should strike in with some Lutheran^ Error in denying the
Gospel or New Scripture to be properly [Christs Law,] and so inveigh against
those that call it the New Law, I know no Reason: but that the ignis fatuus of
contention and prejudice misleadeth them. O happy Disputers that are not
carried headlong into extremes by the spirit of Contradiction! What more
proper to the reformed Religion, as such, then to honor the Scriptures? And
how do these men vilify them, and rob them of their highest honor, that deny
them to be the Laws of God? yea deny this to the Gospel it self? Is not Christ
the Lawgiver? Isa. 33.22. Psalm. 60.7. and 108.8. and the King? Must not the
Law go out of Zion, Isa. 2.3. And is not that the Law and Testimony to which we
must seek? Multitudes of Scriptures, and most of the Fathers (that ever I read)
do call the Gospel Christ's Law or the [new law.]

2. To your second Exception, [against my approving a speech of Dr. W.] I ans.
1. Do I need to tell you how unlike this saying of Dr. Wards is to that of the
Council of Tre^t? You know by Justification they mean principally
Sanctification? But the Dr. says not that these are preparatives to
Justification. Sure you could not seriously suspect me to join with the Papists
when they speak of one Subject and I of another. The acts of that Session will
tell you more differences between them and me, then is worth the while to
repeat: and you know how largely Chemmitius endeavors to prove that by
Dispositions and Preparations, The Council mean Merits; and that they would
subdolously introduce the Thing, (Merita de congruo) by changing the name; as
out of Osius words and others he gather^. 2. And know you not that Chemnitius
prosesseth to yield to the soundness of that very sixth Chapter, which you
allege, were it not for these guiles that they use, and their evil sense to
advance Merit? For says he, Omnino certus est sive modus sive ordo in v^rbo
Dei nobis designatus and prascriptus, quo Deus utitur quando vult hominem ad
Justificationem deduc^re, etc. Et qui ad modum sive ordi^em illum divinitus
prascriptum, non volunt s^ ductu spiritus accommodare, s^d negligunt and
conculcant illum, by ad Justificationem non proveniunt. Vult enim Deus a
N^titia and Assensu verbi sui nos ordiri: and ante Justificationem oportet
praecedere contritionem, hoc est, seriam agnitionem peccatorum, pavores
conscientiae agnoscentio iram Dei adversus nostra peccat^, and dolentis propter
peocatum: in qua contritione non retinetur, sed abjicitur prapositum
pers^verandi and pergendi in sceleribus. Ad hos vere terrores necesse est
acc^d^r^ fidem, que agnitione and fiducia misericordia Dei promissa propter
silium med ator^m, rursui erigat and consoletur animum, ne oppressi
desperatione ruamus in aeternum exitium. Sed fides accedat ad Deum, quaerat,
defideret, petat, apprahendat and accipiat Remissionem peccatorum. Et hoc modo
se^ ordine in v^rbo D^i designat^ via^ p^rari Domino ut in ipso, per and
propteripsum fide consequamur and accipiamus Justificationem, ipsa scriptura
tradit, etc. this also he shows Luther approved of.

Now I pray you tell me whether here be not full as much as Dr. Ward or I say?
And do you think Ghemnitius did join with the Papists of Trent, when he
confuted them?

3. And if Dr. W. had spoak of Sanctification, are there not multitudes of our
own best approved Divines, that make all these acts to be found in men by way
of preparation before Sanctification? Mr. Rogers of Dedham in his Treat. of
faith: Mr. Hooker in his Epist. before that book, and ost in his own book,
affirms not only a common preparatory contrition, Hungring and thirsting,
Hope, Love, Joy, but even effectual special Vocation it self, and so faith to
go before Sanctification and Justification. And indeed what man denies it?
except Mr. Pemble and a very few that with him make Sanctification and Vocation
to be all one? which how far I approve my self, I have showed in Tr^at. of
Rest, Part. 1 Chap. 8. sect. 2.3.4.

4. But look into the words, and find out what error you can! Which of those
acts do you think goes not before Justification? And if they go before, sure
you will not deny but they do some way or other dispose or fit a man for
pardon: or else God would not have prescribed them before it. 1. Catholic
faith is the Belief of the Catholic Doctrine. I am sure you take that to go
before Justification. 2. If Hope of pardon go not before, then Affiance (to
which Hope is essential) goes not before: Yea, then Believers do despair in the
Act of Believing to Justification. 3. I never knew the man that doubted whether
fear of Punishment went before. 4. The same I may say of grief for sin. 5. And
if all the doubt be of Purpose against sin, and for Amendment, 1. Sure they
that say Repentance is pre-requisite to justification, will not exclude a
Purpose of Amendment. 2. And sure those that say Sanctification and Vocation
are all one, and go before Justification will hardly exclude it. 3. They that
take a turning from Idols to the true God, as the end, to be in order before a
Turning from Infidelity to the Mediator as the way, which is by Faith; these
must needs think that so much of Actual Amendment goes before Justification (ye
believe in God, believe also in me.) 4. They that say, Faith alone justifies,
but not the faith which is alone, will surely include this Purpose as
Antecedent. Davenant, Mr. Ball etc. express it, and insist on it. Dr. Twiss
calls works Media and causae dispositivae: But it were endless to cite
Authors in this Point. 5. But I tell you my mind. I take this Purpose of
obeying Christ de futuro to be very Faith it self. For faith is a Covenant
reception of Christ, and to take him for Christ and King-Redeemer, and to
Purpose, yea Covenant to obey him, are but one thing. And therefore a Giving up
our selves as Redeemed-subjects, and so a purpose of being actually subject,
are faith it self. And then they must needs be prerequisite to Justification.
So that whether you take these Acts for common or special, suely they go before
Justification as Dr. Ward says. Dare you tell any man of yout Hearers that
though he have not so much as a Purpose to mend, yet he is justified by Faith?
Truly such passages have embittered the minds of Papists, and many weak ones
against our Doctrine of Justification: and given great advantage to the
Antinomists.

For what you say of contradicting Dr. Downam^ and Mr. Pemble; I answer, 1.
Though they differ between themselves in the point of Justification, and one
has wrote a confutation of the others Doctrine, yet you will never show me
wherein this speech of Dr. Ward does contradict either of them. Indeed if Dr.
Ward had determined whether he meant common Dispositions or special, perhaps he
might have contradicted one of them, they do so far differ themselves. For you
know Mr. Pemble not only in his Vindic. Great. but even in the place you cite (
page 42.43.) takes those Acts to be of special Grace, or a part of
Sanctification, which most Divines do judge to be preparatory thereto. And for
my part, I judge as Mr. Pemble, if you take but that point in to qualify it,
which I have asserted Treat. of Rest, second Edit. part 3. cap. 11. that the
sincerity of Grace as saving* lies not in the bare nature of the Act, but in
the prevailing degree which Morality may specify, then I say as Mr. Pemble,
page 43. that these Virtues which are (many of them by our Divines) reckoned as
Dispositions to Regeneration, are if they be true, the main parts and fruits of
Regeneration.

2. But I admire how you should think that speech of Dr. Wards should be a
joining with the Papists against Dr. Downame and Mr. Pemble, when Downame tells
you that the Papists dispute of another subject then we do; while they mean one
thing by it, viz Sanctification, and we another: (upon which ground Mr. Wotton
is ready to throw out the Dispute, as being about one Term, but different
subjects.) And Mr. Pemble answers [ that the Argument of Bellarmine from that
chapter of the Councils sixth sess. is framed on the Error which puts out of
frame the whole Dispute, viz. that Regeneration and Sanctification is all one
thing with Justification, and that to justify a sinner is nothing else but to
do away inherent corruption by infusion of inherent Righteousness.] And so Mr.
Pemble disputes against it only as thus meant: And Calvin also in his Antidot.
on this 6. Sess. 6. chap. never once finds fault with them here, but only for
ascribing that to free Will which they should ascribe to effectual Grace; and
for making Justification to be Sanctification, but not a word for making these
Acts to be praeparatory to Justification, ( Tractat. Theologic. page 387 388.)
Vid. etiam Articulo^ facultat. Parisiens. Art. 4. de sensu Papissi^o. Every man
that makes Faith to contain many acts (most Divines say, Notitiam, Assensum and
siduciam, Amesius names five,) must needs make all those Acts to be
pre-requisite to Justification, besides Repentance, and besides preparatory
acts of common Grace. No man that I know does seem to come nearer you then Dr.
Downame in placing justifying faith in Assent, and so not taking it to contain
so many acts: And yet even he tells you, that [the act of the Will does concur
to Faith* and that faith which a habit of the mind, is seated as well in the
Will as in the Understanding: and this is confessed by Farthers, Schoolmen, and
the modern Doctors of the Romish Church.] Treat. of Justif. page 358.359. Yea
for ought I can understand he extended faith as far as I, and meant as I do
herein, page 348.349 352. he says, [ By the former which is a bare Assent, we
do after a sort Credere Christum, acknowledge him to be the Savior of these
that believe in him: By the latter, which is the lively and effectual Assent
working on the Heart, we do credere in Christum, and receive him to be our
Savior, whereupon necessarily follows Affiance in Christ, and love of him as
a Savior. Thus then by a true Belief we receive and Embrace Christ, in our
judgment by a lively Assent: in our Hearts, desiring earnestly to be partakers
of him (which Desire we express by our Prayer,) and in our Wills resolving to
acknowledge and Profess him to be our only Savior, and to rest upon him alone
for Salvation. So that a true lively and effectual faith is the work of the
whole soul: that is to say, as well of the Heart as of the Mind, Rom 10.10 Act.
16.14. Act. 8.37.] so far Dr. Downame. Is not this as much as I say? and the
very same? I only mention him (having many more at hand) because 1. you urge
him, and 2. I conjecture, you think you go his way about the nature of faith.
If this be not as much as I say do but add what he says* page 15. and I think
you have as much: (in this particular.) [ The true meaning (says he) of the
Question [whether we are justified by Faith or by Works?] is not as opposing
the inward Grace of Faith to the outward acts of Obedience, which indeed a^eths
fruits of Faith: But as opposing the Righteousness of Christ apprehended by
Faith, to the righteousness which is Inherent in our selves, and performed by
our selves.

And truly Sir, I use to charge my conscience to enquire what may be the plain
meaning of a Text, and to embrace that, and not against Light to be carried by
prejudice: and this conscience tells me that this Resolution of Dr. Downame
being so plainly agreeable to Paul, is not to be rejected. When I impartially,
consider what Paul drives at, my Judgment tells me that it was never his
intent to advance any one simple Act of the soul into the office of justifying,
excluding all the rest; but to advance Christ against men's own works which
stood up then in competition with him: And that Paul never meant that Assent
Justifies, but not Velle, Acceptare, Consentire, Elig^re, Fiduciam habere, etc.

Suppose there be a mortal Disease that has seized on a City, which no man can
cure but one only Physician: nor he but by a Medicine that will cost him as
much as the lives of the Citizens are worth: This Physician comes and sends to
them, and offers then all without exception, that if they will but take him for
their Physician and trust him with their lives, he will not only manifest his
skill, that he is able to cure them, but he will do it, and pay for the
Physic, and not put them to pay a penny. Hereupon some that are his enemies,
and some that are mistaken in the man upon false reports, and some that judge
of him by his outward appearance, do all conclude, [this is some Deceiver, he
is not able to do any such matter; none but fools will trust him, and venture
their lives in his hand: Let us stir about and labor and we shall overcome it,
and do well enough.] On the contrary the Physician, having great compassion on
the poor deluded people, knowing their case better then themselves, and having
already bought the remedy for them, does send to them again, to tell them all,
that those that will believe him and trust him, he will certainly cure, and the
rest shall dye every man of them, for all they think to labor it away. I pray
you now put our Questions here impartially: 1. Is believing and trusting the
Physician some one single act, excluding all others? Or was it ever his intent
to advance some one act of theirs? 2. Would it not be a learned madness to
dispute whether the Physician make the act of Assent, or the act of Willing
only: or Accepting, etc. or Affiance, or Recumbency to be the Healing act; and
of what faculty that act was which must heal them? 3. Is it the Trusting and
Receiving him only 1. as one that has brought a Remedy: 2. Or as one that can
and will cure us by it: or 3. Also as one that must be obeyed in the use of
that remedy for the effecting the cure; which of these is it that he intends
must be the Object of their Act? 4. Does [Trusting him and Believing him]
exclude a Resolution to obey his Directions and the future actual obedience?
Surely no: it includes both: But it excludes both their trusting any other
Physician, and their thinking to work away the Disease and cure themselves. 5
Does Trusting or Believing him cure these men as the Instrument? or is it only
a condition without which he will not cure them? But this Question with you I
may spare.

Lastly, You question, [ How I will avoid Tompsons opinion of the Intercision
of Justification upon the committing a sin that wastes the conscience, when I
make Justification a continued Act upon condition of obedience.?] Answ. 1. Do
you not discern that the Question concerns you and every man, as much as me?
and that it is of aequal difficulty upon your own and others opinion, as upon
mine? Dr. Downame will tell you as well as I, that Justification is a continued
Act. So will Dr. Twiss, and all that with him do take it for an Immanent Act.
Your self, who take it for a transient act but once performed, do yet judge (I
doubt not,) that our Justified estate which is the effect of it is permanent:
and the relations of Reconciled, Pardoned, Adopted, are continued. Also you and
they, I hope, will confess, that Justification passive is continued on the
condition of continued faith. Now I would know how you will avoid Tompsons
Doctrine of Intercision, upon every notable defect of a Christians faith, when
unbelief gives him a foyl, which is too common? as you answer, so will I. If
you say his faith is not overcome habitually, when unbelief is prevalent in the
present Act, I will say so of his obedience. 2. You know most Divines say as
much as I, that obedience is a condition of the continuance of Justification,
(only they say that faith only is the Instrument of Justifying,) and how will
they answer you? 3. You know that all say, that obedience is a condition of
Salvation, and so of our present Title to Salvation. Now how will they avoid
Tompsons Doctrine of Intercision of that Title to Salvation, upon the
committing of such sins? 4. It is not perfect obedience which I say is the
condition, but sincere: And by sincere I mean so much as may express that we
unfeignedly take Christ still for our Lord and Savior: And so it is not every
sin that I say will forfeit or interrupt our Justification and cause it to
discontinue, (that is, lose our Title, or change our Relation in Law:) no nor
every gross sin: but only that sin which is inconsistent with the continued
Accepting Christ for our Sovereign: that sin which breaks the main Covenant,
(of which see Dr. Preston at large,) as Adultery or Desertion does in marriage:
A denying God to be our God, or Christ to be our Christ, by our works, while we
confess him in word: An actual explicit or implicit Renunciation of Christ,
and taking the flesh for our master, and the pleasing of it for our happiness;
or as the Mahometans following a false Christ. Now, I hope that no justified
person does ever commit this sin: much less any elect and justified man, of
whom Tompson speaks. You may see through his ninth chap. part 2 that Tompson
erred through misunderstanding wherein the sincerity of Faith as justifying
does consist: (I wish many more do not so.) He thought that Justification did
follow every act of undissembled Faith; but only rooted Faith would certainly
persevere; and therefore the unrooted (Though true Believers) might lose their
Justification, if they were Reprobates ( Prascits as he calls them,) or have it
interrupted, if they were elect. But if he had known (what I have asserted in
the aforesaid cap. 11. part 3. of Rest, Edit. 2.) that the very sincerity of
faith as justifying, lies not in the natural being of the act merely, but the
prevalent Degree and moral specification, then he would have known, that his
unrooted ones were never justified, and therefore never lost it. And if in
asserting justification by the only act of Faith, he had not over-looked the
use of the habit, he had not spoke so much of Intercision of Justification,
through interruption of the acts, where the Habits remain. (Of this I must
further explain my self, where it is more seasonable.) His Objections page 21.
cap. 5. part. 1. I have answered in the place before cited. Yet even Tompson
denies that ever sins once pardoned do return, or Justificationem a peccatis
s^mel remissis amitti. (page 11 part. 1 cap. 2) sed ^arsonam quae aliquando
justa fuit, posse contrabere, and aliquando actu contra^ere per nova peccata,
novum reatum ire Divinae and mortis aeternae: So that it is not the loss of the
first justification that he asserteth. I conclude then that as you and others
answer Tompson, just so will I* (if you do it well:) for it concerns my cause
no more then yours, or other men's.

But Sir, you have drawn me so near the difficulty which perplexeth me, that I
will now open it to you. How to avoid the Intercision of justification, is a
question that has long troubled me: not on any of these terms proper to my own
judgment; but how on your Grounds, or any Orthodox Divines it will be avoided.
I would know 1. whether we are Guilty (not only facti, sed poenae) of every sin
we commit? or of such sins as David's, before Repentance? if not guilty: then
what need of Pardon, of daily praying Forgive us our Debts, or of a Christ to
procure our Pardon? If we are Guilty, how can that consist with a justified
state? Reatus est obligatio ad Pernam. The least sin unpardoned, makes
obnoxious to condemnation and Hell: He that is obnoxious to them, is not at
present justified. Here I am much puzzled, and in the dark. In my Aphor. I have
slightly touched it, but so as does not quietare intellectum. I deny the
Intercision of universal Justification. Yet I dare not say but that a Believers
sins may be unpardoned till he Repent, Believe and seek pardon. And I dare not
think, that Christ teaches us to pray only for pardon in soro conscientiae, or
only of the temporal punishment, nor only for continuance of what we had
before. But how to make personal universal uninterrupted Justification consist
with the Guilt of one sin, or with one sin unpardoned, here is the knot. Our
British Divines in Dort synod. Act. de Persever. These. 5. page 266. say, that
Believers by such sins Reatum mortis incurrunt. Prideaux Lect. 6. de persev.
page 80. says, they do reatum damnabilem contrahere, sic ut saltem
demeritorie, licet non effective, Jus ad regnum caelorum penitus amittant:
(This distinction does no good: for we pray not, Forgive us our trespasses, i.
e. that they may not deserve Death) Mr. Burges of Justif. Lect. 27. page 242.
thinks, They have an actual Guilt obliging them to eternal wrath not
absolutely, but conditionally till they take the means appointed of God for
their pardon: for God does not will to them salvation while they abide in that
state. Mr. Reynolds (Life of Christ, page 404.442, 443, 496.) says, that they
certainly incur Gods displeasure and create a merit of Death, and deserve
Damnation, but de facto bring it not. Now all this opens not mine
understanding to see, How a man is Reus mortis, and yet perfectly justified
(and so, non-condemnandus etiam in sententia Legis) at the same moment of time.
And were it a thing that should be futurum, (which we may suppose) that he
should dye in that state, whether he should be justified at Judgment, and so
be saved, or not? Sir, though ^ resuse not to accept your further
Animadversions on the former Points, yet (being indeed satisfied pretty well in
them) I chiefly entreat that you would communicate to me your thoughts of this
one Point as soon as you can, if you have any clear way to untye the knot: and
if your Grounds conduce to it more then mine, I shall like them better.

Sir, pardon the prolixity here, and Acrimony elsewhere of

Your unfeigned well-willer, RICHARD BAXTER.

THE Reader must understand that since the Writing of this, I have endeavored
to clear this point in my Directions for Peace of Conscience. To which now I
add but this, that besides a Plenary Guilt or Remission, there seems to be a
Guilt and Remission that are both but imperfect and of a middle sort: that is,
that as in Peter's act of sin, the habit of faith remained, so with his Guilt, a
state of Justification remained: As none of his old sins returned on him, so
the Covenant of Grace upon his Habitual Faith did hinder the Guilt from being
Plenary or fixed, by beginning a Remission; I fear not to call it an imperfect
Remission: The Law does pronounce Death on a man for every sin, and it is so
far in force as to determine that Death is both deserved and due to this man
for this sin. But at the same instant, though after in order of nature, the
Gospel that gives pardon to Believers, does give an Imperfect pardon to David,
Peter and such Habitual Believers as soon as they sin, before Faith and
Repentance for that sin be actual; and their Pardon will become plenary when
they actually Repent and Believe. Their Sin is like the fault of a Kings Son or
Subject, that in a Passion should strike the King, when yet Habitually he has
a loving Loyal heart to him. He deserves Death, and by Law it may be his due;
but he is a Son still, and the King will not take this advantage against him,
though he will not fully pardon him, till he submit and lament his Fault. We
are still the Children of God, notwithstanding those sins that go against the
Habitual bent of our Hearts (for that's the Trial;) but must have actual Faith
and Repentance before we shall have full pardon: Whether you will call that
Pardon which the Promise gives upon mere habitual Repentance, A vertual
Pardon, and that which it gives on actual Repentance, an actual Pardon; or
what name you will give it, I leave to consideration; but complete it is not in
a case of heinous sin, till Actual Repentance: Though it may be in a case of
some unknown, unobserved or forgotten infirmities. For the full condition is
necessary to a full Pardon. He is near the case of a man that has a Pardon
granted him for Murder, but for want of some action to be performed, he has
not yet possession of it, and cannot yet plead it. If you ask me what should
become of such a man, if he so die before Repentance; I answer. 1. I think it
is a case that will never fall out: For 1. God is as it were engaged by Love
and Promise, and by giving his indwelling Spirit to Believers, to bring them to
Repentance. 2. The new Nature or Disposition of such a man will not suffer him
to be long without Actual Repentance, at least in some measure; especially when
Death shall look him in the fa^e. I doubt not but David did repent before
Nathan spoak to him; but God would not wake up with so short and secret a
Repentance for so great and odious a Crime. 2. But if you can prove it
profitable for such a (...) to be suddenly cut off before Repentance, and that
such a thing will be, I should incline to think that he will be fully pardoned
at the instant of Death, and so saved; because the Lord knows that he
repented Habitually and vertually, and would have done it actually, if he had
had time for consideration. 3. Or if we should conclude that God has purposely
left men of such a middle condition, without any certainty how he will deal
with them, that so no man may be encouraged to sin, and in Impudency, I think
it no dangerous Doctrine, nor injurious to the Body of saving Truth. And thus I
have now (many years since the writing of the foregoing Papers) told you in
brief what satisfies me concerning this difficult point, for the reconciling
of the guilt of every particular sin, especially the more heinous, with the
Doctrine of persevering, uninterrupted Justification. Somewhat also I have said
of it in my Papers expressing my Judgment about Perseverance, lately published.

Jan. 5. 1657. 8.

THE FOURTH DISPVTATION.

Qu. Whether the Faith which Paul opposes to Works in the Point of
Justification, be one only Physical Act of the soul? Neg.

OR, Whether all Humane Acts, except one Physical Act of Faith, be the Works
which are excluded by Paul in the Point of Justification? Neg.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in Kederminster, and
are to be sold by him there, and by Nathaniel Ekins at the Gun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

Question. Whether the Faith which Paul opposes to Works in the Point of
Justification, be one only Physical Act of the Soul? Neg. OR, Whether all
Humane Acts, except one Physical Act of faith, be the Works which are excluded
by Paul in the Point of Justification? Neg.
I PUT these two Questions together for brevity and Elucidation of the Matter
in doubt; for so in effect they are but One* avoiding all unnecessary
Explication of terms concerning which we are agreed; it is but little that I
have need to say for your understanding of the sense of the Question.

1. It is here supposed that Paul does maintain Justification by Faith, and
opposes it to Justification by the works of the Law: and so opposes Salvation
by Grace and by works. 2. It is supposed that non datur tertium, there is no
middle way of Justification besides these two, by faith, or by Works: and
therefore whatsoever Acts we are here justified by, it must needs follow, that
those Acts are none of the [Works] that Paul here speaks of as excluded: and
whatsoever Acts are excluded are none of the Faith, by which Paul tells us
here that we are justified. This we are agreed on, and so it is often pressed
by my Opponents that there is no third way; which I grant them. But note that I
do not therefore grant them that there is no tertium, or other act either
employed in Faith, or subservient to it in that way of Justification that is by
Faith: It was never Paul's meaning to exclude all other Gracious Acts relating
to Christ, no not from this business of Justification, as attendants on Faith,
or modifications of it, employed in it, or subservient to it, And therefore it
will not follow that any third thing by which we are thus justified, is either
Faith or Works; but only that is not Works, because they are excluded.

3. I put the Physical Act whose Unity we speak of, in contradistinction to one
moral Fact, which may contain many Physical Acts: such as Marriage, which is
one in a civil or moral sense, but many Physical Acts: and such as almost all
Contracts be; as taking a man to be my Prince, my Commander, my Tutor, my
Physician, my Councellor, etc. which every one of them contain many Physical
acts.

4. There is a fourfold Unity here to be discerned, that the term [One] may be
understood. 1. A general Unity, and this is not it in question. We are agreed
that in genere actus, and in genere actus secundi, and in genere actus
immanentis, Faith is but One. 2. A Unity of the lowest Genus, and the superi or
species. 3. A Unity of the species specialissima. 4. A Numerical Unity. Our
Question is of the third: but yet because the second and fourth are also
controverted, I shall speak of them before I come to the Question. And
concerning the fourth I Assert, that [ The Faith which Paul opposes to Works
in the Point of Justification, is not only one numerical Act of the Soul.

My Opponents in this (though they are unwilling to appear in the opposition)
must needs be all those that say, Justification is simul and semel, at once and
but once, and that it is a good Argument against any acts or works after Faith
that [They exist not till we are justified, therefore they are no conditions of
our Justification:] and all those that deny and scorn the distinction between
1. Our Justification at the first (or putting us into a justified state) 2. And
our daily Justification by the continuation of that state. 3. And our
frequently reiterated particular Justification from the Guilt of particular
sins. 4. And our final Justification by the sentence of the Judge. Especially
by denying the second, they must needs deny my Assertion, as shall be showed
anon.

Argum. 1. If Paul speak not only of Justification as begun, but as continued,
then the Faith which he opposes to works is not only one numerical Act. (For
there must needs go some other Numerical Act before it, or else the person
could not be justified by faith before) But the Antecedent is true, as I prove
from Romans 4.18, 19. and Gal. 3. If Paul prove Justification by faith, from the
instance of Abraham's believing after that he was justified, then he speaks
not only of Justification as begun (or of our first Being justified) But the
Antecedent is plain in the Text compared with Genesis 12. and 13 and 14. and 15.
Abraham was a justified man before he believed the Promise of Sara's having a
Son.

Argum. 2 If a true Believer have a justifying Faith after his first
Justification, even as long as he lives, then the Faith which Paul opposes to
works is not only one numerical Act (because that first Numerical Act does not
continue with us.) But the Antecedent is true, as appears 1. from the
forementioned Instance of Abraham. 2, From the necessity of a continued Active
Justification: For the Passive else would cease, and we should be unjustified.
If God did not continue to forgive us, and still actively repute us just, and
accept us as just and impute Righteousness to us, and his Gospel-Grant did not
continually justify us, (as every Fundamentum continually causes the
Relation,) we should cease to be justified: And Gods active Justification
continues not without the continuance of man's Actual or Habitual Faith:
Otherwise he should justify an Infidel, and he should justify afterward in
another way, and on other terms then he did at first. 3. From the continued
Efficacy of Christ's Merits, Intercession and Covenant, which daily justify us.
So that he that says, that he was never justified but once at one moment, and
by one numemerical Act of Faith, must say that Christ was his Justifier
actually but for a moment, and that he will not be beholden to him to justify
him any more.

And yet that no man may have a pretense of quarrelling about mere words, that
has a mind to it, let it still be remembered, that as the word [Justification]
is used to signify the first making a man just that was unjust (relatively or
qualitatively,) So I confess that God, that Christ, that the Covenant do
justify us Universally but once (though particularly from particular sins
often) And thus it is but one Act of Faith by which we are justified
Relatively, and not the Habit at all. But as Justification is taken for the
same Act continued (though the mutation on us be not ab eodem termino) so we
are justified every moment, and have a justifying faith continually, and are
justified by the Habit, at least as much as by the Act; and in some respect
more. The Sun does as truly Illuminate our part of the world all day after, as
at Sun rising, and by the same Action or Emanation in kind: But as Illuminating
is taken for turning night into day, or illuminating the dark world from its
darkness, so it does only illuminate it from break of day to Sun rising. Your
Lease of your house or Land does first make you a Tenant of no* Tenant at the
first sealing and delivering: but it may by the same sort of action continue
your Right till it expire, and so continue you a Tenant; And thus we are
continually justified by God, by Christ, by the Covenant and by Faith.

Now as to the second kind or matter of Unity (of an Inferior Genus and
Superior species;) this is twofold. 1. As the Acts of man's soul are specified
and denominated from the Faculties or Powers: or (if any deny that real
distinction of faculties) from the Objects of Intellection, Volition, etc.
generally considered. 2. As the acts of the soul are specified by their special
Objects (though not speciei specialissimae.) As to the former, the question is
one of these two (which you will in terms, for they are one in sense) Whether
the act of Faith which Paul opposes to works in Justification, be only an act
of the Intellect, or only an act of the Will? Or, Whether it have only Entity
and Verity, or only Goodness for its Object? And in the second case the
Question is this, Whether God alone, or Christ alone, or the Promise alone, or
Pardon or Righteousness alone, or Heaven alone etc. be the Object of that Faith
which Paul opposes to works in Justification.

But the thing intended in our Question is de specie specialissima, Whether it
be but one special act which Paul opposes to works in Justification. Here are
three more Propositions that I shall handle in order, though the last only be
necessary to me.

Proposition 2. The Faith which Paul opposes to works in Justification, is not
only an Act of the Intellect, nor only of the Will.

I shall say but little of this, because I have among Protestants but few
Adversaries. The Papists indeed seat it in the Intellect only: and so does
Camero (calling it a Persuasion) and some few Protestants: some few others (as
Amesius sometimes) place it only in the Will, and take Assent to be but a
presupposed Act: and they call it Affiance* or (as Amesius) also Election,
Acceptance, or Consent, or embracing, or Recumbency, or such like. Pemble
taking Truth and Goodness to be all one, and the Understanding and Will for all
one, takes also Assent and Affiance for all one; but I shall go on the
supposition that his singular opinion is commonly disallowed; however the
Scotists, and many others deny the real Distinction of Faculties. The common
Vote of Protestant Divines is, that Faith is in both Faculties, the Intellect
and Will, and has for its object the Entity of Christ's person, and the Verity
of the Gospel, and the goodness of Christ and his benefits offered, which Faith
accepts. Davenants Words are plain and true, Determ. Qu. 38. page 174. In
actu fidei justificantis tota anima se convertit ad causam justificantem: And
qu. 37. page 166. Fides illa quam Scriptura agnoscit habet in se complicatum
actum Voluntatis and Intellectus -- Neque nobis absurdum, sed valde
consentaneum videtur actum illum quo tota anima purificatur and justificatur ad
totam animam pertinere; ita ut in nudo intellectu habeat initium; in voluntate
complementum.

Argument 1. The Object of this Faith is both Truth and Goodness: Therefore it
is the act both of the Intellect and the Will. That Truth is the Object of it
is evident, 1. In that the Metaphysical Verity of Christ's person is the Object
of it, or else Christ were not the Object of it. 2. In that the moral Verity of
the Gospel, 1. as revealing Christ, 2. as promising pardon, is the object of
it, as is confessed, and the Scripture does so plentifully declare, that it were
superfluous to cite the words.

That goodness is the object of it, appears, 1. In that Christ as Redeemer,
Mediator, Savior, is the object of it, and that is, Christ as necessary and
good to us. It is Christ for our forgiveness, Justification and Salvation: and
so under the formal notion of good. 2. In that it is a Promise as a Promise
(Testament, Grant, or Deed of Gift) that is the Object by it. And it is
Essential to these to be good to us as well as True: and the Truth is but for
the good. 3. In that it is Pardon, Justification and Life eternal finally, that
are the object of it; which as such, and as offered to us, are good. If I
thought these things needed proof, I would give you more.

Argument 2. The Scripture reveals to us that this Faith is the Act both of
the Intellect and the Will, therefore it is so. That it is the act of the
Intellect, is so plain in Scripture, that I should accuse my self of wearying
you with needless work, if I should go about to prove it. The Papists are right
enough in thus much: and Dr. Downame de Justific. and against Pemble in Append.
to Covenant of Grace, has proved it at large. That it is an act of the Will,
our Divines have fully proved against the Papists in many a full Discourse; 1.
From the sense of (...), and (...), which signify Affiance, and such an
Affiance as is the act of the Will as well as of the Intellect. 2. Because the
Scripture often puts [Willing] as equipollent to Believing; in Revel. 22.17.
Whosoever Will, let him take the water of Life freely] where Willing and Taking
are both acts of the Will, and the faith in question; so in other places. 3.
The Scripture calls it by the name of Receiving Christ, Joh. 1.12. Col. 2.6.
which is the Acceptance or consent of the Will. 4. The Scripture often makes
Faith to be the Internal covenanting and closure of the heart with Christ,
which is the act of the Will; and therefore it persuades with the Will to this
end; and accuses men as unwilling, and calls them Refusers, Neglecters,
Slighters, Rejecters, Despisers of Christ, that are Unbelievers (privatively.)
I trouble you not to cite the Texts as being needless, and done by many.
Besides that (as in the former Argument) the Promise, Christ, Pardon, Life, and
other good things, as good, are frequently made the Object of Faith.

Argument 3. The Veracity of God is the formal Object of Faith. But the
Veracity of God is his Goodness (or participateth at least as much of his
Goodness as of his Wisdom and his Power:) therefore the Goodness of Good is the
formal Object of Faith: and consequently it is an act of the Will. God cannot
lie, because he is perfectly good, wise and Powerful.

Object. But (say some Papists) All these acts that you mention here, are Love
and not Faith: Faith does but assent, and Love consents or accepts.

Answ. 1. Do you not your selves call it fides formata charitate? And why then
may not we call it faith? 2. The Scripture calls it Faith in the phrases
formentioned, (...), etc. and therefore it is Faith. 3. Though sometimes in
other cases the Apostle distinguish Faith, Hope and Love; yet when he speaks
of Faith as justifying, and as the form of a Christian, he comprehends Love
to Christ as Savior in it, and a confidence in him, such as in common Language
we call Hope. As Love signifies the Passion of the soul, it may be a
consequent; but as it is but the velle Christum, and beneficia oblata, so it is
faith it self, as Maccovius and Chamier have truly told the Papists. It was a
faith in Christ (though beginning to sink) that's expressed Luke 24.21. [(...).]
[But we trusted that it had been he that should have redeemed Israel.] Our
Translators have put we Trusted for we Hoped, because they thought the
signification the same, or else they would not sure have done it. And when the
Apostle says, that (...), Heb. 11.1. If we may denominate the act from the
Object, we may see that he there makes Faith and Hope to be co-essential. And
when Christ is called (...), Christ our Hope, it seems hope there is but an act
of Faith. And so 2 Cor. 1.10. 1 Timothy 4.10. To Hope in God or Christ, or put our
Hope in him, seems to me all one as to put our Trust in him for future Mercy,
which is Faith. To which is opposed 1 Timothy 6.17. putting our Hope in riches, so
1 Cor. 15.19. to have Hope in Christ, so the Septuagint, Psalm. 42.26. (...):
[Hope in God,] is a Complication of Faith and Hope in one word, and translated
by us, Trust in God.

4. Though the Willing, Consent or Acceptance of an offered Benefit, have truly
somewhat of Love in it, yet Love is not the proper name of that Act. Every
Volition is not usually called Love.

Prop. 3. It is not not only God the Father, nor only Christ the Redeemer, nor
only the Promise, nor only pardon, or Righteousness, or Heaven, that is the
object of that faith which Paul opposes to works in Jusification.

Argument 1. If many or all these art so linked together, that to believe one
of them as revealed in Scripture, is to believe more or all, then it is not any
one of them alone that is the object of that Faith which Paul opposes to
works. But the Antecedent is true, as is evident, e. g. To believe in Christ,
is to believe the promise of the Gospel concerning Christ. For there is no
Belief without a word of revelation to believe. So that here Christ and the
Promise are necessarily conjunct, and Christ and the Gospel History. And to
believe the Gospel with a Divine Faith, is to Believe Gods veracity, and to
believe the Gospel because of Gods Veracity: For this is the Objectum formale
without which there is no faith. So that Believing in God is essential to all
Divine faith. Also materially; to Believe in Christ, is to Believe in him as
our Savior, to save us from the Guilt of sin, even as to believe in a
Physician is to Trust on him to cure us of our Diseases. So forgiveness of sin,
being an end essential to Christ's Office, it is essential to our Faith in
Christ. So also to believe in Christ as a Savior, is to believe in him as one
that is able and willing to reconcile us, and bring us to the favor of God:
And so God and his favor and Reconciliation with him are ends essential to the
office of a Savior (as health is to the Physicians) and therefore they are
essential to our Belief in a Savior. The same may be said of eternal Life: so
that you may see that these have essential respects to one another, and Christ
cannot be believed in alone without the rest as co-essentials respectively in
the object of our faith. Nor can the Promise be believed without believing in
the Promiser and Promised.

Argument 2. The Scripture most expressly makes many such Objects of that faith
which Paul opposes to works in Justification; therefore so must we.

Romans 3.22, 24, 25, 26. There are expressly mentioned all these Objects of
justifying faith. 1. The Righteousness of God. 2, The Person of Jesus Christ,
3. Redemption by Christ, and his propitiatory blood. 4. Remission of sins past.
5. God as a Justifier of Believers; see the Text.

Romans 4 3, 5.6, 7, 8, 17 20, 21, 24, 25 There are all these objects of
Justifying faith expressed, even when the work of Justification is described,
1. God as Revealer and true: 2. God as Justifier. 3. Righteousness; imputation
of it; forgiveness of sin, not imputing it. 4. God as Omniscent. 5. God as
Omnipotent. 6. Jesus our Lord. 7. The death of Christ for our offenses. 8. The
Resurrection of Christ for our Justification. 9. God as the raiser of Christ
from the Dead. Read the words, and you shall find them all expressly mentioned.
I think it superfluous to cite more Texts.

Prop. 4. The faith which Paul opposes to works in the business of
Justification, is not any one single Physical act in Specie specialissima: Nor
was it ever the meaning of Paul to exclude all acts except some such one, from
Justification, under the name of works.

For the proof of this, it is done already, if any one of the three former
Propositions be proved. To which I add Argument 1. from an instance of some
other particulars. If any or all the following particular Acts be such as are
not to be reckoned with works, then it is no one act alone that Paul opposes
to works. But all or some of the following acts are such as are not to be
reckoned with works excluded. Ergo, etc.

E. g. 1. An Assent to the truth of the Gospel in general as the Word of God.
2. A belief on Gods Veracity in this expressed. 3. An Assent to the Truth of the
Word that tells us that Christ is God. 4. An Assent to the truth of the
Article of Christ's Manhood. 5. An Assent to the Truth of the Article of his
conception by the Holy Ghost, and being born of a Virgin, 6. And to the Article
of his being born without original sin in himself. 7. And to the Article of his
sinless holy life. 8. And to the Article of his actual death. 9. And that this
death was for our sins. 10. And that God has accepted it as a sufficient
Ransom, sacrifice or Atonement. 11. And that he actually rose again from the
dead, and overcame death. 12. And that he is the Lord and King of the Church.
13. And that he is the Prophet and Teacher of the Church. 14. And that he is
ascended into Heaven and Glorified, God and man. 15. And that he is now our
Intercessor and Mediator with the Father. 16. And that he has purchased by his
Ransom and given or offered in the Gospel, the free pardon of sin. 17. And that
he has also purchased and offered us eternal life in Glory with God. 18. And
that its the members of Christ, and of the Holy Catholic Church, that shall
partake of pardon and life by Christ. 19. And that he will give us the
Resurrection of life at last. 20. And that he will judge the world. I have
omitted our special Belief in God the Father as Creator, and in the Holy Ghost,
and have given you in these twenty Acts, no more then what is contained in this
one word, [I believe in Christ as Christ] I think there is if any, but few that
are not essential to Faith in Jesus Christ as the Savior. And all these acts
of assent are parts of the faith that is the means of our Justification; and
none of them part of the excluded works. And besides all these there are as
many acts of the Will as of the Intellect concurring in or to this very assent,
so that there is twenty more. For its plain, that seeing the objects of all
these are Good as well as True, they being all Truths concerning our benefit
and Salvation, the Will it self in the Intellects assenting, does command it to
assent, and also does place a certain Affiance in the Revealer, which we call
in English crediting or Giving credit to one, we rest our selves upon his
Truth. As I said before, Veracity is Gods Goodness, and Veracity is the formal
Object in every one of the other Acts about the material Object; and therefore
the Will must act upon Veracity, and so have a part in assent it self: not as
assent, but as a Voluntary assent, and as an assent to Promises or Revelations
of good to us. There is goodness in the word of Revelation subordinate, or in
order to the good Revealed. And so there is an act of the Will upon the good in
the Word, complicated with the Intellects Assent, besides the following fuller
act of the Will, upon Christ and the benefits themselves. And therefore there
is a twofold Affiance. 1. An Affiance in Gods Veracity as the Revealer. 2. An
Affiance in Christ the Mediator, as the bestower, accomplisher and actual
Savior or Deliverer according to his Office and Covenant. The first is an act
of the Will concurring with Assent. And of this Pembles opinion is near Truth,
though not fully it. For here Affiance is as closely joined with Assent as Heat
in the Sun with Light, though they are not the same, But then the second sort
of Affiance follows Assent, and has another act of the Will interceding,
which is Consent or acceptance of the Benefit offered; which also is closely
conjunct with the first act of the Will. And then follows last of all
affiance in Christ for the performance of the undertaken acts. And these latter
are also many particular Physical acts, as the objects in specie specialissima
are many. And yet all these make but one object in a moral sense, and so but
one act, and are done in a few moments of time* of which after. Would it not be
too tedious, I should stay to cite several Texts, to prove that never a one of
all these acts is excluded as works by Paul. But of diverse of them its before
proved from Romans 3. and 4. and of more in Heb. 11. and in Gal. 3.1, 6, 7, 8, 9,
13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22. There are at least these Objects of Justifying
faith expressed. 1. Christ's Person, 2. that he was seed promised. 3. That he
was crucified. 4. That this was for our sins. 5. That he was made a curse for
us in this his death. 6. That hereby he Redeemed us from the curse. 7. That he
is the Mediator. 8. God as the Party with whom he is Mediator. 9. God as
Believed in his Promise. 10. God as Justifier. 11. The Gospel preached, and he
Promise made. 12. Blessedness by Christ. 13. The confirmed Covenant. 14. The
Inheritance. 15. Righteousness. 16. Adoption. 17. That Belief is the means, and
believers the subjects of these benefits. All these objects of Faith you will
find in the Text.

Argument 2. Ex natura rei. If other acts of faith in Christ are no more works
then that one (whatsoever it be) which you will say Paul opposes to works,
then Paul does not call them works* or number them with works. But the
Antecedent is true, therefore so is the Consequent. Doubtless the Scripture
calls them as they are: and therefore if they are not works, it calls them not
works. And for the Antecedent, 1. If by works you mean the Keeping of the first
Covenant by sinless obedience, so neither the one or the other are works. 2. If
you mean the keeping of Moses Law; so neither of them are works. 3. If you mean
the performance of an act of obedience to any Precept of God, so the several
acts are works, but justify not as acts of obedience to the command (that's but
their matter) but as the condition of the Promise. 4. If you mean that they are
Acts of the soul of man, so every act of Faith is a work, though it justify
not as such, so that here is no difference to be found. E. g. If you make the
Believing in Christ as Dying, (though you take in both assent and affiance) to
be the only Justifying act; what reason can you give why our Believing in
Christ incarnate, in Christ obeying the Law, in Christ rising again, and
Glorified and Interceding, in Christ actually now giving out the pardon of sin
and Adoption, etc. should be called works any more then our Believing in Christ
as crucified? No reason at all, nor any Scripture can be brought for it. Yea
what reason have you that our Believing in Christ as the Physician of our
souls, to cure us of our sins, and cleanse our hearts, and sanctify our
Natures, and in Christ as the Teacher and Guide of our souls to life eternal,
should be called works any more then the other? Or that believing in Christ's
blood for everlasting Life and happiness, should be any more called works then
believing in his blood for Justification? Yea that Believing in him as the
King, and Head, and Captain of his Church to subdue their enemies, and by his
Government conduct them to perseverance and to Glory, should any more be called
works then believing on him as crucified in order to forgiveness?

Argument 3. All acts Essential to faith in Christ as Christ, are opposed to
works by Paul in the point of Justification, and are not the works opposed to
Faith. But many acts are essential to faith in Christ as Christ; therefore they
are many acts that are opposed to works; and no one of those acts is the works
excluded.

The Major is proved thus: If faith in Christ as such, be it that Paul opposes
to works, then every essential part of it is by Paul opposed to works (for it
is not faith in Christ if it want any essential part) But the Antecedent is
true. Ergo. -- The Minor I have proved in the first Disputation: Though
sometime it is said to be [by faith in his blood] that we have remission of
sin; and sometime that we are justified if we believe in him that raised Christ
from the dead, etc. Yet most frequently it is said to be by faith in Christ; by
believing in the Lord Jesus, receiving Christ Jesus the Lord etc. Belive in the
Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, was the Gospel preached to the Jailer,
Acts 16. But this is sufficiently proved already. That many acts are essential
to faith in Christ as such, is also proved: and particularly, that believing in
him as our Teacher, Lord, and as Rising, Interceding, and Justifying by
sentence and Gift, as well as believing in him as dying for our Justification.
As Christ is not Christ (as to his Office and work) without these Essentials,
so faith is not the Christian faith without these acts.

But here observe that though I say these acts of faith are not the works which
Paul excludes, I speak of them as they are, and not as they are misunderstood:
For if any man should imagine that Believing in Christ is a Legal Meritorious
work, and that can justify him of or for it self; I will not deny but he may
so make another thing of faith, and so bring it among excluded works (if it be
possible for him to believe contradictories:) But then, this is as true of one
act of Faith as another: If a man imagine that its thus Meritorious to Believe
in Christ as purchasing him Justification, it is as much the excluded works, as
to think it Meritorious to Believe in him as our Teacher, or King and Judge,
that will lead us to final Absolution, and actually justify us by his Sentence
at that Judgment.

Argument 4. Those acts of Faith that are necessary to Justification, are none
of the works that Paul excludes from Justification (unless changed by
misunderstanding* as aforesaid.) But other acts of faith as well as one are
necessary to Justification: Ergo. --

The Minor (which only is worthy the labor of a proof) 1. is proved before,
and in the first Disputation. 2. And it is confessed by my Opponents, that say
[ Faith in Christ as Teacher, King, etc. is the fides quae Justificat, and the
condition of Justification, as Repentance also is, though it be not the
Instrumental cause, as they think some other Act is. Paul does not exclude that
which he makes necessary.

Argument 5. That which makes not the Reward to be of Debt and not of Grace, is
none of the works that Paul sets faith against. But other acts of faith in
Christ do not make the reward to be of Debt and not of Grace any more then the
one act which you will choose ( E. g. Believing in Christ as King and Teacher,
any more then believing in him as a Ransom:) therefore they are not the works
that Paul's sets faith against. The Major is proved from the Description of the
excluded works, Romans 4.4. The Minor is evident.

Argument 6. All acts of Faith in Christ as our Justifier, are such as are
opposed to works by Paul, and are none of the works which faith is opposed to.
But they are more then one or two that are Acts of faith in Christ as
Justifier: Ergo. --

The Major I think will be granted; the Minor is plain: For 1. Christ
justifies us meritoriously as a Sacrifice. 2. And as Obeying and fulfilling
the Law. 3. As the complement of his satisfaction, and the entrance upon his
following execution, his Resurrection justifies us. 4. As the Heavenly Priest
at Gods right hand, he justifies us by his Intercession. 5 As King and Head,
he justifies us by his Covenant or Law of Grace. 6. As King and Judge he
justifies us by sentence* 7. As Prophet he teaches us the Doctrine of
Justification, and how to attain to Justification by sentence. So that at
least* none of these are the excluded works.

Argum. 7. If the whole Essence of Christian faith be opposed to works, and so
be none of the opposed works in the matter of Salvation, then its so also in
the matter of Justification. But the Antecedent is true; therefore so is the
Consequent.

The Minor is confessed by my Opponents. The consequence of the Major I prove.
1. Because Salvation is as free as Justification, and no more of works which
Paul excludes. 2. Salvation comprehends Justification: and Glorification
has the same conditions as final Justification at Judgment, it being part of
Justification to adjudge that Glory. 3. The express Scripture excludes works as
much from Salvation as from Justification: Ephesians. 2.8, 9. For by Grace ye are
saved through faith; and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of
works, lest any man should boast. Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. [Not by works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by
the washing of, Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed
on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being justified by his
Grace, we should be made Heirs according to the hope of eternal Life.] Many
such places are obvious to any diligent Reader. For the Minor also read 1 Cor.
15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.

Argum. 8. If no man can name any one Act of faith that is opposed to all the
rest as works, or opposed to works when the rest are not, then no such thing it
to be asserted. But no man can name the Act that is thus opposed alone to
works. 1. It is not yet done that I know of. We cannot get them to tell us what
Act it is. 2. And if they do, others will make as good a claim to the
Prerogative.

Argum. 9. They that oppose us, and affirm the Question, do feign God to have a
strange partiality to one Act of faith above all the rest, without any reason
or aptitude in that act to be so exalted. But this is not to be feigned (and
proved it cannot be,) that God should annex our Justification to the Belief in
Christ as a sacrifice only; and to oppose this to belief in him as Rising,
Interceding, Teaching, Promising or Judging, is a fiction contrary to
Scripture. Examine any Text you please, and see whether it will run well with
such an Exposition, Romans 4.4, 5. [ Now to him that works, i. e. Believes in
Christ as Teacher, Judge, Intercessor, and is the reward not reckoned of Grace
but of Debt. But to him that works not, that is, believes not on Christ as
King and Teacher, etc. but Believes on him that justifies the ungodly (an act
of his Kingly office) etc. -- Does this run well? I will not trouble you with
so unsavory a Paraphrase upon the like Scriptures: you may try at pleasure on
Romans 3. and 4. and Gal. 3. Ephesians. 2. Phil. 3. or any such Text.

Argument 10. If the Doctrine of the Opponents (holding the Affirmative) were
true, then no man can tell whether he be a condemned Legalist, or not: yea
more, if it be not faith in Christ as such (containing the whole Essence) by
which we are justified, as opposed to works, or which is none of the excluded
works; then no man can tell but he is a condemned Legalist. But the Consequent
is false; therefore so is the Antecedent.

The Reason of the Consequence is, because no man is able to tell you which is
the sole justifying Act, or which are the only acts, if it be not faith
Essentially that is it; for among all the acts before mentioned, if a man
mistake and think one other ( E. g. faith in Christ's Resurrection, in Christ as
King, Judge, Teacher, etc.) is it by which he must be justified, then he falls
upon Justification by Works, and so falls short of Grace: for if it be of
Works, then it is no more of Grace: else Works were no Works. And so no man can
tell but he destroys Grace, and expects Justification by works: much less
can weak Christians tell. I never yet saw or heard from any Divine a just
Nomination (with proof) of the one Justifying act, or a just Enumeration of the
many acts, if all must not be taken in that are Essential. Some say Affiance is
the only act: but as that's confuted by the most that take in Assent also, so
there are many and many acts of Affiance in Christ that are necessary: and they
should tell us which of these it is.

Object. And do you think that we can any better tell when we have all that are
Essential? Or does every weak Christian believe all the twenty Articles that
you mentioned at first?

Answ. 1. We can better know what is Revealed then what is unrevealed. The
Scripture tells us what faith in Christ is; but not what one or two acts do
Justify, excluding all other as Works. Divines have often defined Faith; but I
know not that any has defined any such one act, as thus exalted above the rest
of the Essence of Faith. If we covld not tell what is essential to Faith, we
could not tell what faith is. 2. The twenty Objects of Assent before mentioned
are not all Articles or material Objects* the second is the formal Object. And
of the rest, unless the Fifth [Believing that Christ was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, and born of a Virgin] may be excepted (which I dare not affirm) I know
not of one that's not essential to Christianity. And I think if we had Heretics
among us that denied Christ to be conceived by the Holy Ghost, we should scarce
take them for Christians. But that man that shall deny or not believe that
Christ is God, that he is Man* that he was no sinner, that he dyed, and that
for our sins, and that he was a Sacrifice or Ransom for us, and that he Rose
again, is Glorified, and will judge us: that he has offered us a pardon of
sin; that there will be a Resurrection of the body, and life Everlasting by
this our Redeemer, I cannot see how he can be a Christian. And for the number
of Articles, ^ left out much of the ancient Creed it self, (the Belief in God
the Father, Creator, etc. in the Holy Ghost: the Article of the Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints, of Christ's burial, Descent into Hell, and
more.) And yet do you think this too big to be essential to Christian Faith? If
so, tell not any Heretic that denies any one of these, that he denies an
Essential Article of our faith.

But for the ignorant weak Christian, I say, 1. He knows all these Articles
that I have named; but 2. perhaps not with so ripe a manner of apprehension as
is formed into mental words, or which he can express in words to others: I find
my self in my studies, that I have sometimes an apprehension of a Truth before I
have ripened that conception for an expression. 3. And perhaps they are not
Methodical and Distinct in their conceptions, and cannot say that there are
just so many Articles. Every sick man can understand what it is to desire and
accept of such a man to be his Physician; and herein he first verily desires
health, and secondly, desires Physic as a means to Health, and thirdly,
desires the Physician in order to the use of that means, and fourthly, therein
does take him to be a Physician, and fifthly, to have competent skill, and
sixthly, to be in some measure faithful, to be trusted, and seventhly, does
place some confidence in him, etc. all this and more is truly in his mind; and
yet perhaps they are not ripened and measured into such distinct conceptions,
as that he can distinctly tell you all this in tolerable Language, or does
observe then as distinct Conceptions in himself (and whether uno intuitu the
eye and the Intellect may not see many Objects, though ab objectis, the acts
must be called many and diverse, is a Controversy among Philosophers; and as I
remember Pet. Hurtad. de Mendoza affirms it.) But if you your selves will
form all these into distinct conceptions, and ask your Catechist his judgment
of them, its like he can make you perceive at least by a Yea or Nay, that he
understands them all. The new formed body of the Infant in the Womb has all
the Integral parts of a man; and yet so small that you cannot so easily discern
them as you may do the same parts when he is grown up to manhood. So the
knowledge of every particular Essential Article of faith is truly in the
weakest Christian in the very moment of his conversion; but perhaps it may be
but by a more crude imperfect Conception, that observes not every Article
distinctly, nor any of them very clearly, but his knowledge is both too dim and
too confused. And yet I must say that it is not only such as some Papists call
a Virtual or Implicit Faith or knowledge, As to believe only the General
Revelation and the formal Object; as that the Scripture is Gods Word, and God
is true: or that whatever the Church propounds as an Article of faith is true;
while they know not what the Church or Scripture does propound: for this is not
actual Christian faith, but such a part as a man may have that is no Christian.
And yet some Papists would persuade us that where this much is, there is saving
faith, though the person believe not (yea, or deny by the probable Doctrine of
seducing Doctors) some of the foresaid Essential Articles.

Argum. 11. If the terms [ Faith in Christ, receiving Christ, Resting on
Christ, etc.] are to be understood as Civil, Political and Ethical terms in a
moral sense, then must we suppose that they signify many Physical acts, and
not any one only. But these terms are to be thus morally understood. Ergo. --
The Antecedent is proved thus. Terms are to be understood according to the
nature of the Subject and Doctrine: But the Subject and Doctrine of the Gospel
which uses these terms, is Moral Political: therefore the terms are agreeably
to be interpreted. The same term in Physic, Law, Mathematics, Soldiery,
Navigation, Husbandry, etc. has various significations: but still it must be
interpreted according to the nature and use of the doctrine, Art or Science
that makes use of it. The consequence of the Major is proved, because it is
the use of Ethics and Politics thus to interpret such phrases, as containing
diverse Physical Acts. Marriage is one Civil act; but it is many Physical Acts:
it contains diverse acts of the understanding concerning the Essentials of the
Relation: and diverse acts of the Will in consenting thereunto; and the outward
words or signs of Consent, for making the Contract. So taking a man to be my
King my General, my Tutor, Teacher, Pastor, Physician, Master, etc. all
signify the acts of the Understanding, Will and expressing Powers, which the
several parts of the Objects do require.

Argument 12. If there be many Acts besides Faith in Christ, attendant on it,
and subservient to it, which are none of the works which Paul excludes, and
opposes faith to; then the Essential Acts of faith it self are none of those
works. But the Antecedent is true, as I prove in some instances:

For a man to repent of sin, to confess it, to believe and confess that we are
unworthy of any Mercy, and unable to justify our selves, or make satisfaction
for our sias, and that we are in absolute necessity of Christ, having no
Righteousness, Sanctification or Sufficiency of our own, to take God for our
Father reconciled in Christ, and to Love him accordingly: to forgive our
Brethren from the sense of Christ's forgiving us: to show our Faith by fruitful
works and words. When Paul says, Romans 4.4, 5. [To him that works the Reward
is not of Grace] the meaning is not [To him that repents to him that denies
himself and his own Righteousness to his Justification, to him that confesses
his sin, that loves God as a reconciled Father in Christ, etc,] and when he
says, [To him that works not, but believeth] the meaning is not [ to him
that loves not God, to him that repents not, that forgiveth not others, etc.
but believes.

Object. But yet it may be [to him that thinks not to be justified by or for
these, but by Faith.] Answer 1. Concomitants and Subordinates may not be set in
opposition; faith supposes the Concomitancy and Subserviency of these in and
to Justification 2. Believing in Christ's Ransom, may as well be excluded too,
if men think to be justified for so doing meritoriously. 3. He that thinks to
be Justified by any work in that way which is opposed to Justification by Grace
and Faith, must think to be justified by the Merit of them, or without a
Savior, which all these Graces forementioned contradict. 4. God says
expressly, that we must [ Repent and be converted, that our sins may be blotted
out: and repent that we may be forgiven: and if we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins: and if we forgive, we shall be
forgiven; and that by works we are justified and not by faith only: and that by
our words we shall be justified: So that Paul's works which he opposes faith
to, are neither James' works, nor any of these particulars mentioned: for these
are made necessary conditions or means of pardon, and of some sort of
Justification, such as Paul's works could not contribute to, which were falsely
imagined by the doers to make the Reward to be not of Grace but Debt.

Object. There is but one faith, Ephesians. 4.3. Answer. But that One faith has many
Physical Acts or Articles. There is but one true Religion, but it has many
parts. There is but one Gospel, but that one contanieth many particular Truths.

COnsect. 1. To be justified by Faith, is to be justified by Faith in Christ as
Christ, and not by any one part of that Faith, excluding any of its Essential
parts.

2. To be justified by Faith in Christ as Christ, and so as Rising, Teaching,
Pardoning, Ruling, Judging, as well as satisfying, i.e. as the Savior that
has undertaken all this, is not in Paul's sense to be justified by works:
therefore it is the true Justification by Faith.

3. It is therefore unsound to make any one Act or part of Faith the fides qua
Justificans, and the other Essential parts to be the fides qua justificat, when
no more can be said of any but that it is fides ex qua justificamur, and that
may be said of all.

4. Though Faith be an Acceptance of Christ and Life as offered in the Gospel,
so that its very Nature or Essence is morally Receptive, which may tolerably be
called its Metaphorical Passive Instrumentality; yet are we not justified by it
qua talis, that is, qua fides, and so not quatenus Instrumentum tale
Metaphoricum, vel Acceptatio, vel Receptio moralis, but qua conditio Testamenti
vel faederis prastita.

5. Therefore it is not only the Acceptance of Righteousness by which we are
justified, much less the Affiance in Christ as dying only; but the Belief in
Christ as the Purchaser of Salvation, and as the Sanctifier, Guide and Teacher
of our souls in order thereunto, has as true an Interest in our Justification
as the believing in him for Pardon. And so far as any other holy act does
modifie and subserve faith, and is part of the Condition of Justification with
it, so far by it also we are justified.

FINIS

