The Divine Life: IN THREE TREATISES; THE FIRST, Of the Knowledge of God. THE
SECOND, Of Walking with God. THE THIRD, Of Coversing with God In SOLITUDE.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, and
Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster. 1664.

A TREATISE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. AND THE Impression which it must make upon
the Heart; and its necessary Effects upon our Lives.

Upon John 17. 3.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, and
Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster. 1664.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Exemplary Lady ANN COUNTESS OF BALCARRES.
MADAM,
IN hope of the fuller pardon of my delay, I now present you with two other
Treatises besides the Sermon (enlarged) which at your desire I preached at your
departure hence. I knew of many and great afflictions, which you had undergone
in the removal of your dearest friends, which made this subject seem so
suitable and seasonable to you at that time: But I knew not that God was about
to make so great an addition to your trials in the same kind, by taking to
himself Charles Earl of Balcarres who dyed of a stone in his heart, of a very
strange magnitude.
the principal branch of your Noble Family, (by a rare disease; the emblem of
the mortal malady now reigning.) I hope this loss also shall promote your gain,
by keeping you nearer to your Heavenly Lord, who is so jealous of your
affections, and resolved to have them entirely to himself: And then you will
still find, that you are not alone, nor deprived of your dearest or most
necessary friend, while the Father, the Son, the sanctifying and comforting
Spirit is with you. And it should not be hard to reconcile us to the disposals
of so sure a friend. Nothing but good can come from God; however the blind may
miscall it, who know no Good or Evil, but what is measured by the private
standard of their selfish interest, and that as judged of by sense. Eternal
Love engaged by Covenant to make us happy, will do nothing but what we shall
find at last, will terminate in that blessed end. He envyed you not your Son,
as too good for you, or too great a mercy, who has given you his own Son, and
with him the mercy of eternal life. Corporal sufferings with Spiritual
blessings, are the ordinary lot of Believers here on earth: As corporal
prosperity with spiritual calamity is the lot of the ungodly* And I beseech you
consider, that God knows better than you or I, what an Ocean your son was
ready to lanch out into, and how tempestuous and terrible it might have proved,
and whether the world that he is saved from, would have afforded him more of
safety or seduction, of comfort or calamity? whether the protraction of the
life of your Noble husband, to have seen our sins and their effects and
consequents, would have afforded him greater joy or sorrow? Undoubtedly as God
had a better title to your Husband, and Children, and Friends than you had, so
it is much better to be with him, than to be with you, or with the best or
greatest upon earth. The heavenly inhabitants fear not our fears, and feel not
our afflictions. They are past our dangers, and out of the reach of all our
enemies, and delivered from our pains and cares, and have the full possession
of all those mercies which we pray and labor for. Can you think your Children
and Friends that are with Christ, are not safer and better than those that yet
remain with you? Do you think that earth is better than heaven for you your
self? I take it for granted you cannot think so, and will not say so; And if it
be worse for you, its worse for them. The providence which by hastening their
Glorification, does promote your Sanctification; which helps them to the End,
and helps you in the Way, must needs be good to them and you, however it
appear to flesh and unbelief. O Madam, when our Lord has showed us (as he will
shortly do) what a state it is to which he brings the spirits of the just,
and how he does there entertain and use them, we shall then be more competent
judges of all those acts of Providence, to which we are now so hardly
reconciled! Then we shall censure our censurings of these works of God, and be
offended with our offenses at them, and call our selves blind unthankful
sinners, for calling them so bad as we did in our misjudging unbelief and
passion. We shall not wish our selves or friends again on earth, among
temptations and pains, and among uncharitable men, malicious enemies, deceitful
flatterers, and untrusty friends! When we see that face which we now long to
see, and know the things which we long to know, and feel the Love which we long
to feel, and are full of the joys which now we can scarce attain a taste of,
and have reached the End which now we seek, and for which we suffer, we shall no
more take it for a judgment to be taken from ungodly men, and from a world of
sin, and fear, and sorrow; nor shall we envy the wicked, nor ever desire to be
partakers of their pleasures. Till then, let us congratulate our departed
friends the felicity which they have attained, and which we desire; and let us
rejoice with them that rejoice with Christ, and let us prefer the least
believing thought of the everlasting joys, before all the defiled transitory
pleasures of the deluded, dreaming, miserable world. And let us prefer such
converse as we can here attain, with God in Christ, and with the Heavenly
Society, before all the pomp and friendship of the world. We have no friend
that is so able to supply all our wants, so sufficient to content us, so ready
to relieve us, so willing to entertain us, so unwearied in hearing us, and
conversing with us, as our blessed Lord. This is a friend that will never prove
untrusty; nor be changed by any change of interest, opinion or fortune; nor
give us cause to suspect his Love: A friend that we are sure will not forsake
us, nor turn our enemy, nor abuse us for his own advantage, nor will ever dye
or be separated from us, but we shall be always with him, and see his Glory,
and be filled and transported with his Love, and sing his praise to all
Eternity. With whom then should we so delightfully converse on Earth? and till
we can reach that sweet delightful converse, whom should we seek with more
ambition, or observe with greater devotedness and respect? O that we were less
carnal, and more spiritual, and lived less by Sense, and more by Faith; that we
knew better the difference between God and Man, between visible Temporals, and
invisible Eternals! we should then have other thoughts, and desires, and
resolutions, and converse, and employments and pleasures than too many have!

Madam, it displeases me that it is no more elaborate a Treatise, to which the
present opportunity inviteth me to prefix your Name; but your own Desire of the
Third must be my excuse for all: But pardon the Manner, and I dare commend the
Matter to you, as more worthy your serious contemplation, and your daily most
delightful practice, than any other that was ever proposed unto mortal man.
This is the man-like noble life: The life which the Rational soul was made for:
To which if our faculties be not by sanctifying Grace restored, they fall below
their proper dignity and use, and are worse than lost; like a Prince or Learned
man that is employed only in sweeping Dog-kennels, or tending Swine. To walk in
Holiness with the most Holy God, is the improvement and advancement of the
nature of man, toward its designed equality with Angels: When Earthliness and
Sensuality degrade humanity into (a voluntary, and therefore sinful)
brutishness: This is the Life which affords the soul a solid and durable
pleasure and content: When carnal minds evaporate into Air, and bubble into
froth and vanity, wasted in a dream, and the violent busy pursuit of a shadow;
deceiving themselves with a mixture of some counterfeit Religion; playing with
God, and working for the world; living in jest, and dying, and despairing, and
suffering in earnest; with unwearied labor building on the Sand, and sinking
at death for want of a foundation; hating the serious practice of their own
professed Religion, because it is not the profession, but the serious practice
which has the greatest enmity to their sensual delights; yet wishing to be
numbered with those hereafter, whom they hated here: This Holy Walking with the
most Holy God, is the only life which is best at last, and sweet in the review;
which the Godly Live in, and most of the ungodly could wish to dye in; like him
that wished to be Caesar in life, and Socrates at death: Yea this is the Life
which has no end; which we are here but learning, and beginning to practice,
and which we must hereafter live (in another manner and degree) with God for
ever: O wondrous Mercy! which thus ennobleth even the state of mortality! and
honors Earth with so much participation of, and communion with Heaven! That
by God, and with God, we may walk in holy peace and safety unto God, and there
be blessed in his perfect Sight and Love for ever! Madam, the greatest service
I can do you for all your favors, is, to pray that God will more acquaint you
with himself, and lead you by this blessed way to that more blessed end; that
when you see all worldly glory in the dust, you may bless him for ever, who
taught you to make a wiser choice: Which are the prayers of

Dec. 24. 1663. MADAM, Your very much obliged Servant, RICHARD BAXTER.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE Embryo of this Book was but one Sermon, preached a little before the
ending of my public Ministry, upon the Text of the third Treatise, (upon the
occasion intimated in the Epistle to that truly Honor able Lady) Being obliged
to communicate the Notes, and unavoidably gullty of some delays, I made a
compensation by enlargement; and (having reasons for the publication of them,
with which I shall not trouble you) to make them more suitable to the designed
end, I prefixed the two former Treatises: The first I had preached to my
ancient flock: Of the second I had preached but one Sermon: If many of the
materials in the second be the same as in the first, you must understand that
my design required that it should be so: They being the same Attributes of God,
which the first Part endeavors to imprint upon the mind; and which the
second and third endeavor to improve into a constant course of holy affection
and conversation: As it is the same food which the first concoction chylifieth,
which the perfecting concoctions do work over again, and turn into blood and
spirits and flesh: so far am I in such points from gratifying thy sickly desire
of variety, and avoiding the displeasing of thee by the rehearsals of the same,
that it is my very business with thee to persuade thee, to live continually
upon these same Attributes and Relations of God, as upon thy daily air and
bread; and to forsake that lean consuming company, who feed on the shells of
hard and barren controversies, or on the froth of complements and affected
shows, and run after novelty instead of substantial solid nutriment: And to
tell thee, that the primitive, pure, simple Christianity, consisted in the
daily serious use of the great materials of the Creed; Lords Prayer, and ten
Commandments, contracted in the words of our Baptismal Covenant. Do thus, and
thou will be like those examples of the succeeding Church, in uprightness,
purity, simplicity, charity, peaceableness and holy communion with God, when
the pretended subtilties and sublimities of wanton, uncharitable, contentious
wits, will serve but to strangle or delude their souls. I have purposely been
very brief on the several Attributes and Relations of God, in the first
Treatise, because the copious handling of them would have made a very great
volume of it self, and because it is my great design in that first part, to
give you a sight of all Gods Attributes and Relations conjunct, and in their
order, that looking on them, not one by one, but all together in their proper
places, the whole Image of God, may by them, be rightly imprinted on your
minds; The Method being the first thing, and the necessary Impressions on the
soul the second, which I there desire you to observe and employ your minds
about, if you desire to profit, and receive what I intend you.

December. 24. 1663.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Text explained: The Doctrine. The Knowledge of the only true God
and of Jesus Christ the Mediator, is the life, of grace and the necessary way
to the life of glory. What is contained in the Knowledge of God, as to the Act:
what as to the Object. A short Scheme of the Divine properties and Attributes
to be known. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Knowledge of Gods Being, and the necessary
effects of it on the heart. p. 14 CHAP. III. Of the Knowledge of Gods Unity and
Indivisibility, and its necessary effects. p. 17 CHAP. IV. Of the Knowledge of
Gods Immensity, and so of his Incomprehensibleness, Omnipresence, and the
effects. p. 21 CHAP. V. Of the Knowledge of Gods Eternity and its due effects.
A Believer referring all things to Eternity, honors his very horse, or dog,
or smallest mercy, more than Unbelievers honor their King, their lives, their
souls, regarding them but for transitory ends. Unbelievers denying the End,
destroy morally all souls, all mercies, all Divine revelations, all Gods
ordinances, all graces, and duties, and the whole Creation. p. 28 CHAP. VI. The
Knowledge of God as he is a Spirit, and incorporeal: and consequently, 1. As he
is simple or uncompounded. 2. Invisible, etc. 3. Immortal, Incorruptible,
Immutable: The Uses of Gods Simplicity: The Uses of his Invisibility: The Uses
of his Immortality, and Immutability. p. 44 CHAP. VII, Of the Knowledge of Gods
Almightiness, and of its due effects. p. 50 CHAP. VIII. Of the Knowledge of
Gods Omniscience, or Infinite Wisdom; with the due effects. p. 57 CHAP. IX. Of
the Knowledge of Gods Infinite Goodness, and Love; and of the due impression of
it on the soul. p. 65 CHAP. X. Of the Knowledge of God as the first Cause,
Creator and Preserver of all things. All things are for God, as the Ultimate
End; manifested. How his Will is still fulfilled. Whether he will de eventu
that all obey him? God wills not sin. Differences ended about it. Whether he
Decree not or will not ut evenit peccatum? Whether he will de eventu that sin
shall not come to pass, when it does? All Gods works good: None to be
dishonored: no not our selves, our Reason and Freewill, as Natural and of God;
though as vitiated by us and ill disposed, we must accuse it. p. 76 CHAP. XI.
Of the Knowledge of God as our Redeemer. Infants not in a state of Innocence,
but of Original sin: fully proved: The great ends of Redemption, enumerated:
The effects it must have upon the soul. p. 86 CHAP. XII. The Knowledge of God
the Holy Ghost as our Sanctifier and Comforter: A further proof of Original
sin. Twenty considerations by way of Quere's to convince them that deny or
extenuate the Sanctifying works of the Holy Ghost, ascribing them to Nature and
themselves. p. 100 CHAP. XIII. Of the Knowledge of God as the Absolute Owner,
Proprietary or Lord of all: of his Jus Dominii grounded on his Creation and
Redemption; and the Uses. p. 109 CHAP. XIV. Of the Knowledge of God as our
Sovereign Governor or King: His Jus Imperii: The grounds: The exercise: The
uses and effects. p. 115 CHAP. XV. Of the Knowledge of God as our most
bountiful Benefactor, or most Loving Father. The Benefits founding this
Relation: 1. Common: 2. Special to his chosen ones. The necessary effects. p.
124 CHAP. XVI. Of the Freedom of God. p. 131 CHAP. XVII. Of the Justice of
God: what it is: the effects. p. 132 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Knowledge of Gods
Holiness. What it is. The necessary effects. p. 133 CHAP. XIX. Of Gods
Veracity, or Truth and Faithfulness. The Uses: The Dominicans doctrine of
Phyfical efficient immediate predetermination, at once obliterateth all Divine
faith, by denying the Veracity of God, which is its formal Object: Lying and
Perjury abominable. p. 138 CHAP. XX. Of the Knowledge of Gods Mercifulness
(including his Patience and long suffering) and the necessary uses and effects.
p. 144 CHAP. XXI. Of the Knowledge of Gods Dreadfulness or Terribleness: and
the necessary uses and effects. p. 148
ERRATA.
PAge 20. l. 1. blot out it. p. 54. l. 25. r. a fly. p. 58. l. 20. r.
themselves. p. 78. l. 35. r. Does he not. p. 82. l. 7. r. wilfully. l. 29. r.
he has. l. 3^. r. workers. p. 106. l. ^. blot out that. p. 118. l. 22. r.
wheel. p. 127. l. 30. r. Object. p. 145. l 26 for us r. it. p. 146. l. 5 r.
breath's in. p. 151. l 18. r. true. p. 178. l. 37: blot out of. p 187. l. 20.
for particular r practical. p. 204. l. 26. r would not be. p. 219. l. 8. r.
possessor. p. 229. l. 33. for presumptuous r. awakened. p 243 l. 22. r.
unproved. p. 252. l. 27 r. straining. p. 259. l. 5 for do r. no. l. 12. for H^
r No. l. 24. after and r. his. p. 266. l. 24. for what r that. p. 276. l. 10.
for any r an. l. 21. r. preparation. p. 282. l. 22. blot out not. p. 306. l.
14. r. grudge and distasts. p. 307. l. 4. blot out that. p 310. l. 4. for serve
r. seem. p. 315 l. 27. for might r. wight. p. 337. l. 14. for in r is p. 357.
l. 16. blot out a. p. 369. l. 20. for form^ r. found p. 371. l. 33 r. workers.
p. 372. l. 16. for that r. than. p. 375. l. 19 blot out faithful. p. 376. l.
20. for of it r. often. p. 377. l. 31. for nor r. no.

JOHN 17. 3. And this is Life Eternal, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
CHAP. I.
GOD is the Principal Efficient, the Supreme Directive, and the Ultimate final
Cause of man: For OF him, and THROUGH him, and TO him are all things, and to
him shall be the Glory for ever, Romans 11. 36. The New life, or Nature in the
Saints is his Image, Col. 3. 10. The Principle of it is called The Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. The exercise of that principle (including the principle it
self) is called The life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. from which the Gentiles are said
to be alienated by their ignorance. Therefore it is called Holiness, which is a
separation to God from common use: and [ Gods dwelling in us*] and [ ours in
him] 1 John 4. 12, 13. of whom we are said to be [ born and regenerate] 1 John
4. 7. John 3. 5. And our perfection in Glory, is our living with God, and
enjoying him for ever. GODLINESS then is the comprehensive name of all true
Religion. Jesus Christ himself came but to restore corrupted man to the Love,
and Obedience, and Fruition of his Creator, and at last will give up the
Kingdom to the Father, that God may be All, and in all: and the Son himself
shall be subject to this end, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28. The End of Christ's Sacrifice
and Intercession is to Reconcile God and man: The End of his Doctrine is to
teach us to know God: The end of his Government is to reduce us to the perfect
obedience of our Maker. It is therefore the greatest Duty of a Christian to
know God as revealed by his Son; and it is such a Duty about our Ultimate End
as is also our greatest Mercy and Felicity. Therefore does the Lord Jesus here
in the Text describe that Life Eternal which he was to give to those whom the
Father had given him, to consist in Knowing the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom he had sent. My purpose is in this Treatise to speak only of the first
part of the Text, ( The Knowledge of God) And first I shall very briefly
explain the Text.

[THIS] That is, This which I am describing.

[LIFE] Life is taken sometime for the Souls abode in the Body, which is the
Natural Life of man: or the souls continuation in its separated state, which is
the Natural life of the soul: and sometimes for the Perfections of Natural
life: And that either its Natural Perfection, that is, Its Health and Vivacity;
or its moral perfection or Rectitude; and that is either in the Cause, and so
God is our Life; Christ is our Life; the Holy Spirit is our Life: or in it
self: and so Holiness is our Life in the Principle, Seed or Habit. Sometime
Life is taken for the Work, Employment and Exercise of Life; and so a Holy
Conversation, is our Moral, Spiritual, or holy life. And sometime it is taken
for the Felicity of the living: And so it contains all the former in their
highest perfection, that is, both Natural Life, and Moral-Spiritual Life, and
the holy exercise thereof, together with the full attainment and fruition of
God in Glory, the End of all.

[ETERNAL] That is, simply eternal, objectively, as to God the principal
object: and Eternal ex part post, subjectively; that is, Everlasting.

[THIS IS LIFE ETERNAL] Not Natural life in it self considered, as the Devils
and wicked men shall have it. But 1. It is the same Moral-Spiritual Life which
shall have no End, but endure to Eternity: It is a Living to God in Love; But
only initial, and very imperfect here, in comparison of what it will be in
Heaven. 2. It is the Eternal felicity, 1. Seminally; for Grace is as it were a
seed of Glory; 2. As it is the Necessary way or means of attaining it; and that
preparation which infallibly procures it. The Perfect Holiness of the Saints
in Heaven will be one part of their perfect happiness: And this Holiness
imperfect they have here in this life: It is the same God that we know and love
here and there, and with a Knowledge and Love that is of the same nature
seminally: As the egg is of the nature of the Bird: (Whether it may be properly
said to be formally and specifically the same quoad actum, as well as quoad
objectum; yea whether the Objectum clare visum, and the objectum in speculo vel
aenigmate visum make not the act specifically differ, I shall not trouble you
to dispute.) And this imperfect Holiness has the promise of Perfect Holiness
and Happiness in the full fruition of God hereafter. So it is the Seed, and
Prognostic of Life Eternal.

[TO KNOW] Non semper and ubique eodem modo vel gradu: Not to know God here and
hereafter in the same manner or degree. But to know him here as in a glass, and
hereafter in his Glory, as face to face. To know him by an Affective Practical
knowledge: There is no Text of Scripture of which the rule is more clearly true
and necessary than of this, that Words of Knowledge do imply affection. It is
the closure of the whole soul with God, which is here called the knowing of
God: And because it is not meet to name every particular act of the soul, when
ever this duty is mentioned, it is all denominated from Knowledge, as the first
Act, which infers all the rest. 1. Knowledge of God in the Habit, is
Spiritual Life as a Principle. 2. Knowledge of God in the exercise, is
Spiritaal Life, as an employment. 3. The Knowledge of God in perfection with
its effects, is Life Eternal as it signifies full felicity. What it contains
I shall further show anon.

[THEE] That is, The Father, called by some Divines, Fons vel fundamentum
Trinitatis: the fountain, or foundation of the Trinity: and often used in the
same sense as the word [GOD,] to signify the pure Deity.

[THE ONLY] He that believes that there is more Gods than One, believes not
in any. For though he may give many the Name, yet the description of the true
God can agree to none of them. He is not God indeed, if he be not One only.

This does not at all exclude Jesus Christ, as the second person in Trinity:
but only distinguishes the pure Deity, or the Only true God as such, from
Jesus Christ as Mediator between God and man.

[TRUE] There are many that falsely and Metaphorically are called Gods: If we
think of God but as one of these, it is not to know him, but deny him.

[GOD] The word GOD does not only signify the Divine perfections in himself,
but also his Relation to the Creatures. To be a God to us, is to be one to whom
we must ascribe all that we are or have; and one whom we must Love and obey,
and honor with all the powers of soul and body: and one on whom we totally
depend, and from whom we expect our judgment and reward, in whom alone we can
be perfectly blessed.

[AND JESUS CHRIST] That is, As Mediator, in his Natures, (God and man) and in
his Office and Grace.

[WHOM THOU HAVE SENT;] That is, whom thy Love and Wisdom designed and
commissioned to this undertaking and performance.

The Knowledge of the Holy Ghost seems here left out, as if it were no part
of life Eternal: But 1. At that time the Holy Ghost in that Eminent sort, as
sent by the Father and Son on the Apostles after the Resurrection and Ascension
of Christ, was not yet so manifested as afterward, and therefore not so
necessarily to be distinctly known and believed in as after: The having of the
Spirit being of more necessity than the distinct knowledge of him. Certain it
is that the Disciples were at first very dark in this article of faith: And
Scripture more fully reveals the necessity, to salvation, of believing in the
Father and Son, than in the Holy Ghost distinctly; yet telling us, that if any
man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. 2. But
presently after, when the Spirit was to be sent, the necessity of believing in
him is expressed; especially in the Apostles Commission to Baptize all* Nations
(that were made Disciples) in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Doct. THe Knowledge of the only true God, and of Jesus Christ the Mediator, is
the Life of Grace, and the necessary way to the life of Glory.

As James distinguishes between such a dead faith as Devils and wicked men
had, and such a living and working faith as was proper to the justified; so
must we here of the Knowledge of God. Many profess that they know God, but in
works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work
reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. There is a form of knowledge which the unbelievers had,
Romans 2. 22. and a knowledge which puffs up, and is void of Love, which
hypocrites have, 1 Cor. 8. 1. and 13. But no man (spiritually) knows the
things of God, but by the spirit. And they that rightly know his name, will put
their trust in him, Psalm. 9 10. Thus he gives the regenerate a heart to know
him, Jer. 24. 7. and the new creature is renewed in knowledge, Col. 3. 10. And
vengeance shall be poured out on them that know not God, 2 These. 1. 8.

This saving Knowledge of God which is Eternal Life, contains and implies in
it all these acts. 1. The understandings apprehesion of God according to the
necessary articles of faith. 2. A Belief of the truth of these articles: that
God is, and is such as he is therein described. 3. An high estimation of God
accordingly. 4. A Volition, complacency or Love to him as God, the chiefest
Good. 5. A Desiring after him. 6. A Choosing him, with the rejection of all
competitors. 7. A Consent that he be our God, and a giving up our selves to him
as his people. 8. An intending him as our Ultimate End in the use of means, in
the course of our Conversations. 9. A seeking him in the choice and use of
means. 10. An obeying him as our Sovereign Governor. 11. An honoring, and
praising him as God. 12. And an enjoying him and delighting in him (in some
small foretasts here, as he is seen by says; but perfectly hereafter, as
beheld in Glory.) The affective practical Knowing of God, which is Life
eternal, contains or implies all these parts.

And every Christian that has any of this Knowledge desires more: It is his
great desire to Know more of God, and to know him with a more affecting
powerful knowledge. He that grows in grace, does accordingly grow in this
knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ. The vigor and alacrity of our souls
lies in it: The rectitude of our actions, and the holiness of them flows
from it: God is the excellency of our Hearts and lives: Our advancement and our
joy is here only to be found. All other knowledge is so far desirable, as it
conduces to the knowledge of God, or to the several duties which that
knowledge does require. All knowledge of words or things, of causes and
effects, of any creatures, actions, customs, Laws, or whatsoever may be known,
is so far valuable as it is useful; and so far useful as it is Holy, subserving
the knowledge of God, in Christ. What the sun is to all men's eyes, that God is
to their souls, and more: It is to Know him that we have understandings given
us; And our understandings enjoy him but so far as they know him; as the eye
enjoys the Light of the sun, by seeing it. The ignorance of God, is the
blindness and part of the atheism of the soul, and infers the rest. They
that know him not, desire not heartily to know him; nor can they Love him,
Trust him, fear him, serve him, or call upon him, whom they do not Know. How
shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed, Romans 10. 14. The heart
of the Ungodly says to God, Depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways; what is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit shall
we have if we pray unto him? Job. 21. 14, 15. and 22. 17. All wickedness has
admission into that heart or land, where the knowledge of God is not the watch
to keep it out: Abraham inferred that the men of Gerar would kill him for his
wife, when he saw that the fear of God was not in that place: Genesis 20. 11. It
was Gods controversy with Israel, because there was no truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of God in the land; but by swearing, and lying, and killing and
stealing, they brake out, and blood touched blood, Hos. 4. 1, 2. They are
called by God, a foolish people, sottish children, of no understanding, that
knew not God; though they were wise to do evil, Jer. 4. 22. He will pour out
his fury upon the heathen that know him not, and the families that call not on
his name, Jer. 10. 25. As the day differs from the night by the light of the
sun, so the Church differs from the world by the Knowledge of God in Jesus
Christ. Psalm. 76. 1, 2. In Judah is God known; his name is great in Israel: In
Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. The Love, and
Unity, and peace which shall succeed persecution and malice in the blessed
times, shall be because the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord,
as the waters cover the sea, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Hypocrites shall know him
superficially and uneffectually: and his holy ones shall know him so as to Love
him, fear him, trust him, and obey him; with a knowledge effectual upon heart
and life: And he will continue his loving kindness to them that know him, Psalm.
36. 10.

He is the best Christian that has the fullest impression made upon his soul
by the Knowledge of God in all his Attributes. Thus it is our Life eternal to
Know God in Christ. It is to reveal the Father that the Son was sent; and it is
to reveal the Father and the Son, that the Holy spirit is sent; God is the
light and the life, and felicity of the soul. The work of its salvation is but
the restoring it to him, and putting it in possession of him. The beginning of
this is Regeneration and Reconciliation: the perfection o^ it is Glorification,
beatifical Vision, and Fruition. The Mind that has least of God is the darkest
and most deluded Mind: And the mind that has most of him, is the most lucide,
pure, and serene. And how is God in the Mind, but as the Light and other
visible objects are in the eye; and as pleasant melody is in the ear; and as
delightful meats and drinks are in the taste? But that God makes a more deep
and durable impress on the soul, and such as is suitable to its spiritual
immaterial nature.

As your seal is to make a full impression on the wax, of the whole figure that
is upon it self, so has God been pleased in diverse seals to engrave his Image,
and these must make their Impress upon us. 1. There is the seal of the
Creation; sor the world has much of the Image of God: It is engraven also on
the seal of Providential disposals (though there we are incapable of reading it
yet, so fully as in the rest) 2. It is engraven on the seal of the holy
Scriptures. 3. And on the Person of Jesus Christ, who is the purest clearest
Image of the Father, as also on the holy example of his life. 4. And by the
means of all these applied to the soul, in our sober consideration, by the
working of the Holy Ghost, the Image of God is made upon us.

Here note, 1. That All the revealed Image of God must be made on the soul, and
not a part only: and all is wrought where any is truly wrought. 2. That to the
compleatness of his Image on us, it is necessary that each part of Gods
Description be orderly made, and orderly make the Impress on us, and that each
part keep its proper place: For it is a monster that has feet where the head
should be, or the backside forward, or where there is any gross misplacing of
the parts. 3. Note also that all the three forementioned seals contain all Gods
Image on them; but yet not all alike; but the first part is more clearly
engraven upon the first of them, and the second part upon the second of them,
and the third part most clearly on the third and last.

To open this more plainly to you; Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, is
the sum of our holy faith. In the Deity there is revealed to us, One God in
three persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; The Essence is but one; the
subsistences are three. And as we must conceive and speak of the Divine Nature
according to its Image, while we see it but in a glass; so we must say, that in
this Blessed Deity in the Unity of Essence, there is a Trinity of Essential
properties and Attributes, that is, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, Life, Light
and Love; The measure of which is to have no measure, but to be Infinite. And
therefore this Being is Eternal, and not measured by Time, being without
Beginning or end: He is Immense, as being not measured by Place, but contains
all places, and is contained in none. He is Perfect, as not Measured by Parts
or by Degrees, but quite above Degrees and Parts. This Infiniteness of his
Being does communicate it self, or also consist in the Infiniteness of his
Essential properties. His Power is Omipotency, that is, Infinite Power; His
Knowledge or wisdom is Omniscience* that is, Infinite Wisdom: His Goodness is
Felicity it self, or Infinite Goodness.

The first seal (to our Cognizance) on which he engraved this his Image, was
the Creation, that is 1. The whole world in General. 2. The Intellectual
Nature, or Man in special.

In the Being of the Creation and every particular Creature, his Infinite Being
is revealed; so wretched a Fool is the Atheist, that by denying God, he denies
all things! Could he prove that there is no God, I would quickly prove that
there is no world, no man, no creature: If he know that he is himself, or that
the world or any Creature is, he may know that God is: For God is the Original
Being; And all Being that is not Eternal, must have some Original: And that
which has no Original is God, being Eternal, Infinite, and without cause.

The Power of God is revealed in the Being and Powers of the Creation. His
Wisdom is revealed in their Nature, Order, Offices, Effects, etc. His Goodness
is revealed in the Creatures Goodness, its beauty, usefulness and
accomplishments. But though all his Image thus appear upon the Creation, yet is
it his Omnipotency that principally there appears. The beholding and
consideration of the wonderful greatness, activity and excellency of the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, the fire, and other creatures, does first and chiefly
possess us with apprehensions of the Infinite Greatness or Power of the Creator.

In the Holy Word or Laws of God, which is the second glass or seal (more clear
and legible to us than the former) there appears also all his Image; His
power in the narratives, predictions, etc. His Wisdom in the prophesies,
precepts, and in all: His Goodness in the promises, and institutions in a
special manner. But yet it is his second property, his Wisdom, that most
eminently appears on this second seal, and is seen in the glass of the holy
Law. The discovery of such mysteries; the revelation of so many Truths; the
suitableness of all the instituted means; and the admirable fitness of all the
holy contrivances of God, and all his precepts, promises and threatenings, for
the Government of Mankind, and carrying him on for the attainment of his end,
in a way agreeable to his nature, these show that wisdom that is most Eminently
here revealed, though Power and Goodness be revealed with it; so in the face of
Jesus Christ, who is the third and most perfect seal and glass, there is the
Image of the Power, and Wisdom and Goodness of the Godhead: But yet it is the
Love or Goodness of the Father that is most Eminently revealed in the son: His
Power appeared in the incarnation, the conquests over Satan and the world, the
Miracles, the Resurrection and the Ascension of Christ. His wisdom appears in
the admirable mystery of Redemption, and in all the parts of the office,
works, and laws of Christ, and in the means appointed in subordination to him;
But Love and Goodness shines most clearly and amiably through the whole; it
being the very end of Christ in this blessed work, to reveal God to man in the
Richo^ of his Love, as giving us the greatest mercies, by the most precious
means, in the meetest season and manner for our good; Reconciling us to
himself, and treating us as Children, with Fatherly compassions, and bringing
us nearer him, and opening to us the everlasting treasure, having brought life
and immortality to light in the Gospel.

God being thus revealed to man from without, in the three Glasses or Seals of
the Creation, Law, and Son himself, he is also revealed to us in our selves,
man being, as it were, a little world.

In the Nature of man is revealed as in a Seal or Glass the nature of the
blessed God in some measure. In Unity of Essence, we have a Trinity of
Faculties of soul, even the Vegetative, Sensitive and Rational, as our bodies
have both parts and spirits, Natural, Vital, and Animal; the Rational Power in
Unity, has also its Trinity of faculties, even Power for Execution,
Understanding for Direction, and Will for Command: The measure of Power is
Naturally sufficient to its use and end; the understanding is a faculty to
reason, discern, and discourse; The will has that Freedom which beseems an
undetermined, self-determining creature here in the way.

Besides this Physical Image of God that is inseparable from our Nature, we
have also his Law written in our hearts, and are our selves objectively part of
the Law of nature, that is, the signifiers of the will of God. Had we not by
sin obliterated somewhat of this Image, it would have showed it self more
clearly, and we should have been more capable of understanding it.

And then when we are Regenerate and Renewed by the Grace and Spirit of Christ,
and planted into him, as living members of his body, we have then the third
impression upon our souls, and are made like our Head in Wisdom, Holiness and
in effectual strength.

Considered as Creatures endued with Power, understanding and will, we have the
Impress of all the foresaid Attributes of God; But Eminently of his Power.

Considered as we were at first possessed with the light and law of works or
Nature, (of which we yet retain some part) so we have the Impress of all these
Attributes of God; But most Eminently of his Wisdom.

Considered as Regenerate by the Spirit, and planted into Christ, so we have
the impress of all his said Attributes; But most eminently of his Love and
Goodness, shining in the Moral accomplishments or graces of the soul.

Man being thus made at first the Natural and Sapiential image of God, (with
much of the Image of his Love) the Lord did presently by necessary Resultancy
and voluntary consent, stand Related to us in such variety of Relations, as
answer the foresaid Properties and Attributes. And these Relations of God to
us, are next to be known, as flowing from his Attributes and Works.

As we have our derived Being from God who is the Primitive Eternal Being; so
from our Being given by Creation, God is Related to us as our Maker; From this
Relation of a Creator in Unity, there arises a Trinity of Relations: This
Trintty is in that Unity, and that Unity in this Trinty. First God having made
us of nothing, is necessarily Related to us as our Lord; By a Lord we mean
strictly, a Proprietary or Owner, as you are the Owner of your goods or any
thing that is your Own.

Secondly, He is Related to us as our Ruler, our Governor or King. This rises
from our nature, made to be Ruled in order to our End* being Rational Voluntary
Agents; and also from the Dominion and blessed nature of God, who only has
Right to the Government of the world, and only is fit and capable of Ruling it.

Thirdly, He is Related also to us as our Benefactor or Father; freely and of
his bounty giving us all the good that we do receive.

His first Relation in this Trinity, answers his first Property in the
Trinity: He is our Almighty Creator, and therefore is our Owner or our Lord.

The second of these Relations answers the second Property of God. He is most
Wise, and made an Impress of his Wisdom on the Rational Creature, and therefore
is our Governor.

The third Relation answers the third property of God. As he is most Good, so
he is our Benefactor; Psalm. 119. 68. Thou art Good, and do Good. Man's nature
and disposition is known by his Works, though he be a free agent; For the Tree
is known by its fruit, Mat. 7. 17. And so Gods nature is known by his works (as
far as is fit for us here to know) though he be a free agent.

In each of these Relations, God has other special Attributes, which are
denominated from his Relations, or his following works.

As he is our Lord or Owner, his proper Attribute is to be Absolute, having so
full a title to us, that he may do with us what he list, Mat. 20. 15. Romans 9.
21.

As he is our Ruler, his proper Attribute is to be our Sovereign or Supreme;
there being none above him, nor coordinate with him, nor any Power of
Government but what is derived from him.

As he is our Benefactor, it is his prerogative to be our Chief, or All: the
Alpha and Omega; the Fountain or first Efficient cause of all that we receive
or hope for; and the End or ultimate final cause that can make us Happy by
fruition, and that we must still intend.

As these are the Attributes of God in these his great Relations, so in Respect
to the Works of these Relations, he has other subordinate Attributes. As he is
our Owner, it is his Work to Dispose of us; and his proper Attribute to be most
Free. As he is our Ruler, it is his work to Govern us; which is first, by
making Laws for us, and then by teaching and persuading us to keep them, and
lastly by executing them; which is by Judging, Rewarding, and Punishing. In
respect to all these, his principal Attribute is, to be Just or Righteous; In
which is comprehended his Truth or Faithfulness, his Holiness, his Mercy, and
his terrible dreadfulness. As his Attributes appear in the Assertions of his
word, he is True (his Veracity being nothing but his Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, expressing themselves in his Word or Revelations.) For he that is
Able to do what he will, and so wise as to Know all things, and so Good as to
Will nothing but what is Good, cannot possibly lie; For every lie is either for
want of Power, or Knowledge, or Goodness; He that is most Able and Knowing,
need not deceive by Lying; And he that is most Good, will not do it without
need. As his first properties appear in the word of Promise, he is called
Faithful, which is his Truth in making good a word of grace. As he Commands
Holy duties, and condemns sin as the most detestable thing, by a pure,
righteous Law, so he is called Holy; and also as the fountain of this Law, and
the Grace that sanctifies his people. As he fulfilleth his promises, and
rewards, and defends men according to his word, so he is called Merciful
and Gracious as a Governor, (where his Mercy is considered as limited or
ordinate by his laws.) As he fulfilleth his Threatenings, he is called, Angry,
wrathful, terrible, dreadful, holy, jealous, etc. But he is Just in all.

And as these are his Attributes as our Sovereign Ruler; so as our Benefactor,
his special Attribute is to be Gracious, or Bountiful or Benign; or to be
Loving, and inclined to do good. These are the Attributes of God resulting from
his Nature as appearing in his Image in the Creation, Laws, and the person of
his Son; and resulting from his Relations and the works of those Relations;
even as he is our Creator, in Unity; and our Lord or Owner, our Ruler, and
Benefactor, in Trinity.

Were it not my purpose to consine my self to this short discovery of the
nature, attributes, and works of God, but to run deeper into the rest of the
body of Divinity, I should come down to the fall, and work of Redemption, and
show you in the Gospel and all the ordinances, etc. the footsteps of this
Method of Trinity in Unity, which I have here begun; but that were to digress.

Besides what is said, we might name you many Attributes of God that are
commonly called Negative, and do but distinguish him from the Imperfect
Creature, by setting him above us Infinitely in his perfections. Man has a
Body; but God is not a Body, but a spirit; Man is mutable, but God Immutable;
Man is Mortal, but God Immortal, etc. And now as I have showed you these
Properties, Relations, and Attributes of God, so I must next tell you that we
also stand in answerable counter-relations unto him; and must have the
qualities, and do the works that answer those Relations.

1. As God is our Almighty Creator, so we are his Creatures, impotent and
insufficient for our selves. We owe him therefore all that a Creature can owe
his Maker, that has but our receivings. 2. In this Relation is contained a
Trinity of Relations. 1. We are his Own, as he is our Lord. 2. We are his
subjects as he is our Ruler. 3. We are his Children as he is our Father; or his
obliged Beneficiaries as he is our Benefactor. And now having opened to your
observation the Image of God, and the extrinsick seals, I have ripened the
discourse so far, that I may fitlyer show you, How the Impression of this Image
of God is to be made upon the soul of the Believer.

CHAP. II. Of the Knowledge of Gods Being.
1. HE that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. The first thing to be imprinted
on the soul is, that there is a God: that he is a real most Trascendent Being.
As sure as the Sun that shines has a Being, and the Earth that bears us
has a being, so sure has God that made them a Being infinitely more excellent
then theirs. As sure as the streams come from the fountain, and as sure as
Earth and Stones, and Beasts, and Men did never make themselves, nor do uphold
themselves, or continue the course of nature in themselves and others, nor
govern the world, so sure is there an Infinite eternal Being that does this.
Every Atheist that is not mad must confess that there is an Eternal Being, that
had no beginning or cause; The question is only, which this is * which ever it
is, it is this that is the true God. What now would the Atheist have it to be?
Certainly it is that Being that has being it self from none that is the first
cause of all other Beings: And if it caused them, it must necessarily be every
way more excellent then they, and contain all the good that it has caused; For
none can give that which it has not to give; nor make that which is better
then it self; that Being that has made so glorious a creature as the Sun, must
needs it self be much more glorious. It could not have put strength and power
into the Creatures, if it had not it self more strength and power. It could not
have put Wisdom and Goodness into the Creature, if it had not more Wisdom and
Goodness then all they. Whatever it is therefore that has more Power, Wisdom
and Goodness then all the world besides, that is it which we call God. That
cause that has communicated to all things else, the Being, Power, and all
perfections which they have, is the God whom we acknowledge and adore; If
Democritists will ascribe all this to Atoms, and think that the Motes did make
the Sun; or if others will think that the Sun is God because it participateth
of so much of his excellency, let them be mad a while till judgment shall
convince them. So clear beyond all question to my soul is the Being of the
Godhead, that the Devil has much lost the rest of his more subtle temptations,
when he has foolishly and maliciously adjoined this, to draw me to question
the Being of my God; which is more then to question Whether there be a Sun in
the Firmament.

But what is the Impress that the Being of God must make upon the Soul?

I answer From hence the holy soul discerns that the Beginning and the End of
his Religion, the substance of his Hope is the Being of Beings, and not a
shadow; and that his faith is not a fancy. The Object is as it were the
matter of the act. If our faith and hope and Love and Fear be exercised about
the most Real Being, it shows that there is a Reality in our faith, and that we
be not exercised in a delusory work; God is to the Atheist but an empty name;
He feels no life or Being in him; And accordingly he offers him a shadow of
devotion, and a nominal service. But to the holy soul there is nothing that
has life and Being but God, and that which does receive a Being from him, and
leads to him. This Real object puts a Reality into all the devotions of a
holy soul. They look upon the vanities of the world as Nothing; and therefore
they look on worldly men as on idle dreamers that are doing nothing. This puts
a seriousness and Life into the faith and holy affections of the believer. He
knows whom he trusts, 2 Timothy 1. 12. he knows whom he Loves, and in whom he
Hops. Atheists and all ungodly men, do practically judge of God, as the true
Believer judges of the world. The Atheist takes the pleasures of the world to
be the only substance; and God to be but as a shadow, a notion, or a dream.
The godly take the world to be as nothing, and know it is but a fancy and
dream, and shadow of pleasures, and honor, and profit, and felicity, that men
talk of and seek so eargerly below; but that God is the substantial object and
portion of the soul. If you put into the mouth of a hungry man, a little froth,
or breath, or air, and bid him eat it, and feed upon it, he will tell you, he
finds no substance in it; so judges the graceless soul of God, and so judges
the gracious soul of the creature as separate from God.

Let this be the Impression on thy soul, from the consideration of Gods
transcendent Being! O look upon thy self and all things as nothing without him!
and as Nothing in comparison of him! And therefore let thy Love to them be as
nothing, and thy desires after them and care for them as nothing! But let the
Being of thy Love, desire, and endeavors, be let out upon the transcendent
Being. The creature has its kind of being; but if it would be to us instead of
God, it will be as nothing. The Air has its Being, but we cannot dwell in it,
nor rest upon it to support us as the earth does. The water has its Being, but
it will not bear us, if we would walk upon it. The name of the great Jehovah is
[ I am] Exodus 3. 14. Try any Creature in thy need, and it will say, as Jacob to
Rachel, Genesis 30. 2. Am I in Gods stead that has withheld thy desire from thee?
send to it, and it will say as John Baptist* that confessed [I am not the
Christ] Joh. 1. 20. Let none of all the affections of thy soul, have so much
Life and Being in them, as those that are exercised upon God. Worms and motes
are not regarded in comparison of mountains: a drop is not regarded in
comparison of the Ocean. Let the Being of God take up thy soul and draw off thy
observation from deluding vanities, as if there were no such things before
thee. When thou remembrest that there is a God, Kings and Nobles, Riches and
Honors, and all the world should be forgotten in comparison of him; And thou
should live as if there were no such things, if God appear not to thee in
them. See them as if thou did not see them, as thou see a candle before the
sun; or a pile of grass or single dust in comparison with the Earth. Hear them
as if thou did not hear them; as thou hear the leaves of the shaken tree,
at the same time with a clap of thunder. As greatest things obscure the least,
so let the Being of the Infinite God so take take up all the powers of thy
soul, as if there were nothing else but he, when any thing would draw thee from
him. O if the Being of this God were seen by thee, thy seducing friend would
scarce be seen, thy tempting baits would scarce be seen, thy riches and honors
would be forgotten; all things would be as nothing to thee in comparison of him.

CHAP. III.
2. AS the Being of God should make this Impression on thee, so the Attributes
that speak the perfection of that Being, must each one have their work; as his
unity or indivisibility, his Immensity, and Eternity.

And first, the thought of Gods unity should contract and unite thy straggling
affections, and call them home from multifarious vanity. It should possess thy
mind with deep apprehensions of the excellency of holy Unity in the soul, and
in the Church; and of the evil of Division, and misery of distracting
multiplicity. The Lord our God is One God, 1 Cor. 8 6. Perfection has unity
and simplicity. We fell into Divisions and miserable distraction when we
departed from God unto the Creature; For the Creatures are Many and of contrary
qualities, dispositions, and affections; And the heart that is set on such an
object, must needs be a Divided heart; And the heart that is Divided among so
many and contrary or discordant objects, must needs he a distracted heart. The
confusions of the world confound the heart that is set upon the world. He that
makes the world his God, has so many Gods, and so discordant, that he will
never please them all, and all of them together will never fully content and
please him. And who would have a God that can neither please us, nor be
pleased? He that makes Himself his God, has a compounded God (and now
corrupted) of multifarious, and now of contrary desires, as hard to please as
any without us. There is no Rest or Happiness but in Unity. And therefore none
in our selves or any other creature; but in God the only center of the soul.
The further from the Center, the further from Unity. It is only in God that
differing minds can be well united. Therefore is the world so divided, because
it is departed so far from God. Therefore have we so many minds and ways, and
such diversity of opinions, and contrariety of affections, because men forsake
the Center of Unity. There Is no Uniting in any worldly, carnal, self-devised
principles, or practices. When Holiness brings these distracted, scatterd souls
to God, in him they will be one. While they bark at Holiness, and cry up Unity,
they show themselves distracted men. For Holiness is the only way to Unity,
because it is the closure of the soul with God. All countries, and persons
cannot meet in any one interest or Creature, but each has a several interest
of his own; But they might all meet in God. If the Pope were God and had his
perfections, he would be fit for all the Church to Center in; But being man,
and yet pretending to this Prerogative of God, he is the grand divider and
distracter of the Church. The Proverb is too true; [ So many men, so many
minds] because that every man will be a God to himself, having a self mind, and
self will, and all men will not yield to be one in God. God is the common
interest of the Saints; and therefore all that are truly Saints, are truly
united in him. And if all the Visible Church, and all the world, would heartily
make him their Common Interest, we should quickly have a Common Unity and
Peace, and the Temple of double faced Janus would be shut up. They that
sincerely have One God, have also one Lord (and Savior) one spirit, one faith,
one Baptism (or holy Covenant with God) even because they have one God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in them all. And
therefore they must keep the nuity of the spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.
3, 4, 5, 6. Though yet they have different degrees of gifts* (verse. 7.) and
therefore differences in opinion about abundance of inferior things. The
further we go from the trunk or stock, the more numerous and small we shall
find the branches. They are one in God, that are divided in many doubtful
controversies. The weakest therefore in the faith must be received into this
Union and Communion of the Church; but not to doubtful disputations, Romans 14.
1. As the ancient Baptism, contained no more but our Engagement to God, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, so the ancient Profession of saving faith, was of
the same extent. God is sufficient for the Church to Unite in. A Union in other
Articles of faith is so far necessary to the Unity of the Church, as it is
necessary to prove our faith and Unity in God. and the sincerity of this
ancient simple belief in God the Father Son, and Spirit.

The Unity of God is the Attribute to be first handled and imprinted on the
mind, even next unto his Essence; Deuteronomy. 6. 4. The Lord our God is one Lord. And
the unity of the Church is its excellency and attribute, that is first and most
to be esteemed and preserved next unto its Essence. If it be not a Church, it
cannot be One Church; and if we be not Saints, we cannot be united Saints. If
we be not Members, we cannot make One Body. But when once we have the Essence
of Saints and of a Church, we must next be solicitous for its Unity; Nothing
below an essential point of faith will allow^ns to depart from the Catholic
Unity, love, and peace that is due to Saints; And because such essentials are
never wanting in the Catholich Church, or any true member of it, therefore we
are never allowed to divide from the Catholic Church, or any true and visible
member. It is first necessary that the Church be a Church, that is, a People
separated from the world to Christ; and that the Christian be a Christian in
Covenant with the Lord. But the next point of Necessity is it that the Church
be One, and Christians be One. And he that for the sake of lower points, how
True soever, will break this holy bond of Unity shall find at last to his shame
and sorrow, that he understood not the excellency or necessity of unity. The
prayer of Christ for the perfection of his Saints is, [ that they all may be
One, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us;
that the world may believe that thou have sent me: And the glory which thou
gave me I have given them, that they may be One, even as we are One: I in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in One, that the world may
know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have lved me] Here it
appears that the Unity of the Church or Saints is necessary, to convince the
world of the truth of Christianity, and of the Love of God to his people, and
necessary to the glory and perfection of the Saints. The nearer any Churches,
or members are to the divine perfections, and the more strictly conformable to
the mind of God, the more they are One, and replenished with Catholic Love to
all Saints, and desirous of Unity and Communion with them. It is a most
lamentable delusion of some Christians that think their ascending to higher
degrees of Holiness, does partly consist in their withdrawing from the
Catholic Church, or from the Communion of most of the Saints on Earth, upon
the account of some smaller differing opinions; And they think that they should
become more loose, and leave their strictness, if they should hold a Catholic
Communion, and leave their state of separation, and division! Is there any
strictness amiable or desirable, except a strict Conformity to God? Surely a
strict way of sin and wickedness is not desirable to a Saint. And is not God
One, and his Church One, and has he not commanded all his servants to be One,
and is not Love the new and great commandment* by which they must be known to
all men to be his Disciples? Which then is the stricter servant of the Lord? he
that Loves much, or he that Loves little? he that Loves all Christians, or
he that Loves but a few, with the special Love? He that Loves a Christian as
a Christian; or he that Loves him but as one of his party or opinion? He that
is One in the Catholic Body; Or he that disowneth Communion with the far
greatest part of the body? Will you say that Christ was loose, and Pharisees
strict, because Christ eat and drank with Publicans and Sinners, and the
Pharisees condemned him for it? It was Christ that was stricter in holiness then
they; for he abounded more in Love and Good works; but they were stricter then
he in a proud, self-conceeted morosity and separation. Certainly he that is
highest in Love, is highest in Grace, and not he that confineth his Love to
few. Was it not the weak Christian that was the stricter, in point of meats and
drinks and days? Romans 14. and 15. But the stronger that were censured by them,
did more strictly keep the commandment of God.

Christian Reader, let the Unity of God have this effect upon thy soul, 1. To
draw thee from the distracting multitude of Creatures, and make thee long to be
all in God. That thy soul may be still working toward him, till thou and
nothing but God alone within thee. In the multitude of thy thoughts within
thee, let his comforts delight thy soul, Psalm. 94. 19. The multitude
distracteth thee; Retire into Unity that thy soul may be composed, quieted, and
delighted.

2. And let it make thee long for the Unity of the Saints, and endeavor it to
the utmost of thy power, that the Church in Unity may be more like the Head.

3. And let it cause thee to admire the Happiness of the Saints, that are
freeed from the bondage of the distracting Creature, and have but One to Love,
and Fear, and Trust, and Serve, and Seek, and Know; One thing is needful, which
should be chosen, but its many that we are troubled about, Luke 11. 42.

CHAP. IV.
3. THe Immensity of God (which is the next Attribute to be considered) must
have this Effect upon thy soul: 1. The Infinite God that is everywhere
comprehending all places and things, and comprehended by none, must raise
admiring reverent thoughts in the soul of the believer We wonder at the
Magnitude of the Sun and the Heavens, and of the whole Creation; But when we
begin to think what is beyond the Heavens, and all created Being, we are at a
kind of loss. Why it is God that is in all, and above all, and beyond all, and
beneath all: and where there is no place because no Creature, there is God; And
if thy thoughts should imagine millions of millions of miles beyond all place
and measure, all is but God, and go as far as thou can in thy thoughts and
thou can not go beyond him. Reverently admire the Immensity of God. The world
and all the Creatures in it, are not to God so much as a sand or atome is to
all the world. The point of a needle is more to all the world, then the world
to God. For between that which is Finite, and that which is Infinite, there is
no comparison. Isa. 40. 12, 15, 17. Who has measured the waters in the hollow
of his hand? and meated out Heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of
the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales and the hills in a
balance? -- Behold the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as
the small dust of the ballance^* behold he takes up the Isles as a very little
thing, -- All Nations before him are as nothing: and they are counted to him
less then Nothing and Vanity.]

2. From this Greatness and Immensity of God also thy soul must reverently stay
all its busy, bold enquiries, and know that God is to us and to every creature
Imcomprehensible. If thou could fathom or measure him, and know his
Greatness by a comprehensive knowledge, he were not God. A Creature can
comprehend nothing but a Creature. You may know God, but not comprehend him; As
your foot treads on the earth, but does not cover all the earth. The Sea is
not the Sea, if you can hold it in a spoon. Thou can not comprehend the Sun
which thou see, and by which thou see all things else, nor the sea, or
earth, no nor a worm or pile of grass: Thy understanding knows not all that
God has put into any the least of these; Thou art a stranger to thy self, and
to somewhat in every part of thy self, both body and soul. And think thou to
comprehend God, that perfectly comprehendest nothing? Stop then thy overbold
enquiries, and remember that thou art a shallow finite worm, and God is
Infinite. First, reach to comprehend the Heaven and Earth and whole Creation,
before thou think of Comprehending him, to whom the world is nothing, or
vanity, or so small a dust, or drop, or point. [Job. 37. 1, 5. says Elihu, At
this my heart trembles, and is moved out of his place: Hear attentively the
Noise of his Voice, -- God thundereth marvelously with his Voice; great things
does he which we cannot comprehend] How then should we comprehend himself? When
God pleads his cause with Job himself, what does he but convince him of his
Infiniteness and absoluteness, even from the greatness of his works, which are
beyond our reach and yet are as nothing to himself! Should he take the busy
enquirer in hand, but as he did begin with Job, 38. 1, 2. etc. [ Who is this
that darkeneth Counsel by words without knowledge? Gird up thy loins like a
man, for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me, etc.] alas, how soon would
he nonplus and confound us? and make us say as Job. 40. 4. [ Behold I am vile!
what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth: Once have I spoken,
but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no further.] Indeed there
is mentioned Ephesians. 3. 11. The Saints comprehending the dimensions of the Love of
Christ, but as the next verse says, it passes knowledge; so comprehending
there signifies no more, but a knowing according to our Measure; an attainment
of what we are capable to attain; nay nor all that neither, but such a
prevalent knowledge of the Love of Christ as is common to all the Saints; As
there is nothing more visible then the Sun, and yet no visible being less
comprehended by the sight; so is there nothing more Intelligible then God (for
he is All in all things) and yet nothing so Incomprehensible to the mind that
knows him. It satisfies me not to be Ignorant of God, nor to know so little
as I know, nor to be short of the measure that I am capable of; but it
satisfies me to be incapable of comprehending him; or else I must be
unsatisfied because I am not God. O the presumptuous arrogance of those men, if
I may call them men, that dare prate about the Infinite God such things as
never were revealed to them, in his works or word? and dare pretend to measure
him by their shallow understandings, and question, if not deny and censure,
that of God which they cannot reach! and sooner suspect the word that does
reveal him, then their muddy brains that should better conceive of him! Says
Elihu Job 36. 26. [ Behold God is Great, and we know him not, neither can the
number of his years be searched out.] Though the Knowledge of him be our Life
Eternal, yet we know him not by any full and adequate conception. We know an
Infinite God, and therefore with an Excellent Knowledge objectively considered;
but with a poor degree and kind of Knowledge next to none, as to the act; and
it is a thousand thousand fold more that we know not of him, then that we know:
For ineeed there is no comparison to be here made.

3. The immensity of God as it proves him incomprehensible, so it contains
his Omnipresence; And therefore should continually affect us as men that
believe that God stands by them. As we would compose our thoughts, and minds
and passions, if we saw (were it possible) the Lord stand over us, so should we
now labor to compose them. As we would restrain and use our tongues, and order
our behavior if we saw his Majesty, so should we do now when we know that he
is with us. An eye servant will work hard in his masters presence, what ever he
does behind his back. Bestir thee then Christian, for God stands by; In him we
live and move and have our Being, Act. 17. 28. Loyter not till thou can truly
say that God is gone or absent from thee; sin not by wilfulness or negligence
till thou can say, thou art behind his back. Alas that we should have no
more awakened serious souls and no more fervent lively prayers, and no more
serious holy speech, and no more careful heavenly lives, when we stand before
the living God, and do all in his sight, and speak all in his hearing? O why
should sense so much affect us, and faith, and Knowledge work no more? we can
be awed with the presence of a man, and would not do before a Prince, what most
men do before the Lord. Yea other things affect us when we see them not; and
shall not God? But of this more anon.

4. The Immensity of God assures us much of his Alsufficiency. He that is
everywhere, is easily able to hear all prayers, to help us in all straits, to
supply all wants, to punish all sins. A Blasphemous conceit of God as Finite*
and as absent from us, is one of the causes of our distrust. He that does
distrust an absent friend, as thinking he may forget him, or neglect him, will
trust him when he is with him; cannot he hear thee, and pity thee and help
thee that is still with thee? O what an awe is this to the careless! what a
support to faith! what a quickener to duty! what a comfort to the afflicted
troubled soul! God is in thy poor cottage, Christian, and well acquainted with
thy wants. God is at thy bedside when thou are sick, and nearer thee then the
nearest of thy friends. What would thou do in want or pain if God stood by?
would thou not Pray and Trust him if thou saw him? so do though thou see
him not, for he is surely there.

5. The Immensity and Infinite Greatness of God assures us of his Particular
Providence. Some blasphemous Infidels imagine that he has only a General
Providence, and has left all to some inferior powers, and medleth not with
particular things himself: They think that as he has left it to the Sun to
illuminate the world, so has he left all other inferior things and events to
nature or inferior causes; and that he does not himself regard, observe, reward
or punish the thoughts, and words, and ways of men. And all this is because
they consider not the Immensity or Infinite Greatness of the Lord. Its true,
that God has framed the Nature of all things, and delights to maintain and
use the frame of second causes which he has made; and will not easily and
ordinarily work against or without this order of causes: But it is as true and
certain both that sometimes he makes use of Miracles, and that in the very
course of natural causes he is able to exercise a particular Providence, as
well as without them by himself alone. The Creature does nothing but by him.
All things move as he first moves them, in their natural agency. His wisdom
guides, his will intends, and commands; his Power moves and disposes
all. The Sun would not shine, if he were not the light of it; and he is no less
himself the Light of the world, then if he did illuminate it without a Sun. God
is never the further off* because the Creatures are near us; nor never the less
in the effect, because he uses a second cause, then if there were no second
cause at all. What influence second causes have upon the souls of men, he has
for the most part kept unknown to us; But that himself disposes of us and all
things after the counsel of his own will, is beyond all question. Can he that
is most nearly present with thy thoughts, be regardless of them? can he be
regardless of thy words and ways that is with thee and sees and hears all?
If thou believe not that he is as verily with thee as thou art there thy self,
thou art then an Atheist. If thou believe him not to be Infinite, thou
believe him not to be God. It is not God that can be absent, limited or
finite. And if thou be not such a senseless Atheist, but know that God is
everywhere, how is it possible thou should doubt of his care or observance or
particular providence about every thing? No child is scarce so foolish that
will think his Father cares not what he says or does, when he stands before
him. Would thou doubt of Gods particular providence, whether he regard thy
heart, and talk and practice, if thou did see him with thee? sure it is
scarce possible. Why then do thou question it when thou know that he is
with thee? If thou be an Atheist and know not, look about thee on the world,
and bethink thee whether stones, and trees, and earth, whether beasts, or birds
or men do make themselves; If they do, thou were best uphold thy self, and be
not sick, and do not die. If thou made thy self, thou can sure preserve thy
self; But if any thing else made thee and all these lower things, either it was
somewhat greater or less then they* either something better or worse then they.
If less, or worse, how could it make them Greater or Better then it self? Can
any thing give that which it has not? If it must needs be Greater and Better
then the Creatures, then as it must be Wiser than they, and more Holy, Gracious
and Just then they, so must it be more comprehensive then all they. Whoever
made this earth, is certainly greater then the earth, or else he should give it
more than he had to give. And if he be Greater, he must be present: If thou
should be so vain as to account any other higher thing the Maker of this
world* that is not God, thou must ascribe also a sufficiency to that maker, to
exercise a particular providence, and moreover be put to consider who did make
that Maker. Nothing therefore is more certain even to Reason it self, then the
Maker of the world must be Greater then the world, and therefore present with
all the world; and therefore must observe and regard all the world. When thou
can find out a thought, or word, or deed that was not done in the presence of
God, or any creature that is not in his presence, then believe and spare not
that he sees it not, or regards it not; yea and that it has no being. O
blind Atheists! you see the Sun before your eyes, which enlightneth all the
upper part of the earth at once; even millions of millions see all by its
light; and yet do you doubt whether God beholds and regards and provides for
all at once! Tell me, if God had never a Creature to look to in all the world
but thee, would thou believe that he would regard thy heart, and words, and
ways, or not? If he would, why not now, as well as then! Is he not as
sufficient for thee, and as really present with thee, as if he had no other
creature else? If all men in the world were dead save one, would the Sun any
more illuminate that one then now it does? May thou not see as well by the
light of it now, as if it had never another to enlighten? And do thou see a
Creature do so much, and will thou not believe as much of the Creator? If thou
think us worms too low for God so exactly to observe, thou may as well think
that we are too low for him to Create, or preserve; and then who made us and
preserves us? Does not the sun enlighten the smallest bird, and crawling
vermin, as well as the greatest prince on earth? Does it withhold its light
from any Creature that can see, and say, I will not shine on things so base?
And will thou more restrain the Infinite God that is the Maker, Light, and Life
of all? It is he that fills all in all* Ephesians. 1. 23. The Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain him, 1 King. 8. 27. and is he absent from thee? He does beset
thee before and behind, and lays his hand upon thee; Whither will thou go
from his spirit, or whither will thou fly from his presence? If thou ascend up
into Heaven, he is there; If thou make thy bed in Hell, thou will feel him
there; If thou take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts
of the Sea, even there shall thou find him to be to thee as thou art, Psalm.
139. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10. Thou may think with sinful Adam and Eve, Genesis 3. 8. to
hide thy self from the presence of the Lord: But thou will quickly find that he
observes thee; and be sure thy sin will find thee out, Numb. 32. 23. Thou
may with Cain be turned out of the Gracious presence of God, Genesis 4. 16. and
cast out of his Church and Mercy; and with the damned thou may be turned out
of the presence of his blessedness and glory: but thou shall never be out of
his essential presence, nor so escape the presence of his Justice, Job 1. 12.
and 2. 7. It is the presence of his Grace where the upright are promised here
to dwell, Psalm. 140. 13. and out of which they fear lest they be cast, Psalm.
51. 11. [ Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from
me] And it is the presence where is fullness of Joy, which they aspire after,
Psalm. 16. 11. But there is also a presence that the earth shall tremble at,
Psalm. 114. 7. and that the wicked shall perish at, Psalm. 68. 2. so that a
particular Providence must be remembered by them that believe and remember the
Immensity of God.

CHAP. V.
4. THe Eternity of God is the next Attribute to be Known* which also must have
its work upon the soul. And 1. This also shows us that God is
Incomprehensible; For man cannot comprehend Eternity. When we go about to think
of that which has no Beginning nor End, it is to our mind, as a place a
thousand miles off is to our eye; even beyond our reach; we cannot say there is
no such place, yea we know there is; but we cannot see it: so we know there is
an Eternal Being; but our Knowledge of his Eternity is not intuitive, or
comprehensive* Eternity therefore is the object of our faith, and reverence,
and admiration, but forbids our busy bold enquiries, O the arrogance of those
ignorantly* learned, and foolishly-wise disputing men, that have so long
perplexed, if not torn in pieces the Church, about the priority and
posteriority of* the knowledge and decrees of God, when they confess them all
to be Eternal! As if they knew not that terms of priority, presentiality, and
posteriority, have not that significancy in or about Eternity as they have with
us!

2. The Eternity of God must draw the soul from Transitory, to Eternal things.
It is an Everlasting blessedness, even the Eternal God, that our souls are made
for* the Bruits are made for a mortal happiness; The Immortal soul cannot be
fully content with any thing that will have an end. As a capacity of this
endless blessedness does difference man from the beasts that perish; so the
Disposition to it does difference Saints from the ungodly; and the Fruition of
it does difference the Glorified from the damned. Alas what a silly thing were
man if he were capable of nothing but these transitory things! What were our
Lives worth, and what were our time worth, and what were all our mercies worth,
or what were all the world worth to us, or what were we worth, our selves? I
would not undervalue the works of God; but truly if man had no other life to
live but this, I should esteem him a very contemptible creature. If you say
that there is some excellency in the Bruits, I answer, True; but their
usefulness is their chiefest excellency; And what is their use but to be a
glass in which we may see the Lord, and to be serviceable to man in his passage
to Eternity? They are not capable of Knowing, or Loving, or enjoying God
themselves: but they are useful to man that is capable of this; and so they
have an everlasting end, and this is their Excellency. And therefore the
Atheist that denies an everlasting life to man, does bring himself into a far
baser state then the bruits are in. For the bruits have an everlasting end, in
promoting the happiness of man: But if man have no everlasting end himself,
there is no other whose everlasting happiness he can promote. The unbeliever
therefore does debase his own soul and the whole creation: And faith and
holiness advance the soul and all things with it, that are useful to our
advancement. The true Believer honors his horse, his dog, his food and
raiment, and the earth he treads on, and every creature, incomparably more
than the Infidel does honor his own or any others soul, or then he honors
the greatest prince on earth. For the Believer uses all things, even the
vilest in reference to Eternity; but the Infidel uses his life and soul but to
a transitory end; and takes the greatest Prince on earth to be but for a
transitory use. And as Eternity is unvalualbe in comparison of time, so the use
and excellency that a Believer does ascribe to a bit of bread or the basest
creature in the sanctified improvement of it, is ten thousand times, even
unspeakably above the use and excellency that an Unbeliever ascribes to his
soul or to his Prince. He that stampeth the Image of a Dog or a Toad upon gold
instead of the Image of the Prince, and would have ten thousand pounds-worth
go but for a farthing, does not by a thousand degrees so much debase the gold
as the Infidel does debase his soul and all things. Infidelity is guilty of the
destruction of all souls, and the destruction of all mercies, and the
destruction of all Divine Revelations, of all graces, of all ordinances, and
means, and of the destruction of the whole creation that was made for man: For
he that destroys the End, destroys all the means: But the Infidel
destroys and denies the end of every one of these, and Holiness only does
give them up and use them to their ends.

1. He is guilty of the destruction of all souls: For as much as in him lies
they are destroyed, while they are all made useless to the End for which they
were created. If there be no other life and happiness Everlasting, what are
souls good for? what is the Reasonable creature good for? Is it to be Happy
here? In what? Here is no happiness. Is it in eating and drinking and sleeping?
why these are to strengthen us for our service which tends to our end* and
therefore cannot be themselves our end. Is it not better be without either meat
or drink or sleep in point of Happiness, so be it we also were without the need
of them, then to need them and have them for our need, especially with the care
and trouble which they cost us? I had an hundred times rather for my part, if
it were lawful to desire it, never have meat, or drink, or sleep, and be
without the need of them, as I had rather be without a sore, then to have a
plaster that will ease it, and be every day at the pains to dress it. Brutes
have some advantage in these above men, in that they have not the care, and
fear, and sorrow of mind as we have, in the getting or keeping what they have
or need. If you go downward, and say that men are made to govern brutes, then
what are brutes made for, unless to dung the earth? and so the basest shall be
the end of the noblest, and God may be as wisely said to be for man, because he
is to govern him. Truly if there were no Everlasting life, but man were a mere
terrestrial animal, I had rather never have been born, or should wish I had
never been a man: I knew not what to do with my self, nor how to employ the
faculties of my soul or body, but they would all seem to me as useless things.
What should I do with my Reason* if I had no higher an end then beasts? what
should I do with a mind that knows that there is a God* and another world,
and that is capable of desiring him, seeking and enjoying him, if it must be
frustrated of all? what should I do with a heart that's capable of the Love of
God and delighting in his Love, if I have no God to Love and delight in when
this life is ended? why have I a heart that so desires him, in fuller vision
and fruition, if I be capable of no such thing? what then should I do with my
time and life? verily I know not, if I were fully of this sad opinion, whether
I should turn brute in my life agreeably to my judgment, or whether I should
make an end of my life to be eased of a useless burden; but confident I am I
should not know what to do with my self; I should be like a poor cashiered
Soldier, or like one turned out of his Service, that knew not where to have
work and wages: And if you found me standing all day idle, I must give you the
reason, because no man has hired me. What do those wretches do with their
lives, that think they have no God to serve and seek, or future happiness to
attain? As men use to say of naughty Ministers, so may I say of all mankind
according to the Doctrine of the Infidels: A sorry Tailor may make a Botcher,
or a bad Shoemaker may make a Cobbler, and a broken Mercer may be a Peddler; but
a naughty Priest is good for nothing (And its true of him as such) and as
Christ himself says, Matthew. 5. 13, 14. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if
the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth
good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men: ye
are the light of the world: men do not light a candle to put it under a bushel.
So I say of the Reasonable Creature: The grass is useful for the beasts: The
beasts are serviceable unto man: A swine that cannot serve you living, is
useful being dead. But if there were no God to seek and serve, and no life but
this for us to hope for, for ought I know man were good for nothing: What were
Light good for if there were no eyes? or eyes if there were no light to see by?
what is a Watch good for but to tell the hour of the day? All the curious parts
and workmanship of it, is worth no more then the metal is worth, if it be not
useful to its proper end. And what Reason, and will, and affections in man are
good for, I know not, if not to seek, to please and to enjoy the Lord! Take off
this poise, and all the wheels of my soul must stand still, or else do worse.

2. The Infidel and ungodly man that looks not after an Etern lend, destroys
all the mercies of God, and makes them as no mercies at all: Creation and our
Being is a mercy: but it is in order to our Eternal end. Redemption by Christ
is an unspeakable mercy* but its denied by the Infidel, and rejected by the
Ungodly: what is Christ worth, and all his mediation, if there be no life for
man but this? Peace and Liberty, health and life, friends and neighbors, food
and raiment, are all mercyes to us, as a ship and sails are to the Mariner, or
a fair way, or Horse, or Inn to a Traveller: But if by denying our Eternal end,
you make our voyage or our journey vain, these mercies then are little worth:
no more then a ship on the land, or a plow in the sea, or a horse to him that
has no use for him. And O what an ungrateful wretch is that who will deny all
the mercies of God to himself, and to all others! For once deny the use and the
Eternal end, and you deny the mercy.

3. He that believes not, or seeks not after an Eternal end, destroys all
the Doctrine, Law and Government of God: For all is but to lead us to this end.
All the holy Scriptures, the precepts of Christ and his holy example, the
Covenant of Grace, the gifts and miracles of the Holy Ghost, the light and law
of Nature it self, are all to bring us to our Eternal end: And therefore he
that denies that end, does cancel them all, and cast them by as useless things.

4. And he denies all the Graces of the Spirit: For what use is there for
Faith, if the object of it be a falsehood? what use for Hope, if there be no
life to be Hoped for? what use for holy desires and love, if God be not to be
enjoyed? Grace is but the delusion and deformity of the soul, if the Infidel
and ungodly be in the right.

5. They destroy also All the means of our Salvation, if they deny Salvation
which is the End. To what purpose should men study, or read, or hear, or pray,
or use either Sacraments or any other means, for an End that is not to be had?
To what end should men obey or suffer, for any such end that's not attainable?

6. Yea they do let loose the soul to sin, and take off all essectual
restraint. If there be no Eternal end, and no Reward or Punishment but here,
what can effectually hinder the men of this opinion from stealing, whoredom,
or any villainy when it may be done with secrecy? what should hinder the
revengeful man from poisoning or secret murdering his enemy, or setting his
house on fire in the night? If I know a man or woman that believes no life to
come, I take it for granted they are revengeful, thieves, deceivers,
fornicators, or any thing that is bad, if they have but temptation and secret
opportunity. For what has he to seek but the pleasing of his flesh, that
thinks he has no God to seek or please, or no future reward or punishment to
expect? He that confesses himself an Infidel, to me, does confess himself to
be in all things else as bad as ever he can or dare. Honesty is renounced by
that man or woman that profess themselves to be Atheists or Infidels: Methinks
in congruency with their profession they should take it for a wrong to be
called or reputed honest! If you tell me that Heathens had a kind of Honesty; I
must tell you again that most Heathens believed the Immortality of the soul,
and that kind of seeming Honesty which they had was only in those of them that
thus expected a life to come. But those that believe not another life where man
is to have his punishment and reward, have nothing like to Honesty in them, but
live like greedy ravenous beasts, where they are from under the Laws and
Government of them that look for another life. The Cannibals that eat men's
flesh, and some such savages as they, are the Nations that expect no life but
this. It is believed so commonly by all the civil Infidels and Turks, as shows
it to be a principle that nature does reveal.

7. Yea the whole Creation that is within the sight of man is destroyed
opinionatively by the Infidels that look for no Immortal life: For all things
were made to further our Salvation: the Heavens to declare the Glory of God,
and the sirmament to show his handy work, and all Creatures to be our Glass in
which we must behold the Lord, and our Book in which we must read and learn his
nature and his will. The sun is to light us, and maintain our Life, and the
Life of other lower Creatures, while we prepare for Immortality: The earth is
to bear us, and to bear fruit for us; and the Trees and Plants and every
Creature to accommodate and serve us, while we serve the Lord and pass on to
Eternity. And therefore the Atheist that denies us our Eternity, denies the
usefulness of all the world; what were all the Creatures here good for, if
there were no men? the earth would be a wilderness, and the beasts would for
the most part perish, for want of sustenance, and all would be like a forsaken
Cottage that no man dwells in, and does no good; And if man be not the Heir
of Immortality, they can do him no good. All Creatures are but our provision in
the way to this Eternity: And therefore if there were no Eternity, what should
we do with them? what should we do with ways, and pavements, or with Inns for
Travelers, or with horses or other provision for our journey, if there were no
traveling that way? And who will travel to a place that is not, or a City that
is nowhere but in his brains, besides a mad man? Its evident therefore that as
all the tools in a workmans shop, are made useless to him if he be forbidden to
use his trade, and all the books in my Library are useless, if I may not read
them to get knowledge; so all Creatures under Heaven are made useless and
destroyed doctrinally by the Atheist, that thinks there is no Eternal life for
which they should be used. I must seriously profess if I believed this (being
in other things of the mind I am) I knew not what to do with any thing. What
should I do with my Books, but to learn the way to this Eternity? what should I
do with my money, if there be no treasure to be laid up in Heaven, nor friends
to be made with the Mammon abused commonly to unrighteousness? what should I do
with my Tongue, my Hands, my Time, my Life, my Self, or any thing, if there
were no Eternity? I think I should dig my grave, and lay me down in it and die
and perish, to escape the sorrows of a longer life that must be my companions.

Remember then Christians, and still remember it, that Eternity is the matter
of your Faeith and Hope! Eternity is your portion and felicity! Eternity is the
End of all your desires, and labors, and distresses! Eternity is your
Religion, and the Life of all your holy motions; and as without the Capacity of
it, you would be but beasts, so without the Love and Desire of it, and title to
it, you would be but wicked miserable men. Set not your hearts on transitory
things, while you stand near unto Eternity. How can you have room for so many
thoughts on fading things, when you have an Eternity to think on? what light
can you see in the Candles or Glowworms of this world, in the Sunshine of
Eternity? Oh remember when you are tempted to please your eyes, your taste, and
sensual desires, that these are not Eternal pleasures! Remember when you are
tempted for wealth or honor to wrong your souls, that these are not the
Eternal riches! Houses and Lands are not Eternal! meats and drinks are not
Eternal! sports and pastimes, and jocund sinful company are not Eternal! Alas,
how short! how soon do they vanish into nothing! But it is God, and our dear
Redeemer that are Eternal! The flower of beauty withers with age, or by the
nipping blast of a short disease; the honors of the world are but a dream;
your graves will bury all its glory. Down comes the Prince, the Lord, the
gallant, and suddenly takes his lodgings in the dust. The corpse that was
pampered and adorned yesterday, is a clod to day. The body that was bowed to,
attended and applauded but the other day, is now interred in the vault of
darkness, with worms and moles. To day it is corruption and a most loathsome
thing, that lately was dreaming of an earthly happiness. One day he is striving
for riches and preheminences, or glorying and rejoicing in them, that the next
day may be snatched away to hell. O fix not your minds on fading things, that
perish in the using, and by their vanishing mock you that set your hearts upon
them. You will not fix your eye and mind upon every bird that flies by you, as
you will on the houses that you must dwell in: nor will you mind every
passenger, as you will do your friends that still live with you. And shall
transitory vanity be minded by you above Eternity?

3. It is Eternity that must direct you in your estimate of all things. It is
this that shows you the excellency of man above the beasts: It is this that
tells you the worth of Grace, and the weight of sin, the preciousness of holy
Ordinances and helps, and the evil of hindrances and temptations; the wisdom
of the choice and diligence of the Saints, and the folly of the choice, and
negligent, sinful lives of the ungodly; the worth of Gods favor, and the
vanity of man's; and the difference between the godly and the unsanctified
world, in point of Happiness.

Were no^ Grace the egg, the seed, the earnest of an Eternal glory, it were not
so glorious a thing. But O how precious are all those thoughts, desires,
delights and breathings of the soul, that bring us on to sweet Eternity! Even
those sorrows, and groans, and tears are precious that lead to an Eternal joy!
Who would not willingly obey the holy motions of the holy Spirit, that is but
hatching and preparing us for Eternity! This is it that makes a Bible, a
Sermon, a holy Book, to be of greater value then Lands and Lordships. It is
Eternity that makes the illuminated soul so fearful of sinning, so diligent in
holy duties, so cheerful and resolved in suffering, because he believes it is
all for an Eternity. A Christian in the holy Assemblies, and in his reading,
learning, prayer, conference, is laying up for Everlasting, when the worldling
in the Market, in the field or shop, is making provision for a few days or
hours: Thou gloriest in thy Riches and pre-eminence now, but how long will thou
do so? To day that house, that land is thine; but can thou say, it shall be
thine to morrow? Thou can not: But the Believer can truly say, My God, my
Christ, is mine to day, and will be mine to all Eternity! O Death! thou can
take my friends from me, and my worldly riches from me, and my time, and
strength, and life from me! but take my God, my Christ, my Heaven, my Portion
from me, if thou can! My sin is all thy sting and strength! But where is thy
sting when sin is gone? and where is thy strength when Christ has conquered
thee? Is it a great matter that thou deprivest me of my sinful weak and
troublous friends, when against thy will thou bring me to my perfect blessed
friends with whom I must abide for ever! Thou do indeed bereave me of these
Riches; but it is that I may possess the unvaluable Eternal riches! Thou endest
my Time, that I may have Eternity! Thou castest me down that I may be exalted!
Thou take away my strength of life, that I may enter into Life Eternal! And
is this the worst that Death can do? And shall I be afraid of this? I willingly
lay by my clothes at night, that I may take my rest, and I am not loath to put
off the old when I must put on new. The bird that is hatched is not grieved
because he must leave the broken shell. Nor is it the grief of man or beast
that he has left the womb! Death does but open the womb of Time, and let us
into Eternity, and is the second birth day of the soul. Regeneration brings us
into the Kingdom of Grace; and Death into the Kingdom of Glory. Blessed are
they that have their part in the New birth of Grace and the first Resurrection
from the death of sin; for to such the Natural Death will be Gain; and they
shall have their part in the second Resurrection, and on them the everlasting
Death shall have no power. O sirs, it is Eternity that tells you what you
should mind, and be, and do! and that turns the seals in all things where it
is concerned. Can you sl^ep in sin so near Eternity! Can you play and laugh
before you are prepared for Eternity! Can you think him wise that sells his
eternal Joy for the ease, the mirth, the pleasure of a moment! and trifleth
away the time in which he must win or lose Eternity! If these men be wise,
there are n^ fools! nor any but wise men in Bedlam! Dare thy tongue report, or
thy heart imagine, that any holy work is needless, or a heavenly life too much
ado, or any suffering too dear, that is for an Eternity! O happy souls that
win Eternity with the loss of all the world! O bless that Christ, that spirit,
that light, that word, that messenger of God, that drew thy heart to choose
Eternity before all transitory things! That was the day when thou beganst to be
wise, and indeed to show thy self a man! Thy wealth, thy honor, thy pleasure
will be thine when the sensual world has nothing to show, but sin and Hell, of
all they labored for. Their pleasures, honors, and all die, when they die;
But thine will then begin their perfection! The Hopes of the ungodly are like
an addle egg that when it is broken sends forth nothing but an odious stink,
when another sends forth the living bird; O all you worldlings, rich and poor,
you dream, you play, you trif^le, because you labor not for Eternity! Even
worldly Princes, and Nobles of the earth, your glory is but a squib, a flash, a
nothing, in comparison of the Eternal glory which you lose; you are doing
Nothing when you are ^^iving for the world, you are trifling and befooling your
^mmortal souls while you are grasping a shadow, the uncer^^in Riches (...) is
the Believer whom you despise, that seeks ^^^ something, th^^ loses not his
labor, that shows himself a ^an of reason, who is caring, and studying, and
laboring, and (...) watching, and suffering for Eternity; why is a (...)
courts of God, so much better then a thousand in (...) o^ palaces of
wickedness, but because it is the Ex^ where we have News of Heaven, and trade
for an Eternity? And why is it better to be a door keeper in the (...) of God,
then to floursh in the prosperity of sinners, but because Gods house is the
porch or entrance of an Eternity ^^ delights, and the lowest room among the
saints affords us a better prospect into Heaven, then the Highest state of
worldly (...)! The ungodly are near to cutting down when they flourish in their
greatest glory, Psalm. 37. 2, 20. Stay but a little, and h^ that flourishes
will be withered and cast into the fire, and the Righteous shall see it when he
is out off, and shall seek him, but he is not to be found, verse. 34, 35, 36,
38. For the enemies of God, and all that are far from him shall perish, Psalm.
92. 9. and 13. 27. their desire shall perish, Psalm. 112. 10. their hope shall
perish, Prove. 11. 7. Job 8. 13. their way shall perish, Psalm. 1. 6. and himself
and all that they sought, and loved, and delighted in, shall perish, Job 20. 7.
2 Pet. 2. 12. Romans 2. 12. Heb. 1. 11. Even the visible Heavens and Earth, which
they abused, shall be consumed with fire. Seeing then that all these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversation and godliness, looking toward and waiting for the coming and
appearance of our Lord! 2 Pet. 3. 11. Shall any man be accounted w^le, that is
not wise for Eternal happiness? shall any man be counted Happy that must be
most miserable to Eternity? In the name of God, Christian, I charge thee to
hold on, and look to thy soul, thy words, thy ways, for it is for Eternity. O
play not, loyter not, do nothing by the halves in the way to Eternity! Let the
careless world do what they will; they despise, and know not what they do
despise; they neglect, and know not what they do neglect; but thou that
seek, and labourest, and waitest, know what thou seek, and labourest
and waitest for. They sin and and know not what they do. They know not what
they are treasuring up for an Eternity. But t^^n know why thou ^^test, and
avoidest sin.

Sinners, be awakened by the Call of God; Do you know where you are, and what
you do? You are every man of you stepping into Eternity? Will you sin away,
will you loyter away, will you sell-for nothing, an Eternal Glory? Is thy
sinful lust, and gain, and mirth, and gluttony and excess of drink, a price to
set upon Eternity? If Heaven be no more worth to thee, art thou not as bad as
Judas, that for thirty pieces of silver would sell his Lord? O Eternity,
Eternity, what hearts have they that can so forget thee, neglect thee, and
disesteem thee, when they stand so near thee! O sleepy souls! do you never use
to rub your eyes, and look before you toward Eternity? And does it not amaze
you to see whither it is that you are going? Merrily you run down the Hill; but
where is the bottom! If you look but down from the top of a steeple, it may
occasion an amazing fear; what then should it cause in you to look down into
Hill, which is your Eternity? No good can possibly be small that is Eternal;
And no hurt or pain can be called little that is Eternal: An Eternal tooth-ake,
or an Eternal gowt, or stone, or fever, were a misery unspeakable; But O what
are these to an Eternal loss of Heaven, and to an Eternal sense of the burning
wrath of God Almighty! To be out of Heaven a day, and in Hell that day, is a
misery now unknown to sinners; But if it were as many thousand years as the
earth has sands, it were a greater Misery; But to be there for Ever, does make
the Misery past all Hope, and all conceiving. O me thinks the very name of
Eternity, should frighten the drunkard out of the Alehouse, and the sleepy
sinner out of his security, and the lustful, sportful, voluptuous sinner out of
his sensual delights! Methinks the very name of Eternity, should call off the
worldling to seek betime a more enduring treasure, and should take down the
gallants pride, and bring men to look after other matters then the most do look
after. Me thinks to hear the name of Eternity should with men of any faith and
reason, even blast all the beauty, and blurre the glory, and sadden the
delights, and weaken the temptations of the world, and make all its pleasure,
pomp and splendor, to be to our apprehensions as a smoke, a shadow, as the
dirt that we tread upon. Methinks to hear the name of Eternity, should lay so
odious a reproach on sin, and so nakedly open the folly, and shame and misery
of the ungodly, and so lively show the need, and worth of faith and Holiness,
that men should be soon resolved in their choice, and soon be at the end of an
ungodly course, and need no more words to make them the resolved servants of
the Lord, before to morrow. O me thinks, that a thought of Eternity, should
with a Believer, answer all temptations, and put life into all his prayers and
endeavors! If we were never so cold, or dull, or sleepy, one would think a
serious thought of Eternity should warm us, quicken us, and awake us! *O
Christians, shall we hear carelessly or speak carelessly of Eternity? shall we
pray coldly, or labor negligently for Eternity! O what an Ocean of Joy will
Eternity be unto the sanctified! It has neither banks nor bottom. O what a
gulf of misery, and woe, will Eternity be to the ungodly! wonderful! that on
their dying beds they quake not with the horror, and that they cry not out
with greatest lamentation, to think what a bottomless gulf of misery their
departing souls must be cast into! To be for Ever, Ever, Ever, under the most
heavy wrath of God! This is the appointed wages of ungodliness; This is the end
of wicked ways; This is it that sinners chose, because they would not live to
God! This they preferred, or ventured on, before a holy heavenly life! And this
is it that Believers are laboring to escape in all their holy care and
diligence! It is an Infinite value that is put upon the blood of Christ, the
promises of God, the ordinances and means of Grace, and grace it self, and the
poorest duties of the poorest Saints, because they are for an Infinite, Eternal
glory. No Mercy is small that tastes of Heaven (as all does or should do to the
Believer.) No action is low that aims at Heaven. And O how lively should the
Resolutions and courage of those men be, that are traveling, sighting, and
watching for Eternity! How full should be their Comforts, that are fetched from
the foresight of Infinite Eternal Comforts! As all things will presently be
swallowed up in Eternity, so methinks the present apprehension of Eternity
should now swallow up all things else in the soul.

Object. But ( says the Unbeliever) if God have made man for Eternity, it is a
wonder that there are no more lively Impressions of so Infinite a thing upon
the souls of all! Our sense of it is so small, that it makes me doubt whether
we are made for it.

Answ. Consider, 1. That benummedness, and sleep and death, is the very state
of an unholy soul! Have thou cast thy self into a sleepy senseless disease, and
will thou argue thence against Eternity? This is as if the blind should
conclude that there is no Sun, or that the eye of man was not made to see it,
because he has no sight himself! Or as if you should think that man has not
any life or feeling, because your palsy limbs do not feel! Or that the stomach
was not made for meat, because the stomachs of the sick abhor it!

2. And for believers, 1. You may see by their lives that they have some
apprehensions of Eternity: why else do they differ from you, and deny
themselves, and displease the world and the flesh it self? why do they set
their hearts above, if they have not lively thoughts of an Eternity!

2. But if you ask me, Why their apprehensions are not a thousand times more
lively about so Infinite a thing; I answer, 1. Their Apprehensions must be
suitable to their State. Our state here is a state of Imperfection; and so will
our apprehensions be; But a perfect state will have perfect apprehensions. It
is no proof that the Infant in the womb is not made to come into this world,
and see the Sun, and converse with men, because he has no apprehensions of it.
Our state here is a conjunction of the soul to a frail distempered body; and so
near a conjunction, that the actions of the soul must have great dependence on
the Body; And therefore our Apprehensions are limited by its frailty; and the
soul can go no higher then the capacity of the Body will allow; 2. And our
Apprehensions now are fitted to our Use and benefit; We are now Believers, and
must live by faith: And therefore must not be Beholders, and live by sense. If
Eternity were open to men's Natural sight, or we had here as clear and lively
apprehensions of it, as those have that are there, then it were not thanks, no
praise to us to be believers, or to obey, and live as Saints! And then God
should not Govern man as man here in the way by a Law, but as a beast by sense,
or as the glorified that have possession. Where there are perfect Apprehensions
of God and Glory, there will be also perfect Love, and Joy, and Praise, and
consequently perfect Happiness; and this were to make Earth and Heaven, the way
and the end to be all one. Perfect apprehensions are kept for a perfect state
of Happiness. But here it is well if we have such Apprehensions as are fitted
to the use of travelers and soldiers as will carry us on, and prevail against
the difficulties of our course. If you had never been at London, you could not
have any such clear Apprehensions of the place, as those that see it have; And
yet your imperfect Apprehensions might be sufficient to make you take a journey
thither, and you may come as safely and certainly to it, as if you had seen it.
Moreover, the body, the brain, which the soul in Apprehending now makes use of,
cannot bear such Apprehensions as are suitable to the thousandth part of the
greatness of the object, without distraction. The smallest eye may see the sun,
but the greatest cannot endure to gaze upon its Glory; much less if it were at
the nearest approach. Its a mercy o^ mercies to give us such Apprehensions of
Eternity, as are meet for passengers to bring us thither; and it is part of our
Mercy that those Apprehensions are not so great as to distract and over whelm
us.

4. Lastly, The Eternity of God must teach the soul contentedness and patience
under all labors, changes, sufferings and dangers that are here below.
Believing Soul, draw near; look seriously on Eternity, and try whether it will
not make such Impressions as these upon thee. Art thou weary of Labors, either
of the mind or body? Is not Eternity long enough for thy Rest? Can thou not
afford to work out the day light of this life, when thou must Rest with Christ
to all Eternity? Can thou not run with patience so short a race, when thou
look to so long a Rest? Can thou not watch one hour with Christ, that must
Reign with him to all Eternity? Do thou begin to shrink at sufferings for
Christ, when thou must be in Glory with him for ever? How short is the
suffering? how long is the Reward? Do thou begin to think hatdly of the
dealing of the Lord, because his people are here afflicted, and made the scorn
and byword of the world? why is not Eternity long enough for God to show his
Love and bounty to his people in? Is not the day at hand, when Lazarus and the
Rich worldling both must hear [ But now he is comforted, and th^n art
tormented] Luke 16. 25. Did not that [ Now] come ^^me enough which was the
entrance of Eternity? Even Jesus the Author and perfecter of our says, for the
Joy that was ^^t before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the throne of God! consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, l^st y^^ be w^^^ied and saint in your
minds] Heb. 12. 2, 3. D^st (...) the prosperity of the wicked, and prevalency
of the Churches Enemies! Look then unto Eternity, and (...)e whether that be
not long enough, for the (...) and the wicked to be tormented. Would (...)
their time? Do thou begin to (...) of Christ, o^ the truth of his promises,
because he does (...)? O what is a thousand years to Eternity! is there not yet
time enough before thee, for Christ to make good all his promises in! Were not
those Disciples sharply but justly rebuked as [ Fools and slow of heart to
believe] that when their Lord had been but two days dead, were unbelievingly
saying [ We hoped this had been he that should have redeemed Israel?] O
Remember, Christian, in all thy darkness and ignorance of the difficult
passages of Scripture, or of Providence, that the things that are chained to
Eternity, cannot be perfectly understood by him that stands in an inch of
time: but when Eternity comes, thou shall understand them. Remember when things
seems crooked in this world, and the best are lowest, and the worst are
highest, that Eternity is long enough to set all straight. Remember when
sinners crow and triumph, that Eternity is long enough for their complaints! In
thy poverty, and pain, and longest afflictions, remember that Eternity is long
enough for thy relief. If thy sorrow be long, and thy comforts short, remember
that Eternity is long enough for thy Joys. Cannot we be content to take up
short in this life, when we believe Eternity? Do thou stagger at the length
or strength of thy temptations? and art thou ready to draw back and venture
upon sin? why what Temptation can there be, that should not be lighter then a
feather, if Eternity be put against it in the scales? In a Word, if there be
any man that escapes the foolish seductions of this world, and uses it as not
abusing it, and has all his worldly accommodations as if he had none, it is he
that fixes his eye upon Eternity, and sees that the fashion of these lower
things does pass away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. No man can be ignorant of the
Necessity and worth of a Holy life, that discerns that the Eternal God is the
End of it. The right Apprehensions of Gods Eternity, (supposing him our End,
which is further to be manifested in its place) is a most powerful antidote
against all sin, and a most powerful composer of a distempered mind, and a most
powerful means to keep up all the powers of the soul in a resolute, vigorous,
cheerful motion to the Eternal God for whom and by whom it was Created.

CHAP. VI.
5. THe next Attribute of God, that is to make its Impress on us, is, that He
is a spirit. In this One are these three especially comprehended: 1. That he is
Simple, and not material or compounded as bodies are; 2. That he is Invisible,
and not to be seen as Bodies are: 3. That he is Immortal and Incorruptible, and
not subject to death or change, as Bodies are.

1. As simplicity signifies unity in opposition to Multiplicity we have spoken
of it before. As it is opposite to all materiality, mixture or composition, we
are now to speak of it: And the believing thoughts of Gods immateriality and
simplicity, should have these three effects upon the soul. 1. It should do much
to win the heart to God, and cause it to close with him as its felicity:
Because as he has no matter or mixture, so he has nothing but pure and
perfect Goodness, and therefore there is nothing in him to discourage the soul.
The Creatures have evil in them with their good, and by contrary qualities do
hurt us when they help us, and displease us when they please us: But in God
there is nothing but Insinite goodness. And should not the soul adhere to him,
where it is sure to find nothing but simple, pure and unmixed good? The
Creatures are all liable to some exceptions: In one thing they help us, but in
another they hinder us; in one thing they are suitable to us, and in another
thing unsuitable! But God is liable to no exceptions. This will for ever
confound the ungodly that gave not up themselves unto him: They did even for a
thing of naught forsake that God that was purely and simply good, and against
whom they had no exceptions. Had there been any thing in God to discourage the
soul, or which his most malicious enemy could blame, the ungodly soul had some
excuse. But this will stop all the mouths of the condemned, that they had
nothing to say against the Lord, and yet they had no mind to him, no hearts for
him, in comparison of the vain vexatious Creatures.

2. The simplicity of God should make us know the imperfection and vanity of
all the Creatures that are compounded things; and so should help to alienate us
from them. Our friends have in them perhaps much holiness, but mixed with much
sin. They may have much knowledge; but mixed with much ignorance. Their
humility is mixed with Pride; their meekness with some Passions, their love with
selfishness, and a small matter will cause them to distaste us: They may be much
for God; but withal they may do much against him. They help the Church; but
through their weakness they may lamentably detract or wrong it: They are able
to help us but in part; and willing but in part; and they have usually
interests of their own, that are inconsistent with ours. We have no Commodity,
but has its discommodity: Our houses, our families, our neighbors, our
callings, our cattle, our land, our Countries, Churches, Ministers,
Magistrates, Laws and Judgments, yea even health, and plenty, and peace it
self, all have their Mixtures of bitterness or danger, and those the most
dangerous commonly that have least bitterness. But in God there is none of all
this Mixture, but Pure uncompounded Good. He is light, and with him is no
darkness, 1 John 1. 5. Indeed there is somewhat in God that an ungodly man
distasteth, and that seems in the state that he is in to be against him and
hurtful to him: as is his Justice, Holiness, Truth, etc. But Justice is not
evil, because it does condemn a Thief or Murderer: Meat is not bad because the
sick distaste it. It is the cross position of the sinful soul, or his enmity to
the Lord, that makes the Lord to use him as an enemy. Let him but become a
subject fit for sweeter dealing from God, and he is sure to find it. Leave then
the compounded, self-contradicting Creature, and adhere to the Pure, simple
Deity.

3. Gods simplicity must draw the soul to a holy simplicity, that it may be
like to God. We that se^ve a Pure simple God, must do ^^ with simple Pure
affections, and not with hypocrisy, or a double heart. His interest in us
should be maintained with a holy Jealousy, that no other Interest mix it self
therewith. The soul should attain to a holy simplicity by closing with the
simple infinite God, and suffering nothing to be a sh^^er with him in our
superlative affections. All Creatures must keep their places in our hearts, and
that is only in a due subordination and subserviency to the Lord: But nothing
should take up the least of that estimation, affections or endeavors that are
his own peculiar. God will not accept of ha^^ a heart: A double minded, double
hearted, double faced, or double tongued person, is contrary to the holy
simplicity of a Saint. As we would not bow the knee to any gods but one, so
neither should we bow the heart or life to them. We should know what is Gods
prerogative, and that we should keep entirely for him. A subordinate esteem,
and love, and desire the Creature may have, as it reveals God to us, or
leads to him, or helps us in his work: But it should not have the least of
his part in our esteem, or love, or desire. This is the Chastity, the Purity,
the Integrity of the soul. It is the mixture, impurity, corruption and
consusion of our souls, when any thing is taken in with God. See therefore
Christian that in thy heart thou have no God but ONE, and that he have all thy
heart, and soul, and strength as far as thou can attain it. And because there
will be still in imperfect souls, some sinful mixture of the Creatures interest
with Gods, let it be the work of thy life to be watching against it, and
casting it out, and cleansing thy heart of it, as thou would do thy food if
it fall into the dirt. For whatever is added to God in thy Affections, does
make no better an increase there, then the adding of earth unto thy gold, or of
dung unto thy meat, or of corrupted humors and sickness to thy body. Mixture
will make no better work.

It may be thy Rejoicing if thou have the testimony of a good conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, thou have had thy conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1. 12. It is the
state of Hypocrisy, when One God is openly professed and worshipped, and yet
the creature lies deepest and nearest to the heart.

2. The Invisibility of God also must have its due effects upon us. And, 1. It
must warn us, that we picture not God to our eye sight, or in our fancies in
any bodily shape. Says the Prophet, Isa. 40. 18. To whom will you liken God?
or what likeness will ye compare unto him? so 25. [ No man has seen God at any
time; the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of his Father, he has
declared him, Joh. 1. 18. and therefore we must conceive of him but as he is
declared, Joh. 6. 46. Not that any man has seen the Father, save he which is
of God, he has seen the Father.]

If you ask me, How then you should conceive of God, if not in any Bodily
shape? I answer, Get all these Attributes, and Relations of God to make their
proper Impress upon thy soul, as now I am teaching you, and then you will have
the true Conceiving of God: This Question therefore is to be answered at the
end of this Discourse, when you have seen all the Attributes of God together,
and heard what impression they must make upon you.

2. This must teach us, to think most highly of the things that are Invisible,
and meanlier of these visible things. Let it be the property of a Beast and not
of a man, to know nothing but what he sees or has seen: Let it be the mark of
the brutish Insidels, and not of Christians to doubt of the invisible things
because they are invisible; or to think that things visible are more excellent
or sure. As the senses are more ignoble then the Intellect* (a beast having as
perfect senses as a man, and yet no reasonable understanding) so the objects of
sense must proportionably be below the Objects of the understanding, as such.
The grossest and most palpable objects are the basest. It is the subtle part
that's called the Spirits, which being drawn out of plants or other vegetables
is most powerful and excellent, and valued, when the earthly dregs are cast
away as little worth. It is that subtle part in our blood that's called the
Spirits, that has more of the virtue of life, and does more of the works then
the feculent gross and earthly part. The air and wind have as true a Being as
the Earth, and a more excellent nature, though it be more gross, and they
invisible. The Body is not so excellent as the invisible soul. Invisible things
are as real as visible, and as suitable to our more noble invisible part, as
visible things to our fleshly baser part.

3. The invisibility of God must teach us to Live a life of Faith, and to get
above a sensual life: And it must teach us to value the faith of the Saints, as
knowing its excellency and necessity. Invisible objects have the most perfect
excellent Reality; and therefore Faith has the pre-eminence above sense.
Natural Reason can live upon things not seen if they have been seen, or can be
known by natural evidence (subjects obey a Prince that they see not: and fear a
punishment which they see not: and the nature of man is afraid of the Devils
though we see them not.) But Faith lives upon such invisible things, as mortal
eye did never see, nor natural ordinary evidence demonstrate, but are revealed
only by the Word of God: though about many of its invisible objects, Faith has
the consent of Reason for its encouragement. Value not sight and sense too
much. Think not all to be mere uncertainties and notions that are not the
objects of sense. We should not have heard that God is a spirit, if Corporal
substances had not a baser kind of Being then Spirits: Intellection is a more
noble operation then sense. If there be any thing properly called sense in
Heaven, it will be as far below the pure Intellective Intuition of the Lord, as
the glorified Body will be below the glorified soul. But what that difference
will be, we cannot now understand. Fix not your minds on sensible things.
Remember that your God, your home, your portion are unseen: And therefore live
in hearty Affections to them, and serious prosecution of them as if you saw
them. Pray as if you saw God, and Heaven, and Hell. Hear as if you saw him that
sends his Messenger to speak to you. Resist all the Temptations to lust, and
sensuality, and every sin, as you would do if you saw God stand by. Love him,
and Fear him, and Trust him, and Serve him, as you would do if you beheld him.
Faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. Believing must be to you
in stead of seeing; and make you as serious about things unseen, as sensual men
are about things sensible. In every thing that you see, remember it is he that
is unseen that appears in them. He lights you by the sun; he warmeth you by
the fire; he bears you by the earth. See him in all these by the eye of Faith.

3. The Immortality, Incorruptibility and Immutability of God, must 1. Teach
the soul to rise up from these Mortal, Corruptible, Mutable things, and to fix
upon that God who is the immortal, incorruptible portion of his Saints.

2. It must comfort and encourage all Believers in the consideration of their
felicity; and support them under the failings of all mortal, corruptible
things. Our Parents, and Children, and Friends are mortal: They are ours to
day, and dead to morrow: They are our delight to day, and our sorrow or horror
to morrow* But our God is Immortal. Our houses may be burned: Our goods may be
consumed or stolen; our clothes will be worn out; our treasure here may be
corrupted. But our God is unchangeable, the same for ever. Our Laws and
Customs may be changed; our Governors and Privileges changed; our company,
and employments, and habitation changed: but our God is never changed. Our
estates may change from Riches to poverty; and our names that were honored may
incur disgrace. Our health may quickly turn to sickness, and our ease to pain:
But still our God is unchangeable for ever. Our friends are unconstant and may
turn our enemies: Our Peace may be changed into war; and our liberty into
slavery: but our God does never change. Time will change customs, families and
all things here: but it changes not our God. The Creatures are all but earthen
metal, and quickly dashed in pieces: our comforts are changeable; our selves
are changeable and mortal: but so is not our God.

3. And it should teach us to draw as near to God as we are capable, by
unchangeable fixed Resolutions, and constancy of endeavors; and to be still
the same as we are at the best.

4. It should move us also to be more desirous of passing into the state of
immortality, and to long for our unchangeable habitation, and our immortal,
incorruptible Bodies, and to possess the Kingdom that cannot be moved, Heb. 12.
28. And let not the mutability of things below much trouble us, while our Rock,
our Portion is unmovable. God waxes not old: Heaven does not decay by
duration: the Glory of the blessed shall not wither, nor their sun set upon
them, nor their day have any night; nor any mutations or commotions disturb
their quiet possessions. O Love and Long for Immortality and Incorruption!

CHAP. VII.
6. HAving spoken of the effects of the Attributes of Gods Essence as such, we
must next speak of the Effects of his three great Attributes which some call
Subsistential, that is his Omnipotency, Understanding and Will; or his Infinite
Power, Wisdom and Goodness: By which it has been the way of the Schoolmen and
other Divines to denominate the three Persons, not without some countenance
from Scripture Phrase. The Father they call the Infinite Power of the God head;
and the Son, the Wisdom and Word of God, and of the Father: and the Holy Ghost,
the Love and Goodness of God, of the Father and Son. But that these Attributes,
of Power, Understanding and Will, or Power, Wisdom and Goodness, are of the
same importance with the terms of Personality, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, we
presume not to affirm. It suffices us, 1. That God has assumed these
Attributes to himself in Scripture. 2. And that man who bears the Natural
Image of God, has Power, Understanding and Will; and as he bears the Holy
Moral Image of God, he has a Power to execute that which is Good, and Wisdom
to direct, and Goodness of Will to determine for the execution: And so while
God is seen of us in this Glass of Man, we must conceive of him after the Image
that in man appears to us, and speak of him in the language of man, as he
does of himself.

And first, The Almightiness of God must make these impressions on our souls.
1. It must possess the soul with very awful Reverent thoughts of God; and fill
us continually with his holy Fear. Infinite Greatness and Power, must have no
common careless thoughts, lest we Blaspheme him in our Minds, and be guilty of
Contempt. The Dread of the Heavenly Majesty should be still upon us; and we
must be in his fear all the day long, Prove. 23. 17. Not under that slavish Fear
that is void of Love, as men fear an Enemy, or hurtful Creature, or that which
is Evil: For we have not such a spirit from the Lord, nor stand in a Relation
of enmity and bondage to him: But Reverence is necessary; and from thence a
Fear of sinning and displeasing so Great a God. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1. 7. and 9. 10. Psalm. 111. 10. By it men depart
from evil, Prove. 16. 6. Sin is for want of the Fear of God, Luke 23. 40. Pro.
3. 7. Jer. 5. 24. I. ev. 25. 36. The Fear of God is often put for the whole new
man, or all the work of Grace within us, even the Principle of new life; Jer.
2. 19. and 32. 40. And it is often put for the whole work of Religion or
Service of God, Psalm. 34. 11. Prove. 1. 29. Psalm. 130. 4. and 34. 9. And
therefore the Godly are usually denominated, such as Fear God, Psalm. 15. 4. and
22. 23. and 115. 11, 13. and 135. 20. and 34. 7, 9. etc. The godly are devoted
to the Fear of God, Psalm. 119. 38. It is our Sanctifying the Lord in our
hearts, that he be our fear and dread, Isa. 8. 13. If we Fear him not, we take
him not for our Master, Mal. 1. 6. Evangelical Grace excludes not this Fear,
Luke 12. 5. Though we receive a Kingdom that cannot be moved, yet must our
acceptable service of God, be with Reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28. With
fear and trembling we must work out our salvation, Phil. 2. 12. In fear we must
pass the time of ^^journing here, 1 Pet. 1. 17. In it we must converse
together, Ephesians. 5. 4. Yea Holiness is to be perfected in the fear of God, 2 Cor.
7. 1. and that because we have the Promises. The most prosperous Churches walk
in this fear, Acts 9. 31. Its a necessary means of preventing destruction, Heb.
11. 7. and of attaining salvation when we have the promises, Heb. 4. 1. God
puts this fear in the hearts of those that shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.
40. See therefore that the Greatness of the Almighty God possess thy soul
continually with his Fear.

2. Gods Almightiness should also possess us with holy Admiration of him, and
cause us in heart and voice to Magnify him. Oh what a Power is that which made
the world of nothing? which upholdeth the earth without any foundation but his
Will? which placed and maintains all things in their Order in Heaven and
Earth! which causes so great and glorious a creature as the Sun, that is so
much bigger then all the earth, to move so many thousand miles in a few
moments, and constantly to keep its time and course! that gives its instinct
to every brute, and causes every part of nature, to do its office* By his
Power it is that every motion of the Creature is performed, and that order is
kept in the Kingdoms of the world. Jer. 32. 17, 18, 19. [ He made the Heaven
and the Earth by his Great Power and stretched out arm, and nothing is too hard
for him: The Great, the Mighty God, the Lord of Hosts is his Name; great in
counsel, and mighty in works] Neh. 9. 32. The Great, the Mighty, the terrible
God,] Psalm. 136. 4. To him therefore that alone does Great wonders we must give
the Greatest Praise] O how Great are his works, and his thoughts are very deep,
Psalm. 92. 5. [ Great is our Lord and of Great Power, Psalm. 147. 5.] And
therefore in Zion must ^e be Great] Psalm 99. 2. And his Great and terrible
Name must be Praised.

3. In the Church where he is known, must his Name be Great, Psalm. 76. 1. For
we know that the Lord is Great, and our God is above all Gods, Psalm. 135. 5.
His Saints delight to praise his Greatness: Psalm. 104. 1, 2, 3, 4. [ Bless the
Lord O my soul! O Lord my God thou art very Great: thou art clothed with
honor and Majesty, who coverest thy self with Light as with a garment, who
stretchest out the Heavens like a Curtain, who lays the beams of his Chambers
in the waters, who makes the clouds his Chariot, who walks upon the wings of
the wind, who makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a flame of fire, etc.]
From Almightiness all things have their being, and therefore must honor the
Almighty, Rev. 1. 8. [ I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending;
says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty]
Rev. 15. 3. They that magnify the Lord with the song of Moses and of the Lamb,
say [ Great and Mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty; Just and True
are thy ways thou King of Saints.]

3. The Almightiness of God must imprint upon our souls a strong and steadfast
confidence in him, according to the tenor of his Covenant and promises.
Nothing more certain then that Impotency and Insufficiency will never cause him
to fail us or to break his word. O what an encouragement is it to the Saints,
that they are built on such an impregnable Rock, and that Omnipotency is
engaged for them! And O what a shame is this to our unbelief, that ever we
should distrust omnipotency!

If God be Almighty, 1. Remembe in thy greatest wants, that there is no want
but he can easily and abundantly supply.

2. Remember in thy greatest sufferings, pains, or dangers, that no pain is so
great which he cannot mitigate and remove, and no danger so great from which he
is not able to deliver thee. The servants of Christ dare venture on the flames,
because they trust upon the Almighty, Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. In confidence on
Omnipotency they dare stand against the threatenings of the greatest upon earth.
[ We are not careful (said those three Believers to the King) to answer thee in
this matter: If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, etc.] He
that is afraid to stand upon a slender bow, or upon the unstable waters, is not
afraid to stand upon the earth; And he that is afraid of robbers when he is
alone, is bolder in a conquering Army; what will man Trust, if he distrust
Omnipotency? Where can we be safe, if not in the Love, the Covenant, the hands
of the Almighty God? When storms and winds had feared the Disciples, lest they
should be drowned when Christ was in the ship, their sin was aggravated by the
presence of their Powerful Lord, whose mighty works they had often seen [ Why
fear ye (says he) O ye of little faith! Mat. 8. 26.] Cannot he rebuke our
winds and waves! and will not all obey the rebukes of the Almighty? when thou
have a want that God cannot supply, or a sickness that he cannot cure, or a
danger that he cannot prevent, then be thou Fearful, and distrust him and spare
not.

3. Remember also in thy lowest state, and in the Churches greatest sufferings
or dangers, that the Almighty is able to raise up his Church or thee even in a
moment.

If you say, that Its true God can do it, but we know not whether he will; I
answer 1. I shall show you in due place, how far he has revealed his Will for
such deliverances. In sum, we have his promise, that all things shall work
together for our good, Romans 8. 28. and what would we have more? Would you have
that which is evil for you?

2. At present, see that Omnipotency do establish thy confidence so far as it
is concerned in the cause. As 1. Be sure that no work is too hard for the
Almighty; Do not so much as in the thoughts of thy heart, make question of his
Power, and say with those unbelievers, Psalm. 78. 19, 20. [ Can God furnish a
Table in the wildernest? Can he give Bread also? Can he provide Flesh?] If
really thou distrust not the Power of God, believe then the most difficult or
improbable things, as well as the easiest and most probable, if God reveal or
promise them. The Resurrection seems improbable to impotent man; But God has
promised it; And nothing is difficult to Omnipotency. The calling of the Jews;
the ruin of the Turk; the downfall of the Pope; the unity of Christians, do
all seem to us unlikely things; But all things to God are not only possible,
but easy. He is at no more labor to make a world, then to make a straw, or
make fly, [ Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and earth, in
the sea and in the depths] Psalm. 135. 6. Do thou think it improbable that
ever all thy sins should be conquered? and that ever thy soul should live with
Christ among the holy Saints and Angels? and that ever thy Body that must first
be dust, should shine as the stars in the firmament of God? And why does it
seem to thee improbable? Is it not as easy to God as to cause the earth to
stand on nothing, and the ^un to run its daily course? If God had promised thee
to live a day longer, or any small and common things, thou could then believe
him; And is it not as easy to him to advance thee to Everlasting Glory, as ^o
cause thee to live another hour, or to keep a hair of thy head from perishing?
sin is too strong for thee to overcome, but not for God. Death is too strong
for thee to conquer^* but not for Christ. Heaven is too high for thee to reach
by thy own strength; but he that is there, and prepared it for thee can take
thee thither. Trust God or trust nothing: He that cannot Trust in him, shall
despair for ever; for all other confidence will deceive him. Psalm. 9. 10. [
They that know his Name, will put their Trust in him; for the Lord has not
forsaken them that seek him.] All those that Trust in him shall Rejoice, and
ever shout for joy, because he defends them, Psalm. 5. 11. [ Blessed is the
man that makes the Lord, his Trust, and respects not the Proud, nor such as
turn aside to lies, Psalm 40. 4. ^ [ Who so puts his Trust in the Lord shall
be safe, Prove. 29. 25*] O what has Almightiness done in the world? and what
for the Church? and what for thee? and yet will thou distrust him? [ O how
great is the goodness that he has laid up for them that fear him? which he
has wrought for them that Trust in him before the sons of men? Psalm. 31. 19.]
[ The Lord redeemeth the souls of his servants, and none of them that Trust in
him shall be desolate, Psla. 34. 22* Are thy straits too great? thy work too
hard? [ Commit thy way unto the Lord* Trust also in him, and he shall bring it
to pass, Psalm. 37. 5.] In thy lowest state look up to the Almighty, and say [
What time I am afaid I will Trust in thee: In God have I put my Trust; I will
not fear, what man can do unto me, Psalm. 56. 3, 4.] [ The Lord is my Rock, and
my fortress, and my deliverer: my God; my strength; in whom I will put my
Trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower, Psalm. 18.
2.] [ He is a buckler to all that Trust in him] [Some Trust in Chariots, and
some in Horses; but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God, Psalm. 20.
7.] Trust not in the Creature* that is, in vanity and infirmity. There is not
Almightiness in man, or any Creature. [ It is better therefore to Trust in the
Lord, then to put confidence in man: It is better to Trust in the Lord, then to
put confidence in Princes. Psalm. 118. 7, 8.] what a working passage is that,
Jer. 17. 5, 6, 7. [ Thus says the Lord, Cursed be man that Trusts in man,
and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord! For he shall
be like the heath in the deserts, and shall not see when good comes. Blessed
is the man that Trusts in the Lord, whose Hope the Lord is; For he shall be
as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her roots by the river,
and shall not see when heat comes -- ]

2. Trust also in God as one that is assured, that no Enemy is too strong for
the Almighty* Alas, what is an Army of Dust to Omnipotency? If the Lord do but
arise, his Enemies will be scattered, and they that hate him will flee before
him; as smoke is driven away, and as wax melts before the fire, the wicked
shall perish at the presence of the Lord, Psalm. 68. 1, 2.] while the Lord of
Hosts is for us, we need not fear if hosts come against us; As worst they can
but Kill our bodies; And Greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the
world, 1 John 4. 4.] Oh what a match have the miserable Enemies of the Church?
what a work do they undertake? what a desperate attempt do they enterprise? to
strive against Heaven, and overcome Omnipotency?

3. Trust in the Lord, as one that believes that no Means or Instruments are
too small or weak for Almightness successfully to use. No matter who the
Instrument be, how mean, and weak, and despicable, if it be but an Almighty
hand that uses it. A few poor fishermen and despised people shall pull down
Satan's Kingdom in the world, and conquer the greatest, and bring in the Nations
to the faith if Omnipotency be with them.

4. The Almightiness of God must fill our hearts, with Courage and Resolueion
in his Cause, and make us go on with greatest alacrity in his work. Though we
must be Doves and Lambs for innocence and meekness, yet must we be soldiers
for valor and stability. Shall we flag or shrink that have Omnipotency on our
side? who ever scorneth thee, hates thee, threatens thee, imprisoneth thee,
is not the Almighty enough to set against them all for thy encouragement?

5. The Almightiness of God must be the Comfort of all that have Interest in
him. O did the blind world but see him that is Omnipotent, or know the strength
that is engaged for the weakest Saint, they would soon see which is the
stronger side, and which to cleave to for their security. O Blessed people that
have the Almighty on their side, and engaged with them against their enemies,
and to do their works, and answer their desires? How can any of them perish,
when the Almighty is engaged for their salvation? The Father is Greater then
all, and none shall take them out of his hands, Joh. 10. 29.] How glad would
men be in the beginning of a war to know which side will prove the stronger,
that they may join with that? Can the side that God is on be conquered? If you
are wise, observe what cause is his, and let that be yours. Its hard to Kick
against the Pricks; Woe to those souls that the Almighty is against, and that
dash themselves on the Rock that they should build on.

CHAP. VIII.
7. THe next Attribute that must work upon us, is the Infinite Wisdom, or
Omniscience of God. Psalm. 147. 5. His understandig is Infinite] And the
Impressions that this should make upon our souls are these.

1. Delight in Wisdom, that you may in your places be like to God. The New man
is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that Created him, Col. 3. 10. If
God be infinitely Wise, those then are the most excellent that are the Wisest.
Ignorance is the souls blindness, and the privation of the Image of God on the
understanding. [ Wisdom excels folly, as far as light excels darkness,
Eccles. 2. 13.] To desire as Adam did any of that Knowledge that God has
reserved to himself, or is unnecessary for us, is not indeed to be Wise in our
desires: Unnecessary Knowledge is but a trouble. But to Know the Lord, and his
revealed Will; and the way of life, is the light and glory of our minds. He
that has lost his eye sight, has lost his principal natural delight, and is
as out of the world while he is in it. And the ignorant souls that are void of
the heavenly Illumination, must needs be void of the delights of Grace: and
though they live in the visible Church, where the beauty of Holiness is the
excellency of the Saints, yet they do not see this beauty, but are like the
Infidels that are out of the Church while they are in it. The Blind are in
continual danger; They know not where they set their feet. And they know not
when to be confident, nor when to fear; sometimes they are afraid where there
is no cause, because there may be cause for ought they know; And sometime they
are fearless at the very brink of death, and little think of the evil that they
are near. Why do our poor deluded people so boldly live in an unconverted
state, but because they Know not where they are? Why do they so carelessly lie
down and rise in an unsanctified condition, unpardoned, unready for death and
judgment, and under the condemnation of the Law, but because they know not the
misery or danger in which they stand? Why do they go on so carelessly and
wilfully in sin, and despise the counsel of their Teachers and of the Lord, and
take a holy life as needless, but because they Know not what they do? Men could
not go so quietly or merrily to Hell, with their eyes open, as they do when
they are shut by Ignorance. Whence is it that such Multitudes are still ungodly
under all the Teachings and warnings of the Lord? but because [ they have their
understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of God by the ignorance
that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart: and therefore many
being past feeling have given them over to lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with gr^ediness, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.] Sin is the fruit of folly, and
the greatest folly; They are fools that make a jest of it, Prove. 14. 9. And it
is for want of wisdom that they die, Prove. 10. 21. and 1. 32. The ignorant are
prisoners to the Prince of darkness, Ephesians. 6. 12. and 5. 8. Knowledge is
despised by none but fools, Prove. 1. 7, 22. The conquest of so many subtle
enemies, the performance of so many spiritual duties, which we must go through
if we will be saved, are works too hard for fools to do. The saving of a man's
soul, is a work that requires the greatest wisdom. And therefore the
Illumination of the mind is Gods first work in the Conversion of a sinner, Act.
26. 18. Ephesians. 1. 18. If Infinite wisdom communicate to you but the smallest beam
of heavenly light, it will change your minds, and make you other men then
before, and set you on another course; Wisdom will be your guide, and keep you
in safe paths; It will cause you to refuse the evil, and to choose the good: It
will show you true Happiness, and the way to obtain it: It will cause you to
foresee the evil, and escape it, when fools go on and are destroyed, Prove. 22.
3. Wisdom will teach you to know the season, and Redeem your Time, and walk
exactly, when folly will leave you to too late repentance, Ephesians. 5. 15. There is
not a soul in Hell but was brought thither by sinful folly; Nor is there a soul
in Heaven (of them at age) but by heavenly wisdom was conducted thither. In
worldly matters the wicked may seem wisest; and many a Saint may be very
ignorant: But when you see the end, you will all consess that those were the
wise men that had wisdom to repel temptations, and to refuse the entising
baits of sin, and to make sure of everlasting Joys.

O therefore apply your hearts to Wisdom! Go to Christ for it, who is the
Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. and is appointed by him to be our Wisdom, 1 Cor.
1. 30. He will teach it you, who is the best Master in the world, so you will
but keep in his School, that is his Church, and will humbly learn as little
Children, and apply your selves submissively to his spirit, word and Ministers:
Ask Wisdom of God, that gives liberally, and upbraideth not with former
ignorance, Jam. 1. 5. Think not any pains in holy means too much to get it,
Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [ If thou will receive the words of God, and hide his
Commandments with thee, and incline thy heart to wisdom, and apply it to
understanding; yea if thou cryest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding; if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God; For the Lord gives wisdom; out of his mouth is Knowledge and
understanding.] And fear not being a loser by thy cost or labor. For [ Happy
is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets undestanding: For the
merchandise of it is better then silver, and the gain thereof then of fine
gold: she is more precious then Rubies, and all the things thou can desire,
are not to be compared to her; Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her
paths are peace -- ] Prove. 3. 13. to 18.

2 The Infinite Wisdom of God, must resolve you to take him for your principal
Teacher, Counselor and director in all your undertakings. Who would go seek
the advice of a fool, when he may have Infallible wisdom to direct him? In a
work of so great difficulty and concernment, a work that Hell and Earth and
Flesh opposes; a work that our Everlasting state depends on, I think it
behooves us to take the best advice that we can get. And who knows the will
of God like God? or who knows the certain means of salvation like him that is
(...)ver of salvation? would you know whether it (...)a ^ortified holy life?
Who shall be your coun(...) you advise with your Flesh, you know that it would
(...). If you advise with the World of wicked men, you know that they would be
imitated, and judge as they are; and are not like to be wise for you, that are
so foolish for themselves, as to part with Heaven for a merry dream. If you
advise with the Devil, you know he would be obeyed, and have company in his
misery. You can advise with none but God, but such as are your Enemies; And
will you ask an enemy, a deadly enemy, what course you should take to make you
happy? Will you ask the Devil how you may be saved? Or will you ask the blind
ungodly world, what course you should take to please the Lord? Or will you ask
the Flesh, by what means you may subdue it and become spiritual? If you take
advice of Scripture, of the spirit, of a holy well informed Minister, or
Christian, or of a renewed well informed Conscience, I take this for your
advising with the Lord; But besides these that are his mouth, you can ask
advice of none but enemies. But if they were never so much your friends, and
wanted wisdom, they could but ignorantly seduce you. And do you think that any
of them all, is as wise as God? It is the constant course of a worldly man to
advise with the world, and of carnal men to advise with the flesh; and
therefore it is that they are hurried to perdition. The flesh is brutish, and
will lead you to a brutish life, and if you live after it, undoubtedly you
shall die, Romans 8. 13. and if you sow to it, you shall but reap Corruption,
Gal. 6. 6, 7. If you are tempted to Lust, will you ask the flesh that tempts
you whether you should yield? If the cup of excess be offered to you, or
flesh-pleasing feasts prepared for you, will you ask the flesh whether you
should take them or refuse them? You may easily know what counsel it will give
you. The Counsel of God, and of your flesh are contrary, and therefore the
lives of the carnal and spiritual man are contrary. And will you venture on the
advice of a brutish appetite, and refuse the counsel of the all knowing God?
such as is your Guide, and Counselor, such will be your End. Never m^n
miscarried by obeying God: and never man ^ped well by obeying the flesh: God
leads no man to perdition, and the flesh leads no man to his Salvation.
Gods motions are all for our Eternal good, though they seem to be for our
temporal hurt: The motions of the flesh are for our Eternal hurt, though at
present they seem to be for our Corporal benefit. If at any time you be at a
loss; and your carnal friends, or your commodity, or pleasure advises you one
way, and the Word of God, and his faithful Ministers advise you another way,
use but your Reason well, and consider whether God or those that contradict him
be the wiser, and accordingly suit your practice. Alas man, thy friend is
ignorant and knows not what is good for himself. Thy flesh is ignorant, and
knows not what is good for thy soul! But God knows all things. Your flesh and
friends do feel what pleases them at present, and judge accordingly: but what
will be hereafter they understand not, or consider not: But God knows as well
what will be as what is: He counsels you as one that knows how your
actions will appear at last, and what it is that will save you or undo you to
all eternity. If you be but sick, its too to one but the Counsel of your
Physician and of your Appetite will differ. And if you will obey your Physician
before your Appetite, for your health or life, should you not obey God before
it for your Salvation? Do you think in your Consciences that any that persuade
you to a careless worldly fleshly life, are as Wise as God that persuades you
to the contrary? you dare not say so with your tongues? and yet the most dare
say so with their lives. O how justly do the ungodly perish, that deliberately
choose a brutish appetite, a malignant world, and a malicious Devil, as a wiser
or fitter conducter then the Lord! But blessed is the man that walks not in
the counsel of the ungodly, but his delight is in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.
1, 2. And woe to the ungodly that reject and set at naught the counsel of the
Lord, Prove. 1. 25, 30. Luke 7. 30. and will have none of it! that wait not for
his counsel, Psalm. 106. 13. that rehell against the words of God, and contemn
the counsel of the most High, Psalm. 107. 11. And woe to them that take counsel
against the Lord and his Christ, that they may break asunder his bondt, and
cast away his obligations, Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3. And woe to them that are given up
to the lusts of their own hearts, and to walk in their own counsels, Psalm. 81.
12. For by their own counsels shall they fall, Psalm. 5. 10. But had they
harkened to the Lord, and walked in his way, with the fullness of his blessings
would he have satisfied them, Psalm. 81. 13, 16. Resolve therefore what ever the
flesh or the world say, that the Testimonies of God shall be your Counselors,
Psalm. 119. ^4. and bless the Lord that gives thee counsel, Psalm. 16. 7. For
his counsel is infallible; having guided thee by his counsel be will bring thee
to his glory, Psalm* 73. 24.

3. The Infinite Wisdom of God, must resolve the soul to Rest in his
determinations. We are most certain that God is not deceived. Though all men
seem Liars to you, let God be true: for it is impossible for him to lie, Heb.
6. 18. If our Reason be to seek, so is not God. When we are saying with
Nicodemus, How can these things be? God knows how: and it is enough for us to
know that they are so. If Infinite wisdom say the word, Believe it, though all
the world contradict it. Though proud unbelievers say, that the words of God
are improbable, let them know that God is not at a loss when ever men's dark
understandings are at a loss: The Sun is not taken out of the firmament, when
ever a man closes or loses his eyes. What? will those cavillers puzzle the
Almighty! will they pose Omniscience? Does it follow that the course of the
Planets, and the Heavens, and all the Creatures are out of order, if these
silly Moles understand not the order of them? No more will it follow that any
word of God is false, or any Rule of God is crooked, because they see not its
truth and rectitude. Shall dust and ashes judge the Lord? who has been his
Counselor? and with whom has he advised for the making, redeeming or
governing of the world? There is no Rest to an inquisitive soul but in the
Infinite wisdom of the Lord. Find once that it is his word, and enquire no
further. Its madness to demand a further proof. As all Goodness is comprised in
his Will and Love; so all Truth is comprised in his Wisdom and Revelations.
There are no Arguments but what are lower and subordinate to this. And
therefore if thy Reason be at a loss, as to the cause or manner, yet have thou
the greatest Reason to believe that all is just and true that proceeds from
the Wisdom of the Lord. I^ flesh and blood and all the world gain say it, yet
Rest in the Word of God.

4. And that's the next effect that Gods Omniscience should have upon our minds.
Take all the sayings of men as folly that are against the Lord. Let them be
high or low, learned or unlearned if they contradict the God of Infinite
wisdom, take it but as the words of a distracted man. Did you ever meet with
any man of them, that durst say he was wiser than God himself? Herod that was
eaten to death with vermin, was applauded by the flattering crowd, but with
this acclamation, It is the voice of a God, and not of a man, Act. 12. 22. And
will you say of any man that he is wiser than God? If you dare not say so, how
dare you hear them and believe them against the Word of God? How dare you be
drawn from a holy life, or from a selfdenying duty, or from the truth of God,
by the words of a man, yea perhaps of a very sot, that speaks against the Word
of God! To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to these,
it is because there is no Light in them, Isa. 8. 20.]

5. The Infinite wisdom of God, should establish our confidence concerning the
fulfilling of all his Word. He will not fail for want of Knowledge: when he
spoke that Prophecy, that Promise or that Threatening, he perfectly knew all
things that would come to pass, to all eternity. He knew therefore what he said
when he gave out his Word, and therefore will fulfill it. Heaven and earth may
pass away, but one Iota or tittle of his word shall not pass away till all be
accomplished, Mat. 5. 18

6. And from the Infinite wisdom of God, the Church must be encouraged in its
greatest straits, and against all the cunning subtilty of their enemies. Are we
ever in such straits, that God knows not how to bring us out? when we see no
way for our deliverance, does it follow that he sees none? If cunning Serpents
are too subtle for us, do we think that they can overwit the Lord? what had
become of us long ago, if God had not known what ever is plotted at Rome, or
Spain, or Hell against us? If he knows not of all the consultations of the
conclave, and of all the contrivances of Jesuits and Friars; and of all the
juglings of the masked Emissaries; If God had not known of Vaux and his Powder
mine, it might have blown up all our hopes. But while we know that God is in
their Councils, and hears every word they say, and knows every secret of
their hearts, and every mischief which they enterprise, let us do our duty, and
rest in the wisdom of our great Protector, who will prove all his adversaries
to have played the fools: For as sure as his Omnipstency shall be glorified by
overtopping all opposing powers, so sure shall his Infinite wisdom be
glorified, by conquering and befooling the wisdom that is against him.

7. Lstly, if God be Infinite in Knowledge, it must resolve us all to live
accordingly. O Remember what ever thou Think, that God is acquainted with
all thy Thoughts. And will thou feed on lustful, or covetous, or malicious, or
unbelieving Thoughts, in the eye of God? Remember in thy prayers and every
duty, that he knows the very frame of all thy affections, and the manner as
well as the matter of thy services. And will thou be cold and careless in the
sight of God? O Remember in thy secretst sins, and thy works of darkness, that
nothing is unknown to God; and that before him thou art in the open light. And
fear thou not the face of the Almighty? Will thou do that when he knows
it, that thou would not do if man did know? He knows whether thou deceive thy
neighbor, or deal uprightly! Defraud not therefore; for the Lord is the
avenger, 1 These. 4. 6. Do nothing that thou would not have God to know. For
certainly he knows all things. Shall he not see that made and illuminateth
the eye? and shall he not hear that made both tongue and ears? and shall he not
know that gives us understanding, and by whom we know? Psalm. 94. 8, 9, 10.

And let this be thy comfort in thy secret duties. He that knows thy Heart,
will not overlook the desires of thy Heart, though thou had not words as thou
desire to express them. And he that knows thy uprightness, will justify
thee, if all the world condemn thee. He that sees thee in thy secret Alms, or
Prayers, or Tears, will openly reward thee, Mat. 6. 4 6. Let this also comfort
thee under all the slanders of malicious or misinformed men. He that must be
thy Judge and theirs, is acquainted with the truth: who will certainly bring
forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noone day, Psalm.
37. 6. O how many souls are justified with the Omniscient God that are
condemned by the malignant world! And how many blots will be wiped off before
the world at the day of Judgment, that here did lie upon the names of faithful
upright men! O how many Hypocrites shall be then disclosed! And what a cutting
thought should it be to the dissembler, that his secret falsehood is known to
God! And when he has the Reputation that he sought with men, he has his
reward! Mat. 6. 2. For its a sadder reward that God will give him.

CHAP. IX.
8. THE next of Gods Attributes that must make its Impress on the soul, is Hit
Infinite Goodness. The Denomination of Goodness (as all other his Attributes)
is fetched from, and suited to the capacity or affections of the soul of man.
That which is truly Amiable is called Good. Not as if there were no Goodness,
but what is a means to man's felicity, as some most sottishly have affirmed: For
our End and Felicity it self, and God as he is Perfect and Excellent in
himself, is more amiable then all means.

In three respects therefore it is that God is called Good, or Amiable to man.
1. In that he is Infinitely Excellent and perfect in Himself. For the Love of
Friendship is a higher Love then that of Desire. And the most perfect sort of
Love, is that which wholly carries the Lover from himself *to the perfect
object of his Love. The soul Delights to contemplate excellency, when the
excellency it self and not the delight, is the ultimate end of that desire and
contemplation.

2. God is called Good as he is the Pattern and Fountain of all Moral Good. As
he makes us Righteous Holy Laws, commanding Moral Good, and forbidding and
condemning evil. And thus his Goodness is his Holiness and Righteousness, his
Faithfulness and Truth.

3. God is called Good, as he is the Fountain of all the Creatures happiness,
and as he is bountiful and gracious and ready to do good, and as he is the
felicitating end and object of the soul.

And this Infinite goodness must have these effects upon us. 1. It must possess
us with a superlative Love to God. This blessed Attribute is it that makes us
Saints indeed, and makes that Impression on us, which is as the Heart of the
New Creature. It is Goodness that produces Love. And Love is that Grace that
closes with God as our Happiness and End, and is the felicitating enjoying
Grace. Without it we are but as sounding brass, or tinkling Cymbals, whatever
our gifts and parts may be* 1 Cor. 13. Love is the very excellency of the soul,
as it closes with the infinite excellency of God. It is the very felicity of
the soul, as it enjoys him that is our felicity. Most certainly the
prevailing Love of God, is the surest evidence of true sanctification. He that
has most Love, has most Grace; and is the best and strongest Christian: and
he that has least Love, is the worst or weakest. Knowledge and faith are but
to work our hearts to Love; and when Love is perfect they have done their work,
1 Cor. 12. 31. and 13. 8, 9, 10, 13. Teaching and distant Revelations will not
be for ever; and therefore such Knowledge and Faith as we have now, will not be
for ever. But God will be for ever Amiable to us, and therefore Love will
endure for ever. The goodness of God is called Love, and as God is Love, so he
that dwells in Love does dwell in God, and God in him, 1 John 4. 16. The
knowledge of Divine goodness makes us good, because it makes us Love him that
is good. It is Love that acts most purely for God. Fear is selfish, and has
somewhat of aversation. Though there be no evil in God for us to fear, yet is
there such good in him that will bring the evil of punishment upon the evil;
and this they fear. But Love does resign the soul to God, and that in the most
congruous acceptable manner. Make it therefore your daily work to possess your
souls with the Love of God. Love him once, and all that he says and does will
be more acceptable to you: and all that you say or do in Love, will be more
acceptable unto him. Love him and you will be loath to offend him: you will be
desirous to please him: you will be satisfied in his Love. Love him and you may
be sure that he Loves you. Love is the fulfilling of his Law, Romans 13. 10. And
that you may Love him, this must be your work to Believe and Contemplate his
goodness. Consider daily of the Infinite goodness or Amiableness of his Nature,
and of his excellency appearing in his works, and of the perfect Holiness of
his Laws. But especially see him in the face of Christ, and behold his Love in
the design of our Redemption, in the person of the Redeemer, and in the
promises of Grace, and in all the benefits* of Redemption. Yea look by Faith to
Heaven it self, and think how you must for ever live in the perfect blessed
Love of infinite enjoyed goodness. As it is the knowledge and sight of gold, or
beauty, or any other earthly vanity that kindles the Love of them in the minds
of men; so is it the knowledge and serious contemplation of the goodness of God
that must make us Love him, if ever we will Love him.

2. The goodness of God must also encourage the soul to trust him. For Infinite
good will not deceive us. Nor can we fear any hurt from him, but what we
wilfully bring upon our selves. If I knew but which were the best and most
Loving man in the world, I could trust him above all men; and I should not fear
any injury from him. How many friends have I that I dare trust with my estate
and life, because I know that they have Love and goodness in their low degree!
And shall I not trust the Blessed God, that is Love it self and Infinitely
good? what ever he will be in Justice to the ungodly, I am sure he delights
not in the death of sinners, but rather that they turn and live; and that he
will not cast off the soul that Loves him, and would fain be fully conformed
to his will. It cannot be that he should spurn at them that are humbled at his
feet, and long, and pray, and seek, and mourn after nothing more then his grace
and love! Think not of God as if he were scanter of love and goodness, then the
Creature is: If you have high and confident thoughts of the goodness and
fidelity of any man on earth, and dare quietly trust him with your life and
all; see that you have much higher thoughts of God, and trust him with greater
confidence, left you set him below the silly creature in the Attributes of his
goodness, which his Glory and your Happiness require you to know.

3. The Infinite goodness of God, must call off our hearts from the inordinate
Love of all created good whatever. Who would stoop so low as earth, that may
converse with God? And who would feed on such poor delights that has tasted
the graciousness of the Lord? Nothing more sure then that the Love of God does
not reign in that soul, where the Love of the world, or of fleshly lust, or
pleasure reigns, 1 John 2. 15. Had worldlings, or sensual, or ambitious men,
but truly known the goodness of the Lord, they could never have so fallen in
Love with those deceitful vanities. If we could but open their eyes to see the
Loveliness of their Redeemer, they would soon be weaned from other Loves. Would
you conquer the Love of Riches, or Honor, or any thing else that corrupts
your affections? O try this sure and powerful way! Draw nigh to God, and take
the fullest view thou can, in thy most serious Meditation of his Infinite
goodness, and all things else will be vile in thy esteem, and thy heart will
soon contemn them and forget them, and thou will never dote upon them more.

4. The Infinite goodness of God, should increase Repentance, and win the soul
to a more resolute cheerful service of the Lord. O what a heart is that which
can offend, and wilfully offend so good a God! This is the odiousness of sin,
that it is an abuse of an Infinite good. This is the most heinous damning
aggravation of it, that Infinite goodness could not prevail with wretched souls
against the empty flattering world! but that they suffered a dream and shadow,
to weigh down Infinite goodness in their esteem. And is it possible for worse
then this to be found in man? He that had rather the sun were out of the
firmament, then a hair were taken off his head, were unworthy to see the light
of the Sun. And surely he that will turn away from God himself to enjoy the
pleasures of his flesh, is unworthy to enjoy the Lord. Its bad enough that
Augustine in one of his Epistles says of sottish worldly men, that they had
rather there were two stars fewer in the firmament, then one Cow fewer in their
Pastures, or one tree fewer in their woods or grounds. But it is ten thousand
times a greater evil that every wicked man is guilty of, that will rather
forsake the Living God, and lose his part in Infinite goodness, then he will
let go his filthy and unprofitable sins: O Sinners, as you love your souls,
despise not the riches of the goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering of
the Lord; but know that his goodness should lead you to Repentance, Romans 2. 4.
Would you spit at the Sun? Would you revile the stars? Would you curse the holy
Angels? If not, O do not ten thousand fold worse, by your wilful sinning
against the Infinite Goodness it self.

But for you Christians that have seen the Amiableness of the Lord, and tasted
of his perfect Goodness, let this be enough to melt your hearts, that ever you
have wilfully sinned against him* O what a Good did you contemn in the days of
your unregeneracy, and in the hour of your sin* Be not so ungrateful and
disingenuous as to do so again. Remember when ever a Temptation comes, that it
would entice you from the Infinite Good; Ask the tempter, man or Devil, Whether
he has more then an Infinite Good to offer you; and whether he can outbid the
Lord for your affection.

And now for the time that is before you, how cheerfully should you address
your selves unto his service! and how delightfully should you follow it on from
day to day! What manner of persons should the servants of this God be, that are
called to nothing but what is Good! How Good a Master! how good a work! and how
good company, encouragements and helps! and how good an End! All is good,
because it is the Infinite Good, that we serve and seek. And shall we be
loitering unprofitable servants!

5. Moreover this Infinite Goodness should be the matter of our daily Praises.
He that cannot cheerfully magnify this Attribute of God, so suitable to the
nature of the Will, is surely a stranger to the Praises of the Lord. The
Goodness of God should be a daily feast to a gracious soul, and should
continually feed our cheerful Praises, as the spring or cistern fills the
Pipes. I know no sweeter work on earth, nay I am sure there is no sweeter, then
for faithful sanctified souls, rejoicingly to magnify the Goodness of the
Lord, and join together in his cheerful Praises. O Christians, if you would
taste the Joys of Saints, and live like the redeemed of the Lord indeed, be much
in the exercise of this Heavenly work, and with holy David, make it your
employment, and say [ O how great is thy Goodness which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee! Psalm. 31. 19.] The earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord, Psalm. 33. 5.] What then are the Heavens? [ Thy Congregation has dwelt
therein: thou O Lord have prepared thy Goodness for the poor. [O that men would
praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children
of men! For he satisfyeth the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with
goodness, Psalm. 107. 8, 9.] The goodness of God endures continually] Psalm. 52.
1. [ Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart, Psalm.
73. 1.] [ O taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that
trusts in him, Psalm. 34. 8.] [ The Lord is good, his mercy is Everlasting,
his truth endures from generation to generation, Psalm. 100. 5*] [ The Lord is
good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145. 9.] O
Praise the Lord, for the Lord is good, sing Praises to his name, for it is
pleasant, Psalm. 135. ^.] Call him as David [ My goodness, and my fortress, my
high tower, and my deliverer and my shield, and he in whom I trust, Psalm. 144*
2.] Let men therefore speak of the glorious honor of his Majesty and of his
wondrous works: Let them abundantly utter the memory of his great goodness,
and sing of his Righteousness, Psalm. 145* 5, 7.] If there be a thought that is
truly sweet to the soul, it is the Thought of the Infinite Goodness of the
Lord. If there be a pleasant word for man to speak, it is the mention of the
Infinite goodness of the Lord! And if there be a pleasant hour for man on earth
to spend, and a delightful work for man to do, it is to meditate on, and with
the Saints to Praise the Infinite goodness of the Lord. What was the glory that
God showed unto Moses, and the taste of Heaven that he gave him upon Earth? but
this [ I will make all my Goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the
name of the Lord before thee; and I will be gracious on whom I will be
gracious, and will show Mercy on whom I will show Mercy, Exodus 33. 19.] And his
proclaimed Name was [ The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth -- ] Exodus 34. 6. These were the
holy Prai^es that Solomon did consecrate the Temple with, 2 Chronicles. 6. 41. [
Arise O Lord God into thy resting place, thou and the Ark of thy strength: let
thy Priests O Lord God be clothed with salvation, and let thy Saints rejoice
in Goodness.] See Isai. 63. O Christians, if you would have joy indeed let this
be your employment! Draw near to God, and have no low undervaluing thoughts of
his Infinite Goodness; For [ How great is his Goodness and how great is his
Beauty? Zach. 9 17.] Why is it that Divine Consolations are so strange to us,
but because Dive Goodnes^ is so lightly thought upon? As those that think
little of God at all, have little of God upon their hearts; so they that think
but little of his Goodness in particular, have little Love, or Joy, or Praise.

6. Moreover, the Goodness of God, must possess us with desire to be conformed
to his goodness in our measure. The Holy perfection of his Will, must make us
desire to have our Wills conformed to the will of God; We are not called to
Imitate him in his works of Power, nor so much in the paths of his Omniscience,
as we are in his goodness, which as manifested in his work, and word, is the
Pattern and standard of Moral Goodness in the sons of men. The Impress of his
goodness within us, is the chief part of his Image on us; and the fruits of it
in our Lives is their Holiness and Virtue. As he is Good and does Good, Psalm.
119. 68. so must it be our greatest care to be as good and do as much good as
possibly we can. Any thing within us that is sinful and contrary to the
Goodness of God, should be to our souls as griping poison to our bodies, which
nature is excited to strive against with all its strength, and can have no
safety or rest till it be cast out. And for Doing Good, it must be the very
study and trade of our lives. As worldlings study and labor for the world, and
the Pleasing of their flesh; so must the Christian study and labor to improve
his masters talents to his use, and to do as much good as he is able, and to
please the Lord. Prove. 11. 23. [ The desire of the Righteous (as such) is only
Good] To depart from evil and do good, is the care of the just, Psalm. 34. 14.
We must please our neighbors for Good to their Edification, Romans 15. 2. While
we have time we must do good to all men (as we are able) but especially to them
of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10*] Not only to them that do good to us, but
to our enemies, Luke 6. 32, 33, 34. Mat. 5. 44. This is it that we must not
forget, Heb. 13. 16. and which by Ministers we must be ^ut in mind of 1 Timothy 6.
18. which all that love life and would inherit the blessing must devote
themselves to. 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12. In this we must be like our heavenly
Father, and approve our selves his Children, Mat. 5. 45, 46.

7. From the perfect Infinite goodness of God, we must learn to judge of Good
and Evil, and in all the Creatures. To this must all be reduced as the
standard, and by this must they be tried. It is a most wretched absurdity of
sensual men, to try the will, or word, or ways of God, by themselves, and by
their own interests or wills; and to judge all to be Evil in God that is
against them. And yet, alas, how common is this case! Every man is naturally
^oth to be miserable: suffering he abhors; and therefore that which causes his
suffering he calls evil. And so when he has deserved it himself by his sin,
he thinks that the Law is Evil for threatening it, and that God himself is Evil
for inflicting it, so that Infinite Goodness must be tried and judged by the
vicious creature, and the Rule and standard must be reduced to the crooked line
of humane actions or dispositions; and if God will please the worldling, the
sensualist, the proud, the negligent, who should please him, then he shall be
good, and he shall be God; if not, say these judges, he shall be evil, and
unmerciful, and no God. They will not believe that he is Good that punishes
them. And thus if the Thief or Murderer had the choice of Kings and Judges, you
may know what persons he would choose; No one should be a Judge, or accounted a
good man, that would condemn and hang him.

But I beseech you consider, what is sit to be the Rule and standard, if not
perfection of Goodness it self. Do you think that the Will of ignorant,
fleshly, sinful man, is fitter to be the Rule of Goodness, then the Will of
God? We are sure that God is not deceived, and sure that there is no iniquity
with him; but we know that all men are liable to deceit, and have private
interests, and corrupted minds, and wills that have some vicious inclinations.
O what Blaspheamy is in the heart of that man, that will sooner condemn the
holy Will and Law of God, then his own Will, or the Wills of any men, be they
never so seemingly wise or great! The will of God is revealed in his Laws,
concerning the necessity of a holy life; and the will of foolish wicked men is
by their scornful speeches and sinful lives revealed to be against it. And
which of these do you follow? which is it that prescribes you the better
course? the will of God that is infinitely good, or the will of man that is
miserably evil? If thou know any Better then God, follow him before God. But if
none be Greater and more Powerful then he, if none be Wiser or of more
Knowledge, it is as sure that none is Better. Much less are those ignorant
wicked men, that despise the Scripture and a holy life, and would persuade you
that they can tell you of a Better way. Let me speak it to the terror of the
ungodly soul, that by the deceits or scorns of any sort of men, is drawn away
from Christ and holiness; It shall stand on record against thee until
judgment, and it shall stick everlastingly as a dagger in thy heart, that thou
did prefer the Reasons and the Will of man, yea perhaps of a sottish drunkard
or a worldling, before the word or Will of God: And though thy tongue durst not
speak it, thy life did speak it, that thou thoughtest the word and will of man
to be Better then the word and will of God: Yea more, that thou tookest the way
of the Devil, to be better then Gods ways, who is infinitely good: For surely
thou choosest that which thou take to be best for thee. And therefore if that
man deserve damnation, that sets up a man, or a horse, or an image, and says [
This is greater and wiser then God, and therefore this shall be my God] then
do thou deserve the same damnation, that ^e^^est up the words or will of man,
even of wicked men, and say by thy practice [ These are Better then God, and
his word, or will, and therefore I will choose or follow them] For God is full
as jealous of the honor of his Goodness, as of his Power or Wisdom.

Well Christians, let flesh and blo^d say what it will, and let all the world
say what they will, judge that Best that is most agreeable to the Will of God;
for Good and Evil must be measured by this will. That Event is best which he
determines of, and that Action is best which he Commands. And all is naught
and will prove so in the end, that is against this will of God, what policy or
good soever may be pretended for it.

8. And if the will of God be Infinitely Good, we must all labor both to
understand it, and perform it. Many say, Who will show us any Good, Psalm. 4. 6.
Would you not know what is Best, that you may choose and seek it? As the
inordinate desire of Knowing natural Good and Evil did cause our misery, so the
holy rectified desires of Knowing spiritual Good, must recover us; search the
Scriptures then, and study and enquire; for it more concerns you to know the
Will of God, then to know the will of your Princes or benefactors, or to know
of any treasures of the world; The Riches of Grace are given to us, by Gods
making known the mystery of his will, according to his Good pleasure which he
purposed in himself, Ephesians. 1. 7, 9. And our desire to know the Good will of God,
must be that we may Do it. For this must we pray, Col. 1. 9. 10. That we may be
filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, that we may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work] that we may [ be made perfect in every good work
to do his will, and have that wrought in us which is pleasing in his sight,
Heb. 13. 21.] that we may not only know his will and approve the things that
are excellent, Romans 2. 18. but may prepare our selves to do according to his
Will, lest we be punished the more; Luke 12. 47. See that the will of no man be
preferred before Gods will; seck not your own Wills, nor set them up against
the Lords: If Christ whose will was pure and holy, profess that he sought not
his own will, but his Fathers, Joh. 5. 30. and that he came not to do his own
will, but his that sent him, Joh. 6. 38. should it not be our resolution, whose
wills are so misguided and corrupt?

9. If Gods will be Infinitely Good, we must Rest in his Will; when his ways
are dark, or grievous to our flesh: when his word seems difficult; when we know
not what he is doing with us, remember it is the Will that is Infinitely Good,
that is disposing of us. Only let us see that we stand not cross to the greater
Good of his Church, and honor; and then we may be sure that he will not be
against our Good. We that can Rest in the will of a dear and faithful friend,
should much more Rest in the Will of God; Do your duty, and be not unwise, but
understanding what the will of the Lord is for you to do, Ephesians. 5. 17. and then
distract not your minds with distrustful fears about his will that is
infinitely Good, but say, The Will of the Lord be done, Act. 21. 14.

10. The Infinite Goodness of God, should draw out our hearts to desire
communion with him, and to long after the blessed fruition of him in the life
to come. O how glad should we be to tread his courts! to draw near him in his
holy worship, to meditate on him, and secretly open our hearts before him, and
to converse with those gracious souls that love to be speaking honorably of
his name! What will draw the heart of man if Goodness and infinite Goodness
will not? When the drunkard says in the Alehouse [ It is Good to be here] and
the covetous man among his gains, and the sensual man among his recreations and
merry companions, [ It is good to be here] the Christian that can get nigh to
God, or have any prospect of his Love in his ordinances, concludes that of all
places upon earth [ It is good to be here] and that a day in his Courts is
better then a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. But O to depart and be with Christ, is
far better, Phil. 1. 23. With Infinite goodness we shall find no evil, no
emptiness, or defect; when we perfectly enjoy the perfect Good, what more can
be added, but for ever to enjoy it! O therefore think on this Christians when
death is dreadful to you, and you would fain stay here, as being afraid to come
before the Lord, or loath to leave the things which you here posfess, shall
Goodness it self be distrusted by you, or seem no more desirable to you? Are
you afraid of Goodness? even of your Father, of your Happiness it self? Are you
better here, then you shall be with God? Are your houses, or lands, or friends,
or pleasures, or any thing better then Infinite Goodness? () meditate on this
blessed Attribute of God, till you distaste the world, till you are angry with
your withdrawing murmuring flesh, till you are ashamed of your unwillingness to
be with God, and till you can calmly look in the face of death, and contentedly
hear the message that is posting toward you, that you must presently come away
to God. Your Natural birth day brought you into a Better place then the womb;
and your gracious Birth day brought you into a far Better state then your
former sinful miserable captivity; And will not your Glorious birth day put you
into a better habitation then this world? O know, and choose, and seek, and
live to the Infinite Good, and then it may be your greatest joy when you are
called to him.

CHAP. X.
9. HAving spoken of these three great Attributes of God, I must needs speak of
those three great Relations of God to man, and of these three works in which
they are founded, which have flowed from these Attributes.

This one God in three Persons, has Created man and all things which before
were not; has Redeemed man when he was lost by sin; and sanctifies those that
shall be saved by Redemption. Though the external works of the Trinity are
undivided, yet not indistinct as to the order of working, and a special
interest that each person has in each of these works. The Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost did create the world; and they also did Redeem us, and do Sanctify
us. But so as that Creation is in a special sort ascribed to the Father,
Redemption to the Son, and Sanctification to the Holy Spirit; Not only because
of the order of operation, agreeable to the order of subsisting; for then the
Father would be as properly said to be incarnate or to die for us, or mediate,
as the Son to create us; (which is not to be said;) For he created the world by
his Word, or Son and Spirit ( Joh. 1. 3. Psalm. 33. 6.) and he Redeemed it by
his Son, and Sanctifies it by his Spirit. But Scripture assures us that the
Son alone was incarnate for us, and dyed and Rose again, and not the Father, or
the Spirit, and so that the humane nature is peculiarly united to the second
person, in glory; and so that each person has a peculiar interest in these
several works, the Reason of which is much above our reach.

The first of these Relations of God to man, which we are to consider of, is,
that he is our Creator; It is he that gives Being to us and all things; and
that gives us all our faculties or Powers. Under this, for brevity, we shall
speak of him also as he is our Preserver; because preservation, is but a kind
of continued Creation, or a continuance of the Beings which God has caused.
God then is the first efficient cause of all the creatures from the greatest to
the least, Genesis 1. And easily did he make them, for he spoke but the word, and
they were created: They are the Products of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness.
Psalm. 33. 6. Joh. 1. 3. Psalm. 148. 5. He commanded and they were created] He
still produces all things that in the course of nature are brought forth [
Psalm. 104. 30. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: thou renewest
the face of the earth] And from hence these following impressions must be made
upon the considering soul.

1. If All things be from God as the Creater and Preserver, then we must be
deeply possessed with this truth, that All things are for God as their ultimate
end. For he that is the Beginning and first cause of all things, must needs be
the End of all. His Will produced them, and the Pleasure of his Will is the End
for which he did produce them. Isa. 43. 7. I have created him for my glory]
Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for
the day of evil] I think the Chaldee Paraphrase, the Syriack and Arabic give
us the true meaning of this, who concordantly translate it, [ The wicked is
kept for the day of evil] as Job has it, 21. 30. The wicked is reserved to the
day of destruction; they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath. And 2 Pet.
2. 9. [ To reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished] God made
not the wicked as wicked, or to be wicked; but he that gave them their Being
and continues it, will not be a loser by his Creation or preservation, but
will have the glory of his Justice by them in the day of wrath or evil, for
which he keeps them, and till which he bears with them, because they would
not obediently give him the glory of his Holiness and mercy. So it is said of
Christ, Col. 16, 17. For by him were all things created that are in Heaven and
that are in earth, visible and invisible -- all things were created By him and
For him. If they are By him, they must needs be For him. So Rev. 4. 11. Thou
art worthy O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created] This
Pleasure of Gods will is the End of all things: and therefore it is certain
that he will see that all things shall accomplish that end, and his will shall
be pleased. Romans 11. 36. we have all in few words [ For of him, and through
him, and to him are all things, and to whom be glory for ever, Amen.] Of him as
the first efficient that gives them their Beings: and Through him as the
Preserver, disposer and conducter of them to their end: and To him as the
Ultimate end.

If you say, But how is the pleasure of Gods will attained from the wicked that
break his Laws, and displease his will?

I answer; Understand but how his will is crossed or accomplished, pleased or
displeased, and you will see, that his will is always done and pleased, even
by them that displease him in (...)ting his will. ^or Gods will has two sorts
of Objects or Products, which must be still distinguished: 1. He wills what
shall be Due from us to him, and from him to us. 2. He wills Entities and
Events, or what shall actually Be, or come to pass. Strictly both these acts of
Gods will, perform the things willed, and so are not without their proper
effect. God as the Cause and disposer of all things, attaineth his will
concerning Events: All things shall Come to pass which he absolutely wideth
shall come to pass. He is not frustrated of his will herein, being neither
unwise nor impotent, nor unhappy. Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in
Heaven and in Earth, in the Sea and in the depths, Psalm. 135. 6. Our God is in
Heaven, he has done whatsoever he pleased, Ps^^ 115. 3. And as God as our
Governor does by his Laws oblige man to his Duty, his will has its effect: A
Command does but make the thing commanded to be our Duty; and our Duty it is:
and so this act of the will of God is not in vain. Thus far he has his will.
By his Promises he makes the Reward to be Due to all on condition they perform
the Duty, on which he has suspended it, and to be Actually Due to those only
that perform the condition: And all this is accomplished. Heaven is
Conditionally given to all, and Actually to the Faithful only. So that what God
wills to be Due as a Lawgiver, is accordingly Due; and what he actually
wills shall come to pass, shall come to pass according to his will.

But perhaps you will say, He does not will that all men shall Eventually obey
his Laws, but only that it shall be their Duty.

I answer, Our speeches of God being borrowed from man, (who is one of the
Glasses in which he is here seen by us; especially the manhood of Jesus Christ)
We must accordingly conceive and say (acknowledging still the improprieties and
imperfections of our conceptions and expressions) that as man does simply and
most properly will the Event of some things which he absolutely desires should
come to pass, and does not simply will some other things, but only in tantum;
he so far wills them, that he wills and resolves to do such and such
things as have a tendency thereto, and to go no farther, and do no more for the
attaining of them, though he could; so God does simply and properly will some
things, that is, the things which he Decrees shall come to pass: but we must
after our manner conceive and say, that there are other things which he wills
but in tantum, so far as to make it man's Duty to perform it, and persuade him
to the doing of that duty, and give him such a measure of help as leaves him
without any just excuse, if he do it not; and so far he wills the salvation
of such, as to Promise or offer it them on such terms: and no further does he
will the obedience or salvation which never comes to pass, but leaves it here
to the will of man. For if he simply willed that every Duty should be
Eventually done, it would be done: and if he simply willed that all men should
be actually saved, they would be saved. And that he simply wills their Duty
or Obligation, and in tantum, so far, does will the event of their obedience
and salvation, as this comes to, as aforesaid, is certain, and in this we are
all agreed; and I am not so well skild in dividing as to understand where the
real difference lies between the parties that here most contend: But about the
bare Name I know they differ, some thinking that this last is not to be Named
an Act of Gods will, or a willing of man's obedience or salvation, and some
thinking that it is so to be named: who doubtless are in the right; nor is
there room for controversies, while we confess the impropriety of this and all
our speeches of God, as speaking after the manner of men, and while Scripture
that must teach us how to speak of God, does frequently so speak before us.

2. God being the Maker and first Cause of all things, that is of all
substantial Beings, commonly called Creatures, we must conclude that Sin is no
such Being, because it is most certain that he is not the Creator or the cause
of it. Scripture assures us, and all Christians are agreed that God is not the
Cause or Author of sin. How odious then should that be to us, that is so bad as
not to come from God? If God disclaim it, let us disclaim it. Let us abhor that
it should come from us, seeing God abhors that it should come from him. Own
not that which has nothing of God upon it.

If you say, that it is an Accident though not a substance, and therefore it
must needs come from God; because even Accidents have their Being.

I answer, That among the subtilest Disputers it is granted, that it has no
Created Being, or no Being that is caused by God; of this they are agreed. Its
granted by all Christians that sin has no other kind of Being, but what the
will of man can cause. And if that be so, the Philosophical trifling
controversy, whether it be only a Privation, or a Relation, or Modus Entis,
which the will thus causes, must be handled as Philosophical, and valued but
as it deserves: For this is all the controversy that here remains. If the
form be Relative, and the Foundation be but a mere Prevation, (the
Disconformity being founded in a defect) then the case is soon resolved, as to
the rest. He that erreth, understands amiss: that he understands, is of
God: that he erreth, that is, is defective, and so false in his understanding,
is of himself: that he wills when he chooses sin, is of God the Universal
cause: But that he wills a forbidden object rather then the contrary, and
fails in his understanding and his will, this is not of God, but of himself.
If others say, that the very Fundamentum of that Disconformity which is the
Form of sin, is sometime an Act, they must also say that it is not an Act as
such, but This Act comparatively considered, or as circumstantiated, or as
exercised on the forbidden object rather then another, or a Volition instead of
a Nolition, and choosing that which should be refused, or a refusing that which
should be chosen: And whether this comparate specifying foundation, be a
Privation, or a Mode, is a Philosophical controversy; and in Philosophy, and
not in Theology is the difficulty; Divines being agreed as aforesaid, that what
ever you Name it, Being, or Privation, or Mode, it is but such as must be
resolved ultimately into the will of man as its Original, or first cause,
supposing God to be the Creator and Conserver of that free Power that is able
to choose or to refuse, and as an universal Cause to concur with the agent to
the Act as such. But Philosophers indeed are at a loss, and are fain to tell us
of Privations, Modes, Relations, Denominations, Entia Rationis and I know not
what, that they say are neither Beings nor Nothing, but between both they know
not what! the nature of things, in the utmost extremities of the branches being
so cap^llar, and spun with so fine a thread, that the understanding is not
subtle enough to discern them. And shall this disturb us in Divinity, or be
imputed to it?

If you say, That the Will of God is the Cause of all things, and therefore of
sin.

I answer, If you call sin Nothing, as a shadow, darkness, death, etc. are
nothing (for all that we abhor them) then you answer your selves; If you call
it something, we are all agreed, that its but such a something as man can cause
without Gods first causing it; It suffices that God do the part of a Creator
in giving man the free Power of choosing or refusing; and the part of a
preserver, in maintaining that power, and as an universal cause concurring to
all acts in genere, as the sun does shine on the dunghill and the flowers: and
that he also do the part of a just Governor in prohibiting, and dissuading,
and threatening sinners.

Object. But how can sin Eventually be, if God decree it not, seeing all Events
are from his Will?

I answer 1. We are agreed that he Causes it not. 2. And that he does not so
much as Will the Event of sin as sin. 3. And that he willingly permits what
is by him permitted. 4. And that sin is such a thing as may Evenire, be brought
forth by a bare permission, if there be no Positive Decree for the Event. As a
Negative in the effects, requires not a Positive Cause, so neither a Positive
Will for its production. There are millions of millions of worlds, and
individual creatures, and species Possible, that shall never be: And it is
audaciousness to assert, that there must be millions of millions of Positive
Decrees, that such worlds or creatures shall not be.* 5. Nor is it any
dishonor to God, if he have not a Positive Decree or Will about every Negation
(as that all the men in the world shall not be called by a thousand possible
names rather then their own, etc.)

These things being all certain, I add 1. Let them dispute that dare, that yet
de facto God does Positively Will the Events of all Privations, or Negations of
acts. 2. But when men are once habitually wicked, and bent to evil, it is just
with him, if he permit them to follow their own lusts, and if he leave before
them such Mercies as he foreknoweth they will wilfulfully make occasions of
their sin; and if he resolve to make use of the sin which he knows they will
commit, for his Churches Good, and for his Glory.

Object. But does not God Will that sin Eventually shall not be?

Answ. Even as I before said, he wills that obedience eventually shall be. If
sin come to pass, it is certain that God did not simply Will that it should not
come to pass: For then he must be conquered and unhappy by every sin: But he
wills simply that it shall be the Duty of man to avoid it; And he may be said
to Nill the Event in tantum, so far as that he will forbid it, and threaten and
dissuade the sinner, and give him the helps, that shall leave him unexcusable
if he sin, and so leave it to his Will. Thus far he may be said to Will that
sin Eventually shall not be; but not simply.

Though these things are not obvious to vulgar capacities, yet they are such,
as the subject in hand, viz. Gods first causation and Creation, together with
the weight of them, and the contentions of the world about them, have made
needful.

3. If God be the Creator and the cause of all, then we must remember that all
his works are Good: and therefore nothing must be hated by us that has he
made, considered in its native Goodness. God hates sin, and so must we: for
that he made it not, Rev. 2. 6. Psalm. 45. 7. Isa. 1. 14. And he hates all the
works of iniquity as such, Psalm. 5. 5. and so must we; but we must Love all of
God that is in them, and Love them for it. There is somewhat Good and Amiable
in every creature; yea all of it, that is of God. Though Toads and Serpents are
odious to us, because they are hurtful and seem deformed in themselves, yet are
they Good in themselves, and not deformed as parts of the universe, but Good
unto the common end. The wants in the wheels of your watch are as useful to the
motion as the nucks or solid parts. The night is part of the useful order of
the creation, as well as the day. The vacant interspace in your writing, is
needful as well as the words: Every letter should not be a vowel, nor every
character a Capital; Every member should not be a heart or head or eye: Nor
should every one in a Commonwealth be a King, or Lord: So in the Creation the
parts that seem base, are useful in their places, and good unto their Ends. Let
us not therefore vilify or detest the works of God, but study the excellencies
of them, and see, and admire, and Love them as they are of God. It is one of
the hardest practical points before us, to know how to esteem of all the
Creatures, and to use them without running into one extreme. At the same time
to Love the world, and not to Love it; to honor it, and despise it: to exalt
it, and to tread it under our feet; to mind it, and use it with delight, and
yet to be weaned from it as those that mind it not. And yet a great part of our
Christian duty lies in the doing of this difficult work. As the world is the
Devils bait, and the fleshes Idol, set up against God, and would tice us from
him, or hinder us in his service, and either be our Carnal end and happiness,
or a means thereto, so we must make it the care of our hearts to hate it,
despise it, neglect it, and tread it under foot; and the labor of our lives to
conquer it. But the same creatures must be admired, studied, loved, honored,
delighted in, and daily used, as they are the excellent work of the Almighty
God and reveal to us his Attributes or will, being the Glass in which we must
see him while we are in the flesh; and as they lead us to God, and strengthen,
furnish or help us in his service. But to Love them for God, and not for
themselves, O how hard is it! To keep pure affections toward them and a
spiritual delight in in them that shall not degenerate into a carnal delight,
is a task for the holiest Saint on Earth, to labor in with all his care and
power, as long as he here lives. Yet this must be done; and the soul that has
obtained true self denial, and is dead to the world, and devoted and alive to
God, is able in some good measure to perform it. To love the world for it self,
and make the creature our chief delight, and live to it as our End and Idol,
this is the common damning course. To cast away our possessions, and put our
talents into our fellow servants hands, and to withdraw our selves as it were
out of the world into solitude as Monks or Herme^s do, this is too like the
hideing of our talents, and a dangerous course of unfaithfulness and
unprofitableness, unless in some extraordinary case; and is at best the too
easy way of weaklings, that will be soldiers only out of the Army, or where
there is but little danger of the Enemy; But to keep our Stations, and take
Honors, and Riches as our Masters talents, as a burden that we must honor him
by bearing, and the instruments by which we must laboriously do him service,
and to see and Love him in every creature, and study him in it, and sanctify
it to his use; and to see that our lust get no advantage by it, and feed not on
it, but that we tame our Bodies, and have all that we have for God, and not for
our flesh, this is the hard, but the excellent, most acceptable course of
living in this world.

And it is not only other creatures, but our selves also that we must thus
admire, and love, and use for God, while we abase our selves as to our selves,
and deny our selves, and use not our selves for our selves, but as we stand in
due subordination to him. Abase your selves as sinful, and abhor that which is
your own, and not the Lords; But vilify not your nature in it self, ^or any
thing in you that is the work of God. Pretend not humility for the dishonouring
of your Maker. Reason and Natural freedom of the Will, are Gods work, and not
yours, and therefore must be honored, and not scorned and reviled; But the
blindness and error of your Reason, and the bad inclinations and actions of
your free-wills, these are your own, and therefore vilify them and hate them
and spare not. And when you lament the smalness of your Graces, deny them not,
and slight not, but magnify the preciousness of that little that you have,
while you mourn for the imperfection. And when men offend you, or prove your
enemies, forget not to value and love that of God that yet is in them. All is
Good that is of God.

4. If all things be of God as the Creator and Conserver, we must hence
remember on whom it is that our selves and all things else depend. In him we
live and move and have our being, Act. 17. 28. He upholdeth all things by the
word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. The earth stands upon his will and word. The
Nations are in his hands, so are the lives of our friends and enemies, and so
are our selves. And therefore our eye must be upon him; and our care must be to
please him; and our trust and quietness must be in him; and blessed is he that
makes sure of an Interest in his special Love.

5. Hence also we must observe the vanity of all Creature confidence, and our
hearts must be withdrawn from resting in any means or instruments. They are
nothing to us, and can do nothing for us, but what they have or do from him
that made and preserves us.

6. And lastly hence also we may see the patience and goodness of the Lord,
that as he refused not to make those men that he foreknew would live ungodlily,
so he denies not to uphold their Being, even while they sin against him. All
the while that they are abusing his creatures, they are substained by him, and
have those Creatures from him. From him the drunkard has his drink, and the
glutton his meat, and the voluptuous youth their abused health and strength;
and all men have from him the Powers or faculties of soul and Body by which,
they sin. And shall any be so ungrateful as to say therefore that God does
cause their sin? Its true, he can easily stop thy breath while thou art
swearing, and lying, and speaking against the service of God that made thee:
And would thou have him do so? He can easily take away the meat, and drink,
and riches, and health, and life which thou abusest; And would thou have him
do it? He can easily keep thee from sinning any more on earth, by cutting off
thy life and sending thee to pay for what thou have done: And art thou content
with this? Must he be taken to be a partaker in thy sin, because he does not
strike thee dead, or lame, or speechless, or disable thee from sinning? Provoke
him not by thy Blasphemies, lest he clear himself in a way that thou desire
not. But O wonder at his patience, that holds thee in his hand, and keeps
thee from falling into the grave and Hell, while thou art sinning against him.
While a curse or oath is in thy mouth, he could let thee fall into utter
misery. How often have thou provoked him to take thee in thy lust, in thy rage,
or in thy neglect of God, and give thee thy desert! Would any of you support
your enemy, as God does you?

CHAP. XI.
10. AS we must know God as our Creator, so also as our Redeemer; Of which I
shall say but little now, because I have mentioned it more fully in the
Directions for sound Conversion. It is life Eternal to know the Father, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, Job. 17. 3. The Father Redeemeth us by the Son,
whom he sent, and whose Sacrifice he accepted, and in whom he is well pleased.
And this must have these effects upon our souls.

1. We must be hence convinced, that we are not now in a state of innocence,
nor to be saved as innocents, or on the terms of the Law of our Creation: Bue
Salvation is now by a Redeemer: and therefore consists in our recovery and
restoration. The objects of it are only lapsed sinful miserable men. Name the
Creature if you can since Adam, that stood before God here in the flesh, in a
state of personal perfect innocence, except the immaculate Lamb of God. If God
as Creator should now save any, without respect to a Redemption, it must be on
the terms of the Law of Creation, upon which it is certain that no man has or
shall be saved; that is, upon perfect personal persevering obedience. You
cannot exempt Infants themselves from sin and misery, without exempting them
from Christ the Redeemer, and the remedy, Romans 3. 10, 19, 20, 22, 23. [ There
is none Righteous (in himself without a Redeemer) no not one -- They are all
gone out of the way -- That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God. (And if all the world be guilty, none are innocent:)
therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his
sight. For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God; being justified
freely by his grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ] Isa. 53. 6.
All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way,
and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.] Romans 5. 15. [ Through
the offense of one, many are dead] 16. And the judgment was by One to
condemnation] 17. By the offense of one death reigned by one.] 18. By the
offense of one, judgment came on all men to condemnation.] 19. By one man's
disobedience many were made sinners] Psalm. 51. 4. [ We were shapen in iniquity,
and in sin did our mothers conceive us] Ephesians. 2. 1, 3. We were by nature the
Children of wrath, and dead in trespasses and sin] 1 Cor. 15. 22. [ In Adam all
die] 2 Cor. 5. 14 [ We thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all
dead] Ephesians 5. 23. Christ is the Savior of the Body] and v. 25, 26, 27. [ Christ
loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse
it with the washing of water, by the word, that he might present it to himself
a glorious Church -- ] If Infants have no sin and misery, then they are none of
the Body, the Church, which Christ loved and gave himself for that he might
cleanse it. But what need we further proof when we have the common experience
of all the world? Would every man that is born of a woman without exception, so
early manifest sin in the life, if there were no corrupt disposition at the
heart? And should all mankind without exception, taste of the punishment of sin,
if they had no participation of the guilt? Death is the wages of sin; and by
sin death entered into the world, and it passes upon all men, for that all have
sinned, Romans 5. 12. Infants have sickness, and torments, and death, which are
the fruits of sin. And were they not presented to Christ as a Savior, when he
took them in his arms and blessed them, and said, Of such is the Kingdom of
God? Certainly, none that never were guilty or miserable, are capable of a
place in the Kingdom of the Mediator. For to what end should he mediate for
them? or how can he Redeem them that need not a Redemption? or how should he
reconcile them to God that never were at enmity with him? Or how can he wash
them that were never unclean? Or how can he be a Physicion to them that never
were sick? when the whole have no need of the Physicion, Mat. 9. 12. He came to
seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10. and to save his people from
their sins, Mat. 1. 21. They are none of his saved people therefore that had no
sin. He came to redeem those that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 5. But it is most
certain that Infants were under the Law as well as the adult: And (...) a pa^^
of his people Israel whom he visited and Re(...) 1. 68. If ever they be
admitted into Glory, they (...) him that Redeemed (...). God does first
justify those whom he Glorifieth, Romans 8. 30. And they must be born again that
will enter into his Kingdom, J^h. 3. 3, 5. And there is no Regeneration or
renovation but from sin, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 22. Nor any Justification but from
sin, and from what we could not be Justified from by the Law of Moses, Act. 13.
30. Nor any Justification but what contains a Remission of sin, Romans 3. 25.
And where there is no sin, there is none to be Remitted. Nor is there any
Justification but what is through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, and
his propitiation, Romans 3. 24, 25. He is made of God Redemption to us, 1 Cor. 1.
30. And the Redemption that we have by him, is Remission of sins by his blood,
Col. 1. 14. Ephesians. 1. 7. By his own blood entered he once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal Redemption for us: The eternal inheritance is received
by means of death for the Redemption of transgressions, Heb. 9. 12, 15.] so
that all Scripture speaks this truth aloud to us, that there is now no
salvation promised but to the Church, the Justified, the Regenerate, the
Redeemed; and that none can be capable of these but sinners, and such as are
lost and miserable in themselves. And till our necessity be understood,
Redemption cannot be well understood. They that believe that Christ dyed not
only for this or that man in particular, but for the world, methinks should
believe that the world are sinners and need his death. He is called the Savior
of the world, Joh. 4. 42. and the Savior of all men, especially of believers,
1 Timothy 4. 10. 1 John 4. 14. We have seen and do testify that the Father sent
the Son to be the Savior of the world] And from what does he save them? From
their sins, Mat. 1. 21. and from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10. [ For this
is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners] Infants then are sinners, or none of those that he
came to save. Christ has made no man Righteous by his Obedience, but such as
Adam made sinners by his disobedience, Romans 5. 19. [ For as by one man's
disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many shall be
made Righteous.] Infants are not made Righteous by Christ, if they were not
sinners: And sinners they cannot be by any but Original sin, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10.
[ God commended his Love to us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed
for us: Much more being now Justified by his blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him: When we were enemies we were Reconciled to God by the death
of his Son] so that it is sinners that Christ dyed for, and sinners that are
justified by his blood, and sinners that are reconciled to God. Infants
therefore are sinners, or they are none of the Redeemed, Justified or
reconciled. And when Jesus Christ [ by the grace of God did taste death for
every man] Heb. 2. 9. Infants are sure included. [ There is one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.] therefore all had sin and misery and needed that ransom. [ He
is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole world] And is it not plain then that the whole world are sinners?

I speak all this for the evincing of Original sin only, because that only is
denied by such as yet pretend to Christianity; For actual sin is commonly
confessed, and shows it self. And truly so does Original sin in our proneness
to actual; and in the earliness and commonness of such evil inclinations; and
in the remnants of it which the sanctified feel, though they are such as were
sanctified never so early, before actual sin had time to breed those evil
habits, which therefore certainly were born with us.

And if the Image of God, consisting in true holiness, be not natural, or born
in every Infant in the world, then Original sin must needs be born with them:
for that sin is either only or chiefly the Privation of that Image or Holiness.
He that will say that this Image is not requisite to Infants, and so that the
absence of it is a mere negation, does make them bruits, and not of the race of
man, whom God created after his Image, and leaves them incapable of Heaven or
Hell, or any other life then beasts have. And he that thinks so of* Infants to
day, may think so of himself to morrow. And he that will affirm that this Image
or Holiness is born with every Infant into the world, so wilfully contradicts
common evidence which appears in the contrary effects, that he is not worthy
to be further talked with.

One thing more I will propound yet to the contrary-minded; Can they say that
any Infants are saved or not? If not, either they perish as bruits (which is a
brutish opinion) or they live in misery; and then they had sin that did
deserve it; yea if they think that any of them perish in the wrath to come, it
must be for sin. If they think that any of them are saved, it is either by
covenant or without; there is some promise for it, or there is none. If none,
then no man can say that any of them are saved. For who has known the mind of
the Lord without his Revelation? It is arrogance to tell the world of the
saving of any that God did no way reveal that he will save. But if they plead a
Revelation or promise, it is either the Covenant of Nature or of Grace; a
promise contained in Nature, Law or Gospel. The former cannot be affirmed, (not
only because the dissenters themselves deny any such Covenant to have been in
nature or any way made to Adam, but) because there is no such Covenant or
promise in Nature to be found, for the Salvation of all Infants (and if not for
all, then for none:) and because it is contrary to abundance of plain passages
in the Scriptures, that assure us there is but One Covenant of Salvation now in
force: and that all the world shall become guilty before God, and every mouth
be stopped, Romans 3. 19. and that by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be
justified in his sight, v. 20. Gal. 2. 16. And if righteousness come by the
Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2. 21. For as many as are of the works
of the Law, are under the Curse, Gal. 3. 10. And that no man is Justified by
the Law in the sight of God, is evident; for the just shall live by faith; and
the Law is not of faith; but, The man that does them shall live in them And
certainly the Law of nature requires not less then Moses Law, to a man's
justification, if not more. And [ if there had been a Law given which could
have given life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law. But the
Scripture has concluded All under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that belive] Gal. 3. 21, 22.

By the fullness of this evidence, it is easy to see, that Infants and all
mankind are sinners, and therefore have need of the Redeemer.

2. To know God as our Redeemer, contains the knowledge of the great ends of
our Redemption, and of the manifestation of God to man thereby. Having treated
of these in the Book forecited, I shall now say but this in brief. It is beyond
dispute, that God could have made man capable of Glory, and kept him from
falling by confirming grace, and without a Redeemer settled him in felicity, as
he did the Angels. He that foresaw man's fall and necessity of a Savior, could
easily have prevented that sin and necessity: But he would not; he did not: but
chose rather to permit it, and save man by the way of a Redeemer. In which his
Infinite wisdom is exceedingly manifested. And in Christ who is the Power and
Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. among others these excellent effects are declared
to us, which the way of Redemption attaineth above what the saving us on the
terms of Nature would have attained.

1. God is now wonderfully admired and magnified in the person of the Redeemer.
Angels themselves desire to pry into this mystery, 1 Pet. 1. 12. As the frame
of Nature is set us to see God in, where we daily as in a glass behold him and
admire him; so the person of the Redeemer, and work of Incarnation and
Redemption, is set the Angels for their contemplation and admiration, as well
as us: Ephesians. 3. 10. [ To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers
in heavenly places might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God.]
And in the glorious perfection and dignity of the Redeemer will God be
everlastingly glorified; For his greatest works do greatliest honor him: And
as the sun does now to us more honor him then a star, so the glorified person
of the Redeemer, does more honor God then man or Angels. 1 Pet. 3. 23. [ He is
gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and
Powers being made subject to him.] Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. Being raised from the
dead, God has set him at his own right hand in heavenly places, far above all
principalities, and powers, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; and has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to the
Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.] Heb. 1.
3. [ Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person
and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself
purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; being made
so much better then the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more
excellent name then they*]

And here a very great truth appears, which very many overlook, that the
exaltation of the person of the Redeemer, and the glory that God will have in
him, is a higher and more principal part of Gods intent in the sending of him
to be Incarnate and Redeem us, then the glorifying of man, and of God by us.
Christ will be more glorious then men or Angels, and therefore will more
glorify God; and God will eternally take more complacency in him then in men
or Angels; And therefore (though in several respects) He is for us, and the
means of our felicity; and we are for him, and the means of his glory (as the
Head is for the Body, and the Body for the Head) yet we are more for Christ as
a means to his glory, then he for us: I mean he is the more excellent principal
end. [For to this end Christ both dyed, rose and revived, that he might be Lord
both of the dead and living] Romans 14. 9. [ who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:
and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross: Wherefore God also has highly exalted
him, and given him a name, which is above every name; that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, both of things in heaven and things in earth and under
the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to
the glory of God the Father] Phil. 2. 6. to 12. Rev. 5. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. [ And
I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the
beasts, and the elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands: saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing: And every creature which is in Heaven, and
on Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I saying, Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that
sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.] So Rev. 15. 3, 4.
and 20. 6. Rev. 21. 23. [ The City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon
to shine in it; for the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof] Rev. 22. 3, 4. [ The Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and
his servants shall serve him; And they shall see his face, and his name shall
be in their foreheads.] These and many other Scriptures show us, that God will
be for ever Glorified in the person of the Redeemer, more then in either men or
Angels: and consequently that it was the principal part of his Intention in the
design of man's Redemption.

2. (I will be briefer in the rest) In the way of Redemption man will be saved
with greater humiliation and self-denial then he should have been in the way of
Creation. If we had been saved in a way of Innocence, we should have had more
to ascribe to our selves. And it is meet that all Creatures be humbled and
abased, and nothing in themselves, before the Lord.

3. By the way of Redemption, sin will be more dishonored, and Holiness more
advanced, then if sin had never been known in the world. Contraries illustrate
one another. Health would not be so much valued if there were no sickness: nor
Life if there were no Death: nor Day if there were no Night: nor Knowledge if
there were no Ignorance: nor Good if man had not known Evil. The Holiness of
God would never have appeared in execution of vindictive Justice against sin,
if there had never been any sin: and therefore he has permitted it, and will
recover us from it, when he could have prevented our falling into it.

4. By this way also, Holiness and Recovering Grace shall be more triumphant
against the Devil and all its enemies: By the many conquests that Christ will
make over Satan, the World and the Flesh, and Death, there will very much of
God be seen to us, that innocence would not thus have manifested.

5. Redemption brings God nearer unto man: The mystery of Incarnation gives
us wonderful advantages to have more familiar thoughts of God, and to see him
in a clearer glass, then ever we should else have seen him in on earth, and to
have access with boldness to the throne of grace. The pure Deity is at so vast
a distance from us, while we are here in flesh, that if it had not appeared in
the flesh unto us, we should have been at a greater loss. But now without
controversy great is the mystery of godliness; God was manifested in the
flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, and received up into glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16.

6. In the way of Redemption, man is brought to more earnest and frequent
addresses unto God, and dependence on him: Necessity drives him: And he has
use for more of God, or for God in more of the ways of his mercy, then else he
would have had.

7. Principally in this way of saving miserable man by a Redeemer, there is
opportunity for the more abundant exercise of Gods mercy, and consequently for
the more glorious discovery of his Love and Goodness to the sons of men, then
if they had fallen into no such Necessities. Misery prepares men for the sense
of mercy. In the Redeemer there is so wonderful a discovery of Love and Mercy,
as is the astonishment of men and Angels. 1 John 3. 1. [ Behold what manner of
Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of
God!] Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. [ God who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead in sins has quickened us together with Christ
(by grace ye are saved) and has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in the ages to come he might
show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us by Christ
Jesus: for by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves,
it is the gift of God: Not of works lest any man should boast] Tit. 3 3, 4. For
we our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse
lusts and pleasures, etc. But after that the kindness and love of God our
Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration and
renewing of the Holy Ghost] Never was there such a discovery of God as he is
Love, in a way of Mercy to man on earth, as in the Redeemer, and his benefits.

8. In the way of Redemption the soul of man is formed to the most sweet and
excellent temper, and his obedience cast into the happiest mold. The glorious
demonstration of Love, does animate us with Love to God; and the shedding
abroad of his Love in our hearts by the spirit of the Redeemer, does draw out
our hearts in Love to him again: And the sense of his wonderful Love and Mercy
fills us with Thankfulness: so that Love is hereby made the nature of the new
man; and Thankfulness is the life of all our obedience: For all flows from
these principles, and expresses them: so that Love is the compendium of all
Holiness in one word; and Thankfulness of all Evangelical obedience. And it is
a more sweet and excellent state of life, to be the Spouse of Christ, and his
members, and serve God as friends and children, with Love and Thankfulness,
then to serve him merely as the most loyal subjects, or with an obedience that
has less of Love.

9. In the way of Redemption, Holiness is more admirably exemplified in Christ,
then it was, or would have been in Adam. Adam would never have declared it in
that eminency of Charity to others, submission to God, contempt of the world,
self-denial, and conquest of Satan, as Christ has done.

10. And in the way of Redemption, there is a double obligation laid upon man
for every duty. To the obligations of Creation, all the obligations of
Redemption and the new Creation are superadded: And this threefold cord should
not so easily be broken. Here are moral means more powerfully to hold the soul
to God.

11. And in this way there is a clearer discovery of the everlasting state of
man, and life and immortality are more fully brought to light by the Gospel (2 Timothy 1. 10) then for ought we find in Scripture, they were to innocent man
himself [ No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son that is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, Joh. 1. 18.] For no man has
ascended up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the son of
man, which is in heaven, Joh 3. 13.

12. Man will be advanced, to the judging of the ungodly and of the conquered
Angels: even by the good will of the Father, and a participation in the honor
of Christ our head, and by a participation in his Victories, and by our own
Victories in his strength, by the right of Conquest, we shall judge with
Christ, both Devils and men, that were enemies to him, and our salvation: as
you may see 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. And there is more in that promise then we yet well
understand, Rev. 2. 26, 27. [ He that overcomes, and keeps my words unto the
end, to him will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a
rod of Iron, as the vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers, even
as I received of my Father.]

13. And that which Augustine so much insisteth on, I think is also plain in
Scripture, that the Salvation of the Elect is better secured in the hands of
Christ, then his own or any of his posterities was in the hands of Adam. We
know that Adam lost that which was committed to him: But [ we know whom we have
believed, and are persuaded, that he is able to keep that which we commit to
him, against that day] 1 Timothy 1. 12. Force not these Scriptures against our own
Consolation, and the glory of our Redeemer, and then judge. [ Joh. 7. 2. As
thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal Life to
as many as thou have given him] Joh. 6. 3. [ All that the Father gives me,
shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out] Ver.
39. And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day]
Joh. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. [ But ye believe not, because ye are not of my
sheep, as I said unto you: My sheep hear my voice, and I know them and they
follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, and
none shall take them out of my hands: My Father which gave them me is greater
then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hands] Ephesians. 1. 3,
4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, according as he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
without blame before him in Love: Having predestined us to the adoption of
his children by Jesus Christ to himself according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted
in the beloved] [Being predestined according to the purpose of him that
works all things after the counsel of his own will] Ver. 11.

And if Faith, and Repentance, and the right disposition of the will it self,
be his resolved gift to his Elect, and not things left merely to our uncertain
wills, then the case is past all question. 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. [ In meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
Repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may recover
themselves our of the snare of the Devil] Ephesians. 2. 8. [ By grace ye are saved
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God] Gal. 5. 22.
The fruit of the spirit is Love, Faith -- ] Phil. 1. 29. To you it is given on
the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him -- ] Act. 13. 48. As many as
were ordained to eternal life believed] Jer. 24. 7. And I will give them an
heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will
be their God; for they shall return unto me with their whole heart] Ezekiel. 11.
19, 20. And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you:
and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart
of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes, and keep my ordinances and do
them, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God] Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. [
A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh and give you an heart of
flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes] -- See also Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. where this is called the new and
better Covenant [I will put my Laws in their minds and write them in their
hearts -- ] Jer. 31. 33. And Jer. 32. 39, 40. And I will give them one heart
and one way that they may fear me for ever. And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, and I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I
will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me] 1 Cor. 4.
7. Who makes thee to differ? and what have thou that thou did not receive*]
Much more may be produced, from which it is evident that Christ is the Author
and finisher of our Faith; and that the certainty of the salvation of his
Elect, does lie more on his undertaking and resolution infallibly to accomplish
their salvation, then upon our wisdom, or the stability of our mutable
free-wills: and that thus we are better in the hands of the second Adam, then
we were in the hands of the first.

14. To conclude; Vindictive Justice will be doubly honored upon them that are
final rejecters of this grace. Though conscience would have had matter enough
to work upon for the torment of the sinner, and the justifying of God, upon the
mere violation of the Law of nature or works, yet nothing to what it now will
have on them that are the despisers of this great salvation. For of how much
sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy that has trodden under
foot the Son of God?] when it is willful impenitency, against most excellent
means and mercies, that is to be charged upon sinners, and when they perish
because they would not be saved, Justice will be most fully glorified before
all, and in the conscience of the sinner himself. All this considered you may
see that (besides what reasons of the counsel of God are unknown to us) there
is abundant reason open to our sight, from the great advantages of this way,
why God would rather save us by a Redeemer, then in a way of Innocence as our
mere Creator.

But, for the answering of all objections against this, I must desire you to
observe these two things following. 1. That we here suppose man a terrestrial
inhabitant clothed with flesh: otherwise it is confessed that if he were
perfect in heaven, where he had the Beatifical Vision to confirm him, many of
these forementioned advantages to him would be none.

2. And it is supposed that God will work on man by Moral means; and where he
never so infallibly produces the good of man, he does it in a way agreeable to
his nature and present state; and that his work of Grace is Sapiential,
magnifying the contrivance and conduct of his Wisdom, as well as his Power:
otherwise indeed God might have done all without these or any other means.

3. The knowledge of God in Christ as our Redeemer, must imprint upon the soul
those Holy Affections which the design and nature of our Redemption do bespeak,
and which answer these forementioned ends. As 1. It must keep the soul in a
sense of the odiousness of sin, that must have such a remedy to pardon and
destroy it.

2. It must raise us to most high and honorable thoughts of our Redeemer, the
Captain of our Salvation, that brings back l^st sinners unto God: and we must
study to advance the Glory of our Lord, whom the Father has advanced and set
over all.

3. It must drive us out of our selves and bring us to be nothing in our own
eyes, and cause us to have humble, penitent, self* condemning thoughts, as men
that have been our own undoers, and deserved so ill of God and man.

4. It must drive us to a full and constant dependence on Christ our Redeemer,
and on the Father by him: As our life is now in the Son as its root and
fountain, so in him must be our faith and confidence, and to him we must daily
have recourse, and seek to him, and to the Father in his Name for all that we
need, for daily pardon, strength, protection, provision and consolation.

5. It must cause us the more to admire the Holiness of God, which is so
admirably declared in our Redemption; and still be sensible how he hates sin
and loves Purity.

6. It must invite and encourage us to draw near to God, who has condescended
to come so near to us; and as sons we must cry Abba Father, and though with
reverence, yet with holy confidence must set our selves continually before him.

7. It must cause us to make it our daily employment to study the Riches of the
Love of God, and his abundant mercy manifested in Christ; so that above all
books in the world, we should most diligently and delightfully peruse the Son
of God incarnate, and in him behold the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness of the
Father * And with Paul we should desire to know nothing but Christ crucified;
and all things should be counted but loss and dung for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, Phil. 3. 8. That we may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know the Love of Christ which passes knowledge, that we may be
filled with all the fullness of God.]

8. Above all, if we know God as our Redeemer, we must Live in the Power of
holy Love and Gratitude. His Manifested Love must prevail with us so far, that
unfeigned Love to him may be the predominant affection of our souls. And being
free from the spirit of bondage and slavish fear, we must make Love and
Thankfulness the sum of our Religion: and think not any thing will prove us
Christians without prevailing Love to Christ, nor that any duty is accepted
that proceeds not from it.

9. Redemption must teach us to apply our selves to the holy Laws and Example
of our Redeemer for the forming and ordering of our hearts and lives.

10. And it must quicken us to Love the Lord with a redoubled vigor, and to
obey with double resolution and diligence, because we are under a double
obligation. What should a people so Redeemed esteem too much or too dear for
God?

11. Redemption must make us a more Heavenly people, as being Redeemed to the
incorruptible inheritance in Heaven: [ The blessed God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a
lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for us, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation] 1
Pet. 1. 3.

12. Lastly Redemption must cause us to walk the more carefully, and with a
greater care to avoid all sin, and to avoid the threatened wrath of God, because
sin against such unspeakable Mercy is unspeakably great, and condemnation by a
Redeemer for despising his grace will be a double condemnation, Joh. 3. 19. 36.

CHAP. XII.
11. THE third Relation in which God is to be Known by us, is as he is our
Sanctifier and Comforter, which is specially ascribed to the Holy Ghost. And
doubtless as the Dispensation of the Holy Ghost is the Perfecting dispensation,
without which Creation and Redemption would not attain their ends; and as the
sin against the Holy Ghost, is the great and dangerous sin; so our Belief in
the Holy Ghost, and Knowledge of God as our Sanctifier by the Spirit, is not
the least or lowest act of our faith or Knowledge. And it implies or
contains these things following.

1. We must hence take notice of the certainty of our common original sin. The
necessity of sanctification proves the corruption, as the necessity of a
Redeemer proves the guilt: It is not one but all that are Baptized, that must
be Baptized into the Name of the Son and Holy Ghost, as well as of the Father*
which is an entering into Covenant with the Son as our Redeemer, and with the
Holy Ghost as our Sanctifier. So that Infants themselves must be Sanctified or
be none of the Church of Christ* which consists of Baptized Sanctified
persons. [Except a man be born again (even of the Spirit, as well as water) he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.] For that which is born of the flesh
is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, Joh. 3. 3, 5, 6. and
therefore the fleshly birth producing not a Spiritual creature, will not save
without the Spiritual birth: The words are most plain; not only against them
that deny Original sin, but against them that misunderstanding the nature of
Redemption, do think that all Infants are merely by the price paid, put into a
state of Salvation, and have the pardon of their Original sin in common,
attending their natural Birth. But these men should consider, 1. That this text
and constant experience tell us that the new Birth does not thus commonly to
all accompany the natural birth: and yet without the new birth none can be
saved, nor without Holiness any see God. 2. That Pardon of sin is no man's upon
the bare suffering of Jesus Christ; but must be theirs by some Covenant or
Promise conveying to them a Right to the benefits of his suffering. And
therefore no man can be said to be pardoned or saved (without great arrogance
in the affirmer) that has not from God a promise of such mercy. But no man can
show any Promise that gives Remission of Original sin to all Infants. Produce
it, or presume not to affirm it, lest you fall under the heavy doom of those
that add to his holy Word. The Promise is to the faithful and their seed. The
rest are not the children of the promise, but are under the commination of the
violated Law; which indeed is dispensable; and therefore we cannot say that God
will pardon none of them; but withal, we cannot say that he will, unless he had
told us so. All the world are in a necessity of a Sanctifier: and therefore
most certainly (even since Christ's death) they are naturally corrupted.

2. And as our Belief in the Holy Ghost as Sanctifier, engages us to
acknowledge our Original sin and misery, so does it engage us to magnify his
renewing work of grace, and be convinced of the necessity of it, and to confess
the insufficiency of corrupted nature to its own renovation. As no man must
dishonor the work of our Creator; and therefore our faculties of Reason and
natural Freewill are not to be denied or reproached: so must we be as careful
that we dishonor not the works of our Redeemer or Sanctifier: and therefore
the viciousness and ill disposedness of these faculties, and the thraldom of
our wills to their own misinclinations, and to concupiscence, must be
confessed; and the need of Grace to work the cure. It is not ingenuous for us,
when God made it so admirable a part of his work in the world, to Redeem us,
and save us from our sin and misery, that we should hide or deny our diseases,
and make our selves believe that we have but little need of the Physician, and
so that the cure is no great matter, and consequently deserves no great
praise. I know the Church is troubled by men of dark yet self-conceited minds,
that in these points are running all into extremes. One side denying the
Sapiential method, and the other the Omnipotential way of God in our recovery.
One plainly casting our sin and misery principally on God; and the other as
plainly robbing the Redeemer and holy Spirit of the honor of our recovery. But
it is the latter that my subject leads me now to speak to. I beseech you take
heed of any conceit that would draw you to extenuate the honor of our
Sanctifier. Dare you contend against the Holy Ghost for the integrity of your
natures, or the honor of your cure? surely he that has felt the power of this
renewing grace, and found how little of it was from himself, nay how much he
was an enemy to it, will be less inclined to extenuate the praise of grace then
unexperienced men will be. Because the case is very weighty, give me leave by
way of Question to propound these considerations to you.

Quest. 1. Why is it think you that all must be Baptized into the Name of the
Son and Holy Ghost as well as of the Father? Does it not imply that all have
need of a Sanctifier, and must be engaged to that end in Covenant with the
Sanctifier? I suppose you know that it is not to a bare Profession of our
belief of the Trinity of persons that we are baptized. It is our Covenant
entrance into our happy Relation to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, that is
then celebrated. And therefore as Infants and all must be thus engaged to the
Sanctifier, so all must acknowledge their necessity of this mercy, and the
excellency of it. It is essential to our Christianity, that we value it, desire
it and receive it. And therefore an error inconsistent with it proves us
indeed no Christians, Mat. 28. 19.

Quest. 2. Why is it think you that the Holy Ghost and this renewing work, are
so much magnified in the Scripture? Is not the glory of it answerable to those
high expressions? undoubtedly it is. I have already told you elsewhere of the
Elogies of this work. It is that by which Christ dwells in them, and they are
made a habitation of God by the spirit, Ephesians. 3. 17. and 2. 22. They are made by
it the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. It is the Divine Power (which
is no other then Omnipotency) that gives us all things pertaining unto Life
and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Think not I beseech you any lower of this work then
is consistent with these expressions. It is the opening of the blind eyes of
our understanding, and turning us from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, and bringing us into his mavelous light, Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 1.
18. 1 Pet. 2. 9. It is an inward teaching of us by God, Joh. 6. 45. 1 These. 4.
9. an effectual teaching and anointing, 1 John 2. 27. and a writing the Laws in
our hearts and putting them in our inward parts, Heb. 8. 10, 11. I purposely
forbear any exposition of these texts, lest I seem to distort them; and because
I would only lay the naked Word of God before your own impartial
considerations. It is Gods work by the Spirit, and not our own as ours that is
here so much magnified. And can all this signify no more but a common bare
proposal of truth and good to the intellect and will; even such as ignorant and
wicked men have? Does God do as much to illuminate, teach, and sanctify them
that never are illuminated, or taught, and sanctified, as them that are? This
work of the Holy Ghost is called a quickening, or making men that were dead,
alive, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. Romans 6. 11, 13. It is called a new begetting or new birth,
without which none can enter into heaven, Joh. 3. 3, 5, 6. A renewing us, and
making us new men, and new creatures, so far as that old things are past away,
and all become new, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 17. It is a new
creating us after the Image of God. Ephesians. 4. 24. It makes us Holy as God is
Holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. yea it makes us partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet.
1. 4. It gives us repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, that we may
recover our selves out of the snare of the Devil, who were taken captive by him
at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. It gives us that Love by which God dwells in
us, and we in God, 1 John 4. 16. We are redeemed by Christ from all iniquity,
and therefore it is that he gave himself for us, to purify to himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. It is an abundant shedding
of the Holy Ghost on us for our renovation, Tit. 3. 5, 6. and by it a shedding
the Love of God abroad in our hearts, Romans 5. 5. It is this Holy Spirit given
to believers by which they pray, and by which they mortify the flesh, Jud. 20.
Romans 8. 26. 13. By this Spirit we live, and walk, and rejoice, Romans 8. 1. and
14. 17. Our joy, and peace, and hope is through the power of the Holy Ghost,
Rom 15. 13. It gives us a spiritual mind, and takes away the carnal mind that
is enmity against God, and neither is nor can be subject to his law, Romans 8. 7.
By this Spirit that is given to us, we must know that we are Gods children, 1 John 3. 24. and 4. 13. For if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same
is none of his, Romans 8, 9. All holy graces are the fruits of the spirit, Gal.
5. 22, 23. It would be too long to number the several excellent effects of the
sanctifying work of the spirit upon the soul, and to recite the Elogies of it
in the Scripture. Surely it is no low or needless thing which all these
expressions do intend.

Quest. 3. If you think it a most heinous sin to vilify the Creator and his
work, and the Redeemer and his work, why should not you think so of the
vilifying of the sanctifier and his work, when God has so magnified it, and
will be glorified in it? and when it is the applying perfecting work, that
makes the purchased benefits of Redemption to be ours, and forms our Fathers
Image on us.

Quest. 4. Do we not Doctrinally commit too much of that sin (if we undervalue
the Spirits sanctifying work, as a common thing) which the ungodly world do
manifest in practice, when they speak and live in a contempt or low esteem of
grace? And which is more injurious to God? for a profane person to jest at the
Spirits work, or for a Christian or Minister deliberately to extennate it?
especially when the preaching of grace is a Ministers chief work, sure we
should much fear partaking in so great a sin.

Quest. 5. Why is it that the Scripture speaks so much to take men off from
boasting or ascribing any thing to themselves? Romans 3. 19. That every mouth may
be stopped; and why does not the Law of works exclude boasting but only the Law
of faith? Romans 3. 27. Surely the actions of nature (except so far as it is
corrupt) are as truly of God, as the acts of grace. And yet God will not take
it well to deny him the glory of Redemption, or Sanctification, and tell him
that we paid it him in another kind, and ascribed all to him as the author of
our free will by natural production. For as Nature shall honor the Creator,
so Grace shall also honor the Redeemer and Sanctifier. And God designeth the
humbling of the sinner, and teaching him to deny himself; and to honor God in
such a way as may stand with self abasement, leaving it to God to honor those
by way of reward, that honor him in way of duty, and deny their own honor.

Quest. 6. Why is the Blaspheming, and sinning against the Holy Ghost made so
heinous and dangerous a sin, if the works of the Holy Ghost were not most
excellent, and such as God will be most honored by?

Quest. 7. Is it not exceeding ingratitude for the soul that has been
illuminated, converted, renewed, quickened and saved by the Holy Ghost, to
extenuate the mercy, and ascribe it most to his natural Will? O what a change
was it that Sanctification made? what a blessed birth day was that to our souls
when we entered here upon Life Eternal! Joh. 17. 3. And is this the thanks we
give the Lord for so great a Mercy!

Quest. 8. What mean those texts, if they consute not this unthankful opinion?
Phil. 2. 13. [ It is God that works in you to Will and to do of his good
pleasure] Ephesians. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. God has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, that in the ages to come he might
show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us through
Christ Jesus: For by Grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God; Not of works lest any man should boast; For we
are his workmanship Created to Good works in Christ Jesus] The like is in Tit.
3. 5, 6. 7. Joh. 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and
ordained you that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
should remain] 1 John 4. 10. Herein is Love: not that we loved God, but that he
loved us -- ] 1 Cor. 4. 7. For who makes thee to differ? and what have that
thou that thou did not receive] Joh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me, except
the Father which has sent me draw him] 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives
not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither
can be know them, because they are spiritually discerned.] Joh. 3. 6. That
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is
spirit] that is, plainly, the fleshly birth produces but flesh and not spirit;
if any man will have the spirit (and so be saved) it must be by a spiritual
begetting and birth by the Holy Ghost, Act. 16. 14. The Lord opened Lydia's
heart that she attended to the things that were spoken of Paul, etc.] Was the
Conversion of Paul a murdering persecuter his own work rather then the Lords,
when the means and manner were such as we read of? Act. 22. 14. [ The God of
our Fathers has chosen thee that thou should know his will, and see that
just one, and hear the voice of his mouth, etc.] He was chosen to the Means and
to faith, and not only in faith to salvation. When Christ called his Disciples
to come and follow him, was there no prevailing inward power that made them
leave all and follow him? And was it not the power of the Holy Ghost that
Converted three thousand Jews at a Sermon, of them that by wicked hands had
Crucified and slain the Lord Jesus? Act. 2. 23, 41. When the Preaching and
Miracles of Christ Converted so few; his Brethren, and they that saw his
Miracles believed not on him, Joh. 12. 37. and 5. 38. and 6. 36. and 7. 5. but
when the Holy Ghost was given after his Ascension in that plenty which answered
the Gospel and promise, his words were fulfilled, Joh. 12. 32. [ And I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.] I pass by abundance more
such evidence.

Quest. 9. Does it not tend to bring sin into credit which holiness is contrary
to, and to bring the love of God into discredit, and to hinder men's Conversion,
and keep them from a holy life, when holiness is taken for so low and natural
or common a thing?

Quest. 10. And consequently does it not tend to the vilifying of the Attribute
of Holiness in God, when the Image and effect of it is so extenuated?

Quest. 11. And does it not tend to the contempt of Heaven it self, whose state
of felicity consists much in perfect Holiness? And if Sanctification be but
some common motion, which Cain and Judas had as well as Paul, sure it is less
Divine and more inconsiderable then we thought.

Quest. 12. Does it not speak very dangerous suspicion of a soul that never
felt the special work of grace, that can make light of it, and ascribe it most
to his own will? And would not sound Humiliation do more then Arguments to cure
this great mistake? I never yet came near a throughly-humbled soul, but I found
them too low and vile in their own eyes, to have such undervaluing thoughts of
grace, or to think it best for them to leave all the efficacy of grace to their
own wills! A broken heart abhors such thoughts.

Quest. 13. Dare any wise and sober man desire such a thing of God, or dare you
say that you will expect no other Grace, but what shall leave it to your selves
to make it effectual or frustrate it? I think he is no friend to his soul that
would take up with this.

Quest. 14. Do not the constant Prayers of all that have but a show of
godliness contradict the doctrine which I am contradicting? Do you not beg of
God to melt and soften and bow your hearts, and to make them more holy, and
fill them with light, and faith, and Love, and hold you close to God and duty!
In a word, do you not daily pray for effectual grace, that shall infallibly
procure your desired ends? I scarce ever heard a prayer from a sober man but
was orthodox in such points, though their speeches would be heterodox.

Quest. 15. Do you not know that there is an enmity in every unrenewed heart
against sanctification till God remove it? Are we not greater enemies to our
selves, and greater resisters of the Holy Ghost, and of our own conversion and
sanctification and salvation, then all the world besides is? woe to him that
feels not this by himself. And is it likely that we that are enemies to
holiness should do more to our own Sanctification, then the Holy Ghost? Woe to
us if he conquer not our enmity.

Quest. 16. Is it probable that so great a work as the destroying of our
dearest sins, the setting our hearts and all our hopes on an Invisible glory,
and delighting in the Lord, and forsaking all for him, etc. should come rather
from the choice of a will that loves those sins, and hates that holy heavenly
life, then from the spirit of Christ? sure this is much above us.

Quest. 17. Whence is it that so often one man that has been a notorious
sinner is Converted by a Sermon, when a civiler man, of better nature and life,
is never changed though he have that and ten times more persuasions?

Quest. 18. Does not experience tell impartial observers, that the high
esteemers of the sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost, are ordinarily of more
holy heavenly lives, then they that use to ascribe the differencing work to
their free wills? In my observation it is so.

Quest. 19. Should not every gracious humble soul, be more inclined to magnify
God then himself? and to give him the Glory, then to give it to our selves,
especially in a case where Scripture and experience tells us that we are more
unlikely then God to deserve the praise? Our destruction is of our selves, but
in him is our help, Hos. 13. 9. When we see an effect and know it, and the
causes that are in question, it is easy to conjecture from the quality which
is the true cause. If I see a Serpent brought forth, I will sooner think that
it was generated by a Serpent then a Dove. If I see sin in the world, I shall
easily believe it is the spawn of this corrupted will, that is so prone to it.
But if I find a divine nature in me, or see a holy heavenly life in any, I must
needs think that this is liker to be the work of the blessed God, then of such
a naughty heart as man's, that has already been a self-destroyer.

Quest. 20. What motive has any man to exalt himself, and sin again the Holy
Ghost by such an extenuation of his saving grace? It is a causeless, fruitless
sin. The only reason that ever I could hear for it, was, lest the doctrine of
differencing grace should make God a respecter of persons, or the author of
sin, of which there is no reason of a suspicion. We all agree that no man
perishes or is denied Grace, but such as deserve it: And when all deserve it,
it is no more respect of persons in God to sanctify some only of those ill
deservers, then it is that he makes not all men Kings, nor every dog or toad a
man, nor every star a Sun, or every man or Angel. To clear all objections
concerning this would be but to digress.

3. Lastly, Our knowledge of the Holy Ghost must raise us to an high estimation
of his works, and a ready reception of his graces and cheerful obedience to his
motions. He Sanctified our Head, that had no sin, by preventing sin in his
conception, and he anointed him to his office, and came upon him at his
Baptism: He Sanctified and anointed the Prophets and Apostles to their offices,
and by them endited the holy Scripture. He illuminateth, converteth,
sanctifies and guides all that are to be the heirs of life. This is his work.
Honor that part of it that is done on Christ, on the Prophets, Apostles, and
the Scriptures; and value and seek after that which belongs to your selves.
Think not to be Holy without the Sanctifier, nor to do any thing well without
the spirit of Jesus Christ, who is Christ's internal invisible Agent here on
earth (as Tertullian in the Churches Creed speaks, misit vicariam vim spiritus
sancti qui credentes agat.) O that men knew how much of their welfare
depends on a faithful obeying of the Holy Ghost!

CHAP. XIII.
12. THe next part of our Knowledge of God is to know him in those great
consequent Relations, to which he is entitled by Creation and Redemption, viz.
as he is Our Absolute Lord, or Owner, our most Righteous Governor, and ou most
Bountiful or Gracious Father or Benefactor.

1. God both as our Creator and Redeemer has Jus Dominii, an Absolute Dominion
of the world; that is, He is our Owner or Proprietary, and we are his Own; For
we take not the term [ Lordship or Dominion] here in the looser sense as it
signifies a Ruler, but in the stricter sense as it signifies an Owner. Of
this Relation I have already spoken in a Sermon of [ Christ's Dominion:] and
therefore shall say the less in this place.

The Knowledge of Gods Dominion or Propriety must comprehend, 1. The certain
truth of this his right; 2. The fullness of it. 3. The effects that it must have
on us.

I. And the Truth of it is beyond dispute, even among Infidels that know there
is a God. He that made us of his own materials, or of nothing, must needs be
the Owner of us; And so must he that Bought us from destruction. Ezekiel. 18. 4.
Behold all souls are Mine:] Romans 14. 9. To this end Christ both dyed, rose and
revived that he might be Lord both of the dead and living] Joh. 16. 14, 15. All
things that the Father has are Mine] The Father then has this Propriety by
Creation, and the son by Redemption: and the Father also by communication with
the Son in Redemption; and the Son by communication with the Father in Creation.

II. And it must be the most Absolute Plenary Dominion, because the very Being
of all the Creatures is from God, and therefore no one can be coordinate with
him, or his corrival, nor any thing limit his Interest in us.

III. And the effects that this must have upon us, are these following.

1. Hence we must conclude and reverently and willingly consess that further
then he voluntarily does oblige himself to us, it is impossible that God should
be our Debtor; and consequently that upon terms of commutative Justice we
should Merit any thing of God. For what can we render to him but his Own? And
how should he (properly and Antecedently) be indebted to and for his Own?

2. And we must conclude, that (antecedently to his Laws and promise) it is
impossible that God can do us any wrong, or any thing that he can do can be
guilty of injustice: For Justice gives to all their Own; and therefore it
gives Nothing to us from God, but what he voluntarily gives us himself, which
therefore is first a gift of Bounty, and but secondarily a Due in Justice.

3. And therefore we must hence learn, that God may do with his own as he list.
And therefore we must take heed that we repine not at any of his Decrees or
Providence, or any passages concerning them in his word. Much may be above us,
because our blindness cannot reach the reasons of his ways; but nothing is
unreasonable or evil; For all proceeds from Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, as
well as from Omnipotency; As no man must feign any thing of God, and say [ This
is his Decree, or Word or Providence; and therefore it is good,] when there is
no such thing revealed to us; so when we find that it is indeed Revealed, our
Reason must presently submit, and undoubtedly conclude it reasonable and good.
Yet is there no cause from hence to fear, lest God should condemn the innocent,
or break his promises, and deny us the reward; nor is there any hope to wicked
men that he should violate his peremptory threatenings, or (as they call it in
their selfish language) be better then his word: Because though God have an
Absolute Propriety, and therefore in regard of his interest or Power, may do
what he Will, yet he is essentially also most Wise and Good, and accordingly
has fitted all things to their use, and taken upon him the Relation of our
Governor, and as it were obliged himself by his Laws and Covenants, and
declared himself to be most Just; and showed us hereby that he Will do nothing
contrary to these. As there is no contradiction, but most perfect Unity in Gods
Omnipotency, Wisdom and Goodness; his Dominion or Propriety, his Kingdom, and
Paternity; so shall there be no contradiction, but a perfect Concord of all
these in the exercise. He therefore that as our King or Governor, has
undertaken to advance the Godly, and destroy the wicked, will not by the
exercise of his Absolute Dominion, deny himself, nor be unfaithful to his
people or to his rules of Government.

If you ask me, in what cases then this Dominion is exercised? I answer, 1. In
laying the Foundations of laws, and Right. 2. In the Disposal of the
unreasonable Creatures. 3. In abundance of things about his Rational Creatures,
wherein as Rector he is not engaged, nor has in his Laws declared his will;
(As about the various constitutions and complexions of men, their ranks and
dignities in the world, their riches or poverty, their health, or sickness,
their gifts and parts both natural and acquired; the first giving of the
Gospel, and of special Grace, to such as had forfeited them, and had no promise
of them: the degrees of outward means and mercies; the degrees of inward grace,
more then what is promised, etc.)

From hence also we must learn, not to repine at the providence of God about
his Church, which are strange to us, and past our reach, and seem to make
against it welfare. Remember that as he may do with his own as he list, so we
have no reason to think that he will be lavish or disregardful of his own. The
Church is not ours but Gods: and therefore he is fitter then we to be trusted
with it.

And so in our own distresses by affliction; when flesh repineth, let us
remember, that we are his Own, and he may do with us as he please. If we be
poor, despised, sick and miserable in the world, let us remember that as it is
no injury to the beasts that they are not men, or to the worms that they are
not beasts, or to the plants that they have not sense, or to the stars that
they are not suns; so it is no wrong to the subjects that they are not Princes,
or to the poor that they are not rich, or to the sick that they are not
healthful. May not God do with his own, as he list? shall a Beggar grudge that
you give not all that he desires, when you are not bound to give him any thing?

4. Yea hence we must learn to be the more Thankful for all our mercies,
because they proceed from the Absolute Lord, that was not obliged to us. He
might have made us Idiots, or mad men; he might have made us beasts or toads,
without any injury to us; And the Mercies which are consequently from his
Promise, are Antecedently from his Propriety and Dominion: For he might have
put us into other capacities, and have chosen not to have made those promises.
And his promises bind us not to be less thankful but more. As his mercies are
not the less mercies but the greater for being promised; because we have now
the comfort and use of them in the promise, before we have them.

5. Hence also we must learn, that there can be no simple absolute Propriety in
any Creature. No creature gave all the Being and well being to another that it
has, and this originally as of its Own. We being not our Own but God's, cannot
have any thing that is Absolutely our Own. Humane Propriety is but derived*
limited, and respective. Our Goods, and Lands, and Lives are Ours; that is,
they are Ours to Use for God, as the Instruments of a workman to do his work;
but not ours to use as we think meet. They are so ours as that men may not take
them from us, but God may take them from us at his pleasure. And therefore
think not you may mispend a penny if you were never so rich, because it is your
own; but know that you must mispend nothing, because it is not your own, but
Gods.

6. Principally we must hence learn to Deny our selves as being not our own,
and having nothing in the world that is our Own, in respect to God, the
absolute Owner. And therefore above all the sins of your souls, still watch
against this selfishness: lest you should grow to look at your Time, your
Strength, your Wealth, your Interests as your own, and forget that you are mere
stewards; and say as the ungodly, Psalm. 12. 4. [ Our lips are our own: Who is
Lord over us!] O take heed that you use not your strength, or interest, or any
thing for your selves: no not so much as your food and raiment, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
that is, for your selves ultimately, or not in subordination to the Lord. For
self as subject unto God, or as closed with him in the bond of Love, is no
longer self in enmity and opposition, nor that which we are forbidden to seek
or serve.

7. And this Knowledge of the Dominion of God must prevail with us effectually
to Resign our selves absolutely to him. Our consent does give him no title to
us, but it is necessary to our welfare that we confess his title. All men,
even the wicked are his Own: but that is against their wills: but the godly are
willingly his Own, and disclaim all interest in themselves but what is duly
subordinate to his: The name of God is put upon them, as you put your names on
your goods or sheep. Ezekiel. 16. 8. I swear unto thee, and entered into a
Covenant with thee, says the Lord, and thou becamest mine] Mal. 3. 17. [ And
they shall be mine says the Lord in that day when I make up my jewels] To be
entirely his by Covenant is proper to a Saint: For sanctification has these
parts; one is the habitual devotion of the soul to God, and the other is the
actual dedication, and a third is the relation of the person as thus dedicated,
and the fourth is the actual using of our selves for God. These four are the
parts of Sanctification; so that all is but our Giving up our selves to God.
But to be his in Right is common to the Devils and most ungodly. The hearts of
the sanctified do resolvedly and delightfully say [ Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is
mine, and I am his] and 6. 3. [ I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine] See
then that you keep not any thing back, but resign up your selves entirely to
God, as those that know they are wholly his.

8. And with our selves we must resign up all to God that we have. For if we
are not our own but His, then our children, our wealth, our wits, our time, our
abilities and all that we have are his. All is not to be used one way for God:
not all to the poor, nor all to the Commonwealth, nor all to the direct
promoting of his worship: but all must be his, and used for him, in one way or
other, and in those ways which he requires* Possess not any thing merely for
your selves.

9. And especially see to it in the use and improvement, that you use your
selves and all that you have for God. Let this be your intention, trade and
study. See that you be always at his work; that if a man come in upon you any
hour of the day, and ask you what you are doing, and whose work it is that you
are upon, you may truly be able to say, the Lords. If you be asked, who you are
now speaking for, or spending your time for, or for whom you do expend your
wealth?] you may truly say of every hour, and every penny, and every word, [ It
is for the Lord.] Even that which you give your children or friends, and that
which you receive for your support or comfort, may all be principally and
ultimately for God: [Ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a price:
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods] 1 Cor.
6. 19, 20. [ Christ dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but to him that dyed for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.
15.

10. Lastly, This must be a stay to the souls of true believers, and cause them
with comfort to trust themselves and all their affairs in the hands of God.
When we have first made it our care to give to God the things that are God's,
Mat. 22. 21. and heartily consecrated our selves and all that we have to him as
his own; we have no reason to doubt of his acceptance, nor of his care and
protection and merciful disposal of us. This is a wonderful comfort to poor
Christians, to think that they have such an Owner. Whoever is against you
Christians, be sure of it God will look to you, as his own! And if you do but
promise another that you will be as careful of his child, his horse, his goods,
as if they were your own, he will think you say as much as can be expected. If
you be poor, or sick, or desolate, you may be sure that yet God will look to
you as his own. And why should you think he will be careless of his own? Ground
your prayers and confidence on this, as David does, Psalm. 119. 94. I am thine,
save me.] And in all our labors and the affairs of our lives, when our
consciences can say that we live to God, and study to do all we do for him, and
to improve all our time and parts and other talents to his use, it may very
much quiet us in all his disposals of us. If he keep us in the lowest case, if
we be his, we must rest in his wisdom, that knows best how to use his own. If
he take our friends from us, he takes but his own. If he deny his saving grace
to our ungodly children (a heavy judgment of which we must be sensible) yet
when we have devoted them to God, and done our own part, we must be silent as
Aaron was when his sons were destroyed, Lev. 10. 3. and confess that the Potter
has power over his own clay, to make of the same lump ae vessel to honor and
another to dishonor, Romans 9. 21. All his disposals shall work to that end
which is the most universal perfect good, and most denominateth all the means.
But those that are his own by consent and Covenant may be sure that all shall
work to their own good. Let us die with Christ, and be buried to the world, and
know no Lord or Owner but our great Creator and Redeemer (except in a limited
subservient sense) and then we may boldly argue with him to the quiet of our
souls from this Relation [I am thine, help me] Psalm. 35. 23. Stir up thy self
and awake to my judgment, even to my cause, my Lord and my God] when faith and
love have first said as Thomas [ my Lord and my God] Joh. 20. 28.

CHAP. XIV.
13. THE next Relation to be spoken of, is Gods sovereignty: both by Creation
and Redemption, he has the Right of Governing us as our Sovereign King, and we
are obliged to be his willing subjects, and as such to obey his holy laws. He
is the Lord or Owner of all the world; even of Brutes as properly as of Man:
But he is the Sovereign King or Governor only of the Reasonable Creature;
because no other are capable of that proper Moral Government which now we speak
of. Vulgarly indeed his Physical motions and dispositions are called his Rule
or Government: and so God is said to Govern Brutes and inanimate creatures: but
that is but a Metaphorical expression: as an Artificer Metaphorically Governs
his clock or engine, or a Shepherd his sheep. But we now speak of proper moral
Government. God having made man a Rational and free agent having an immortal
soul, and capable of everlasting happiness, his very nature and the end of his
creation required, that he should be conducted to that end and happiness by
means agreeable to his nature: that is, by the Revelation of the Reward before
he sees it, that he may seek it and be fitted for it: and by prescribed duties
that are necessary to obtain it, and to his living here according to his
nature: and by threatened penalties to quicken him to his duty: so that he is
naturally a creature to be Governed, both as sociable, and as one to be
conducted to his end. He therefore that created him having alone both
sufficiency and Right, does by this very Creation become his Governor. His
Government has two parts (the world being thus constituted the Kingdom of God)
The first is by Legislation, or making Laws and Officers for execution. The
second is by the procuring the execution of these Laws: To which end he does
exhort and persuade the subjects to obedience, and judge them according to
their works, and execute his judgment. His first Law was to Adam, the Law of
Nature, obliging him to adhere to his Creator, and to love him, trust him, fear
him, honor him, and obey him with all his might, in order to the pleasing of
his Creator and the attainment of everlasting life: To which was added a
positive Law, against the eating of the tree of Knowledge: and Death was the
penalty due to the sinner: This Law was quickly broken by man; and God delayed
not his judgment, but sentenced the Tempter, the Woman and the Man: but not
according to their merits: but graciously providing a Redeemer, he presently
stopped the execution of the far greatest part of the penalty, the Son of God
undertaking as our surety to become a sacrifice and ransom for us. Hereupon
the Covenant of Grace was made, and the Law of Grace enacted with mankind: but
more obscurely in the beginning; being cleared up by degrees in the several
Promises to the Fathers, the types of the Law, and the Prophecies of the
Prophets of several ages, the Law being interposed because of transgression: In
the fullness of time the Messiah was incarnate, and the first promises
concerning him fulfilled, and after his holy life, and preachings, and
conquests of the Tempter and the world, he gave himself a Ransom for us, and
conquering Death he Rose again, ascended into Heaven, being possessed in his
manhood of the fullness of his power, and all things being delivered into his
hands; so that he was made the General Administrator, and Lord of all. And thus
he more clearly revealing his Covenant of Grace, and bringing life and
immortality to light, commissioned his Ministers to preach this Gospel to all
the world. And thus the Primitive Sovereign is God, and the Sovereign by
Derivation is Jesus the Mediator in his manhood united to the second person in
the Godhead; and the Laws that we are governed by, are the Law of Nature with
the superadded Covenant of Grace; the subordinate officers are Angels,
Magistrates, and Pastors of the Church (having works distinct) the society it
self is called the Church and Kingdom of God; the Reward is everlasting glory,
with the mercies of this life in order to it: and the Punishment is everlasting
misery with the preparatory judgments, especially on the soul, which are here
inflicted. Subjection is due upon our first being; and is consented to or vowed
in Baptism, and is to be manifested in holy obedience to the death. This is
the Sovereignty and Government of God. And now let us see how God as our
Sovereign must be known.

1. The Princes, and all the Rulers of the world, must understand their Place
and Duty: They are first Gods subjects, and then his officers, and can have no
power but from God, Romans 13. 3, 4. nor hold any but in dependence on him, and
subordination to him. Their power extends no further then the Heavenly
Sovereign has signified his pleasure, and by commission to them, or command to
us, conferred it on them. As they have no strength (or natural power) but from
the Omnipotent God, so can they have no Authority (or Governing Power or Right)
but from the Absolute King of all the world. They can less pretend to a Right
of Governing not derived from God, then a Justice or Constable may to such
Power not derived from the earthly sovereigns.

Princes and States also must hence understand their End and Work. God who is
the Beginning, must be the End also of their Government: Their Laws must be but
by Laws subservient to his Laws, to further men's obedience to them. The Common
Good, which is their lower nearer End, must be measured by his Interest in the
Nations, and men's Relations unto him. The Common possession of his favor,
blessing and protection, is the greatest Common Good. His Interest in us, and
ours in him, must therefore be principally maintained.

2. The Knowledge of God as our Sovereign King, must bring the whole man in
subjection to him. Our Understaendings must be subject to his Doctrine; and
resigned to him, as teachable and tractable: When we know what is his Law and
Will, we must rest in it, though we know not the Reasons of it. We take not on
us to be competent Judges of all the Reasons of the Laws of men, but must obey
them without disputing the Reasons (with the limitations after to be
mentioned.) How much more must we submit to the wisdom of the Infallible
Lawgiver, that cannot deceive, or be deceived! Our Wills also must be fully
subject to his Will, revealed by his Precepts. We must desire no more to move
us, or to stop us, but to know what God would have us do. As the first wheels
in a watch or other engine moves all the rest, so the Will of God must move
all our Wills, and Rule our Lives. We must take heed above all things in the
world, lest our Wills (which are the lower Wheels) should have any such
defects, distempers, reserves, any carnal byas, interest, or inclination, that
makes them unfit to receive the Law of God, or be Ruled by his Will. We must
imitate our Lord ( Heb. 10. 7.) and learn of the Prophet, Psalm. 40. 8. [ I
delight to do thy Will, O God.] With cheerful readiness to obey, we must stand
waiting for the word of his Command; and say as Psalm. 143. 10. Teach me to do
thy Will, for thou art my God:] And as Samuel, (1 Samuel 3. 9.) Speak Lord, for
thy Servaent hears.] When a man's selfish carnal Will is mortified, and his
Will lies flat before the Lord, and wholly applies it self to his Will, and it
is enough to a man to move him in the greatest matters, to know that it is the
Will of God, this is a state of true subjection. Thus must we be in subjection
to the Father of Spirits, submitting even to his sharpest dispensations, Heb.
12. 9. And all the Church is subject unto Christ, Ephesians. 5. 24. And this is
essential to our holy Covenant and Christianity it self. When God is taken to
be our God, and we give up our selves to be his People; when Christ is taken to
be our Savior, and we give up our selves to him as his members, and redeemed
ones, it essentially contains our taking him for our chief Governor, and
giving up our selves to him as his subjects. Take heed of that wisdom that
would overtop the Wisdom of God, and be your Guide itself, without depending
on his Wisdom. This is the foolish damning Wisdom of the World. Take heed of
that Concupiscence or Will that would be your Ruler, and overtop the Will of
God. For this is the grand Rebel, and greatest Enemy of God and Us.

3. And Subjection must produce Obedience; Subjection is the Consent of the
Will to be Subjects, and to Obey: Obedience is the actual performance of
Commanded duties. Subjection is the root of Obedience, and Virtually contains
it: Obedience is the fruit of subjection, and supposes it. If God be your
Master, show it by his fear, or service: Mal. 1. 6. It is not calling Christ
our King, but obeying him before all, that will prove us subjects. Mat. 7. 21.
[ Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven: but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.] Romans 12.
1, 2. [ I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the mercies of God, that you
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your
Reasonable service: and be not conformed to this world; but be you transformed
(or turned into other men) by the renewing of your mind, that you may prove
what is that good, that acceptable and perfect Will of God.] [And this is the
Will of God, even your sanctification] 1 These. 4. 3. 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. [
Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind: For he that has suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin: that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the
flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the Will of God] Yea we should [ stand
perfect and complete in all the Will of God, Col. 4. 12.] And by the power of
the Word of God, every thought should be brought in obedience unto Christ] 2
Cor. 10. 5. Our obedience should be public and exemplary, Romans 16. 19. [ For
so is the Will of God, that with well doing we put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men] 1 Pet. 2. 15. Obedience is better than sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15. 22.
Whatever you do, therefore keep close to the Law of God.

4. To this end we must labor to know the Law, and be acquainted with Gods
Will. The book of Nature must be studied: the holy Scripture must be searched,
Joh 5. 39. and meditated in both day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. Princes must have
this Book continually in their hands, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. Josh. 1. 8, 9. Rich
and poor must learn it, that they may Obey it, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7.

5. And our subjection to God obliges us to a subjection to the Officers that
he sets over us. If any man say to Judges, Justices and Constables [ I will
obey the King, but you are not Kings, therefore I will not obey you] he shall
suffer as disobeying the King in his Officers. Contempt of Magistrates and
Ministers reflects on God.

6. Yea hence we must practically understand, in what respect to obey our
Governors: Not merely as the Officers of men: not only as chosen by the
people; but as the Officers of God, that from him have their Authority. The
Atheistical Politicians that derive Authority no higher than the Sword, or the
Peoples choice, or natural strength, do teach men to obey their Governors, but
as a little Dog submits unto a Mastiff, or so far as their Commodity persuades
them, but not for conscience in obedience to God. And they teach men to look to
no higher end than common preservation and liberties, and not to expect
protection or reward from the absolute Sovereign. In a word, they entice all
Princes and people into damnable rebellion against the Lord; as much as if they
should entice all Constables and Justices to hold their places without
dependence on the Prince. But God teaches us that [ there is no Power but of
God: the Powers that be are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation; For he is the Minister of God to us for good; even the
Minister of God* an avenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.] Romans 13.
1, 2, 4. [ Wherefore we must needs be subject not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake -- [ For they are Gods Ministers, continually attending upon
this very thing: and for this cause we must pay them tribute] verse. 5, 6. [
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, -- For so is
the will of God -- 1 Pet. 2. 13, 15. Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. [ Judge righteously
between every man and his brother -- ye shall not respect persons in judgment,
but shall hear the small as well as the great, you shall not be afraid of the
face of man: for the judgment is Gods,] 2 Chronicles. 19 5, 6, 7. [ And he said to
the Judges, Take heed what ye do; for you judge not for man, but for the Lord,
who is with you in the judgment; wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon
you] But our Atheistical Politicians would teach Rulers that they are none of
the Ministers of God, and that they judge for man only and not for him. The
nature of all true obedience is such as Paul describes in children and
servants, Ephesians. 6. 1, 6, 7, 8. that setcheth its rise and motives from the Lord
[ Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right -- Servants be
obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ: not with eye-service as
men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the
heart; with good will doing service as to the Lord and not to men] So Colos. 3.
22, 23.

7. Hence also you must learn, that Gods authority is the highest authority,
and there is indeed no such thing in the world as true authority that is
against him, or not subordinate unto him: And therefore if men command us to
disobey God, by neglecting that which is hic and nunc a duty, or by sinning
against him, their commands are from a disobedient will of their own, but from
no Authority: and it is better in such cases to obey God then man, Act. 5. 29.
so many Prophets, Apostles and other Martyrs, would not have been sacrificed by
the fury of Persecutors, if they had thought it just to obey them before God.
God never gave any man Authority against him] Nor to nullify his laws. The
acts of a Justice or Constable against the King, or beyond their power, are
private or rebellious acts, and not Authoritative. And so are the Laws of men
that are against God. Yet note well, that though we must rather disobey men,
then God, yet we may not forcibly Resist, when we may not obey them. And in
some cases (as if a King would ravish a woman, or the like) when it is lawful
to Resist his fact, it is not lawful to Resist his State, and disturb the
Government of the Commonwealth: Obey men cheerfully when God forbids it not:
but see that God be your Absolute Sovereign, whose Laws can be dispensed with
by none.

If Parents or Masters command you to break the Laws of God, obey them not.
Despise them not, but humbly deprecate their displeasure, and obey them in all
other things; but in the unlawful thing obey them not: no not if they were the
greatest Princes upon earth. But say as the three witnesses of God, Dan. 3. 16,
17. [ We are not careful to answer thee in this matter: If it be so, our God
whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will
deliver us out of thy hands O King: But if not, be it known unto thee O King,
that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship thy golden Image which thou have
set up.

What I have said of Magistrates, in the two last cases, I mean also of
Pastors of the Church. They must be obeyed in and for the Lord; but not
against the Lord. Says Paul of the Churches of Mace^onia, 2 Cor. 8. 5. [ They
gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us, by the will of God] See Act.
20. 28. 1 These. 5. 12. Luke 10. 16. He that hears you hears me, and he that
despises you despises me.] And yet the leaven of the Pharisees must be
avoided: and an Angel from Heaven be held as accursed if he should preach
another Gospel, Gal. 1. 8. And I would not have flatterers to set either
Princes or Pastors above the Angels of Heaven. Though yet in other respects we
may be still obliged, as I said before, to hear and to obey them.

8. And the Knowledge of Gods sovereignty, must teach us to fear his righteous
Threatenings, and reverence his Justice, and prepare our selves to be judged by
him. He rules by his Laws, and so by Threatenings and Promises, which he will
make good. It is not a painted fire that he Threatens. Judgment is a part of
Government. Laws are but shadows if there be no execution [ O worship the Lord
in the beauty of Holiness; fear before him all the earth. Say among the Heathen
that the Lord reigns -- ] Psalm. 96. 9, 10* As his promises, so his peremptory
threatenings shall be fulfilled. He will not revoke his stablished Laws for fear
of hurting willful sinners, that will not fear his judgments till they feel
them, [ Psalm. 33. 8. Let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the inhabitants
of the world stand in aw of him: for he spoke and it was done; he commanded and
it stood fast.] Mark also the present judgments of the Lord, and rush not on
his indignation. For the Lord is known by the judgments which he executes:
the wicked is (often) snared in the work of his own hands] Psalm. 9. 16. Though [
the wicked contemn God, and say in his heart, Thou will not require it] Psalm.
10. 13.) yet they shall find that [ he beholds mischief to requite it with
his hand, and that he is the helper of the fatherless and poor that commit
themselves unto him, ver. 14. [ The Lords throne is in heaven: his eyes behold,
his eyelids try the children of men: the Lord tries the Righteous, but the
wicked and him that loves violence his soul hates, Psalm. 11. 4, 5.

9. The Sovereignty of God is a comfort to his loyal subjects. They may be sure
that he will protect them, and make good his word. Behold he comes, and his
reward is with him, Rev. 22. 12. The righteous Judge at his appearing will give
the Crown of Righteousness to all them that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 18*
7, 8. [ O let the Nations be glad and sing for joy, for thou shall judge the
people righteously, and govern the Nations upon earth] Psalm. 67. 4. [ Let the
Heavens rejoice, and the earth be glad -- before the Lord; for he comes, for
he comes to judge the world with righteousness and the people with his truth,]
Psalm. 69. 11. 13.

10. Lastly, the Knowledge of God as our Sovereign King, must cause us to
desire and pray for and promote the glory of his Kingdom, and the obedience of
his subjects in the world, that his Name may be hallowed, by the coming of his
Kingdom, and the doing of his will on earth as it is in Heaven, must be the
matter of our daily requests to God. It must be the grief of every subject of
the Lord, to think of the Heathen and Infidel parts of the world; and to see
the Rebellion of the Profane among us; and that the Laws of God are unknown or
despised by the most of men. Alas what abundance are ruled by their lusts, and
self-conceitedness, and corrupted wills, and the customs of the world, or the
wills of men! but how few are Ruled by the Laws of God! O how should it grieve
an honest heart, to see Gods Kingdom hindered by Infidelity, and weakened,
divided and disturbed by Popery, and Heresy, and dishonored by scandal and
impiety, as it is! And to see the multitude, and the violence and industry of
corrupters, dividers and destroyers: and the fewness, the coldness, and
remisness of the builders, the healers and restorers! All you that are loyal
subjects to your Lord, lament these ways of Rebellion and Disobedience, and
the diminutions and distempers of the subjects of his Kingdom, and the
unfaithfulness and negligence of his Ministers: and bend your cares, desires
and prayers to the promoting of Gods Kingdom in you, and in the world; and
befriend not any thing that hinders its prosperity.

CHAP. XV.
14. THE third of these Relations, and the next point in the Knowledge of God
to be spoken of, is, that he is [ Our must Loving Father, or Bountiful
Benefactor] As he is Good, so he does Good, Psalm. 119. 68. And as he is the
chiefest Good, so he bestows the greatest Benefits: and therefore is thence
by a Necessary Resultancy, our Most Bountiful Benefactor. The term [ Father]
comprehends in it all his three great Relations to us* 1. A Father gives
Being to his Children, and therefore has some Propriety in them; and God is
the first cause* o^ our whole Being, and therefore we are his Own. 2. A Father
is the Governor of his Children: and God is our Chief Governor. 3. A Father
tenderly Loves his Children that are childlike, loving and obedient to him;
and seeks their felicity: and so does God Love, and will make Happy his
loving and obedient children, who have not only their Being from him as their
Maker, but their New being or Holy nature from him as their Sanctifier. And
this last being the end and perfection of the rest, does communicate its nature
to the rest as the Means. And so, 1. The new nature that God thus gives us in
our Regeneration, is not from his common Love, but is an act of special Grace,
proceeding from his special Fatherly Love. 2. The Government that he exercises
over them as his Regenerate children, is not a Common Government, such as is
that of the mere Law of Nature or of works; but it is a special Government by a
Law of Grace, a Justifying, Remedying, Saving Law, or Covenant; together with
an internal illuminating, quickening, guiding spirit, with Church State, and
Officers and Ordinance* all suited to this way of Grace* Even as his Dominion
or Propriety by Redemption, and our Sanctification and Resignation, is not a
Common Propriety, but a gracious Relation to us as Our Own Father, who have the
endeared Relation to him of being his Own Children. All is from Love* and in a
way of Love, and for the exercise and demonstration of Love: so that when I
call God [ Our Benefactor] I precisely distinguish this last part of his
Relations to us, from the rest: But when I call him [ a Father] I mean the same
thing, or Relation which a Benefactor signifies; but with fuller aspect on the
foregoing Relations, and connotation of them as they are perfected all in this.

And here I. I shall briefly name the Benefits on which this Relation of God is
founded. And 1. Even in Creating us, he acted as a Benefactor, giving us the
Fundamental Good of Being, and the excellency of manhood. 2. By setting us in a
well furnished world, and putting all things under our feet, and giving us the
use of Creatures. 3. By entering into the Relation of a Governor to us, and
consequently engaging himself to terms of Justice in his dealing with us, and
to protect us, and reward us, if we did obey; and making us capable of an
everlasting happiness as our end, and appointing us sufficient means thereto.
These Benefits denominated God the Great Benefactor or Father unto man, in the
state of his Creation.

But then moreover he is a Common Benefactor also. 4. By so loving the world as
to give his only begotten Son, to be their Redeemer; a sufficient sacrifice for
sin. 5. By giving out his Promise or Covenant of Grace, and making a Common
Deed of Gift of pardon, Reconciliation and Eternal Life, to all that will
accept it in and with Christ, to Gospel ends. 6. By sending forth the
Messengers of this Grace, commanding them to Preach to every creature the
Gospel, or word of Reconciliation committed to them, and to beseech men in
Christ's stead, as his Ambassadors, as if God himself did entreat by them, to
be reconciled to God, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. Mar. 16. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. 7. By
affording some common mercies without, and motions of his spirit within, to
second these invitations. But though by this much God has a Title to their
dearest Love, yet they have no Title to his highest Benefits, nor are in the
nearest Relation of Children or Beneficiaries to him.

But, 8. When he begets us again to a lively Hope, by his incorruptible
seed, and gives us both to will and to do, and when the Father effectually
draws us to the Son, and renews us according to his Image, and takes away
our old and stony hearts, and gives us new and tender hearts, and gives us to
Know him, and Love him as a Father; then is he our Father in the dearest and
most comfortable sense, and we are his children that have interest in his
dearest Love. 9. And therefore we have his spirit, and pardon, Justification
and Reconciliation with him. 10. And also we have special Communion with him in
Prayer, Praises, Sacraments and all holy Ordinances and Conversation. 11. And
we and our services are pleasing to him, and so we are in the light of his
countenance, and under a special promise of his protection and provision, and
that all things shall work together for our good. 12. And we have the promise
of perfection in everlasting Glory.

II. And now as you see how God is our Benefactor, or most Gracious and Loving
Father, let us next see what this must work on us.

And 1. Goodness and Bounty should shame men from their sin, and lead them to
Repentance, Romans 2. 4, 5. Love is not to be abused and requited with unkindness
and provocation. He that can turn grace into wantonness, and do evil because
grace has abounded, or that it may abound, shall be forced to confess that his
damnation is just. He that will not hate his sin, when he sees such exceeding
Benefits stand by, and hears mercy, and wonderful mercy plead against it, and
upbraid the sinner with ingratitude, is like to die a double death, and shall
have no more sacrifice for sin.

2. The Fatherly Love and Benefits of God, do call for our best returns of
Love. The Benefits of Creation, oblige all to Love him with all their Heart,
and Soul, and Might: Much more the Benefits of Redemption, and especially (as
applied by sanctifying Grace to them that shall be heirs of life, it obliges
them by multiplied strongest obligations: The Worst are obliged to as much Love
of God, as the Best (for none can be obliged to more than to Love him with all
their Heart, etc.) but they are not as much obliged to that Love: We have new
and special obligations; and therefore must return a Hearty Love, or we are
doubly guilty. Mercies are Loves Messengers, sent from Heaven to win up our
Hearts to Love again, and entice us thither. All mercies therefore should be
used to this end. That mercy that does not increase, or excite and help our
Love, is abused and lost, as seed that is buried when it is sowed, and never
more appears. Earthly Mercies point to Heaven, and tell us whence they come,
and for what. Like the Flowers of the Spring, they tell us of the reviving
approaches of the Sun: But like foolish children, because they are near us, we
Love the Flowers better than the Sun; forgetting that the Winter is drawing on.
But Spiritual Mercies are as the Sunshine that more immediately depends on,
and flows from the Sun it self. And he that will not see (and value) the Sun
by its Light, will never see it! These beams come down to invite our Minds and
Hearts to God; and if we shut the windows, or play till night, and they return
without us, we shall be left to utter darkness.

The Mercies of God must imprint upon our minds the fullest and deepest
conceptions of him, as the most perfect, suitable, Lovely Objects to the soul
of man; when all our Good is Originally in him, and all flows from him, that
has the Goodness of a Means, and finally himself is all; not to Love God then,
is not to Love Goodness it self; and there is nothing but Good that is suited to
our Love. Night and day therefore should the Believer be drawing and deriving
from God, by the views and tastes of his precious Mercies, a sweetness of
nature, and increase of holy Love to God, as the Be sucks Honey from the
flowers. We should not now and then for a recreation light upon a flower, and
meditate on some Mercy of the Lord, but make this our work from day to day, and
keep continually upon our souls, the lively tastes, and deep impressions of the
Infinite Goodness and Amiableness of God. When we Love God most, we are at the
best, most pleasing to God; and our lives are sweetest to our selves: And when
we steep our minds in the believing thoughts of the abundant Fatherly Mercies
of the Lord, we shall most abundantly Love him. Every Mercy is a Suitor to us
from God! The contents of them all is this [ My Son, Give me thy Heart] [Love
him that thus loves thee] Love him, or you reject him. O wonderful Love! that
God will regard the Love of man! that he will enter into a Covenant of Love!
that he will be Related to us in a Relation of Love! and that he will deal with
us on terms of Love! that he will give us leave to Love him, that are so base,
and have so Loved Earth and Sin! yea and that he will be so earnest a suitor
for our Love, as if he needed it, when it is only we that need! But the paths
of Love are mysterious and incomprehensible.

3. As God is in special a Benefactor and Father to us, we must be the
readiest, and most diligent in obedience to him. Childlike duty is the most
willing and unwearied kind of duty. Where Love is the principle, we shall not
be eye-servants, but delight to do the Will of God, and wish, O that I could
please him more! It is a singular delight to a Gracious soul to be upon any
acceptable duty; and the more he can do good, and please the Lord, the more he
is pleased. As Fatherly Love and Benefits are the fullest and the surest, so
will filial duty be. The Heart is no fit soil for Mercies, if they grow not up
to holy fruits. The more you love, the more cheerfully will you obey.

4. From hence we must well learn, both How God is man's End, and what are the
chief Means that lead us to him.

1. God is not the End of Reason, nakedly considered, but he is Finis Amantis,
the End which Love inclines us to, and which by Love is attained, and by love
enjoyed: The understanding of which would resolve many great perplexing
difficulties that a natura finis do step into our way in Theological studies. I
will name no more now, but only that it teaches us, How both God and our own
Felicity in the fruition of him, may be said to be our Ultimate End, without
any contradiction, yet so that it be Eminently and Chiefly God. For it is a
Union (such as our Natures are capable of) that is desired, in which the soul
does long to be swallowed up in God; Understand but what a filial or friendly
Love is, and you may understand what a regular Intention is, and how God must
be the Christians End.

2. And withal it shows us, that the most direct and excellent means of our
felicity, and to our End, are those that are most suited to the work of Love.
Others are means more Remotely, and necessary in their places; but these
directly. And therefore the Promises and Narratives of the Love and Mercy of
the Lord, are the most direct and powerful part of the Gospel conducing to our
End: and the Threatenings the remoter means. And therefore as Grace was advanced
in the world* the Promissory part of Gods Covenant or Law, grew more
illustrious, and the Gospel consisted so much of Promises, that it is called
Glad tidings of great joy. And therefore the most full demonstration of Gods
Goodness and Loveliness to our hearers, is the most excellent part of all our
Preaching, though it is not all. And therefore the meditation of Redemption, is
more powerful than the bare meditation of Creation, because it is Redemption
that most eminently reveals Love. And therefore Christ is the Principal Means
of Life, because he is the Principal Messenger and Demonstration of the Fathers
Love, and by the wonders of Love which he reveals, and exhibiteth in his
wondrous Grace, he wins the soul to the Love of God. For God will have external
objective means, and internal effective means concur, because he will work on
man agreeably to the nature of man. Though there was never given out such
prevalent invincible measures of the Spirit, as Christ has given for the
Renewing of those that he will save, yet shall not that Spirit do it without as
excellent objective means. And though Christ, and the Riches of his Grace
revealed in the Gospel, be the most wonderful objective means, yet shall not
these do it without the internal effectual means. But when Love does shine to
us so resplendently without us, in the face of the Glorious Sun of Love, and is
also ^et into us by the Spirits Illumination, that sheds abroad this Love in
our hearts, then will the holy fire burn, which comes from Heaven, and leads to
Heaven, and will never rest till it have reached its center, and brought us to
the face and arms of God.

5. And from the Fatherly Relation and Love of God, we must learn to Trust him,
and Rest our souls in his securing Love. Shall we distrust a Father? an
Omnipotent Father! Therefore is this Relation prefixed to the Petitions of the
Lords Prayer, and we begin with [ Our Father which art in Heaven] that when we
remember his Love, and our Interest in him, and his Alsufficiency, we may be
encouraged to Trust him, and make our addresses to him. If a Father, and such a
Father smite me, I will submit, and kiss the Rod: for I know it is the healing
fruit of Love. If a Father, and such a Father afflict me, wound me, deal
strangely wi^h me, and grieve my flesh, let me not murmr or distrust him;
for he well understands what he does; and nothing that shall hurt me finally
can come from Omnipotent Paternal Love. If a Father, and such a Father kill
me, yet let me Trust in him, and let not my soul repine at his proceedings,
nor tremble at the separating stroke of death. A Beast knows not when we strive
with him, what we intend, whether to Cure, or to Kill him: but a Child need not
fear a killing blow, nor a Loving soul a damning death, from such a Father. If
he be a Father, where is his Love and Trust?

6. If God be our Father, and so wonderful a Benefactor to us, then Thanks and
Praise must be our most constant work, and must be studied above all the rest
of Duty, and most diligently performed. If the tongue of man, which is called
his Glory, be made for any thing, and good for any thing, it is to give the
Lord his Glory, in the Thankful acknowledgement of his Love and Mercies, and
the daily cheerful Praises of his Name. Let this then be the Christians work.

7. The Children of such a Father, should live a contented cheerful life.
Diligence becomes them, but not contrivances for worldly greatness, nor
carking cares for that which their Father has promised them to care for.
Humility and Reverence beseems them, but not dejection and despondency of
mind, and a still complaining, fearful, troubled, disconsolate soul. If the
Children of such a Father shall not be bold and confident, and cheerful, let
joy and confidence then be banished from the earth, and be renounced by all the
Sons of men.

CHAP. XVI.
15. THere are yet diverse subordinate Attributes of God, that being comprised
in the forementioned, may be passed over with the briefer touch. And the next
that I shall speak of, is, his Freedom. And God is Free in more senses than
one; but for brevity, I shall speak of all together.

1. And first, God has a Natural Freedom of Will, being Determined to Will by
nothing without him, nor liable to any Necessity, but what is consistent with
perfect Blessedness and Liberty. His own Being, and Blessedness, and
Perfections, are not the objects of his Election; and therefore not of that
which we call Free Will: But all his works without, as Creation, Providence,
Redemption, etc. are the effects of his Free Will: Not but that his Will
concerning all these, has a Necessity of existence: For God did from Eternity
Will the Creation, and all that is done in time; and therefore from Eternity
that will existing, had a Necessity of existence: But yet it was Free, because
it proceeds not Necessarily from the very Nature of God: God was God before
he made the world, or Redeemed it, or did the things that are daily done. And
therefore one part of the Schoolmen maintain, not only that there is
Contingency from God, but that there could be no Contingency in the Creature,
if it had not its Original in God: the Liberty of God being the fountain of
Contingency.

2. There is also an Eminency both of Dominion and Sovereignty in God,
according to which he may be called Free. His Absoluteness of Propriety freeth
him from the restraint of any Obligation, but what flows from his own Free
Will, from Disposing of his own as he pleases. And his Absolute Sovereignty
freeth him from the Obligation of his own Laws as Laws, though he will still be
true to his Promises and Predictions. Let man therefore take heed how he
questioneth his Maker, or censureth his Laws, or Works, or Ways.

CHAP. XVII.
16. ANother Attribute of God is his Justice. With submission I conceive that
this is not to be said to be from (...) any otherwise than all Gods Relations
are (as Creator, (...), etc.) because here is no time with God. For though
(...) Blessed Nature denominated Just is from Eternity, yet not (...) ^^r^ality
or Denomination of Justice. For Justice is an Attribute of God, as he is
Governor only: And he was not Governor, till he had Creatures to Govern: And
he could not be a Just Governor when he was no Governor. The Denomination ^^^
not arise till the Creation had laid the Foundation. Many Questions may be
resolved hence, which I will not trouble you to re^^^e.

Justice in God is the Perfection of his Nature, as it gives every his his
due, o^ Governs the world in the most perfect Orders ^or the Ends of
Government. Because he is Just, he will Reward the Righteous, and difference
between the Godly and the Wicked: For that Governor that uses all alike, is
not Just. The Crown of Righteousness is given by him as a Righteous Judge, 2
T^m 4. 8.

1. The Justice of God is substantially (in men we call it an Inclination) ^^^
Nature, and so it is Eternal. 2. It is (...) formally in his Relation of [
Governor.] 3. It is expressively first in his Laws: For as a Just Governor he
made them suited to the Subjects, Objects, and Ends. 4 It is expressively
secondarily in his Judgments and Executions; which is when they are according
to his Law; o^ in the Cares of Penalty where he may dispense at least according
to the state of the subject, and sitted to the Ends of Government.
1. The Justice of God is the Consolation of the Just: He will Justify them
whom his Gospel Justifies, because he is Just. The Justice of God in many
places of Scripture, is taken for his Fidelity in vindicating his people, and
his Judging for them, and procuring them the happy fruits of his Government,
and so is taken in a Consolatory sense, Psalm. 89. 14. Justice and Judgment are
the habitations of thy Throne; Mercy and Truth shall go before thy face] 2
These. 1. 5, 6. It is a Righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble us, and Rest to the troubled.]

2. The Justice of God is the terror of the ungodly. As he would not make
unrighteous Laws, for the pleasure of unrighteous men, so neither will he pass
unrighteous judgment. But look what a man sows, that shall he also reap. All
his peremptory threatenings shall be made good, and his wrath poured out for
ever upon impenitent souls, because he is the Righteous God.

CHAP. XVIII.
17. ANother of Gods Attributes is his Holiness. He is called Holy. 1. As he is
Transcendently above and separated from all the Creatures, in comparison of
whom the He^vens are not clean; and from whom all things stand at an Infinite
distance. 2. As the Perfection of his nature is the Fountain of all Moral Good.
1. In the Holiness of his Law, the Rule of Holiness. 2. In the Holiness of the
soul: and, 3. In his holy Judgments. And consequently as this Perfect Nature
is contrary to all the Moral Pollution of the Creature, loathing iniquity,
forbiding and condemning it. That Perfect Goodness of the will of God, from
whence flows holy Laws, and motions, and the Holiness of the soul of man, is
it that Scripture means usually by Gods Holiness; rather then the foresaid
distance from the Creatures. And therefore his Holiness is usually given as the
Reason of his Laws and Judgments, and of his enmity to sin: And our Holiness
is called his Image (who imitate not his Transcendency) and we are commanded to
be Holy as he is Holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. The nature of the Image will best tell us
what Holiness is in God. Holiness in us is called The Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.
4. and therefore is radically a right inclination and disposition of the soul;
which has its rise from a Transcendent Holiness in God, even as our Wisdom
from his Transcendent Wisdom, and our Being from his Being. Holiness therefore
being indeed the same with the Transcendently Moral Goodness of God, which I
have spoken of before, I shall say but little of it now. Thus must the Holiness
of God be known.

1. It must cause us to have a most high and honorable esteem of Holiness in
the Creature, because it is the Image of the Holiness of God. Three sorts of
Creatures have a Derivative Holiness: The first is The Law; which is the mere
signification of the Wise and Holy Will of God concerning man's Duty with
Rewards and Penalties, for the Holy Governing of the world! This is the nearest
Image of God, engraven upon that Seal which must be the Instrument of
imprinting it on our souls. Now the Holiness of the Word is not the mere
product of the Will of God, considered as a Will; but of the Will of God
considered as Holy, that is, as the Infinite Transcendent Moral Goodness in the
Architype or Original. For all events that proceed from God, are the products
of his Will which is Holy, but not as Holy (as the creating, preserving,
disposing of every fly, or fish in the sea, or worm in the earth, etc.) There
is somewhat therefore in the Nature of God, which is the Perfection of his
Will, and is called Holiness, which ^he Holiness of the Law does flow from and
express.

This Holy Word is the Immortal seed that begets Holiness in the soul, which
is the second subject of derived Holiness; And this our Holiness is a
conformity of the soul to the Law, as the Product of the Holy Will of God, and
not a mere conformity to his predictions, and decreeing Will as such. It is a
separation to God, but not every separation: Pharaoh was set apart to be the
Passive monument of the Honor of Gods Name: and Cyrus was his servant to
restore his people, and yet not thus Holy: But it is a separation from common
and unclean uses; and a Purgation from polluting vice, and a renovation by
reception of the Image of Gods Holiness, whose Nature is to incline the soul to
God, and devote it wholly to him; both in Justice, because we are his own, and
in Love, because he is most Holy and perfectly Good.

The third subject of Holiness is those creatures that are but separated to
Holy uses, and these have but a Relative Holiness, and secundum quid: As the
Temple, the holy utensils, the Bible as to the materials, the Minister, as an
Officer, the people as visible members, etc.

All these must be reverenced and honored by us, according to the proportion
of their Holiness. 1. Our principal Reverence must be to the Holy Word of God:
For Holiness is more perfect there then in our souls. The Holiness of the Word,
which is it that the ungodly hate or quarrel at, is the Glory of it in the eyes
of Holy men. We may much discern a Holy and an unholy soul, by their Loving or
not loving a Holy Law; especially as it is a Rule to themselves. A distaste of
the Holiness of Scripture, and of the Holiness of the writings of Divines, and
of the Holiness of their preaching or conference, discovers an unholy soul. A
Love to holy Doctrine shows that there is somewhat suitable to it in the soul
that Loves it. It is the elogy of the Scriptures, the Promises, the Covenant,
the Prophets and Apostles, that they are all Holy, Romans 1. 2. Psalm. 105. 42.
Luke 1. 70, 72. Rev. 18. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Romans 7. 12. The Holiness of the
Scripture does make it as suitable and savoury to a Holy soul, as Light is
suitable to the eyesight, and sweetness to the taste: and therefore it is to
them as the honey comb. But to the unholy it is a mystery, and as foolishness,
and that which is contrary to their disposition, and they have an enmity to it:
which makes a wonderful difference in their judging of the evidences of
Scripture Verity, and much facilitateth the work of Faith in one sort, and
strengthens unbelief in the other. Holy doctrine is the Glass that shows us
the Holy face of God himself, and therefore must needs be most excellent to the
Saints.

2. And we must honor and love also the Holiness of the Saints: For they also
bear the Image of the Lord. Their Holy Affections, Prayers, Discourses, and
Conversations must be beautiful in our eyes: And we must take heed of those
temptations, that either from personal injuries received from any, or from
their blots or imperfections, or from their meanness in the world, or from the
contempt and reproach and slanders of the ungodly, would draw us to think
dishononrably of their Holiness. He that honors the Holy God, will honor
his Image in his Holy people. In his eyes a vile person will be contemned, but
he will honor them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4. The Saints on earth are
the excellent in his eyes, and his delight is in them, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. The
breathings of Divine Love in the holy Prayers, Praises and Speeches of the
Saints, and their Reverent and Holy mention of his Name, are things that a holy
soul does sweetly relish, and take pleasure in, as we would do to hear an Angel
speak of the Holy things of the invisible Glory.

3 And Relative Holiness it self, though the lowest must be H(...)ured by us.
Holy offices and persons in them must be Re(...)d for their Relative Holiness.
Holy days must be holily (...)rved. Holy Ordinances (which also participate of
the (...) of the Law, as significative) must be reverently used. Due reverence
must be given even to that which is lawfully by men ^^voted to a Holy use, as
are Temples, and Utensils of worship, and the maintenance dedicated to the
service of God. That which is Holy, must not be devoured, Prove. 20. 25. nor
used as we do things common and unclean.

^. Gods Holiness must make us Holy: we must fall in Love with it, and wholly
conform our selves unto it. Every part of Sanctifying grace must be
entertained, and cherished, and excited, and used by us. Sin must be loathsome
to us because it is contrary to the Holiness of God. No Toad or Snake should
seem to us so ugly. A dead carcass is an unpleasant sight, because it shows
us a privation of natural life: But an unholy soul is incomparably a more
loathsome ghastly sight, because it shows us the privation of the life of
Holiness. No man can well know the odiousness of sin, and the misery and
loathsomeness of the unholy soul, that knows not the Holiness of God. [ Speak
unto all the Congregation of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be Holy: for I
the Lord your God am Holy] Lev. 19. 2. [ Sanctify your selves therefore and be
ye Holy, for I am the Lord your God] Lev. 20. 7, 8. [ As be that has called us
is Holy, so must we be holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 25. It is
[ an holy calling wherewith we are called] 2 T^^. 1. 9. We are sanctified to be
a peculiar people to Christ, Tit. 2. 14. [ That denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world]
ver. 12. We are made [ an Holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifice,
acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ] 1 Pet. 2. 5. Romans 12. 1, 2. We must
therefore present our bodies a living sacrifice, Holy, acceptable to God, our
reasonable service] For we are [ chosen in Christ before the foundation of the
world, that we should be Holy, and without blame] Ephesians. 1. 4. and are Redeemed
and Sanctified by Christ, that we may be presented Glorious, Holy, and without
blemish] Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. See therefore that you follow Holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14. For Blessed are the Pure in
heart, for they shall see him, Mat. 5. 8.

3. The Holiness of God, must be to us a standing unanswerable Argument to shun
all temptations that would draw us to be unholy, and to confound all the words
of wicded men that are spoken against Holiness. Remember but that God is Holy,
and if thou like that which is spoken against God, thou art his Enemy. Think on
the Prophecy of Henoch, Jude 14. 15. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand
of his Saints to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are
ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him.] God will not hold him guiltless that takes his holy Name in
vain; much less that blasphemeth Holiness, which is the perfection of his
blessed nature.

4. The Holiness of God must possess us with a sense of our Uncleanness, and
further our Humiliation. When Isaiah heard the Seraphims cry, [ Holy, Holy,
Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory] Isa. 6. 3* He
said [ Woe is me, for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I
dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of Hosts.] v. 5.

5. The Holiness of God must cause us to walk continually in his Fear, and to
take heed to all the affections of our souls, and even to the manner of our
behavior, when we come near to him in his Holy Worship. What suffered the
Be^shemi^es for unreverent looking into the Holy Ark, 1 Samuel, 6. 19. and Uzzah
but for touching it? And what a dreadful example is that of the two Sons of
Aaron, that were slain by a devou^ing fire from the Lord, for offering strange
fire which he commanded not, Lev. 10. 1, 2. And Aaron was awed into silence by
this account from God. [ I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and
before all the people I will be glorified] v. 3. Take heed lest unreverence, or
deadness, or customary heartless wordy services, should be brought before a
Holy God. Take heed of hypocritical carnal worship. The Holy God will not be
mocked with complements and shows.

CHAP. XIX.
18. THe next Attribute of God to be spoken of, is [ His Veracity, Truth, and
Faithfulness.] This is the result of his perfect Wisdom, Goodness, and
Omnipotency: For because he is most Wise and Powerful, he cannot be
Necessitated to Lie: And because he is most Good, he will not Lie. Though God
speaks by none but a Created Voice, and signify his Will to us by men, that
in themselves considered are defectible, yet what he makes his Voice shall
speak Truth; and what he chooses to signify his Will, shall truly signify
it. He therefore condemns Lying in man, because it is contrary to his own
Veracity. For if any should say that God is under no Law, and therefore is not
bound to speak Ttuth, or not deceive a Prophet or Apostle by his Inspirations;
I answer, that he hates Lying as contrary to his Perfect Nature, and is
himself against it, and cannot possibly be guilty of it, because of his own
Perfection; and not because he is under a Law. Lying comes from some
Imperfection, either of Knowledge, Power, or Goodness, which can none of them
befall the Lord. The Goodness of the Creature is a Goodness of Conformity to an
Obliging Law; and the Goodness of the Law is a Goodness of Conformity to, and
expression of the Good Will of God. But the Goodness of God is a Perfection of
Essence, the Primitive Goodness, which is the Fountain, and Standard, and End
of all other Good; and not a Goodness of Conformity to another.

And this Attribute of God is of very great use to his servants. 1. From hence
we must be Resolved for Duty, and for a holy, heavenly life: because the
Commands of God are serious, and his Promises and Threatenings True. If God were
not True, that tells us of these great Eternal things, then might we excuse our
selves from Godliness, and justify the worldling in his sensual way: There is
nothing of common sense and reason that can be said against a Holy life, by a
man that denies not the Truth of God, or of his Word. And to deny Gods Truth
is most unreasonable of all: O Sirs! when you read and hear of the wonderful
weighty matters of the Scripture, of an Endless Life, and the way thereto;
bethink you, if these things be True, what manner of persons you should be in
all Holy Conversation and Godliness! 2 Pet. 3. 11. If the Word be True, that
tells us of Death and Judgment, and Heaven and Hell, is it time for us to
sin, to trifle and live unready!

2. The Truth of God is the Terror of his Enemies. O happymen, if their
Unbelief could make void the Threatenings of God, and doubting of them would
make them false! and if their misery were as easily remedied as denied; and
ended as easily as now forgotten! or forgotten hereafter as easily as now! But
true and righteous is the Lord, and from the beginning his Word is true, Psalm.
119. 16. Not a word shall fall to the ground, nor a jot or tittle pass
unfufilled.

3. The Truth of God is the Ground of Faith, and the stay of our souls, and the
Rock of all our confidence and comfort. A Christian did not differ from another
man (unless in being somewhat more deluded) if God were not True. But this is
the foundation of all our hopes, and the life of our Religion, and all that we
are as Christians, proceeds from this. Faith is animated by Gods Veracity, and
from thence all other Graces flow, or are excited in us. O Christians, what a
treasure is before your eyes, when you open the Blessed Book of God! what life
should it put into your confidence and comforts, to think that all these words
are true! All those descriptions of the Everlasting Kingdom, and all those
exceeding precious Promises of this life, and that which is to come, and all
the expressions of that exceeding Love of God unto his servants, all these are
the True sayings of God. A faithful witness will not Lie, Prove. 14. 5. much
less will the faithful God. Eternal Life is promised by God that cannot Lie,
Tit. 1. 2. [ Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
Promise, the immutability of his Counsels confirmed it by an oath; that by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to Lie, we might have a
strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us] Heb. 6. 17, 18. Let Faith therefore live upon the Truth of God, and
let us be strengthened, and rejoice therein.

4. Abhor all doctrines which deny the Truth and Faithfulness of God: For they
destroy the ground of Christian Faith, of all Divine Faith, and all Religion.
The Veracity of God is the formal Object of all Divine Faith: We believe God,
because he cannot Lie: If he can Lie, and do Lie, he is not credible. But you
will say, Is there any that hold such odious doctrines? Answ. I like not the
charging of Persons with the consequences of their opinions which they discern
not, but disclaim: God will not charge them with such consequences, who do
their best to know the truth, and why should we? All men have some errors,
whose consequences contradict some Articles of Faith. It is not the persons
that I persuade you to dislike, but the Doctrine. And the Doctrine is never the
less to be abhorred, because a wise or good man may hold that which does infer
it.

I shall now instance only in the Dominicans predetermination. They that hold
that it is necessary to the being of every circumstantiated act natural and
free, that God be the principal immediate Physical efficient predetermining
cause of it, do hold that he so causes all the false speeches and writings (as
well as other sins) that ever were spoken or written in the world: not only as
they are acts in genere, but as these words in particular; as that he so
predetermined the tongues of Ananias and Saphira to say those very words which
they said, rather than others: Now seeing it is apparent 1. That God has not a
voice but speaks to us by a Created Voice, even by Prophets and Apostles, and
that the Scripture was written by men. 2. And that Gods Veracity, which is the
formal object of our Faith, consists in his not using lying instruments, nor
sending a lying messenger to us; (it is Veracitas revelantis per alium.) 3. And
that no way of Inspiration can make God to be any more the cause of the words
or writings of an Apostle, than his Immediate Physical efficient specifying
predetermination does (for it can do no more than irresistibly as the first
cause, Physically to premove the agent to this Thought, Will, Word, or Deed,
considered with all its circumstances,) It follows that we have no certainty
when God premoveth an Apostle or Prophet to speak true, and when to speak
falsely; and that no words or writings are o certain truth, upon any account of
Gods inspiration or premotion, because God not only can, but does cause all the
untruths that are spoken or written in the world: Therefore no Faith in Gods
Revelations has any sure foundation, nor any formal object at all: And so all
Religion is dashed out at a stroke. To say that God causes not the falsity of
the word, nor the word as false, but the word which is false, might well be the
justification of them that affirm God to be but the Universal Cause of the Word
o^ Act in genere as a Word or Act; and that the specification is only from the
sinner. But in them that say he is the particular Cause of this word
comparatively rather than another, it is but a contradiction: 1. For there is
no other cause of the falsity, which is a mere Relation, but that which causes
the Rule and the Word or Writing which is false, and so lays the foundation.
2. It overthrows all certainty of Faith, if God speak to us by his
Instruments, those words that are false: The Quod falsum, as well as the Qua
falsum, leaves us no ground of certainty. The Dominicans therefore have but
one task in which their hope is placed, to excuse their opinion from plain
obliterating all Divine Belief and Religion, and that is, to prove that there
is so great a difference between Inspiration, and their Physical
Predetermination, that God cannot by Inspiration premove to an untruth, though
by Physical Predetermination he may: This is their task; which I see not the
least possibility that ever they should perform: If God premove, and
predeterminate every Will, and Tongue, and Pen, to every lie that is spoken or
written, more potently and irresistibly than I move my Pen in writing, it is
past my power to understand what more he can do by inspiration, to interest him
in the Creatures Act: or at least how the difference can be so great as that
one of the ways he can predetermine all men to their falsities, and none the
other way. But of this I have written a large Disputation; yet think it not
needless, even in a practical Treatise to say this much here.

5. The Truth of God must teach us to hate every Motion to Unbelief in our
selves and others: It is a hainons sin to give God the Lie, though he speak to
us but by his messengers: Every honest man, so far as he is honest, is to be
believed: and is God less true? A graceless Gallant will challenge you the
field for the dishonor, if you give him the Lie. If you deny Gods Veracity,
you do not only equal him with the worst of men, but with the Devil, who was a
Liar from the beginning. Yea you make him incapable of being the Governor of
the world, or suppose him to Govern it by Deceits and Lies. Abhor therefore the
first motions of Unbelief. It makes men somewhat worse than Devils; for the
Devils know that God cannot lie, and therefore they believe and tremble.
Unbelief of the Truth of the Word of God, is the curse of the soul; the enemy
and bane of all Grace and Religion, so far as it prevails: Let it be the
principal care and labor of your souls, to settle the foundation of your Faith
aright, and to discern the Evidence of Divine Authority in the holy Scriptures,
and to extirpate the remnants of Infidelity in your hearts.

6. Let the Truth and Faithfulness of God engage you to be True and Faithful to
him, and to each other. You have promised him to be his servants; be faithful
in your promises: You are in Covenant with him: break not your Covenant. Many a
particular promise of Reformation you have made to God: Prove not false to him
that is True to you.

Be as good as your word to all men that you have to do with. Abhor a Lie as
the offspring of the Devil, who is the father of it: Remember you serve a God
of Truth: and that it is the Rectitude and Glory of his servants to be
conformable to him. They say the Turks are offended at Christianity, because of
the lies and falsehood of Christians. But sure they were but nominal Christians,
and no true Christians that ever they found such: And its pity that
Christianity should be judged of through the world, by the lives of them that
never were Christians but from the teeth outward, and the skin that was washed
in Baptism. They that will lie to God, and covenant to be his holy Servants,
when they hate his holy service, will lie to man, when their commodity
requires it. When they seem to Repent, and honor him with their tongues [
They flatter him with their mouth, and lie to him with their tongues; for their
heart is not right with him, neither are they steadfast in his Covenant] Psalm.
78. 34, 35, 36; 37. God says, Levit. 19. 11. Ye shall not steal, nor deal
fasly, nor lie one to another.] A Righteous man hates lying, Prove. 13. 5. The
lying tongue is but for a moment, Prove. 12. 19. For God hates it, and it is an
abomination to him, Prove. 16. 16, 17. The lovers and makers of lies are shut
out of the Kingdom of Christ, Rev. 22. 15.

But above all false Teachers that preach and prophecy lies, and deceive the
Rulers and people of the Earth, are abominable to God. See Jer. 27. 10, 14, 15,
16. and 14. 14. and 23. 25, 26, 32. Ezekiel. 13. 9, 12. Isa. 54. 13. When Ahab was
to be destroyed, a lying spirit in the mouth of his Prophets deceived him. And
if a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked, Prove. 29. 2.

7. Above all false witness and perjury should be most odious to the servants
of the God of Truth, Prove. 19. 9. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and
he that speaks lies shall perish] Eccles. 5. 4, 5. When thou vowest a vow to
God, defer not to pay it. Says David [Thy Vows are upon me, O God, Psalm. 56.
12. And unto thee shall the Vow be performed, Psalm. 65. 1. Perjury is a sin
that seldom scapeth vengeance, even in this life. The instances of Saul the
first, and Zedekiah the last of the Kings of Judah, before their desolation,
are both very terrible. Saul's posterity must be hanged, to stay the Famine that
came upon the people for his breaking a Vow that was made by Joshua, and not by
him, though he did it in zeal for Israel, 2 Samuel 21. Zedekiah's case you may
see, 2 Chronicles. 26. Ezekiel. 17. He that swears, appealeth to God as the searcher
of hearts, and avenger of perjury. The perjured person chooses the vengeance
of God. He is unfit (till he repent) to be a member of any civil society. For
he dissolveth the bond of all societies. He cannot well be supposed to make
conscience of any sin or villainy in the world, against God, his Country, his
King, his Friend or Neighbor, that makes no conscience of an oath. It is not
easy to name a greater wickedness out of Hell, than to approve of perjury by
Laws or Doctrine. And whether the Church of Rome do so or not, I only desire
them to consider that have read the third Canon of the Council at Lateran under
P. Innocent the third, where an Approved General Council decrees, that the
Pope discharge vassals from their allegiance or fidelity to those Temporal
Lords that exterminate not Heretics (as they call them) out of their
dominions. What shall restrain men from killing Kings, or any villainy, if once
the bond of oatht be nullified? But Scripture says [ Keep the Kings
Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God, Eccles. 8 2.] No man
defends Perjury by name: But to say that men that swear to do that which God
commands, or forbids not, are not bound to keep that oath; or that the Pope
may absolve men, or disoblige them that swore fidelity to Temporal Lords, when
once the Pope has excommunicated them, does seem to me of the same importance.

CHAP. XX.
19. THE next Attribute to be spoke of, is, his Mercifulness, and his
Long-suffering Patience, which we may set together. This is implied in his
Goodness, and the Relation of a Father before expressed. Mercy is Gods Goodness
inclining him to prevent or remove his creatures Misery. It is not only the
Miserable that are the object of it, but also those that may be miserable; it
being as truly Mercy to keep us out of it foreseen, as to deliver us out of it
when we are in it. Hence it is that he takes not Pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but rather that he turn and Live. And hence it is that he Afflicts not
willingly, nor grieves the children of men, Lam. 3. 33. Not that his Mercy
engages him to do all that he can do for the salvation of every sinner, or
absolutely to prevent or heal his misery; But it is his Attribute chiefly
considered as Governor of the Rational Creature; and so his Mercy is so great
to all, that he will destroy none but for their wilful sin, and shut none among
us out of Heaven, but those that were guilty of contemning it. God does not
prevent the sinner with his Judgment, but with his Grace he often does. He
never punishes before we are sinners, nor never Decreed so to do, as all will
grant. He punishes none, where his foregoing commands and warnings have had
their due effect for the prevention: And therefore because the Precept is the
first part of his Law, and the Threatening is but subservient to that, and the
first intent of a Governor is to procure Obedience, and Punishing is but upon
supposition that he misseth of the first; therefore is God said not to afflict
willingly; because he does it not ex voluntate antecedente, but ex voluntate
consequente, that is (for so the distinction is sound) not as a Lawgiver, and
Ruler by those Laws considered before the violation; but only as a Judge of the
Law-breakers. But yet Gods Mercy is no security to the abusers of his Mercy.
Bot rather will sink them into deeper misery, as the aggravation of their sin:
As God Afflicts not willingly, and yet we feel that he afflicts: so if he do
not condemn you willingly, you shall find i^ you are impenitent, that yet he
will condemn you.

If you say, God can be forced to do nothing against his will: I answer you,
that it is not simply against his will; for then it should never come to pass:
But it is against the Principal act of his will, which flows from him as a
Lawgiver, or Ruler by Laws, in which respect it may be said that he had rather
that the wicked turn and live: but yet if they will not turn, they shall not
live. A merciful Judge had rather the Thief had saved his life by forbearing to
steal; but yet he had not rather that Thieves go unpunished than he should
condemn them.

But, you will say, If God had rather men did not sin, why does he not hinder it?
I answer 1. He had not absolutely and simply rather; that is, so far as to do
all that he can to prevent it, nor all that without which he foreknoweth it
will not be prevented: But he does much against sin as a Lawgiver, and nothing
for it; he causes us not, but persuades us from it; and therefore as a Ruler
he may be said to have rather that men did not sin, or rather that they would
turn and live.

1. The Mercy of God, therefore should lead sinners to Repentance, and shame
them from their sin, and lead them up to God in Love.

2. Mercy should encourage sinners to Repent, as well as engage them to it: For
we have to do with a Merciful God, that has not shut up any among us in
despair, nor forbid them to come in, but continues to invite when we have often
refused, and will undoubtedly pardon and welcome all that do return.

3. Mercy being specially the portion of the Saints, must keep them in
Thankfulness, Love and Comfort: and all Mercies must be improved for their
proper ends: When a Merciful God is pleased to fill up his servants lives with
such Great and Various Mercies as he does, it should breed a continual
sweetness upon their hearts, and cause them to study the most grateful
retribution. He should breath forth nothing but Thankfulness, Obedience and
Praise, who breaths nothing but Mercies from God. As the food that men live
upon, will be seen in their temperature, (...) and strength; so they that live
continually upon M^rc^^s should be wholly turned into Love and Thankfulness
(...)old become as it were their nature, temperature (...). O how unspeakable
is the Love of God, that (...)eet a life for his servants, even in their
warfare (...)ge in this world? that Mercy must be as it were (...) Air that
they breath in, the food which they must live upon; and the remembrance,
improvement, and thankful mention of it, must be the business and employment of
their lives? O with what sweet affections, meditations, and expressions should
we live, if we lived but according to the rate of those Mercies upon which we
live! Love, and Joy, and Thanks, and Praise, would be our very lives. What
sweet thoughts would Mercy breed and feed in our minds when we are alone? what
sweet apprehensions of the Love of God, and Life Eternal should we have in
Prayer, Reading, Saoraments, and other holy ordinances! Sickness and Health,
Poverty and Wealth, Death as well as Life would be comfortable to us: for all
is full of Mercy to the Vessels of Mercy. O Christians, what a shame is it that
God is so much wronged, and our selves so much defrauded of our peace and joy,
by passing over such abundance of great unvaluable mercies, without tasting
their sweetness, or well considering what we do receive? Had we David's heart,
what songs of Praise would Mercy teach us to indite? How affectionately should
we recount the mercies of our youth and riper age? of every place and state
that we have lived in to the honor of our Gracious Lord, and the encouragement
of those that know not how Good and Merciful he is.

But withal, see that you contemn not, or abuse not Mercy: Use it well; for it
is Mercy that you must trust to in the hour of your distresses. O do not
trample upon Mercy now, lest you be confounded when you should cry for Mercy in
your extremity.

4. The Mercifulness of God, must cause his servants to imitate him in a Love
of mercy: Be merciful, for your heavenly Father is merciful. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Matthew. 5. 7. Be merciful in your
Censures: Be merciful in your retributions: You are none of Gods Children, if
you Love not your Enemies, and pray not for them that curse you, and do not
good to them that hate and persecute you (according to your power) Matthew. 5.
44, 45. If you forgive not men their trespasses, but take your Brother by the
throat, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your Trespasses, Matthew.
6. 14, 15. Mark, that even while he is called [ your heavenly Father] yet he
will not forgive, if you forgive not. Unmerciful men are too unlike to God, to
claim any interest in his saving mercy, in the hour of their extremest misery.
Men of cruelty, blood and violence he abhors: And usually they do not live
out half their days: But they that bite and devour one another, are devoured
one of another, Gal. 5. 15. The last judgment will pass much according to men's
works of mercy, to the members of Christ, Matthew. 25. He shall have judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy: and mercy rejoices against
judgment, James 2. 13. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father
is this, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted in the world, James 1. 27. He that having this worlds goods,
sees his Brother in need, and shuts up the bowels of his compassion from
him, how dwells the Love of God in him? But above all cruelty, there is none
more devilish than cruelty to souls. And in those that undertake the place of
Pastors, cruelty to men's souls is a far greater sin than in any others. To
starve those that they undertake to feed; and to seduce those whom they
undertake to Guide, and be Wolves to those whose Shepherds they pretend to be,
and to prefer their worldly honors, and commodity, and ease, before the souls
of many thousands, to be so cruel to souls, when Christ has been so merciful
to them, as to come down on earth to seek and save them, and to give his life a
ransom for them; this will one day be so heavy a charge, that the man that
must stand as guilty under it, will a thousand times wish, that a milsto^^ had
been hanged about his neck, and he had been cast into the bottom of the Sea,
before he had betrayed or murdered souls, or offended one of the little ones of
Christ. Be merciful to men's souls and bodies, as ever you would find mercy with
a merciful God in the hour of your necessity and distress.

CHAP. XXI.
20. THE last of Gods Attributes which I shall now mention, is, his
Dreadfulness or Terribleness, to those that are the objects of his wrath. This
is the result of his other Attributes, especially of his Holiness, and
Governing Justice, and Truth in his commi^ations. He is a Great and Dreadful
God, Dan. 9 4. A mighty God and terrible, Deuteronomy. 7. 21. A great and terrible
God, Nah. 1. 5. With God is terrible Majesty, Job 37. 22. The Lord most high is
terrible, Psalm. 47. 22.

1. His Children therefore must be kept in a holy awe; God is never to be
approached or mentioned, but with the greatest reverence. We must sanctify the
Lord of Hosts himself, and he must be our fear and dread, Isa. 8. 13. Even they
that receive the unmovable Kingdom, must have grace in their hearts to serve
him acceptably with Reverence and godly fear, because our God is a consuming
fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29. When we come to worship in the holy Assemblies, we
should think, as Jacob, Genesis 28. 17. How dreadful is this place? This is none
other but the House of God, and this is the gate of Heaven. Especially when God
seems to frown upon the soul, his servants must humble themselves before him,
and deprecate his wrath, as Jeremiah did, Jer. 17. 17. Be not a terror to me.
It ill becomes the best of men, to make light of the frowns and threatenings of
God. Also when he deals with us in Judgment, and we feel the smart of his
chastisements, though we must remember that he is a Father, yet withal we must
consider that he shows himself an offended Father: And therefore true and
deep Humiliation has ever been the course of afflicted Saints, to turn away
the wrath of a terrible God.

2. But above all, what cause have the Ungodly to tremble at the Dreadfulness
of that God, who is engaged in Justice, (except they be converted) to use them
everlastingly as his unpardoned enemies. As there is no felicity like the
favor of God; and no joy comparable to his childrens joys; so is there no
misery like the sense of his Displeasure, nor any terrors to be compared to
those, which his wrath inflicteth everlastingly on the ungodly. O wretched
sinner! what have thou done to make God thine enemy? what could hire thee to
offend him by thy willful sin? and to do that which thou knew he forbad and
condemned in his Word? What madness caused thee to make a mock at sin and hell,
and to play with the vengeance of the Almighty? what gain did hire thee to cast
thy soul into the danger of damnation? can thou save by the match, if thou
win the world and lose thy soul? Did thou not know who it was thou had to
do with? It had been better for thee that all the world had been offended with
thee, even men and Angels, great and small, than the most Dreadful God? Did
thou not believe him when he told thee how he was resolved to judge and punish
the ungodly! Read it 2 These. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. and 2. 10, 11. Matthew. 25. Jud. 15.
Psalm. 1. etc. what caused thee to venture upon the consuming fire? Did thou
not know that as he is Merciful, so he is Jealous, Holy, Just and Terrible? In
the Name of God, I require and entreat thee, fly to his Mercy in Jesus Christ;
and hearken speedily to his Grace, and turn at his reproof and warning; To day
while it is called to day, harden not thy heart, but hear his voice, lest he
resolve in his wrath, that thou shall never enter into his rest; There is no
enduring, there is no overcoming, there is no contending with an angry,
dreadful, holy God: Repent therefore and turn to him, and obey the voice of
Mercy that thy soul may live.

3. The Dreadfulness of God, does tell both good and bad the great necessity of
a Mediator. What an unspeakable mercy is it that God has given us his Son! and
that by Jesus Christ we may come with boldness and confidence into the presence
of the Dreadful God, that else would have been to us a greater terror than all
the world, yea than Satan himself. The more we are apprehensive of our distance
from God, and of his Terrible Majesty, and his more Terrible justice against
such sinners as we have been, the more we shall understand the mystery of
Redemption, and highly value the Mediation of Christ.

4. Lastly, let the Dreadfulness of God, prevail with every believing soul, to
pity the ungodly that pity not themselves. O pray for them, O warn them,
exhort them, entreat them, as men that know the Terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.
11. If they knew as well as you do what sin is, and what it is to be children
of wrath, and what it is to be unpardoned, unjustified and unsanctified, they
would pity themselves, and cry for mercy, mercy, mercy, from day to day, till
they were recovered into a state of life, and turned from the power of Satan
unto God. Alas, they know not what it is to die, and to see the world to come,
and to appear before a dreadful God: They know not what it is to be in Hell
fire; nor what it is to be glorified in Heaven: They never saw or tried these
things, and they want the Faith by which they must be foreseen by those that
are yet short of nearer knowledge: you therefore that have Faith to foreknow
these things, and are enlightened by the Spirit of God, O pity and warn and
help the miserable! Tell them how much easier it is to escape Hell, than to
endure it: and how much easier a Holy life on earth is, than the endless wrath
of the most Dreadful God. Tell them that unbelief, presumption and security,
are the certain means to bring their misery, but will do nothing to keep it
off; though they may keep off the present knowledge and sense of it, which
would have droven them to seek a cure. Tell them that death and judgment are
at hand, and that when they laugh, or sport, or scorn, and jest at the
Displeasure of the Dreadful God, it is posting toward them, and will be upon
them before they are aware; and when they slumber, their damnation slumbereth
not: but while unbelieving sinners say, Peace, Peace, sudden destruction will
come upon them, as unexpected travail on a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. O tell them how dreadful a thing it is, for a soul that is unregenerate
and unsanctified, to go from that body which it pampered and sold its salvation
to pleasure, and to appear at the tribunal of God; and how dreadful it is for
such a soul, to fall into the hands of the living God. At least save your own
souls, by the faithful discharge of so great a duty; and if they will take no
warning, let them at last remember when it is too late, that they were told in
time, what they should see and feel at last, and what the later end would
prove; and that God and man did warn them in compassion, though they perish
because they would have no compassion or mercy upon themselves. Thus let the
Terribleness of God provoke you, to do your duty with speed and zeal, for the
converting and saving of miserable souls.

AND thus I have briefly set before you the Glass in which you may see the
Lord, and told you how he must be known: and how he must be conceived of in our
apprehensions; and how the knowledge of God must be improved, and what
impressions it must make upon the heart, and what effect it must have upon our
lives: Blessed and for ever blessed are those souls, that have the truly and
lively Image of this God, and all these his Attributes imprinted on them, (as
to the Creature they are communicable.) And O that the veil were taken from our
hearts, that we all with open face beholding as in a glass the Glory of the
Loord, may be changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the spirit
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. and may increase and live in the knowledge of the
true and only God, and of Jesus Christ, which is Eternal Life.

Amen.
THE DESCRIPTION, Reasons and Reward, OF THE BELIEVERS Walking with God.

On Genesis 5. 24.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleet Street, and
Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster. 1664.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Text explained: what it is to Walk with God: what it contains
both for Matter and Manner. Page 159 CHAP. II. The first Use: A Lamentation of
the practical Atheism of the world. Motives to change your inordinate
creature-converse into converse with God: How much sinners have to do with God;
more than with all the world besides: shewedin 14 instances. p. 185 CHAP. III.
An answer to them that think God does us good by necessity of Nature, as the
sun does illuminate and warm us; and therefore though he have much to do for
us, yet much is not required from us toward him. And to them that think, he is
above our converse, and unsuitable to us. Ten Quere's to evince the necessity
of our own holy diligence in godliness: Especially of exercising our Thoughts
upon God. Ten mischiefs that befall them, who have not God in all their
Thoughts. p. 205 CHAP. IV. Practical Atheism further detected. An answer to
them that think it unfit for ignorant men, or poor men to think so much of God,
and that it will make men melancholy and mad. Ten propositions showing how far
it is our duty to Think of God; by way of explication. p. 220 CHAP. V. An
answer to them that say, God regards not Thoughts but Deeds. Twelve evidences
of the regardableness of our Thoughts. p. 230 CHAP. VI. The application to the
Godly. The Benefits of walking with God. I. It is suitable to humane Nature.
Ho^ it is Natural. No middle life between the sensual and the Holy. Of them
that delight in Knowledge and moral virtue. Nature in its first constitution
was not only Innocent but Holy: Proved. II. To walk with God is the highest and
noblest life. III. It is the only course to prove and make men truly wise.
Proved by ten evidences. IV. It makes men good as well as wise, and advances
to the greatest holiness and rectitude. Proved by five evidences. V. It is the
best preparation for sufferings and death, showed by seven advantages, to that
end. p. 235 CHAP. VII. Five special obligations on true believers to walk with
God, and to avoid inordinate Creature-converse. p. 277
CHAP. I.
Genesis 5. 24. And Henoch walked with God, and he was not; for God took him.
Being to speak of our Converse with God in Solitude, I think it will not be
unsuitable, nor unserviceable to the Ends of that Discourse, if I here premise
a short description of the General Duty of practical godliness, as it is called
in Scripture a Walking with God. It is here commended to us in the example of
Holy Henoch, whose excellency is recorded in this signal character, that [ he
walked with God:] and his special Reward expressed in the words following [ and
he was not, for God took him.] I shall speak most of his Character, and then
somewhat of his Reward.

The Samaritan and vulgar-Latine versions, do strictly translate the Hebrew as
we read it: but the interpretation of the Septuagint, the Syriack, the Chaldee
and the Arabic, are rather good expositions (all set together) of the meaning
of the word, than strict translations. The Septuagint and Syriack read it [
Henoch pleased God.] The Chaldee has [ Henoch walked in the fear of God:] And
the Arabic [ he walked in obedience to God.] And indeed to walk in the fear
and obedience of God, and thereby to please him] is the principal thing in our
[ Walking with God.] The same Character is given of Noah in Genesis 6. 19. and the
extraordinary Reward annexed; He and his family were saved in the Deluge. And
the holy life which God commanded Abraham is called [a walking before God] Genesis
17. 1. [ Walk before me, and be thou perfect.] And in the New Testament the
Christian Conversation is ordinarily called by the name of [ Walking.] Sometime
a Walking in Christ: as Col. 2. 6. Sometime a Walking in the spirit, in which
we live, Gal. 5. 25. And a Walking after the spirit, Romans 8. 1. Sometime a
Walking in the Light, as God is in the Light, 1 John 1. 7. Those that abide in
Christ must so walk even as he has walked,] 1 John 2. 6. These phrases set
together tell us, what it is to Walk with God. But I think it not unprofitable
somewhat more particularly to show you what this Walking with God does contain.

As Atheism is the sum of wickedness, so all true Religiousness is called by
the name of Godliness or Holiness, which is nothing else but our Devotedness to
God, and Living to Him, and our Relation to Him as thus Devoted in Heart and
Life. Practical Atheism is a Living as without God in the world,] Ephesians. 2. 12.
Godliness is contrary to practical Atheism, and is a Living as with and to God
in the world and in the Church, and is here called a Walking with God. And it
contains in it these particulars.

1. To walk with God includes the Practical acknowledge meant (that is made by
the Will as well as the Understanding) of the grand Attributes of God, and his
Relations to Man; that he is Infinite in his Being, that is, Immense and
Eternal; as also in his Power, Wisdom and Goodness: that he is the Creator,
Redeemer and Sanctifier: that he is our Absolute Lord (or Owner) our most
Righteous Governor, and most bountiful Benefactor (or Father:) that Of Him,
and Through Him, and To Him are all things: that in him we Live, and move, and
have our being: that he is the fountain, or first cause from which all (proper)
Being, Truth and Goodness in the Creature is but a derived stream. To have the
soul unfeignedly resign it self to Him, as his Own; and subject it self to Him
as our Governor, walking in the awe of his sovereign Power; sensible of the
strong obligation of his Laws, which Reason, Justice and Necessity do all
command us to obey. To live as in full dependence on him; To have the first and
greatest respect unto him: A more observant respect to Him than to our Rulers:
A more obedient respect to Him than to our Masters: A more dependent tender and
honorable respect to Him than to Parents, or our nearest friends. Thus he that
comes to God (as God, and so as to be accepted of him) must believe that He
is, (his Essential Attributes) and (what he is in his Relations to man;
especially that as our Governor and Benefactor) he is the Rewarder of them
that diligent seek him, Heb. 11. 6. The impress of a Deity in his Essential and
Relative Attributes must be upon the Heart of him that walks with God: Yea, the
Being of God must be much more remarkable to him, than the Being of all
Creatures; and his presence more regarded, than the presence of the Creature;
and all things must be to us in comparison of God, as a Candle is in comparison
of the Sun: His Greatness and transcendent Excellencies must so overpower them
all, as to make them less observed and regarded, by his taking up our chief
observation and regard.

2. Our walking with God includes our Reconciliation to him, and that we are
not in our natural state of Enmity, but made his Children and friends in
Christ. Can two walk the other unless they be agreed? Amos 3. 3. Enmity is against
Unity; Disaffection causes Aversion, and flying from each other: Yea the fears
of a guilty Child may make him fly from his Fathers presence, till there be a
particular Reconciliation besides the general state of Reconciliation. A
provoking faulty Child does Dwell with God his Father, though under the
continual terror of his frowns: But to walk with him (in the full sense) is
more than to be related to him, and to dwell with him: In a large sense indeed
all Gods Children may be said to walk with him, as it signifies only a
conversation ordered in godliness, sincerity and simplicity. But in this
sublimer sense, as it signifies a lively exercise of Faith and Love, and
heavenly-mindedness, and a course of complacential contemplation, and holy
converse with God, so it is proper only to some of the ^ounder and more
vigilant industrious believers. And hereto it is necessary, not only that we be
Justified and Reconciled to God from our state of Enmity, but also that we be
pardoned justified and reconciled from our particular wounding falls, which are
more than the ordinary infirmities of Believers. And also it is necessary that
we have grateful friendly thoughts of God: that we have so much sense of his
excellency, goodness and kindness to our selves, as may give us a complacency
in conversing with him, and may make the thoughts and mention of him to be
desirable and pleasing to us. Walking with God does import, though not the full
assurance of his special Love and Grace to us, yet such an apprehension of his
Love and Goodness, as may draw the heart to think of him with desire, if not
with delight. A lothness to draw near him, to think of him, or to mention him,
a weariness of his special service, are contrary to this special walking with
God.

3. Our Walking with God, does include our esteeming and intending Him as the
Ultimate End and felicity of our souls. He is not to be sought, or loved, or
conversed with, as a means to any greater good (for there is no greater) nor as
inferior, or merely equal unto any: His Goodness must be the most powerful
attractive of our Love: His favor must be valued as our happiness; and the
Pleasing of him must be our most industrious employment. To walk with him, is
to live in the warming reviving sunshine of his Goodness, and to feel a
delighting satisfying virtue in his Love and gracious presence. To live as
those that are not their own, and that have their lives, and faculties, and
provisions, and helps for their Masters service: As a Horse or Dog is of so
much worth, as he is of Use to him that owneth him; and that is the best that
is the most serviceable to his Master: Yet with this very great difference,
that man being a more noble and capacious creature, is admitted not only into a
state of Service, but of Sonship, and Friendship, and Communion with God; and
is allowed and appointed to share more in the pleasure and fruits of his
services, and to put in his own felicity and delight into his End; not only
because Self-love is natural and necessary to the Creature, but also because he
is under the Promise of a Reward; and (more than either) because he is a Lover,
and not only a Servant, and his work is principally a work of Love, and
therefore his End is finis amantis, the end of a Lover, which ^a Mutual
Complacency in the exercises of Love.

He th^^ seeks not first the Kingdom and Righteousness of God, and (...)h
not other things to Him, but seeks first the C^^^^^r^, and God only for it,
does but deny God in his h^a^^, and basely subject him to the works of his own
hands, and does not walk with God, but vilify and reject him. If you Live not
to God, even to obey, and please, and honor him, you do not walk with him; but
walk contrary to him (by living to his Enemies, the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil) and therefore God will walk contrary to you, Levit. 26. 21, 23, 24, 27,
28. You were both Created and Redeemed, though for your own felicity, yet
principally for the Glory and Pleasure of your Creator and Redeemer; and for no
felicity of your own, but what consists in Pleasing him, Glorifying him, and
Enjoying him: Whether therefore we eat or drink, or whatever we do, it should
all be done to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. He that regards a day, or
regards it not; he that eats, or that eats not, must do it to the Lord:
(And though a Good Intention will not sanctify a forbidden action, yet sins of
Ignorance and mere Frailty are forborne and pardoned of God, when it is his
Glory and Service that is sincerely intended, though there be a mistake in the
choice of means.) None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself:
For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we dye, we dye unto the
Lord: Whether we live therefore or dye, we are the Lords: For to this end
Christ ^^th dyed, rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and
living] Romans 14. 6, 7, 8, 9. Our walking with God, is a serious Laboring, that
whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him, 2 Cor. 5. 9* To this the
Love of our Redeemer must constrain us: For he dyed for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for
them, and rose again.] Verse. 14, 15. Religion therefore is called the seeking
of God, because the soul does press after him, and labor tu enjoy him, as the
Runner seeks to reach the prize; or as a Suitor seeks the Love and fruition
of the person beloved. And all the particular acts of Religion are often
denominated from this intention of the End, and following after it, and are all
called a seeking the Lord. Conversion is called a seeking the Lord, Isa. 55. 6.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found:] Hos. 3. 5. The Children of Israel
shall return and seek the Lord their God] Hos. 7. 10. They do not return to the
Lord their God, nor seek him:] Men that are called to Conversion, are called to
seek God, Hos. 10. 12. Break up your fallow ground, for it is time to seek the
Lord till he come and rain Righteousness upon you.] The converted Children of
Israel and Judah shall go weeping together to seek the Lord their God, Jer. 50.
4. The wicked are described to be men that do not seek the Lord, Isa. 9. 13.
and 31. 1. The holy Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13. was to seek the Lord: If
therefore you would Walk with God, let him be the mark, the prize, the
treasure, the happiness, the Heaven it self which you aim at, and sincerely
seek, 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. Now set your heart and your soul to seek the Lord your
God:] Psalm. 105. 3, 4 [ Glory ye in his Holy Name: Let the heart of them
rejoice that seek the Lord: Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face for
evermore.] As the life of a Covetous man is a seeking of Riches, and the life
of an ambitious man is a seeking of worldly honor and applause, so the life of
a man that lives to God, is a seeking Him; to please him, honor him, and
enjoy him, And so much of this as he attaineth, so much dotb he attain of
satisfaction and content. If you live to God, and seek him as your End and All,
the want of any thing will be tolerable to you, which is but consistent with
the fruition of his Love. If he be pleased, man's displeasure may be borne: The
loss of all things if Christ be won, will not undo us. Man's condemnation of us
signifies but little, if God the absolute Judge do justify us. He walks not
with God, that Lives not to him as his only Happiness and End.

4. Moreover our Walking with God includes our subjection to his Authority,
and our taking His Wisdom and Will to be our Guide, and his Laws in Nature and
Scripture for our Rule: you must not walk with him as his Equals, but as his
Subjects: nor give him the honor of an ordinary superior, but of the universal
King: In our doubts he must resolve us; and in our straits we must ask counsel
of the Lord: [ Lord, what would thou have me to do] is one of the first words
of a penitent soul, Act. 9. 6. When sensual worldlings do first ask the flesh,
or those that can do it hurt or good, what they would have them be or do. None
of Christ's true Subjects, do call any man Father or Master on earth, but in
subordination to their highest Lord, Matthew. 23. The Authority of God does aw
them and govern them more than the fear of the greatest upon earth. Indeed they
know no power but Gods, and that which he commits unto man. And therefore
they can obey no man against God, what ever it cost them: but under God they
are most readily and faithfully subject to their Governors, not merely as to
men that have power to hurt them if they disobey; but as to the officers of the
Lord, whose Authority they discern and reverence in them: But when they have to
do with the enemies of Christ, who usurp a power which he never gave them,
against his Kingdom and the souls of men, they think it easy to resolve the
question, whether it be better to obey God or men? As the commands of a
rebellious Constable or other fellow-subject are of no authority against the
Kings Commands; so the commands of all the men on earth, are of so small
authority with them against the Laws of God, that they fully approve of the
ready and resolute answer of those Witnesses, Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. [ We are not
careful to answer thee in this matter: If it be so, our God whom we serve is
able to deliver us, etc. But if not, be it known unto thee O King that we will
not serve thy gods nor worship the golden image which thou have set up.]
Worldlings are ruled by their fleshly interest, and wisdom, and self-will, and
by the will of man so far as it does comporte with these: By these you may
handle them and lead them up and down the world: By these does Satan hold them
in captivity. But believers feel themselves in subjection to a higher Lord and
better Law, which they faithfully though imperfectly observe: Therefore our
walking with God is called A walking in his Law, Exodus 16. 4. A walking in his
statutes, and keeping and doing his commands, Lev. 26. 3. A walking in his
paths, Mic. 4. 2. It is our following the Lamb, which way soever he goes: To
be given up to our own hearts lusts, and to walk in our counsels, is contrary
to this holy walk with God, Psalm. 81. 12. and is the course of those that are
departed from him: And they that are far from him shall perish: he destroys
those that go a whoring from him: But it is good for us to draw near to God,
Psalm. 73. 27, 28.

5. Our walking with God does imply that as we are ruled by his Will, so we
fear no punishment like his threatened displeasure: and that the threats of
death from mortal men, will not prevail with us so much as his threats of Hell,
Luke 12. 4. If God say, I will condemn thee to everlasting punishment if thou will not keep my Laws] And if men say, We will condemn thee to imprisonment or
death if thou keep them] the believer more fears God than man: The Law of the
King does condemn Daniel to the Lions den, if he forbear not to pray for a
certain time. But he more fears God that will deny those that deny him, and
forsake those that forsake him: Therefore the forementioned witnesses ventured
on the fiery furnace, because God threatened a more dreadful fire. Therefore a
true believer dare not live, when an unbeliever dare not die: He dare not save
his life from God lest he lose it; but loses it that he may save it. But
unbelievers that walk not with God, but after the flesh, do most fear them that
they observe most powerful in the world, and will more be moved with the
penalty of some worldly loss or suffering, then with Gods most dreadful threats
of Hell: For that which they see not, is to them as nothing, while they want
that faith by which it is foreknown, and must be escaped.

6. Moreover he that walks with God, does from God expect his full reward. He
cease not his holy course, though no man observe him, or none commend him or
approve him; though all about him hate him and condemn him; though he be so far
from gaining by it with men, that it cost him all that he has or hoped for in
the world: For he knows that Godliness is of it self great gain, and that it
has the promise of this life and that to come, and none can make Gods promise
void: He knows that his Father which sees in secret will reward him openly,
Matthew. 6. and that he shall have a treasure in heaven that parts with all on
earth for Christ, Luke 18. 22. And he has such respect to this promised
recompense of reward, that for it he can suffer with the people of God, and
account the very reproach of Christ a greater treasure then Court or Country
can afford him in a way of sin, Heb. 11. 26. He accounts them blessed that
are persecuted for righteousness sake, because the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs.
He judges it a cause of exceeding joy, to be reviled and persecuted, and to
have all manner of evil falsely spoken of us for the sake of Christ, because our
reward in Heaven is great, Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 12. For he verily believes that
as sure as these transitory pleasures will have an end, and everlastingly
forsake those miserable souls that were deluded by them, so certainly is there
a life of endless joys, to be possessed in Heaven with God and all the Holy
ones; and this he will trust to as that which will fully repair his losses and
repay his cost, and not deceive him: Let others trust to what they will, it is
this that he is resolved to trust to, and venture all to make it sure (when he
is sure that All is Nothing which he ventureth, and that by the adventure he
can never be a loser, nor never save by choosing that which it self must
perish.) Thus he that truly walks with God expects his Reward from God, and
with God, and thence is encouraged in all his duty, and thence is emboldned in
all his conflicts, and thence is upheld and comforted in his sufferings: When
Man is the Rewarder (as well as the chief Ruler) of the Hypocrite, and earthly
things are the poise and motives to his earthly mind.

7. Our walking with God imports that as we expect our Reward from him, so
also that we take his Promise for our security for that Reward. Believing his
Word and trusting his fidelity to the quieting and emboldening of the soul, is
part of our holy walking with him. A promise of God is greater satisfaction and
encouragement to a true believer, than all the visible things on earth: A
promise of God can do more and prevail further with an upright soul, than all
the sensible objects in the world. He will do more and go further upon such a
promise, then he will for all that man can give him. Peruse the life of Christ's
Apostles and see what a promise of Christ can do; How it made them forsake all
earthly pleasures, possessions and hopes, and part with friends, and houses,
and Country, and travail up and down the world, in dangers and sufferings and
unwearied labors, despised and abused by great and small: and all this to
preach the Gospel of the Kingdom which they had never seen, and to attain that
Everlasting Happiness, and help others to attain it, for which they had nothing
but the promise of their Lord. See what a promise well believed will make a
Christian do and suffer. Believers did those noble acts, and the Martyrs under
went those torments, which are mentioned Heb. 11. because they judged him
faithful that had promised, Heb. 11. 11. They considered not difficulties and
defect of means and improbabilities as to second causes, nor staggered at the
promise of God through unbelief; but being strong in faith gave glory to God,
being fully persuaded that what he had promised he was also able to perform.]
As it is said of Abraham, Romans 4. 19, 20, 21.

8. To walk with God, is to live as in his presence, and that with desire and
delight. When we believe and apprehend that wherever we are, we are before the
Lord, who sees our hearts and all our ways; who knows every thought we
think, and every word we speak, and every secret thing which we do: As verily
to believe that God is here present and observes all, as we do that we our
selves are here: To compose our minds, our thoughts, our affections to that
Holy reverence and seriousness as beseems man before his Maker: To order our
words with that care and gravity as beseems those that speak in the hearing of
the Lord. That no man's presence do seem more considerable to us then his
presence: As we are not moved at the presence of a fly, or worm, or dog, when
persons of honor and reverence are present, so should we not comparatively be
moved at the presence of man, how great, or rich, or terrible soever, when we
know that God himself is present, to whom the greatest of the sons of men, is
more inconsiderable then a fly or worm is unto them. As the presence of the
King makes ordinary standers by to be unobserved, and the discourses of the
learned make us disregard the bablings of children, so the presence of God
should make the greatest to be scarce observed or regarded in comparison of
him: God who is still with us should so much take up our regard, that all
others in his presence should be but as a candle in the presence of the sun.
Therefore it is that a believer composeth himself to that behavior which he
knows God does most expect, and beseems those that stand before him: when
others accommodate themselves to the persons that are present, observing them,
pleasing them, and showing them respect, while they take no notice of God at
all, as if they believed not that he is there. Hence it is that the men of God
were wont to speak (though reverently yet) familiarly of God, as children of
their Father with whom they dwell, as being indeed fellow-citizens with the
Saints, who are his household: Abraham calls him Genesis 24. 40. [ The Lord
before whom I walk.] And Jacob, Genesis 48. 15. God before whom my Fathers Abraham
and Isaac walked.] And David resolves, Psalm. 116. 9. [ I will walk before the
Lord in the land of the living.] Yea God himself is pleased to use the terms of
gracious condescending familiarity with them. Christ dwells in them by faith,
Ephesians. 3. 17. His spirit dwells in them as his house and temple, Romans 8. 9. Yea
the Father himself is said to dwell in them, and they in him, 1 John 3. 24. He
that keeps his Commandments dwells in Him, and He in him] and 3. 12. [ If
we love one another, God dwells in us] 13. [ Hereby we know that we dwell in
him, and He in us, because he has given us of His spirit] 15. Whoever shall
confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him and he in God] 16. [
God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him.]
Yea God is said to walk in them, as they are said to walk with Him: 2 Cor. 6.
16. [ For ye are the Temple of the living God; as God has said I will dwell in
them, and walk in them, and I will be their God and they shall be my people.]

Our walking with God then is not only a sense of that common presence which he
must needs afford to all; but it is also a believing apprehension of his
Gracious presence, as our God and reconciled Father, with whom we dwell, being
brought near unto Him by Christ; and who dwells in us by his spirit.

9. To walk with God (as here we are in flesh) includes not only our believing
his presence, but also that we see him (as the chief cause in the effects) in
his creatures and his daily providence, that we look not on creatures as
independent or separated from God; but see them as the Glass, and God as the
represented face; and see them as the letters and words, and God as the sense
of all the creatures that are the first Book which he appointed man to read. We
must behold his glory declared by the Heavens, Psalm. 19. 1. and see Him shining
in the Sun; and see his Power in the Fabric of the world, and his wisdom in
the admirable order of the whole: we must taste the sweetness of his Love in the
sweetness of our food, and in the comforts of our friends, and all our
accommodations we must see, and Love his Image in his Holy ones; and we must
hear his Voice in the Ministry of his Messengers. Thus every creature must
become a Preacher to us, and we must see the Name of God upon it: and thus all
things will be sanctified to us, while Holiness to the Lord is written upon
all. Though we must not therefore make Idols of the creatures, because God
appears to us in them, yet must we hear the message which they bring us, and
reverence in them the Name of the Creator which they ^ear. By this way of
conversing with them, they will not ensnare us, or deceive, or poison us, as
they do the carnal unbelieving world: but as the Fish brought money to Peter to
pay his tribute, so every creature would bring us a greater, even a spiritual
gain. When we behold it, we should say with pleasant admiration [ This is the
work of God, and it is wonderful in our eyes.] This is the true Divine
Philosophy, which seeks, and finds, and contemplateth, and admireth the
Great Creator in his works: When that which sticks in the creature it self
(whatever discovery it seem to make) is but a childish unprofitable trifling:
like learning to shape all the letters aright, without learning to know their
signification and sense. It is God appearing in the creatures, that is the
life, and beauty, and use, and excellency of all the creatures; wthout him they
are but carcasses, deformed, useless, vain, insignificant and very nothings.

10. Our walking with God, does contain our willing and sincere attendance on
him in the use of those holy duties in which he has appointed us to expect his
grace. He is everywhere in his essential presence, but he is not everywhere
alike to be found in the communications of his grace. The assemblies of his
Saints that worship him in holy communion, are places where he is likelyer to
be found, then in an Alehouse or a Playhouse. You are likelier to have holy
converse with him among the holy, that will speak of holy things to your
edification, then among the senseless ignorant sensualists, and the scornful
enemies of Holiness, that are the servants of the Devil, whom he uses in his
daily work for the deceiving and perdition of the world. Therefore the
conversation of the wicked does grieve, and vex a righteous soul (as its said
the Sodomites did by Lot, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.) because all their conversation is
ungodly, far from God, not savouring of any true knowledge of him, or love to
him, but is against him by enmity and provocation. If God himself do dwell and
walk in all his holy ones, then they that dwell and walk with them, have the
best opportunity to dwell and walk with God. To converse with those in whom God
dwells, is to converse with him in his Image, and to attend him at his
dwelling: And wilfully to run among the wicked, is to run far away from God.
In his Temple does every man speak of his Glory, Psalm. 29. 9. when among his
brutish enemies every man speaks to the dishonor of him in his word and
ways. He is otherwise present with those that are congregated in his Name and
for his worship, then he is with those that are assembled for wickedness or
vanity, or live as brutes without God in the world. And we must draw as near
him as we can, if we would be such as walk with God.

We must not be strange to him in our Thoughts, but make him the object of our
most serious meditations: Its said of the wicked that they are far from God;
and that God is not in all their thoughts, Ps. 73. 27. Ps. 10. 4. The thoughts
are the minds employment. It dwells on that which it frequently thinks of. It
is a walk of the Mind, and not of the Body which we are treating of. To mind
the world, and fleshly things, is contrary to this walk with God: we are far
from him, when our thoughts are (ordinarily) far from him. I know that it is
lawful and meet to think of the business of our callings, so far as is
necessary to the prudent successful management of them: and that it is not
requisite that our thoughts be always actually upon God: but he that does
manage his calling in Holiness, does all in obedience to Gods commands, and
sees that his work be the work of God, and he intends all to the glory of
God, or the pleasing of his blessed will: and he often renews these actual
intentions; and often interposeth thoughts of the presence, or power, or love, or
interest of him whom he is serving: He often lifts up his soul in some holy
desire or ejaculatory request to God: He often takes occasion from what he
sees, or hears, or is doing, for some more spiritual meditation or
discourse: so that still it is God that his mind is principally employed on or
for, even in his ordinary work, (while he lives as a Christian.)

And it is not enough to think of God; but we must think of him as God, with
such respect, and reverence, and love, and trust, and submission (in our
measure) as is due from the Creature to his Creator. For as some kind of
speaking of him is but a taking his Name in vain: so some kind of thinking of
him is but a dishonouring of him, by contemptuous or false unworthy thoughts.
Most of our walking with God consists in such affectionate apprehensions of
him as are suitable to his blessed Attributes and Relations. All the day long
our thoughts should be working either on God, or for God: either upon some work
of obedience which he has imposed on us, and in which we desire to please and
honor him, or else directly upon himself. Our hearts must be taken up in
contemplating and admiring him, in magnifying his Name, his Word and Works; and
in pleasant contentful thoughts of his benignity, and of his Glory, and the
Glory which he conferreth on his Saints. He that is unskilful or unable to
manage his own thoughts with some activity, seriousness and order, will be a
stranger to much of the holy converse which believers have with God. They that
have given up the Government of their thoughts, and turned them loose to go
which way fantasy pleases, and present sensitive objects do invite them, and
to run up and down the world as masterless unruly vagrants, can hardly expect
to keep them in any constant attendance upon God, or readiness for any sacred
work. And the sudden thoughts which they have of God, will be rude and stupid,
savouring more of profane contempt, than of holiness, when they should be
reverent, serious, affectionate and practical, and such as conduce to a holy
composure of their hearts and lives.

And as we must walk with God, 1. In our communion with his servants, 2. And in
our affectionate Meditations; so also 3 In all the ordinances which he has
appointed for our Edification and his Worship.

1. The Reading of the Word of God, and the explication and application of it
in good Books, is a means to possess the mind with sound, and orderly, and
working apprehensions of God, and of his holy Truths: So that in such Reading
our understandings are often illustrated with a heavenly Light, and our hearts
are touched with a special delightful relish of that truth, and they are
secretly attracted and engaged unto God, and all the powers of our souls are
excited and animated to a holy obedient life.

2. The same Word preached with a lively voice, with clearness and affection,
has a greater advantage for the same illumination and excitation of the soul.
When a Minister of Christ that is truly a Divine, being filled with the
Knowledge and Love of God, shall copiously and affectionately open to his
hearers the excellencies which he has seen, and the happiness which he has
foreseen and tasted of himself, it frequently (through the cooperation of the
Spirit of Christ) does wrap up the hearers hearts to God, and bring them into a
more lively knowledge of him, actuating their graces, and enflaming their
hearts with a heavenly Love, and such desires as God has promised to satisfy.
Christ does not only send his Ministers furnished with Authority from him, but
also furnished with his Spirit, to speak of spiritual things in a spiritual
manner; so that in both respects he might say [ He that hears you hears
me:] and also by the same Spirit does open and excite the hearts of the
hearers: so that it is God himself that a serious Christian is principally
employed with, in the hearing of his heavenly transforming Word: And therefore
he is affected with reverence and holy fear, with some taste of heavenly
delight, with obediential subjection and resignation of himself to God. The
Word of God is powerful, not only in pulling down all high exalting thoughts,
that rise up against God, but also in lifting up depressed souls, that are
unable to rise unto heavenly knowledge, or communion with God. If some
Christians could but always find as much of God upon their hearts at other
times, as they find sometimes under a spiritual powerful Ministry, they would
not so complain that they seem forsaken, and strangers to all communion with
God, as many of them do. While God (by his Messengers and Spirit) is speaking,
and man is hearing him; while God is treating with man about his reconciliation
and everlasting happiness, and man is seriously attending to the treaty and
motions of his Lord, surely this is a very considerable part of our walking and
converse with God.

3. Also in the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, we are called to a
familiar converse with God: He there appears to us by a wonderful
condescension in the representing, communicating signs of the flesh and blood
of his Son, in which he has most conspicuously revealed his Love and Goodness
to Believers: There Christ himself with his Covenant-gifts are all delivered to
us by these Investing signs of his own institution; even as Knighthood is given
by a sword, and as a House is delivered by a Key, or Land by a Twig and Turf.
Nowhere is God so near to man as in Jesus Christ: and nowhere is Christ so
familiarly represented to us, as in this holy Sacrament. Here we are called to
sit with him at his Table, as his invited welcome guests; to commemorate his
sacrifice, to feed upon his very flesh and blood; that is, with our mouths upon
his Representative flesh and blood, and with our applying Faith upon his real
flesh and blood, by such a feeding as belongs to Faith. The Marriage-Covenant
betwixt God ^ncarnate, and his espoused ones, is there publicly sealed,
celebrated and solemnized. There we are entertained by God as friends, and not
as servants only, and that at the most precious costly feast. If ever a
believer may on earth expect his kindest entertainment, and near access, and a
humble intimacy with his Lord, it is in the participation of this
sacrifice-feast, which is called [ The Communion] because it is appointed as
well for our special Communion with Christ as with one another. It is here that
we have the fullest intimation, expression and communication of the wondrous
Love of God; and therefore it is here that we have the loudest call, and best
assistance to make a large return of Love: And where there is the most of this
Love between God and man, there is most Communion, and most of Heaven, that can
be had on Earth.

But it much concerns the members of Christ, that they deprive not themselves
of this Communion with God in this Holy Sacrament through their miscarriage;
which is too frequently done by one of these extremes. Either by rushing upon
holy things with a presumptuous careless common frame of heart, as if they knew
not that they go to feast with Christ, and discerned not his body: or else by
an excess of fear, drawing back, and questioning the good will of God, and
thinking diminutively of his love and mercy: By this means Satan depriveth many
of the comfortable part of their communion with God, both in this Sacrament,
and in other ways of grace; and makes them avoid him as an enemy, and be loath
to come into his special presence; and even to be afraid to think of him, to
pray to him, or to have any holy converse with him: When the just belief and
observation of his Love would stablish them, and revive their souls with joy,
and give them experience of the sweet delights which are opened to them in the
Gospel, and which believers find in the Love of God, and the foretast of the
everlasting pleasures.

4. In holy, faithful, servent Prayer a Christian has very much of his
converse with God. For Prayer is our approach to God, and calling to mind his
presence and his attributes, and exercising all his graces in a holy motion
toward him, and an exciting all the powers of our souls to seek him, attend
him, and reverently to worship him: It is our treating with him about the most
important businesses in all the world: a be^ging of the greatest mercies, and a
deprecating his most grievous judgments; and all this with the nearest
familiarity that man in flesh can have with God. In prayer the Spirit of God is
working up our hearts unto him, with desires expressed in sighs and groans: It is
a work of God as well as of man: He blows the fire, though it be our hearts
that burn and boil. In Prayer we lay hold on Jesus Christ, and plead his merits
and intercession with the Father: He takes us as it wereby the hand, and
leads us unto God, and hides our sins, and procures our acceptance, and
presents us amiable to his Father, having justified and sanctified us, and
cleansed us from those pollutions, which rendered us loathsome and abominable.
To speak to God in serious prayer, is a work so high, and of so great moment,
that it calls off our minds from all things else, and gives no creature room
or leave to look into the soul, or once to be observed: The mind is so taken up
with God, and employed with him, that creatures are forgotten, and we take no
notice of them (unless when through the diversions of the flesh, our prayers
are interrupted and corrupted, and so far degenerate, and are no prayer; so far
I say as we thus turn away from God.) So that the soul that is most and best at
Prayer, is most and best at walking with God, and has most communion with him
in the Spirit: And to withdraw from Prayer, is to withdraw from God: And to be
unwilling to pray, is to be unwilling to draw near to God. Meditation or
Contemplation is a duty in which God is much enjoyed: But Prayer has
Meditation in it, and much more. All that is upon the mind in Meditation, is
upon the mind in Prayer, and that with great advantage, as being presented
before God, and pleaded with him, and so animated by the apprehensions of his
observing presence, and actuated by the desires and pleadings of the soul. When
we are commanded to Pray, it includes a command to Repent and Believe, and
Fear the Lord, and Desire his Grace: For Faith and Repentance, and Fear and
Desire, are altogether in action in a serious prayer; And, as it were,
naturally each one takes his place, and there is a holy order in the acting of
these graces in a Christians prayers, and a harmony* which he does seldom
himself observe. He that in Meditation knows not how to be regular and
methodical, when he is studiously contriving and endeavoring it, yet in Prayer
before he is aware, has Repentance, and Faith, and Fear, and Desire, and every
grace fall in its proper place and order, and contribute its part to the
performance of the work. The new nature of a Christian is more immediately and
vigorously operative in Prayer, than in many other duties: And therefore every
Infant in the family of God can pray (with groaning desires, and ordered
graces, if not with well-ordered words:) When Paul began to live to Christ, he
began (aright) to pray: Behold he prays, says God to Ananias, Act. 9. 11.
And because they are Sons, God sends the Spirit of his Son into the hearts of
his Elect, even the Spirit of Adoption, by which they cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.
6. as children naturally cry to their Parents for relief. And Nature is more
regular in its works than Art or humane contrivance is. Necessity teaches many
a beggar to pray better for relief to men, than many learned men (that feel not
their necessities)* can pray to God. The Spirit of God is a better Methodist
than we are: And though I know that we are bound to use our utmost care and
skill for the orderly actuating of each holy affection in our Prayers, and not
pretend the sufficiency of the Spirit for the patronage of our negligence or
sloth (for the Spirit makes use of our understandings for the actuating of our
wills and affections;) yet withal it cannot be denied, but that it was upon a
special reason that the Spirit that is promised to Believers is called a Spirit
of Grace and Supplication, Zech. 12. 10. And that it is given us to help our
infirmities, even the infirmities of our understanding, when we know not what
to pray for as we ought, Romans 8. 26. And that the Spirit it self is said to
make intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. It is not the
Spirit without that is here meant: such intercession is nowhere ascribed to
that. How then is the Prayer of the Spirit within us distinguished from our
Prayer? Not as different effects of different causes: as different prayers by
these different parties: But as the same prayer proceeding from different
causes, having a special force (for quality and degree) as from one cause (the
Spirit) which it has not from the other cause (from our selves) except as
received from the Spirit. The Spirit is as a New Nature, or fixed inclination
in the Saints: For their very self-love and will to good is sanctified in them,
which works so readily (though voluntarily) as that it is in a sort by the way
of Nature, though not excluding Reason and Will; and not as the motion of the
brutish appetite. And that God is their felicity, and the only help and comfort
of their souls, and so the principal Good to be desired by them, is become to
them a truth so certain, and beyond all doubt, that their understandings are
convinced that Velle Bonum, and Velle Deum, to Love Good, and to Love God, are
words that have almost the same signification; and therefore here is no room
for deliberation and choice, where there is omnimoda ratio boni, nothing but
unquestionable good. A Christian (so far as he is such) cannot choose but desire
the favor and fruition of God in immortality, even as he cannot choose (because
he is a man) but desire his own felicity in general: And as he cannot (as a
man) but be unwilling of destruction, and cannot but fear apparent misery, and
that which brings it; so as a Christian he cannot choose but be unwilling of
damnation, and of the wrath of God, and of sin as sin, and fear the apparent
dangers of his soul, so that his New Nature will presently cast his Fear, and
Repentance, and Desires into their proper course and order, and set them on
work on their several objects (about the main unquestionable things, however
they may err, or need more deliberation about things doubtful:) The New
Creature is not as a lifeless Engine (as a Clock, or Watch, or Ship) where
every part must be set in order by the art and hand of man, and so kept and
used: But it is liker to the frame of our own nature, even like man who is a
living Engine, when every part is set in its place and order by the Creator,
and has in it self a living and harmonical principle, which disposes it to
action, and to regular action, and is so to be kept in order and daily exercise
by our selves, as yet to be principally ordered and actuated, by the Spirit
which is the principal cause.

By all which you may understand how the Holy Ghost is in us a spirit of
Supplication, and helps of our infirmities, and teaches us to pray, and
intercedeth in us; and also that Prayer is to the New Man, so natural a motion
of the soul toward God, that much of our walking with God is exercised in this
holy duty: And that it is to the New Life, as breathing to our Natural Life;
and therefore no wonder that we are commanded to pray continually, 1 These 5.
17. as we must breath continually, or as nature which needs a daily supply of
food for nourishment, has a daily appetite to the food which it needs, so
has the Spiritual Nature to its necessary food, and nothing but sickness does
take it off.

And thus I have showed you how our walking with God contains a holy use of
his appointed means.

II. To walk with God includes our Dependence on him for our Receivings, and
taking our Mercies as from his hand. To live as upon his Love and Bounty; as
Children with their Father, that can look for nothing but from him. As the eye
of a Servant, yea of a craving Dog, is upon his Masters face and hand, so must
our eye be on the Lord, for the gracious supply of all our wants. If men give
us any thing, we take them but as the Messengers of God, by whom he sends it
us: We will not be unthankful unto men; but we thank them but for bringing us
our Fathers gifts. Indeed man is so much more than a mere Messenger, as that
his own Charity also is exercised in the gift. A mere Messenger is to do no
more but obedientlly to deliver what is sent us, and he need not exercise any
Charity of his own; and we owe him thanks only for his fidelity and labor, but
only to his Master for the gift: But God will so far honor man, as that he
shall be called also to use his Charity, and distribute his Masters gifts with
some self-denial; and we owe him thanks, as under God; he partaketh in the
Charity of the Gift; and as one child owes thanks to another, who both in
obedience to the Father, and Love to his Brother, does give some part of that
which his Father had given him before. But still it is from our Fathers Bounty,
as the principal cause that all proceeds. Thus Jacob speaks of God, Genesis 48.
15. [ God, before whom my Fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed
me all my life long unto this day, the Angel which redeemed me from all evil,
bless the Lads, etc.] When he had mentioned his Father Abraham and Isaac's
walking with God, he describes his own by his dependence upon God, and
receiving from him, acknowledging him the God that had fed him, and delivered
him all his life. Carnal men that live by sense, do depend upon inferior
sensible causes; and though they are taught to pray to God, and thank him with
their tongues, it is indeed their own contrivances and industry, or their
visible benefactors, which their hearts depend upon and thank. It were a shame
to them to be so plain as Pharaoh, and to say, Who is the Lord? or to speak as
openly as Nebuchadnezzar, and say, Is not this great Babylon that I have built,
by the might of my power* etc. D^n. 4 30. Yet the same Atheism and
Self-idolizing is in their hearts, though it be more modestly and cunningly
expressed. Hence it is that they that walk with God, have all their Receivings
sanctified to them, and have in all a Divine and spiritual sweetness, which
those that take them but as from Creatures, do never feel or understand.

12. Lastly it is contained in our Walking with God, that the greatest business
of our lives be with Him, and for him. It is not a walk for complement or
recreation only that is here meant; but it is a life of nearness, converse and
employment, as a servant or child that dwells with his Master or Father in
the house. God should be always so regarded, that Man should stand by as
Nothing, and be scarce observed in comparison of Him. We should begin the day
with God, and entertain Him in the first and sweetest of our thoughts: we
should walk abroad and do our work as in his sight: we must resolve to do no
work but His, no not in our trades and ordinary callings: we must be able to
say, It is the work which my Master set me to do, and I do it to obey and
please his Will. At night we must take an account of our selves, and spread
open that account before him, desiring his acceptance of what was well, and his
pardon for what we did amiss, that we may thus be ready for our last account.
In a word, though Men be our fellow laborers and companions, yet the principal
business of our Care and Diligence, must be our Masters service in the world.
And therefore we must look about us, and discern the opportunities of serving
him, and of the best improvement of his talents; and must make it our daily*
study and business, to do him the greatest service we are able, whatever it may
cost us through the malice of the enemies, being sure our labor shall not be
in vain, and that we cannot serve him at too dear a rate. It is not as idle
companions, but as servants, as soldiers, as those that put forth all their
strength, to do his work and reach the Crown, that we are called to walk with
God. And all this is done, though not in the same degree by all, yet according
to the measure of their Holiness by every one that lives by faith.

Having told you what it is to Walk with God, as to the Matter of it, I shall
more briefly tell you as to the Manner: The nature of God, of man, and of the
work, will tell it you.

1. That our walk with God must be with the greatest reverence: were we never
so much assured of his special love to us, and never so full of faith and joy,
our reverence must be never the less for this. Though Love cast out that guilty
fear which discourageth the sinner from hoping and seeking for the mercy which
would save him, and which disposes him to hate and fly from God, yet does it
not cast out that Reverence of God, which we owe him as his creatures so
infinitely below him as we are. It cannot be that God should be known and
remembered as God, without some admiring and awful apprehensions of him.
Infiniteness, Omnipotency and inaccessible Majesty and Glory, must needs affect
the soul that knows them, with reverence and selfe-abasement. Though we
receive a Kingdom that cannot be moved, yet if we will serve God acceptably,
we must serve him with reverence and godly fear, as knowing that as he is our
God, so he is also a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29. We must so worship him as
those that remember that we are worms and guilty sinners, and that he is most
High and Holy, and will be sanctified in them that come nigh him, and before
all the people he will be glorified, Lev. 10. 3. Unreverence shows a kind of
Atheistical contempt of God, or else a sleepiness and inconsiderateness of the
soul. The sense of the Goodness and Love of God, must consist with the sense of
his Holiness and Omnipotency. It is presumption, pride or blockish stupidity,
which excludes Reverence; which Faith does cause, and not oppose.

2. Our walking with God must be a work of humble boldness and familiarity. The
Reverence of his Holiness and Greatness, must not overcome or exclude the sense
of his Goodness and compassion, nor the full assurance of faith and hope.
Though by sin we are enemies and strange to God, and stand a far off, yet in
Christ we are reconciled to him and brought near, Ephesians. 2. 13. For he is our
Peace, who has taken down the partition, and abolished the enmity, and
reconciled Jew and Gentile unto God. Ver. 14, 15, 16. And through him we have
all an access to the Father by one spirit: we are now no more strangers and
forraigners, but fellow-Citizens of the Saints and of the household of God: ver.
18, 19. In him we have boldness and access with confidence by the belief of
him, Ephesians. 3. 12. Though of our selves we are unworthy to be called his
children, and may well stand a far off with the Publican, and not dare to lift
up our faces toward heaven, but smite our breasts and say, O Lord be merciful
to me a sinner.] Yet have we boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the blood
of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us, through the
vail, that is to say, his flesh: And having an high Priest over the house of
God, we may draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith.] Heb. 10.
19, 20, 21, 22. Therefore whenever we are afraid at the sight of sin and
Justice, let us remember that we have a great high Priest that is passed into
the heavens, even Jesus the Son of God: and therefore let us come boldly to the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need,] Heb. 4. 14, 15, 16. He that allows us to walk with him, does allow us
such humble familiarity as beseems those that walk together with him.

3. Our walking with God must be a work of some holy pleasure and delight. We
may unwillingly be dragged into the presence of an enemy, and serve as drudges
upon mere necessity or fear. But walking together is the loving and delightful
converse of friends. When we take sweet counsel of the Lord, and set him
always as at our right hand, and are glad to hear from him, and glad to speak
to him, and glad to withdraw our thoughts from all the things and persons in
the world, that we may solace our selves in the contemplations of his
excellency, and the admirations of his Love and Glory, this is indeed to walk
with God. You converse with him as with a stranger, an enemy, or your
destroyer, and not as with God, while you had rather be far from him, and only
tremble in his presence, and are glad when you have done and are got away, but
have no delight or pleasure in him. If we can take delight in our walking with
a friend, a friend that is truly loving and constant, a friend that is learned,
wise and holy! if their wise and heavenly discourse be better to us, then our
recreations, meat, or drink, or clothes! what delight then should we find in
our secret converse with the most high, most wise and gracious God! How glad
should we be to find him willing and ready to entertain us? How glad should we
be that we may employ our thoughts on so high and excellent an object? what
cause have we to say, [ My meditation of him shall be sweet, and I will be glad
in the Lord, Ps. 104. 34. In the multitude of my thoughts within me (my
sorrowful, troublesome, weary thoughts) thy comforts do delight my soul, Ps.
94. 19. Let others take pleasure in childish vanity, or sensuality, but say
thou as David, Ps. 119. 14, 15, 16. [ I have rejoiced in the ways of thy
Commandments, as much as in all riches: I will meditate in thy precepts and
have respect unto thy ways: I will delight my self in thy statutes, and will
not forget thy Word.] Ver. 47. I will delight my self in thy commandments
which I have loved] Let scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge,
(Prove. 1. 22.) but make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for therein
do I delight: Psalm. 119. 35. If thou would experimentally know the safety and
glory of a holy life, delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the
desire of thy heart, Ps. 37. 4. Especially when we draw near him in his solemn
worship, and when we separate our selves on his holy days from all our common
worldly thoughts, to be conversant as in heaven with the blessed God, then may
we with the holy Apostle be in the spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. and if
we turn away our foot from the Sabbath, from doing our pleasure on that holy
day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing our own ways, nor finding our own pleasure, nor
speaking our own words, then shall we delight our selves in the Lord,] Isa. 58.
13, 14. and understand how great a privilege it is, to have the liberty of
those holy days and duties for our sweet and heavenly converse with God.

4. Our walking with God must be a matter of industry and diligence: It is not
an occasional idle converse, but a life of observance, obedience and
employment, that this phrase imports. The sluggish idle wishes of the
hypocrite, whose hands refuse to labor, are not this walking with God: nor the
sacrifice of fools, who are hasty to utter the overflowings of their fantasy
before the Lord, while they keep not their foot, nor hearken to the Law, nor
consider that they do evil] Eccles. 5. 1, 2, 3. He that comes to God (and will
walk with him) must believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them
that diligently seek him: God is with you while you are with him; but if you
forsake him, he will forsake you, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Up and be doing, and the Lord
will be with you, 1 Chronicles. 22. 16. If you would meet with God in the way of
Mercy [take diligent heed to do the Commandment and Law, to love the Lord your
God, and to walk in all his Ways, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him
with all your heart, and with all your soul, Josh. 22. 5.

5. Our walking with God is a matter of some Constancy: It signifies our
course and trade of life, and not some accidental action on the by: A man may
walk with a stranger for a Visit, or in Complement, or upon some unusual
occasion: But this walk with God, is the act of those that dwell with him in
his Family, and do his work. It is not only to step and speak with him, or cry
to him for mercy in some great extremity, or to go to Church for company or
custom, or think or talk of him sometime heartlesly on the by, as a man will
talk of news, or matters that are done in a foreign Land, or of persons that we
think we have little to do with: But it is to be always with him, Luke 15. 31.
To seek first his Kingdom and Righteousness, Matthew. 6. 33. Not to labor
(comparatively) for the food that perishes, but for that which endures to
everlasting life, Joh. 6. 27. To delight in the Law of the Lord, and meditate
in it day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. That his words be in our hearts, and that we
teach them diligently to our Children, and talk of them sitting in the house,
and walking by the way, lying down, and rising up, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8. That
we pray continually, 1 These. 5. 17. And in all things give thanks. But will the
hypocrite delight himself in the Almighty, or will he always call upon God?
Job 27. 10. His goodness is as the morning Cloud, and as the early Dew it goes
away, Hos. 6. 4. So much of the description of this walking with God.

CHAP. II.
Use. WE are next to consider how far this doctrine does concern our selves,
and what use we have to make of it upon our hearts and lives.

And first it acquainteth us with the abundance of Atheism that is in the
world, even among those that profess the knowledge of God. It is Atheism not
only to say, There is no God: but to say so in the heart. Psalm. 14. 1. While
the heart is no more affected toward him, observant of him, or consident in
him, or submissive to him, than if indeed there were no God: When there is
nothing of God upon the Heart, no Love, no Fear, no Trust, no Subjection, then
is Heart-Atheism. When men that have some kind of knowledge of God, yet
glorify him not as God, nor are thankful to him, but become vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish hearts are darkened; these men are
Heart-Atheists, and professing themselves wise, they become fools, and are
given up to vile affections: And as they do not like to retain God in their
knowledge (however they may discourse of him, so) God often gives them over to a
reprobate mind, to do those things that are not convenient, being filled with
all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness,
envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, etc. Romans 1. 21, 22, 26, 28, 29, 30.
Swarms of such Atheists go up and down under the self-deceiving name of
Christians: being indeed unbelieving and defiled, so void of Purity, that they
deride it, and nothing is Pure to them; but even their mind and conscience is
defiled: They profess that they know God, but they deny him in their works,
being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 15,
16. What is he but an Atheist, when God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10.
4. unless it be in their impious or blaspheming thoughts, or in their slight
contemptuous thoughts! To take God for God indeed, and for our God, essentially
includes the taking him to be the most powerful, wist and good, the most just
and holy, the Creator, Preserver and Governor of the world, whom we and all
men are obliged absolutely to obey and fear, to love and desire, whose Will is
our Beginning, Rule and End: He that takes not God for such as here described,
takes him not for God, and therefore is indeed an Atheist: What name soever he
assumeth to himself, this is the name that God will call him by; even a fool
that has said in his heart there is no God: while they are corrupt and do
abominably, they understand not, and seek not after God; they are all gone
aside, and are altogether become filthy, there is none of them that does good;
they are workers of iniquity that have no knowledge, and eat up the people of
God as bread, and call not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. [ Ungodliness]
is but the English for [ Atheism.] The Atheist or Ungodly in Opinion. is he
that thinks that there is no God, or that he is One that we need not Love and
Serve (and that is but the same, viz. to be no God.) The Atheist or Ungodly in
Heart or Will, is he that consents not that God shall be his God, to be
loved, feared and obeyed before all. The Atheist in Life or outward practice,
is he that lives as without God in the world; that seeks him not as his
chiefest good, and obeys him not as his highest absolute Lord; so that indeed
Atheism is the sum of all iniquity, as Godliness is the sum of all Religion
and moral good. If you see by the description which I have given you, what it
is to be Godly, and to walk with God, and what it is to be an Atheist or
Ungodly, you may easily see that Godliness is more rare, and Atheism more
common, than many that themselves are Atheists will believe. It is not that
which a man calls his God, that is taken by him for his God indeed. It is not
the Tongue, but the Heart that is the man. Pilate called Christ the King of the
Jews, when he crucified him. The Jews called God their Father, when Christ
tells them, they were of their father the Devil, and proves it, because
(what ever they said) they would do his lusts, Joh. 8. 44. The same Jews
pretended to honor the name of the Messiah, and expect him, while they killed
him. The question is not what men call themselves, but what they are: Not
whether you say you take God for your God, but whether you do so indeed: Not
whether you profess your selves to be Atheists, but whether you are Atheists
indeed or not. If you are not, look over what I have here said, and tell your
consciences, Do you walk with God? who is it that you submit your selves
willingly to be disposed of by? To whom are you most subject? and whose
commands have the most effectual authority with you? who is the Chief Governor
of your hearts and lives? whom is it that you principally desire to please?
whom do you most fear? and whose displeasure do you principally avoid? from
whom is it that you expect your greaetest reward? and in whom, and with whom do
you place and expect your happiness? whose work is it that you do, as the
greatest business of your lives? Is it the goodness of God in himself and unto
you, that draws up your hearts to him in Love? Is he the ultimate End of the
main intentions, design, and industry of your lives? Do you trust upon his Word
as your security for your everlasting hopes and happiness? Do you study and
observe him in his works? Do you really live as in his presence? Do you delight
in his Word, and meditate on it? Do you love the Communion of Saints? and to be
most frequent and familiar with them that are most frequent and familiar with
Christ? Do you favor more the particular affectionate discourse about his
Nature, Will and Kingdom, than the frothy talk of empty wits, or the common
discourse of carnal worldlings? Do you love to be employed in thanking him for
his Mercies, and in praising him, and declaring the glory of his attributes and
works? Is your dependence on him as your great benefactor, and do you receive
your mercies as his gifts? If thus your principal observation be of God, and
your chief desire after God, and your chiefest confidence in God, and your
chiefest business in the world be with God, and for God, and your chifest joy
be in the favor of God (when you can apprehend it) and in the prosperity of
his Church, and your hopes of glory; and your chiefest grief and trouble be
your sinful distance from him, and your backwardness and disability in his love
and service, and the fear of his displeasure, and the injuries done to his
Gospel and honor in the world; then I must needs say, you are savingly
delivered from your Atheism and Ungodliness; you do not only talk of God, but
walk with God; you are then acquainted with that spiritual life and work, which
the sensual world is unacquainted with, and with those invisible everlasting
excellencies, which if worldlings knew, they would change their minds, and
choice and pleasures: You are then acquainted with that rational, manly,
saintly life, which ungodly men are strangers to; and you are in the way of
that well grounded Hope and Peace to which all the Pleasures and Crowns on
earth, if compared, are but cheats and misery. But if you were never yet
brought to walk with God, do not think that you have a sound belief in God, nor
that you acknowledge him sincerely, nor that you are saved from heart atheism:
Nor is it Piety in the Opinion and the Tongue, that will save him that is an
Atheist or ungodly in heart and life. Divinity is an affective-practical
science: Knowing is not the ultimate or perfective act of man: but a means to
holy Love and Joy and service. Nor is it clear and solid knowledge, if it do
not somewhat affect the heart, and engage and actuate the life, according to
the nature and use of the thing known. The soundness of Knowledge and Belief is
not best discerned in the intellectual acts themselves, but in their powerful,
free and pleasant efficacy, upon our choice and practice. By these therefore
you must judge, whether you are Godly or Atheistical. The question is not what
your Tongues say of God, nor what complemental ceremonious observances you
allow him, but what your Hearts and your endeavors say of him, and whether you
glorify him as God when you say you know him: Otherwise you will find that the
wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who held the truth in unrighteousness,] Romans 1. 18, 21.

And now alas, what matter of lamentation is here before us! To see how
seriously men converse with one another; and how God is overlookt or neglected
by the most! How men live together, as if there were more that is considerable
and regardable in these particles of animated dust, then in the Lord Almighty,
and in all his graces, service and rewards! To see how God is cast aside, and
his interest made to give place to the interest of the flesh, and his services
must stay till men have done their service to their lusts, or to worldly men,
that can do them hurt, or show them favor! And his will must not be done, when
it crosses the will of sinful man! How little do all the commands, and
promises, and threatenings of God signify with these Atheistical men, in
comparison of their lusts, or the laws of men, or any thing that concerns
their temporal prosperity! O how is the world revolted from their Maker! How
have they lost the knowledge of themselves, and forgotten their natures,
capacities and obligations, and what it is to be indeed a man! O hearken
sinners, to the call of your Redeemer! Return, O seduced wandering souls, and
know at last your resting place! why is not God in all your thoughts? or why is
he thought on with so much remisness, unwillingness, and contempt! and with so
little pleasure, seriousness, or regard? Do you understand your selves in this?
Do you deal worthily with God? Or wisely for your selves? Do you take more
pleasure, with the Prodigal, to feed swine, and to feed with swine, then to
dwell at home with your heavenly Father? and to walk before him, and serve him
in the world? Did you but know how dangerous a way you have been in, and how
unreasonably you have dealt, to forsake God in your hearts, and follow that
which cannot profit you, what haste would you make to leave the crowd, and come
home to God, and try a more noble and gainful conversation? If Reasons may have
room and leave to work upon you, I will set a few before you more distinctly,
to call you off from your barren inordinate creature converse, to a believing
serious converse with God.

1. The higher and more excellent the object is (especially when it is also of
most concernment to our selves) the more excellent is the converse. Therefore
as nothing dare compare it self with God, so no employment may be compared with
th^s of holy walking with him. How vile a contempt is it of the Almighty, and
of our Celestial joys, for the heart to neglect them, and turn away, and dwell
upon vanity and trouble, and let these highest pleasures go! Is not God and
Glory worthy of thy thoughts, and all thy service?

2. What are those things that take thee up? Are they better then God? Or
fitter to supply thy wants? If thou think, and trust in them accordingly, ere
long thou shall know better what they are, and have enough of thy cursed choice
and confidence. Tell those that stand by thee at the parting hour, whether thou
did choose aright and make a gaining or a saving match. O poor sinners! have
you not yet warning enough to satisfy you that all things below are Vanity and
Vexation, and that all your hope of happiness is above! Will not the testimony
of God satisfy you? will not the experience of the world for so many thousand
years together satisfy you? will not the ill success of all the damned
satisfy you? will nothing but your own experience convince you? If so,
consider well the experience you have already made, and seasonably retire, and
try no further, and trust not so dangerous a deceiver to the last, least you
buy your knowledge at a dearer rate then you will now believe.

3. You have daily more to do with God, than with all the world, whether you
will or no: And therefore seeing you cannot avoid him if you would, prefer that
voluntary obediential converse, which has a reward, before that necessitated
converse which has none. You are always in his hands: he made you for his
service; and he will dispose of you and all that you have according to his
will. It shall not go with you as your selves would have it, nor as your
friends would have it, nor as Princes and great ones of the world would have
it; (unless as their wills comply with Gods;) but as God would have it, who
will infallibly accomplish all his will. If a sparrow fall not to the ground
without him, and all the hairs of our heads are numbered, then certainly he
overruleth all your interests and affairs, and they are absolutely at his
dispose. To whom then in reason should you so much apply your selves as unto
him? If you will not take notice of him, he will take notice of you: He will
remember you whether you remember him or not: but it may be with so strict and
severe a remembrance, as may make you wish he did quite forget you. You are
always in his presence; and can you then forget him, and hold no voluntary
converse with him, when you stand before him? If it be but mean inferior
persons that we dwell with and are still in company with, yet we mind them
more, and speak more to them, then we do to greater persons that we seldom see.
But in God there is both Greatness and Nearness to invite you. Should not all
the worms on earth stand by, while the Glorious God does call you to him, and
offer you the honor and happiness of his converse? shall the Lord of Heaven
and Earth stand by, and be shut out, while you are chatting or trifling with
his creatures? Nay, shall he be neglected that is always with you? You cannot
remove your selves a moment from his sight; and therefore you should not shut
your eyes, and turn away your face, and refuse to observe him who is still
observing you.

Moreover, your dependence both for soul and body is all on him: You can have
nothing desirable but by his gift. He feeds you, he cloatheth you, he
maintains you, he gives you life and breath, and all things; and yet can you
overlook him or forget him? Do not all his mercies require your
acknowledgement? A Dog will follow him that feeds him: his eye will be upon
his Master: And shall we live upon God, and yet forget and disregard him? We
are taught a better use of his Mercies by the Holy Prophet, Psalm. 66. 8, 9. O
bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard: which
holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved!

Nay it is not your selves alone, but all the world that depends on God. It is
his power that supporteth them, and his will that disposes of them, and his
bounty that provideth for them: And therefore he must be the observation and
admiration of the world: It is less unreasonable to take no notice of the Earth
that bears us and yields us fruit, and of the Sun that yields us heat and
light, than to disregard the Lord that is more to us than Sun and Earth, and
all things. The eyes of all things wait on him; and he gives them their meat
in season: He opens his hand and satisfies the desire of every living thing,
Psalm. 145. 15, 16. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all
his works: All his works therefore shall praise him, and his Saints shall bless
him: They shall speak of the glory of his Kingdom, and talk of his power, verse.
10, 11.

Moreover God is so abundantly and wonderfully represented to us in all his
works, as will leave us under the guilt of most unexcusable contempt, if we
overlook him, and live as without him in the world. The Heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work: Day unto day utters
speech; and night unto night shows knowledge, Psa. 19. 1, 2. Thus that which
may be known of God is manifest; for the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so that the ungodly are without
excuse, Romans 1. 19, 20. Cannot you see that which all the world reveals? nor
hear that which all the world proclaims? O sing ye forth the honor of his
name: make his praise glorious! Say to the Lord, How terrible art thou in thy
works! through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves
unto thee: All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee: they
shall sing unto thy name: come and see the works of God: he is tertible in his
doings toward the children of men, Psalm. 66. 2, 3, 4, 5. Can we pass him by
that is everywhere present, and by every Creature represented to us? Can we
forget him, when all the world are our remembrancers? Can we stop our ears
against the voice of Heaven and Earth? Can we be ignorant of him, when the
whole Creation is our Teacher? Can we overlook that holy glorious Name, which
is written so legibly upon all things that ever our eyes beheld, that nothing
but blindness, sleepiness or distraction, could possibly keep us from
discerning it! I have many a time wondered, that (as the eye is dazzled so with
the beholding of the greatest Light, that it can scarce perceive the shining of
a lesser, so) the Glorious transcendent Majesty of the Lord, does not even
overwhelm our understandings, and so transport and take us up, as that we can
scarce observe or remember any thing else. For naturally the greatest objects
of our sense, are apt to make us at that time insensible of the smaller: And
our exceeding great business, is apt to make us utterly neglect and forget
those that are exceeding small: And O what Nothings are the Best and Greatest
of the Creatures, in comparison of God! And what toys and trifles are all our
other businesses in the world, in comparison of the business which we have with
Him! But I have been stopped in these admirations by considering that the wise
Creator has fitted and ordered all his Creatures according to the use which he
designeth them to: And therefore as the eye must be receptive only of so much
light as is proportioned to its use and pleasure, and must be so distant from
the Sun, that its Light may rather guide, than blind us, and its Heat may
rather quicken, than consume us; so God has made our understandings capable of
no other knowledge of Him here, than what is suited to the work of holiness:
And while we have Flesh, and fleshly works to do, and lawful necessary business
in the world, in which Gods own commands employ us, our souls in this Lanthorn
of the body, must see him through so thick a glass, as shall so far allay our
apprehension, as not to distract us, and take us off the works which he
enjoyneth us. And God and our souls shall be at such a distance, as that the
proportionable Light of his countenance may conduct us, and not overwhelm us;
and his Love may be so revealed, as to quicken our desires, and draw us on to a
better state, but not so as to make us utterly impatient of this world, and
utterly weary of our lives, or to swallow us up, or possess us of our most
desired happiness, before we arrive at the state of happiness. While the soul
is in the body, it makes so much use of the body (the brain and spirits) in
all is operations; that our wise and merciful Creator and Governor, does
respect the body as well as the soul in his ordering, disposing, and
representing of the objects of those operations: so that when I consider that
certainly all men would be distracted, if their apprehensions of God were
anywhit answerable to the Greatness of his Majesty and Glory (the Brain being
not able to bear such high operations of the soul, nor the greatness of the
passions which would necessarily follow) it much reconcileth my wondering mind,
to the wise and gracious providence of God, even in setting innocent nature it
self at such a distance from his Glory (allowing us the presence of such Grace,
as is necessary to bring us up to Glory) Though it reconcile me not to that
doleful distance which is introduced by sin, and which is furthered by Satan,
the world, and the flesh, and which our Redeemer by his Spirit and Intercession
must heal.

And it further reconcileth me to this disposure and will of the blessed God,
and this necessary natural distance and darkness of our minds, when I consider,
that if God, and Heaven, and Hell, were as near and open to our apprehensions,
as the things are which we see and feel* this life would not be what God
intended it to be, a life of Trial and preparation to another, a work, a race,
a pilgrimage, a warfare; what Trial would there be of any man's Faith, or Love,
or Obedience, or Constancy, or Self-denial? If we saw God stand by, or
apprehended him as if we saw him (in degree) it would be no more praiseworthy
or rewardable for a man to abhor all temptations to worldliness, ambition,
gluttony, drunkenness, lust, cruelty, etc. than it is for a man to be kept from
sleeping that is pierced with thorns, or for a man to forbear to drink a cup of
melted Gold which he knows will burn out his bowels, or to forbear to burn
his flesh in the fire. It were no great commendation to his Chastity, that
would forbear his filthiness, if he saw or had the fullest apprehensions of
God; when he will forbear it in the presence of a mortal man: It were no great
commendations to the intemperate and voluptuous, to have no mind of sensual
delights, if they had but such a knowledge of God as were equal to sight. It
were no thanks to the persecutor to forbear his cruelty against the servants of
the Lord, if he saw Christ coming with his glorious Angels, to take vengeance
on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel, and to be admired in his
Saints, and glorified in them that now believe, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. I deny
not but this happily necessitated Holiness is best in it self, and therefore
will be our state in Heaven; but what is there of Trial in it? or how can it be
suitable to the state of man, that must have Good and Evil set before him, and
Life and Death left to his choice; and that must conquer if he will be crowned,
and approve his fidelity to his Creator against competitors, and must live a
rewardable life before he have the reward?

But though in this life we may neither hope for, nor desire, such overwhelming
sensible apprehensions of God, as the rest of our faculties cannot answer, nor
our bodies bear; yet that our apprehensions of him should be so base, and
small, and dull, and unconstant, as to by born down by the noise of worldly
business, or by the presence of any creature, or by the tempting baits of
sensuality, this is the more odious, by how much God is more Great and Glorious
than the creature, and even because the use of the creature it self is but to
reveal the Glory of the Lord. To have such slight and stupid thoughts of him,
as will not carry us on in uprightness of obedience, nor keep us in his fear,
nor draw out our hearts in sincere desires to please him, and enjoy him, and as
will not raise us to a contempt of the pleasures, and profits, and honors of
this world, this is to be despisers of the Lord, and to live as in a sleep, and
to be dead to God, and alive only to the world and flesh. It is no unjust
dishonor or injury to ^e Creature, to be accounted as Nothing in comparison of
God, that it may be able to do Nothing against Him and his interest: But to
make such a Nothing of the most Glorious God, by our contemptuous forgetfulness
or neglect, as that our apprehensions of Him cannot prevail against the sordid
pleasures of the flesh, and against the richest baits of sin, and against all
the wrath or allurements of man, this is but to make a God of dust, and dung,
and nothing, and (in heart and practice) to make God worse than dust and dung.
And it is a wonder that man's understanding can become so sottish, as thus to
wink the Sun it self into a constant darkness, and to take God as Nothing, or
a^ no God, who is so abundantly revealed to them in astonishing transcendent
Greatness and Excellency, by all the Creatures in the world, and with whom we
have continually so much to do. O sinful man! into how great a depth of
ignorance, stupidity and misery art thou fallen!

But because we may see by the lives of the ungodly, that they little think
that they have so much to do with God, though I have spoke of this to the Godly
in the other Part of this Treatese, I shall somewhat more particularly acquaint
those that have most need to be informed of it, what business it is that they
have with Ged.

1. It is not a business that may be done, or left undone, like your business
with men: but it is such as must be done, or you are undone for ever. Nothing
is absolutely Necessary but this: Nothing in all the world does so much concern
you. You may at far cheaper rates forbear to eat, or drink, or cloth your
selves, or live, than forbear the dispatch of this necessary work.

2. Your business with God, and for God in the world, is that which you have
all your powers and endowments for; it is that which you were born into the
world for, and that which you have understanding and free will for, and that
which you have your thoughts, and memories, and affections for, and that which
you have eyes, and ears, and tongues, and all your corporeal parts and
abilities for: It is that which you have your food and raiment for; and that
which you have your time for; and your preservation, protection and provisions:
It is that which you have all your teaching for; which Christ himself came for
into the world; which the Scriptures are written for; which Ministers are sent
for, which all Order and Government in Church and State is principally
appointed for: In a word, it is that for which you have your lives, and all
things, and without which all were as nothing, and will be to you worse than
nothing, if they do not further your work with God: You will wish you had never
seen them if they befriend you ot in this.

3. Your business with God, and for him, is such as you must be continually
doing: as is incumbent on you every hour, for you have every hour given you for
this end. You may dispatch this man to day, and another to morrow, and have no
more to do with them again of a long time: but you have always incessantly
important works to do with God. For your common work should be all his work;
and all should be done with principal respect to him.

But I shall yet more particularly tell the ungodly what business it is that
they have with God, which it seems by their careless negligent lives they are
not aware of.

1. You must be either saved or damned by him; either Glorified with Him, or
punished by Him to everlasting: And it is Now that the matter must be
determined, which of the two conditions you must be in: You must Now obtain
your title to Heaven, if ever you will come thither: You must Now procure your
deliverance from Hell fire, if ever you will escape it. Now it is that all that
must be done, upon which the scales must turn for your salvation or damnation:
And you know this work is principally to be done between you and God, who alone
can save you or destroy you; and yet do you forget him, and live as if you had
no business with him, when you have your salvation to ^btain from him, and your
damnation to prevent? Have you such business as this with any other?

2. You have a strict and righteous Judgment to undergo, in order to this
salvation or damnation. You must stand before the Holy Majesty, and be judged
by the Governor of the World: you must be there accused, and found guilty or
not guilty; and judged as fulfillers or as breakers of the holy Covenant of
Grace: you must be set on the right hand or on the left: you must answer for
all the time that you here spent, and for all the means and mercies which you
here received, and for that you have done, whether it were good or evil: And it
is now in this life that all your preparation must be made, and all that must
be done, upon which your justification or condemnation will then depend. Anh it
is between God and you that all this business must be done: And yet can you
live as negligently toward him, as if you had no business with him?

3. You have a Death to dye, a change to make which must be made but once;
which will be the entrance upon endless joy or pain: And do you think this
needs not your most timely and diligent preparation? You must struggle with
pains, and faint with weakness, and feel death taking down your earthen
tabernacle: you must then have a life that is ending to review, and all that
you have done said open to your more impartial judgment; You must then see
Time as at an end, and the last sand running, and your candle ready to go out,
and leave the snuff; You must then look back upon all that you have had from
the world, as ending; and upon all that you have done as that which cannot be
undone again, that you may do it better; and you must have a more serious look
into Eternity, when you are stepping thither, then you can now conceive of: And
does all this need no preparation? It is with God that all that business must
be Now transacted, that must make your death to be comfortable, or safe. If Now
you will only converse with men, and know no business that you have with God,
you shall find at last to your exceeding terror, that you are in his hands,
and passing to his bar, and that it is God that then you have to do with, when
your business with all the world is at an end: He will then have something to
do with you, if you will now find nothing to do with him.

4. In order to all this, you have now your Peace to be made with God, and the
pardon of all your sins to be obtained. For woe to you if then you are found
under the guilt of any sin. Look back upon your lives, and remember how you
have lived in the world, and what you have been doing: how you have spent your
time, in youth and in your riper age; and how many sinful thoughts, and words,
and deeds you have been guilty of; how often you have sinfully pleased your
appetites, and gratified your flesh, and yielded to temptations, and abused
mercy, and lost your time: how often you have neglected your duty, and betrayed
your souls: how long you have lived in forgetfulness of God and your salvation;
minding only the things of the flesh and of the world: how often you have sinned
ignorantly and against knowledge, through carelessness and through rashness,
through negligence and through presumption, in passion, and upon deliberation;
against convictions, purposes and promises: how often you have sinned against the
precepts of piety to God, and of justice and charity to men. Think how your
sins are multiplied and aggravated, more in number then the hours of your
lives: Aggravated by a world of mercies: by the clearest teachings, and the
lowdest calls, and sharpest reproofs, and seasonable warnings, and by the long
and urgent importunities of grace. Think of all these, and then consider
whether you have nothing now to do with God, whether it be not a business to be
followed with all possible speed and diligence to procure the pardon of all
these sins: you have no such businesses as these, to transact with men: you may
have business with them which your estates depend upon, or which touch your
credit, commodity or lives; but you have no business with men (unless in
subordination to God) which your salvation does depend upon: your eternal
happiness is not in their hands: They may kill your bodies, (if God permit
them) but not your souls. You need not solicit them to pardon your sins
against God: It is a small matter how you are judged of by man: you have one
that judges you, even the Lord, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. No man can forgive sin, but
God only. O then how early, how earnestly should you cry to him for mercy!
Pardon must be obtained now or never: There is no Justification for that man at
the day of Judgment, that is not forgiven and justified now. Blessed then is
the man whose iniquity is forgiven, whose sin is covered, and to whom it is not
imputed by the Lord, Romans 4. 7, 8. And woe to that man that ever he was born,
that is then found without the pardon of his sins! Think of this as the case
deserves, and then think if you can, that your daily business with God is small.

5. Moreover, you have Peace of Conscience to obtain; and that depends upon
your Peace with God. Conscience will be your accuser, condemner and tormenter,
if you make it not your friend, by making God your friend. Consider what
Conscience has to say against you, and how certainly it will speak home, when
you would be loath to hear it: and bethink you how to answer all its
accusations, and what will be necessary to make it a messenger of Peace; and
then think your business with God to be but small, if you are able. It is no
easy matter to get assurance that God is reconciled to you, and that he has
forgiven all your sins.

6. In order to all this, you must be united to Jesus Christ, and be made his
members, that you may have part in him, and that he may wash you by his blood,
and that he may answer for you to his Father! woe to you if he be not your
righteousness, and if you have not him to plead your cause, and take upon him
your final justification! None else can save you from the wrath of God: And he
is the Savior only of his body, Ephesians. 5. 23. He has dyed for you without your
own consent, and he has made an universal conditional grant of pardon and
salvation, before you consented to it: But he will not be united to you, nor
actually forgive and justify and save you without your own consent: And
therefore that the Father may draw you to the Son, and may give you Christ and
Life in him (1 John 5. 9, 10, 11.) when all your hope depends on it, you may
see that you have more to do with God, then your senseless hearts have hitherto
understood.

7. And that you may have a saving interest in Jesus Christ, you must have
sound Repentance for all your former life of wickedness, and a lively effectual
faith in Christ: Neither sin nor Christ must be made light of. Repentance must
tell you to the very heart, that you have done foolishly in sining, and that it
is an evil and a bitter thing that you forsook the Lord, and that his fear was
not in you: and thus your wickedness shall correct you and reprove you* Jer. 2.
19. And Faith must tell you that Christ is more necessary to you then food or
life, and that there is no other name given under heaven by which you can be
saved, Act. 4. 12. And it is not so easy, nor so common a thing to Repent and
Believe as ignorant presumptuous sinners do imagine. It is a greater matter to
have a truly humbled contrite heart, and to loath your selves for all your
sins, and to loath those sins, and resolvedly give up your selves to Christ and
to his Spirit for a holy life, then heartlesly and hypocritically to say, I am
sorry, or I Repent, without any true Contrition or Renovation. And it is a
greater matter to betake your selves to Jesus Christ as your only hope to save
you both from sin and from damnation, then barely through custom and the
benefit of education to say, I do believe in Christ. I tell you it is so great
a work to bring you to sound Repentance and Faith, that it must be done by the
power of God himself, Act. 5. 31. 2 Timothy 2. 25. They are the Gift of God, Ephesians.
2. 8. you must have his spirit to illuminate you, Ephesians. 1. 18. and show you the
odiousness of fin, the intolerableness of the wrath of God, the necessity and
sufficiency, the power and willingness of Christ; and to overcome all your
prejudice, and save you from your false opinions and deceits; and to repulse
the temptations of Satan, the world and the flesh which will all rise up
against you. All this must be done to bring you home to Jesus Christ, or else
you will have no part in him, his righteousness and grace: And can you think
that you have not most important business with God, who must do all this upon
you, or else you are undone for ever!

8. Moreover you must have all the corruptions of your natures healed, and your
sins subdued, and your hearts made new by sanctifying grace, and the Image of
God implanted in you, and your lives made holy and sincerely conformable to the
will of God. All this must be done, or you cannot be acceptable to God, nor
ever will be saved: Though your carnal interest rise against it; though your
old corrupted natures be against it; though your custom, and pleasure, and
worldly gain and honor be against it; though all your carnal friends and
superiors be against it; though the devil will do all that he can against it;
yet all this must be done, or you are lost for ever: And all this must be done
by the Spirit of God; for it is his work to make you New and Holy: And can you
think then that the business is not great which you have with God? when you
have tried how hard every part of this work is, to be begun and carried on, you
will find you have more to do with God, than with all the world.

9. Moreover in order to this, it is necessary that you read, and hear, and
understand the Gospel, which must be the means of bringing you to God by
Christ: This must be the instrument of God, by which he will bring you to
Repent and Believe, and by which he will renew your Natures, and imprint his
Image on you, and bring you to Love him, and obey his will. The Word of God
must be your Counselor, and your delight, and you must set your heart to it,
and meditate in it day and night. Knowledge must be the means to reclaim your
perverse misguided Wills, and to reform your careless crooked Lives, and to
bring you out of the Kingdom of darkness into the State of Light and Life. And
such Knowledge cannot be expected without a diligent attending unto Christ the
Teacher of your souls, and a due consideration of the truth. By that time you
have learnt what is needful to be learnt for a true Conversion, a sound
Repentance, a saving Faith, and a holy Life, you will find that you have far
greater business with God than with all the world.

10. Moreover for the attaining of all this Mercy, you have many a prayer to
put up to God: You must daily pray for the forgiveness of your sins, and
deliverance from temptations, and even for your daily bread, or necessary
provisions for the work which you have to do: You must daily pray for all the
supplies of Grace which you want, and for the gradual mortification of the
flesh, and for help in all the duties which you must perform; and for strength
against all the spiritual enemies which will assault you; and preservation from
the manifest evils which attend you: And these prayers must be put up with
unwearied constancy, fervency and Faith. Keep up this course of fervent prayer,
and beg for Christ, and Grace, and Pardon, and Salvation in any measure as they
deserve, and according to thy own necessity, and then tell me whether thy
business with God be small, and to be put off as lightly as it is by the
ungodly.

11. Moreover, you are made for the Glory of your Creator, and must apply your
selves wholly to glorify him in the world: You must make his service the trade
and business of your lives, and not put him off with something on the by: You
are good for nothing else but to serve him; as a knife is made to cut, and as
your clothes are made to cover you, and your meat to seed you, and your horse
to labor for you; so you are made and redeemed, and maintained for this, to
Love and Please your great Creator: And can you think that it is but little
business that you have with him, when he is the End and Master of your lives,
and all you are or have is for him?

12. And for the due performance of his service, you have all his Talents to
employ. To this end it is that he has entrusted you with reason, and health,
and strength, with time, and parts, and interest, and wealth, and all his
mercies, and all his ordinances and means of Grace; and to this end must you
use them, or you lose them: And you must give him an account of all at last,
whether you have improved them all to your Masters use. And can you look within
you, without you, about you, and see how much you are trusted with, and must be
accountable to him for, and yet not see how great your business is with God?

13. Moreover, you have all the graces which you shall receive to exercise; and
every grace does carry you to God, and is exercised upon him, or for him: It is
God that you must study, and know, and love, and desire, and trust, and hope
in, and obey: It is God that you must seek after, and delight in so far as you
enjoy him: It is his absence or displeasure that must be your fear and sorrow:
Therefore the soul is said to be sanctified when it is renewed, because it is
both disposed and devoted unto God. And therefore Grace is called Holiness,
because it all disposes, and carries the soul to God, and uses it upon and
for him. And can you think your business with God is small, when you must live
upon him, and all the powers of your soul must be addicted to him, and be in
serious motion toward him? and when he must be much more to you than the Air
which you breath in, or the Earth you live upon, or than the Sun that gives you
light and heat; yea than the soul is to your bodies?

14. Lastly, you have abundance of temptations and impediments to watch and
strive against, which would hinder you in the doing of all this work, and a
corrupt and treacherous heart to watch and keep in order, which will be looking
back, and shrinking from the service. Lay all this together, and then consider
whether you have not more and greater business with God, than with all the
creatures in the world.

And if this be so (as undeniably it is so) is there any cloak for that man's
sin, who is all day taken up with creatures, and thinks of God as seldom and
as carelessly as if he had no business with him? And yet, alas, if you take a
survey of high and low, of Court, and City, and Country, you shall find that
this is the case of no small number, yea of many that observe it not to be
their case; it is the case of the profane that pray in jest, and swear, and
curse, and rail in earnest. It is the case of the malignant enemies of
holiness, that hate them at the heart that are most acquainted with this
converse with God, and count it but hypocrisy, pride or fancy, and would not
suffer them to live upon the Earth, who are most sincerely conversant in
Heaven. It is the case of Pharise^s and Hypocrites, who take up with
ceremonious observances, as touch not, taste not, handle not, and such like
traditions of their forefathers, instead of a spiritual rational service, and a
holy serious walking with the Lord. It is the case of all ambitious men, and
covetous worldlings, who make more ado to climb up a little higher than their
brethren, and to hold the reins, and have their wills, and be admired and
adored in the world, or to get a large estate for themselves and their
posterity, than to please their Maker, or to save their souls: It is the case
of every sensual Epicure, whose belly is his God, and serves his fancy, lust
and appetite before the Lord. It is the case of every unsanctified man, that
seeks first the prosperity of his flesh, before the Kingdom and Righteousness
of God, and is most careful and laborious to lay up a treasure on Earth, and
labors more (with the greater estimation, resolution and delight) for the
meat that perishes, than for that which endures to everlasting life. All
these (who are too great a part of the world, and too great a part of professed
Christians) are taken up with creature converse; and yet think to escape the
deludge of Gods displeasure, because the Henochs and Noah's are so few who walk
with God; and they think God will not destroy so many: And thus they think to
be saved by their multitude, and to hide themselves in the crowd from God: They
will go the wide and common path, and be of the mind that most are of: They
will not be convinced till most men are convinced; that is, till their wisdom
come too late, and cost them dearer than its worth. When all men are convinced
that God should have been preferred before the world, and served before their
fleshly lusts (as they will certainly and sadly be) then they will be convinced
with the rest. When all men understand that Life was given them to have done
the work which Eternal Life depends on, then they will understand it with the
rest. When all men shall discern between the righteous and the wicked; between
those that serve God, and that serve him not, then they will discern it with
the rest: They will know what their business was in the world, and how much
they had to do with God, when all men know it. But O how much better for them
had it been to have known it in time while knowledge might have done them
better service, than to make them feel the greatness of their sin and folly,
and the hopes which once they had of happiness, and to help the sting of
desperation continually to prick them at the heart. They would be of so little
a Flock as that to which it was the good pleasure of God to give the Kingdom,
Luke 12. 32. If you demand a Reason of all this, their Reason was in their
throats and bellies: They had fleshly appetites and lusts, and thereby could
relish fleshly pleasures; but spiritual life and appetite they had none, and
therefore rellished not spiritual things: Had Christ, and Holiness, and Heaven
been as suitable to their appetites, as the sweetness of their meat, and drink,
and lusts, and as suitable to their fantasies as their worldly dignities and
greatness were, they would then have made a better choice. They would have
walked with God, if drunkenness and gluttony, and pride and wantonness, and
covetousness and idleness, had been the way in which they might have walked
with him. If these had been Godliness, how Godly would they have been? How
certainly would they have come to Heaven, if this had been the* way? To be
idle, and proud, and fleshly, and worldly, is it that they love; and to be
humble, and holy, and heavenly, and mortified, is that which they hate, and
cannot away with: And their Love and Hatred proceed from their corrupted
natures; and these are instead of Reason to them. Their strong apprehensions of
a present suitableness in fleshly pleasures to their appetites, and of a
present unsuitableness of a holy life, do keep out all effectual apprehensions
of the excellencies of God, and of spiritual heavenly delights, which cross
them in the pleasures which they most desire.

But yet (their appetites corrupting their understandings as well as their
wills) they will not be mad without some reason, nor reject their Maker and
their happiness without some reason, nor neglect that holy work which they were
made for without some reason: Let us hear then what it is.

CHAP. III.
Object. 1. THey say [It is true that God has much to do with us, and for us:
but it follows not that we have so much to do with him, or for him, as you
would have us to believe: For he is necessarily Good, and necessarily does
good; and therefore will do so, whether we think of him or not: The Sun will
not give over shining on me, though I never think on it, or never pray to it,
or give it thanks. Nor does God need any service that we can do him, no more
than the Sun does: nor is he pleased any more in the praise of men, or in their
works.

Answ. 1. It is most certain that God is Good as necessarily as he is God: But
it is not true that he must necessarily do good to you, or other individual
persons; nor that he necessarily does the Good he does to them. As he is not
necessitated to make Toads and Serpents as happy as Men, or Men as Angels; so
he is not necessitated to save the Devils or damned souls (for he will not save
them.) And he was under no greater a necessity to save you, than them. He was
not necessitated to give you a being: He could have past you by, and caused
others to have possessed your room. As it was Gods freewill and not any necessity
that millions more are never born, that were in possibility of it: (For all
that is possible does not come to pass.) So that you and millions more were
born, was not of necessity but of the same freewill. And as God did not make
you of Necessity but of freewill; so he does not Necessarily but Freely,
justify, or sanctify, or save. If he did it by necessity of nature, he would
do it to all as well as some; seeing all have a natural capacity of grace as
well as those that receive it: God is able to Sanctify and save more, yea all,
if it were his will: And it is not for want of power or Goodness that he does
not. Millions of beings are possible which are not future. God does not all the
good which he is able, but communicates so much to his several creatures as to
his wisdom seems meet. If the damned would be so presumptuous as to argue,
that because God is able yet to sanctify and save them, therefore he must do
it of necessity of nature, it would not be long before they should thus dispute
themselves out of their torments. God will not ask leave of sinners to be God:
Their denying him to be Good (that is, to be God) because he complyeth not with
their conceits and wills, does but prove them to be fools and bad themselves.

Indeed some Sciolists, pretending to learning, while they are ignorant of most
obvious principles of natural knowledge, have taught poor sinners to cheat
their souls with such dreams as these. They have made themselves believe that
Goodness in God is nothing else but his Benignity, or disposition to do Good.
As if the creature were the ultimate end, and all Gods Goodness but a means
thereto: And so God were the Alpha or first efficient, and yet the Creature the
Omega or finis ultimus: and all the Goodness in God were to be estimated and
denominated by its respect to the felicity of man: And so the creature has the
best part of the Deity. Such notions evidently show us, that lapsed man is
predominantly selfish, and is become his own Idol, and is lost in himself,
while he has lost himself, by his loss of God: when we see how powerful his
self-interest is, both with his intellect and will: even men of great
ingenuity, till Sanctification has restored them to God, and taught them
better to know Him and themselves, are ready to measure all Good or Evil by
their own interest; when yet common reason would have told them, if they had
not perverted it by pride and partial studies, that short of God, even among
the Creatures, there are many things to be preferred before themselves and
their own felicity: He is irrationally enslaved by self love, that cannot see
that the happiness of the world, or of his Country, or of multitudes is more to
be desired then his happiness alone. And that he ought rather to choose to be
annihilated or to be miserable (if it were made a matter of his deliberation
and choice) then to have the Sun taken out of the firmament, or the world, or
his Country to be annihilated or miserable. And God is infinitely above the
Creature.

Obj. But they say, He needs nothing to make him happy, having no defect of
happiness.

Answ. And what of that? Must it needs therefore follow that he made not all
things for himself, but for the creature finally? He is perfectly happy in
himself, and his will is himself: This will was fulfilled when the world was
not made, (for it was his will that it should not be made till it was made) and
it is fulfilled when it is made, and fulfilled by all that comes to pass: And
as the absolute simple Goodness and Perfection of Gods essence is the Greatest
Good, the eternal immutable Good; so the fulfilling of his will is the ultimate
end of all obedience: He has expressed himself to take pleasure in his works,
and in the holiness, obedience and happiness of his chosen: And though Pleasure
be not the same thing in God as it is in man (no more then will or
understanding is) yet it is not nothing which God expresses by such terms, but
something which we have no fitter expression for: This Pleasing of the will of
God being the end of all, even of our felicity, is better then our felicity it
self.

They that will maintain that God, who is naturally and necessarily Good, has
no other Goodness but his Benignity or aptness to do good to his creatures,
must needs also maintain that ( God being for the Creature, and not the
Creature for God) the Creature is better then God, as being the ultimate end of
God himself, and the highest use of all his Goodness being but for the felicity
of the Creature: As also that God does do all the Good that he is able: (For
natural necessary agents work ad ultimum posse.) And that all men shall be
saved, and all Devils, and every worm and toad be equal to the highest Angel,
or else that God is not able to do it. And that he did thus make happy all his
Creatures from eternity (for natural necessary agents work always if they be
not forcibly hindered;) and that there never was such a thing as pain or
misery, in man or brute, or else that God was not able to prevent it. But
abundance of such odious consequences must needs follow from the denying of the
Highest Good, which is God himself, and confesting none but his efficient
Goodness. But some will be offended with me for being so serious in confuting
such an irrational Atheistical conceit, who know not how far it prevails with
an Atheistical generation.

Be it known to you careless sinners, that though the Sun will shine on you
whether you think on it or not, or love it, or thank it or not; and the fire
will warm you whether you think on it and love it or not; yet God will not
justify or save you whether you love him or think on him or not: God does not
operate brutishly in your salvation; but Governs you wisely, as rational
Creatures are to be governed; and therefore will give you Happiness as a
reward; and therefore will not deal alike with those that love him and that
love him not, that seek him and that seek him not, with the laborers and the
loiterers, the faithful and the slothful servant. Would you have us believe
that you know better then God himself what pleases him, or on what terms he
will give his benefits, and save men's souls? or do you know his nature better
then he knows it, that you dare presume to say, because he needs not our
love or duty, therefore they are not pleasing to him! Then what has God to do
in governing the world, if he be pleased and displeased with nothing that men
do, or with good and evil actions equally? Though you cannot hurt him, you
shall find that he will hurt you if you disobey him: And though you cannot make
him happy by your holiness, you shall find that he will not make you happy
without it.

And if he did work as necessarily as the Sun does shine, according to your
similitude; yet, 1. Even the shining of the Sun does not illuminate the blind,
nor does it make the seeds of thorns and nettles to bring forth vines or roses,
nor the gendering of frogs to bring forth men; but it actuateth all things
according to the several natures of their powers. And therefore how can you
expect that an ignorant unbelieving and unholy soul, should enjoy felicity in
God, when in that state they are incapable of it? 2. And if the Sun do
necessarily illuminate any one, he must necessarily be illuminated; and if it
necessarily warm or quicken any thing, it must be necessarily warmed and
quickened: else you would assert contradictions. So if God did necessarily save
you and make you happy, you would necessarily be saved and made happy. And that
contains essentially your Holiness, your Loving, desiring and seeking after
God; To be saved or happy without enjoying God by Love, or to Love him and not
Desire him, seek him or obey him, are as great contradictions as to be
illuminated without light, or quickened without life. What way soever it be
that God conveyeth his sanctifying spirit, I am sure that if any man have not
the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. and that without
Holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. and that if you will have the Kingdom
of God, you must seek it first, preferring it before all earthly things, Matthew.
6. 33. Joh. 6. 27. Col. 4. 1, 2, 3. And then if all the question that remains
undecided be, whether God do you wrong or not in damning you, or whether God be
Good because he will not save you when he can, I shall leave you to him to
receive satisfaction, who will easily silence and consound your impudence, and
justify his works and laws. Prepare your accusations against him, if you will
needs insist upon them, and try whether he or you shall prevail: but remember
that thou art a worm and he is God, and that he will be the only judge when all
is done; and ignorance and impiety that prate against him to their own
confusion, in the day of his patience, shall not then usurp the throne.

Object. 2. But how can God be fit for mortals to converse with, when they see
him not, and are infinitely below him?

Answ. I hope you will not say that you have nothing to do at home, with your
own souls: and yet you never saw your souls. And it is the souls, the Reason
and the will of men that you daily converse with here in the world, more then
their bodies, and yet you never saw their souls, their Reason or their wills.
If you have no higher light to discern by then your eyesight, you are not men
but beasts. If you are men, you have Reason, and if you are Christians you have
faith, by which you know things that you never saw. You have more dependence on
the things that are unseen, then on those which you see, and have much more to
do with them.

And though God be infinitely above us, yet he condescendeth to communicate to
us according to our capacities: As the Sun is far from us, and yet does not
disdain to enlighten, and warm, and quicken a worm or fly here below. If any be
yet so much an Atheist as to think that Religious converse with God is but a
fancy, let him well answer me these few questions.

Quest. 1. Does not the continued being and well-being of the Creatures, tell
us that there is a God on whom (for being and well-being) they depend, and from
whom they are and have whatsoever they are and whatsoever they have? And
therefore that passively all the Creatures have more respect to him by far then
to one another?

Quest. 2. Seeing God communicates to every Creature according to their
several capacities; is it not meet then that he deal with man as man, even as a
Creature Rational, capable to know and love and obey his Great Creator, and to
be happy in the knowledge, love and fruition of him? That man has such natural
faculties, and capacities, is not to be denied by a man that knows what it is
to be a man: And that God has not given him these in vain, will be easily
believed by any that indeed believe that he is God.

Quest. 3. Is there any thing else that is finally worthy of the highest
actions of our souls? or that is fully adequate to them, and fit to be our
happiness? If not, then we are left either to certain infelicity, contrary to
the tendency of our natures, or else we must seek our felicity in God.

Quest. 4. Is there any thing more certain then that by the title of Creation,
our Maker has a full and absolute right to all that he has made; and
consequently to all our love and obedience, our time and powers? For whom
should they all be used but for him from whom we have them?

Quest. 5. Can any thing be more sure, then that God is the Righteous Governor
of the world? and that he Governs man as a rational creature, by Laws and
Judgment? And can we live under his absolute Sovereignty, and under his many
righteous Laws, and under his Promises of salvation to the Justified, and under
his threatenings of damnation to the unjustified, and yet not have more to do
with God than with all the world? If indeed you think that God does not Love
and reward the holy and obedient, and punish the ungodly and disobedient, then
either you take him not to be the Governor of the world, or (which is worse)
you take him to be an unrighteous Governor: And then you must by the same
reason say, that Magistrates and Parents should do so too, and love and reward
the obedient and disobedient alike: But if any man's disobedience were exercised
to your hurt, by slandering, or beating, or robbing you, I dare say you would
not then commend so indifferent and unjust a Governor.

Quest. 6. If it be not needless for man to Labor for food and raiment, and
necessary provision for his body, how can it be needless for him to labor for
the happiness of his soul? If God will not give us our daily bread while we
never think of it, or seek it, why should we expect that he will give us Heaven
though we never think on it, value it, or seek it?

Quest. 7. Is it not a contradiction to be happy in the fruition of God, and
yet not to mind him, desire him, or seek him? How is it that the Soul can reach
its Object, but by estimation, desire and seeking after it: And how should it
enjoy it but by Loving it, and taking pleasure in it?

Quest. 8. While you seem but to wrangle against the Duty of believers, do you
not plead against the comfort and happiness of believers? For surely the
employment of the soul on God (and for him) is the health and pleasure of the
soul; And to call away the soul from such employment, is to imprison it in the
dungeon of this world, and to forbid us to smell to the sweetest flowers, and
confine us to a sink or dunghill* and to forbid us to taste of the food of
Angels, or of men, and to offer us Vinegar and Gall, or turn us over to feed
with Swine. He that pleads that there is no such thing as real Holiness and
Communion with God, does plead in effect that there is no true felicity or
delight for any of the Sons of men: And how welcome should ungodly Atheists be
unto mankind, that would for ever exclude them all from happiuess, and make
them believe they are all made to be remedilesly miserable?

And here take notice of the madness of the unthankful world, that hates and
persecuteth the Preachers of the Gospel, that bring them the glad tidings of
pardon, and hope, and life eternal, of solid happiness, and durable delight;
and yet they are not offended at these Atheists and ungodly Cavillers, that
would take them off from all that is truly good and pleasant, and make them
believe that nature has made them capable of no higher things than beasts, and
has enthralled them in remediless infelicity.

Quest. 9. Do you not see by experience that there are a people in the world
whose hearts are upon God, and the life to come, and that make it their
chiefest care and business to seek him and to serve him? How then can you say
that there is no such thing, or that we are not capable of it, when it is the
case of so many before your eyes? If you say that it is but their fancy or
self-deceit: I answer, that really their hearts are set upon God, and the
everlasting world, and that it is their chiefest care and business to attain
it; this is a thing that they feel, and you may see in the bent and labor of
their lives; and therefore you cannot call that a fancy, of which you have so
full experience: But whether the motives that have invited them, and engaged
them to such a choice and course, be fancies and deceits or not, let God be
Judge, and let the awakened consciences of worldlings themselves be Judge, when
they have seen the end, and tried whether it be Earth or Heaven that is the
shadow, and whether it be God* or their unbelieving hearts that was deceived.

Quest. 10. Have you any hopes of living with God for ever, or not? If you have
not, no wonder if you live as beasts, when you have no higher expectations than
beasts: When we are so blind as to give up all our hopes, we will also give up
all our care and holy diligence, and think we have nothing to do with Heaven.
But if you have any such hopes, can you think that any thing is fitter for the
chiefest of your thoughts and car^^, than the God and Kingdom, which you hope
for ever to enjoy? Or is there any thing that can be more suitable, or should
be more delightful to your thoughts, than to employ them about your highest
hopes, upon your endless happiness and joy? and should not that be now the most
noble and pleasant employment for your minds, which is nearest to that which
you hope to be exercised in for ever? Undoubtedly he that has true and serious
thoughts of Heaven, will highliest value that life on Earth which is likest to
the life in Heaven: And he that hates, or is most averse to that which is
nearest to the work of Heaven, does boast in vain of his hopes of Heaven.

By this time you may see (if you love not to be blind) that man's chiefest
business in the world is with his God, and that our thoughts and all our powers
are made to be employed upon him, or for him; and that this is no such needless
work as Atheists make themselves believe.

Remember that it is the description of the desperately wicked, Psalm. 10. 4.
that God is not in all his thoughts. And if yet you understand it not, I will a
little further show you the evil of such Atheistical unhallowed thoughts.

1. There is nothing but darkness in all thy Thoughts, if God be not in them.
Thou know nothing, if thou know not him; and thou usest not thy
knowledge, if thou use it not on him. To know the creature as without God, is
to know nothing: No more than to know all the Letters in the Book, and not to
know their signification or sense. All things in the world are but
insignificant ciphers, and of no other sense or use, if you separate them from
God, who is their sense and end. If you leave out God in all your studies, you
do but dream and dote, and not understand what you seem to understand. Though
you were taken for the learned men in the world, and were able to discourse
of all the Sciences, and your thoughts had no lower employment daily than the
most sublime speculations which the nature of all the creatures does afford, it
is all but folly and impertinent dotage, if it reach not unto God.

2. Yea, your thoughts are erroneous and false, which is more than barely
ignorant, if God be not in them. You have false thoughts of the world, of your
houses and lands, and friends and pleasures, and whatsoever, is the daily
employment of your minds. You take them to be something, when they are nothing;
you are covetous of the empty purse, and know not that you cast away the
treasure: You are thirsty after the empty cup, when you wilfully cast away the
drink. You hungrily seek to feed upon a painted feast: You murder the creature
by separating it from God who is its life, and then you are enamoured on the
carcass, and spend your days and thoughts in its cold embracements. Your
thoughts are but vagabonds, straggling abroad the world, and following
impertinencies, if God be not in them. You are like men that walk up and down
in their sleep, or like those that have lost themselves in the dark, who weary
themselves in going they know not whither, and have no end, nor certain way.

3. If God be not in all your thoughts, they are all in vain. They are like the
drone that gathers no honey: They fly abroad and return home empty: They
bring home no matter of honor to God, of profit or comfort to your selves:
They are employed to no more purpose than in your dreams: Only they are more
capable of sin: Like the distracted thoughts of one that doteth in a fever,
they are all but nonsense, whatever you employ them on, while you leave out
God who is the sense of all.

4. If God be not in all your thoughts, they are nothing but confusion: There
can be no just Unity in them, because they forsake him who is the only Center,
and are scatterad abroad upon incoherent creatures. There can be no true Unity
but in God: The further we go from him, the further we run into divisions and
confusions. There can be no just Method in them, because he is left out that is
the Beginning and the End. They are not like a well ordered Army, where every
one is moved by the will of one Commander, and all know their colors and their
ranks, and unanimously agree to do their work: But like a swarm of Flies, that
buzze about they know not whither, nor why, nor for what. There is no true
Government in your thoughts, if God be not in them; they are masterless and
vagrants, and have no true order, if they be not ordered by him and to him; if
he be not their First and Last.

5. If God be not in all your thoughts, there is no Life in them: They are but
like the motion of a bubble, or a feather in the Air: They are impotont as to
the resisting of any evil, and as to the doing of any saving-good. They have no
strength in them, because they are laid out upon objects that have no strength:
They have no quickening, renewing, reforming, encouraging, resolving, confirming
power in them, because there is no such power in the things on which they are
employed: whereas the thoughts of God and everlasting life, can do wonders upon
the soul: They can raise up men above this world, and teach them to despise the
worldlings Idol, and look upon all the pleasures of the flesh as upon a Swines
delight in wallowing in the mire. They can renew the soul, and cast out the
most powerful beloved sin, and bring all our powers into the obedience of God,
and that with pleasure and delight: They can employ us with the Angels, in a
heavenly conversation, and show us the Glory of the world above, and advance us
above the life of the greatest Princes upon earth: But the thoughts of earthly
fleshly things have power indeed to delude men, and mislead them, and hurry
them about in a vertiginous motion; but no power to support us, or subdue
concupiscence, or heal our folly, or save us from temptations, or reduce us
from our errors, or help us to be useful ie the world, or to attain felicity at
last. There is no Life, nor Power, nor Efficacy in our thoughts, if God be not
in them.

6. There is no stability or fixedness in your thoughts, if God be not in them.
They are like a boat upon the Ocean, tossed up and down with winds and waves: The
mutable uncertain creatures can yield no rest or settlement to your minds. You
are troubled about many things; and the more you think on them, and have to do
with them, the more are you troubled: But you forget the One thing Necessary,
and fly from the Eternal Rock, on which you must build if ever you will be
established. While the Creature is in your thought instead of God, you will be
one day deluded with its unwholesome pleasure, and the next day feel it gripe
you at the heart: One day it will seem your happiness, and the next you will
wish you had never known it: That which seems the only comfort of your lives
this year, may the next year make you aweary of your lives. One day you are
impatiently desiring and seeking it, as if you could not live without it: and
the next day, or ere long you are impatiently desiring to be rid of it: You are
now taking in your pleasant mors^ls, and drinking down your delicious draughts,
and jovially sporting it with your inconsiderate companions: But how quickly
will you be repenting of all this, and complaining of your folly, and vexing
your selves, that you took not warning, and made not a wiser choice in time?
The creature was never made to be your end, or rest, or happiness: and
therefore you are but like a man in a wilderness or a maze, that may go and go
but knows not whither, and finds no end, till you come home to God, who
only is your proper end, and make him the Lord and life and pleasure of your
thoughts.

7. As there is no present fixedness in your thoughts, so the business and
pleasure of them will be of very short continuance, if God be not the chief in
all. And who would choose to employ his thoughts on such things as he is sure
they must soon forget, and never more have any business with to all eternity!
You shall think of those houses, and lands, and friends, and pleasures but a
little while, unless it be with repenting tormenting thoughts, in the place of
misery: you will have no delight to think of any thing, which is now most
precious to your flesh, when once the flesh it self decays, and is no more
capable of delight, Psalm. 146. 4. His breath goes forth, he returns to his
earth; in that very day his thoughts perish.

Call in your thoughts then from these transitory things, that have no
consistency or continuance, and turn them unto him with whom they may find
everlasting employment and delight: Remember not the enticing baits of
sensuality and pride, but [ Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them.]

8. Thy thoughts are but sordid, dishonorable and low, if God be not the
chiefest in them. They reach no higher then the habitation of beasts; nor do
they attain to any sweeter employment then to meditate on the felicity of a
brute: Thou choosest with the fly to feed on dung and filthy ulcers, and as
magots to live on stinking carrion, when thou might have free access to God
himself, and might be entertained in the Court of heaven, and wellcomed
thither by the holy Angels: Thou wallowest in the mire with the swine, or
diggest thy self a house in the earth, as worms and moles do, when thy thoughts
might be soaring up to God, and might be taken up with high and holy and
everlasting things. What if your thoughts were employed for preferment, wealth
and honor in the world? Alas what silly things are these, in comparison of
what your souls are capable of? You will say so your selves when you see how
they will end, and fail your expectations. Imprison not your minds in this
infernal cell, when the superior regions are open to their access: confine them
not to this narrow vessel of the body, whose tossings and dangers on these
boistrous seas will make them restless, and disquiet them with tumultuous
passions, when they may safely land in Paradise and there converse with Christ.
God made you men, and if you reject not his grace, will make you Saints: Make
not your selves like beasts or vermin. God gave you souls that can step in a
moment from earth to heaven, and there foretast the endless joys: Do not you
stick then fast in clay, and setter them with worldly cares, or intoxicate them
with fleshly pleasures, nor employ them in the worse-then-childish toys of
ambitious, sensual, worldly men: Your thoughts have Manna, Angels food,
provided them by God: If you will loath this and refuse it, and choose with the
serpent to feed on the dust, or upon the filth of sin, God shall be judge, and
your consciences one day shall be more faithful witnesses, whether you have
dealt like wise men or like fools; like friends or enemies to your selves; and
whether you have not chosen baseness, and denied your selves the advancement
which was offered you.

9. If God be not the chiefest in your thoughts, they are no better then
dishonest and unjust. You are guilty of denying him his own. He made not your
minds for lust and pleasure, but for himself: you expect that your cattle,
your goods, your servants, be employed for your selves, because they are your
own. But God may call your minds his own by a much fuller title: for you hold
all but derivatively and dependently from him: what will you call it but
injustice and dishonesty, if your wife, or children, or servants, or goods, be
more at the use and service of others, then of you? If any can show a better
title to your Thoughts then God does, let him have them; but if not, deny him
not his own. O straggle not so much from home; for you will be nowhere else so
well as there: Desire not to follow strangers, you know not whither, nor for
what: you have a Master of your own, that will be better to you then all the
strangers in the world. Bow not down to creatures, that are but Images of the
true and solid good: Commit not Idolatry or Adultery with them in your
thoughts: Remember still that God stands by: Bethink you how he will take it at
your hands: and how it will be judged of at last, when he pleads his right, his
kindness, and solicitations of you; and you have so little to say for any
pretense of right or merit in the creature. Why are not men ashamed of the
greatest dishonesty against God, when all that have any humanity left them, do
take adultery, theft and other dishonesty against creatures for a shame? The
time will come when God and his interest shall be better understood, that this
dishonesty against Him, will be the matter of the most confounding shame, that
ever did or could befall men. Prevent this by the juster exercise of your
thoughts, and keeping them pure and chaste to God.

10. If God be not in your thoughts (and the chiefest in them) there will be no
matter in them of solid comfort or content. Trouble and deceit will be all
their work: when they have fled about the earth, and taken a taste of every
flower, they will come laden home with nothing better then Vanity and
Vexation. Such thoughts may excite the laughter of a fool, and cause that mirth
that is called madness, Eccles. 7. 4, 6. and 2. 2. But they will never conduce
to settled Peace, and durable content: And therefore they are always repented
of themselves, and are troublesome to our review, as being the shame of the
sinner, which he would fain be cleared of or disown. Though you may approach
the creature with passionate fondness, and the most delightful promises and
hopes, be sure of it, you will come off at last with grief and disappointment,
if not with the loathing of that which you chose for your delight. Your
thoughts are in a wilderness among thorns and briars, when God is not in them
as their guide and end: They are lost and torn among the creatures; but rest
and satisfaction they will find none. It may be at the present it is pleasanter
to you to think of recreation, or business, or worldly wealth then to think of
God: But the pleasure of these thoughts is as delusory, and short-lived, as are
the things themselves on which you think. How long will you think with pleasure
on such fading transitory things? And the pleasure cannot be great at the
present, which reaches but the flesh and fantasy, and which the possessed
knows will be but short. Nay you will shortly find by sad experience, that of
all the creatures under heaven, there will none be so bitter to your thoughts,
as those which you now find greatest carnal sweetness in: O how bitter will the
thought of idolized honor, and abused wealth and greatness be to a dying or a
damned Dives! The thoughts of that Alehouse or Playhouse where thou had thy
greatest pleasure, will trouble thee more then the thoughts of all the houses
in the town besides: The thoughts of that one woman with whom thou did commit
thy pleasant sin, will wound and vex thee more then the thoughts of all the
women in the town besides. The thoughts of that beloved sport which thou
could not be weaned from, will be more troublesome to thee then the thoughts
of a thousand other things in which thou had no inordinate delight. For the
end of sinful mirth is sorrow: when Solomon had tried to please himself to the
full, in mirth, in buildings, vineyards, woods, waters, in servants, and
possessions, silver, and gold, and cattle, and singers, and instruments of
music of all sorts, in greatness, and all that the eye or appetite or heart
desired, he finds when he awaked from this pleasant dream, that he had all
this while been taken up with Vanity and Vexation, in so much that he says on
the review [ Therefore I hated life, because the work that is wrought under the
sun, is grievous to me, for all is vanity and vexation of spirit: Yea I hated
all my labor which I had taken under the sun,] Eccles. 2. 1, 2, 3, etc. 17.
18. You may toil out and tire your selves among these briars, in this barren
wilderness; but if ever you would feel any solid ground of quietness and rest,
it must be by coming off from vanity, and seeking your felicity in God, and
living sincerely for Him and upon Him, as the worldling does upon the world.
His pardoning mercy must begin your Peace forgiving you your former thoughts,
and ^is healing quickening mercy must increase it, by teaching you better to
employ your thoughts, and drawing up your hearts unto himself; and his
glorifying mercy must perfect it, by giving you the full intuition and fruition
of himself in heaven, and employing you in his perfect Love and Praise, not
leaving any room for creatures, nor suffering a thought to be employed on
vanity for ever.

CHAP. IV.
BY this time I hope you may see reason to call your selves to a strict
account, what converse you have been taken up with in the world, and upon what
you have exercised your thoughts: surely you must needs be conscious, that the
thoughts which have been denied God, have brought you home but little
satisfaction, and have not answered the ends of your creation, redemption or
preservation! and that they are now much fitter matter for your penitential
tears, then for your comfort, in the review! I do not think you dare own and
stand to, those thoughts which have been spent for fleshly pleasures, or in
unnecessary worldly cares, or that were wasted in impertinent vagaries upon any
thing, or nothing, when you should have been seeking God! I do not think you
have now any great pleasure, in the review of those thoughts, which once were
taken up with pleasure, when your most pleasant thoughts should have been of
God. Dare you approve of your rejecting your Creator and the great
concernments of your soul out of your thoughts, and wasting them upon things
unprofitable and vain? Did not God, and Heaven deserve more of your serious
thoughts then any thing else that ever they were employed on? Have you laid
them out on any thing that more concerned you? or on any thing more excellent,
more honorable, more durable, or that could claim precedence upon any just
account? Did you not shut heaven it self out of your thoughts, when you shut
out God? And is it not just that God and Heaven should shut out you? If Heaven
be not the principal matter of your thoughts, its plain that you do not
principally love it: And if so, judge you whether those that Love it not are
fit to be made possessors of it.

O poor distracted senseless world! Is not God Great enough to command and take
up your chiefest cogitations? Is not Heaven enough to find them work, and
afford them satisfaction and delight? And yet is the dung and dotage of the
world enough? Is your honor and wealth, and fleshly delights aed sports
enough? God will shortly make you know, whether this were wise and equal
dealing! Is God so low, so little, so undeserving, to be so often and easily
forgotten, and so hardly and so slightly remembered? I tell you, ere long he
will make you think of him to your sorrow, whether you will or no, if grace do
not now set open your hearts, and procure him better entertainment.

But perhaps you will think that you walk with God, because you think of him
sometimes ineffectually, and as on the by. But is he esteemed as your God, if
he have not the Command, and if he have not the precedence of his creatures?
Can you dream that indeed you walk with God, when your hearts were never
grieved for offending him, nor never much solicitous how to be reconciled to
him; nor much inquisitive whether your state or way be pleasing or displeasing
to him? when all the business of an unspeakable importance, which you have to
do with God, before you pass to judgment, is forgotten and undone, as if you
knew not of any such work that you had to do! when you make no serious
preparation for death, when you call not upon God in secret, or in your
families, unless with a little heartless lip labor; and when you love not the
spirituality of his worship, but only delude your souls with the mockage of
hypocritical outside complement. Do you walk with God while you are plotting
for preferment, and gaping after worldly greatness, while you are gratifying
all the desires of your flesh, and making provision for the future satisfying
of its lusts? Romans 13. 13. Are you walking with God when you are hating him in
his Holiness, his Justice, his Word and Ways, and hating all that seriously
love and seek him? when you are doing your worst to dispatch the work of your
damnation, and put your salvation past all hope, and draw as many to Hell with
you as you can: If this be a walking with God, you may take further comfort
that you shall also dwell with God according to the sense of such a walk: you
shall dwell with him as a devouring fire, and as just, whom you thus walked
with in the contempt o^ his mercies, and the provocation of his Justice.

I tell you, if you walked with God indeed, his authority would rule you, his
Greatness would much take up your minds, and leave less room for little things;
You would trust his promises, and fear his threatenings, and be awed by his
presence, and the Idols of your hearts would fall before him* He would over
power your lusts, and call you off from your ambitious and covetous designs,
and obscure all the creatures Glory. Believing serious effectual thoughts of
God, are very much different from the common, doubtful, dreaming, uneffectual
cogitations of the ungodly world.

Object. But (perhaps some will say) [ This seems to be the work of
Preachers, and not of every Christian to be always meditating of God: Poor
people must think of other matters: They have their business to do, and their
families to provide for: And ignorant people are weak-headed, and are not able
either to manage or endure a contemplative life: so much thinking of God will
make them melancholy and mad, as experience tells us it has done by many: and
therefore this is no exercise for them.]

To this I answer, 1. Every Christian has a God to serve* and a Soul to save,
and a Christ to believe in and obey, and an endless happiness to secure and
enjoy, as well as Preachers: Pastors must study to instruct their flock, and to
save themselves* and those that hear them: The people must study to understand
and receive the mercy offered them, and to make their own calling and election
sure. It is not said of Pastors only, but of every blessed man, that His
delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he meditate day and night,
Psalm. 1. 2. 2. And the due meditation of the soul upon God, is so far from
taking you off from your necessary business in the world, that it is the only
way to your orderly and successful management of it. 3. And it is not a
distracting thoughtfulness that I persuade you to, or which is included in a
Christians walk with God: but it is a directing, quickening, exalting,
comforting course of meditation: Many a hundred have grown melancholy and mad
with careful discontentful thoughts of the world; it does not follow therefore
that no man must think of the world at all, for fear of being mad or
melancholy; but only that they should think of it more regularly, and correct
the error of their thoughts and passions: so is it about God and heavenly
things: Our thoughts are to be well ordered, and the error of them cured, and
not the use of them forborne. Atheism and Impiety, and forgetting God, are
unhappy means to prevent melancholy: There are wiser means for avoiding
madness, than by renouncing all our Reason, and living by sense like the beasts
that perish, and forgetting that we have an everlasting life to live.

But yet because I am sensible that some do here mistake on the other hand, and
I would not lead you into any extreme, I shall fully remove the scruple
contained in this Objection, by showing you in those following Propositions, in
what sense, and how far your thoughts must be taken up with God (supposing what
was said in the beginning, where I described to you the duty of Walking with
God.)

Prop. 1. When we tell you that your Thoughts must be on God, it is not a
course of idle musing, or mere thinking, that we call you to, but it is a
necessary practical thinking of that which you have to do, and of him that you
must love, obey and enjoy. You will not forget your Parents, or Husband, or
Wife, or Friend; and yet you will not spend your time in sitting still and
thinking of them, with a musing unprofitable thoughtfulness; But you will have
such thoughts of them, and so many as are necessary to the Ends, even to the
Love and Service which you owe them, and to the Delight that your hearts should
have in the fruition of them. You cannot love, or obey, or take pleasure in
those that you will not think of: You will follow your trades, or your Masters
service but unhappily, if you will not think on them. Thinking is not the work
that we must take up with: It is but a subservient instrumental duty, to
promote some greater higher duty: Therefore we must Think of God, that we may
Love him, and do his Service, and Trust him, and Fear him, and Hope in him, and
make him our Delight. And all this is it that we call you to, when we are
persuading you to Think on God.

2. An hypocrite, or a wicked enemy of God, may Think of him speculatively, and
perhaps be more frequent in such thoughts than many practical believers. A
Learned man may study about God, as he does about other matters, and names, and
notions* and propositions and decisions concerning God, may be a principal part
of his Learning: A Preacher may study about God and the matters of God, as a
Physician or a Lawyer do about the matters of their own profession, either for
the pleasure which knowledge as knowledge brings to humane nature, or for the
credit of being esteemed wise and learned, or because their gain and
maintenance comes in this way. They that fill many Volumes with Controversies
concerning God, and fill the Church with contentions and troubles by them, and
their own hearts with malice and uncharitableness against those that are not of
their opinions, have many and many a thought of God, which yet will do nothing
to the saving of their souls, no more than they do to the sanctifying of them.
And such learned men may think more Orthodoxly and Methodically concerning God,
than many an honest serious Christian, who yet thinks of him more effectually
and savingly: Even as they can discourse more orderly and copiously of God,
when yet they have no saving knowledge of him.

3. All men must not bestow so much time in Meditation as some must do: It is
the Calling of Ministers to study so as to furnish thrir minds with all those
truths concerning God, which are needful to the Edification of the Church; and
so to meditate on these things as to give themselves wholly to them, 1 Timothy 4.
15, 16. It is both the work of their common and their special Calling: The
study necessary to Christians as such, belongs as well to others as to them:
But other men have another special or particular Calling, which also they must
think of, so far as the nature and ends of their daily labors do require. It
is a hurtful error to imagine that men must either lay by their Callings to
meditate on God, or that they must do them negligently, or to be taken up in
the midst of their employments with such studies of God as Ministers are that
are separated to that work.

4. No man is bound to be continually taken up with actual, distinct
cogitations about God: For in duty we have many many other things to think on,
which must have their time: And as we have Callings to follow, and must eat our
bread in the sweat of our brows, so we must manage them with prudence: A good
man will guide his affairs with discretion, Psalm. 112. 5. It is both necessary
as duty, and necessary as a means to the preservation of our very faculties,
that both body and mind have their times of employment about our lawful
business in the world: The understandings of many cannot bear it, to be always
employed on the greatest and most serious things: Like Lute* strings they will
break, if they be raised too high, and be not let down and relaxed when the
lesson is played. To think of nothing else but God, is to break the Law of God,
and to confound the mind, and to disable it to think aright of God, or any
thing. As he that bid us pray continually, did not mean that we should do
nothing else, or that actual prayer should have no interruptions, but that
habitual desires should on all meet occasion be actuated and expressed; so he
that would be chief in all our thoughts, did never mean that we should have no
thoughts of any thing else, or that our serious meditation on him should be
continual without interruption: but that the final intending of God, and our
dependence on him, should be so constant as to be the spring or mover of the
rest of the thoughts and actions of our lives.

5. An habitual intending God as our End, and depending on his support, and
subjection to his Government, will carry on the soul in a sincere and constant
course of Godliness, though the actual most observed thoughts of the soul, be
fewer in number about God, than about the means that lead unto him, and the
occurrences in our way: The soul of man is very active and comprehensive, and
can think of several things at once: and when it is once clear and resolved in
any case, it can act according to that knowledge and resolution, without any
present sensible cogitation; nay while its actual most observed thoughts, are
upon something else. A Musician that has an habitual skill, can keep time and
tune while he is thinking of some other matter: A Weaver can cast his shuttle
right, and work truly, while he is thinking or talking of other things. A man
can eat and drink with discretion while he talks of other things. Some men can
dictate to two or three Scribes at once, upon diverse subjects: A Traveller can
keep on his way, though he seldom think distinctly of his Journies end, but be
thinking or discoursing most of the way, upon other matters: For before he
undertook his Journey he thought both of the end and way, and resolved then
which way to go, and that he would go through all both fair and foul, and not
turn back, till he saw the place: And this habitual understanding and
resolution, may be secretly and unobservedly active, so as to keep a man from
erring, and from turning back, though at the same time the Travelers most
sensible thoughts and his discourse may be upon something else. When a man is
once resolved of his End, and has laid his design, he is past deliberating of
that, and therefore has less use of his cogitations thereabout: but is readier
to lay them out upon the means, which may be still uncertain, or may require
his frequent deliberation. We have usually more thoughts and speeches by the
way, about our company, or our Horses, or Innes, or other accommodations, or
the fairness or foulness of the way, and other such occurrences, than we have
about the place that we are going to: And yet this secret intention of our end,
will bring us thither. So when a soul has cast up his accounts, and has
renounced a worldly and sensual felicity, and has fixed his hopes and
resolutions upon Heaven, and is resolved to cast himself upon Christ, and take
God for his only portion, this secret habitual resolution will do much to keep
him constant in the way, though his thoughts and talk be frequently on other
things: Yea when we are thinking of the creature, and feel no actual thoughts
of God, it is yet God more than the creature that we think of: For we did
beforehand look on the creature as Gods work, representing him unto the world,
and as his talents which we must employ for him, and as every creature is
related to him: And this estimation of the creature is still habitually (and in
some secret less-perceived acts)) most prevalent in the soul. Though I am not
always sensibly thinking of the King, when I use his Coin, or obey his Law,
etc. yet it is only as his Coin still that I use it, and as his Laws that I
obey them. Weak Habits cannot do their work without great carefulness of
thoughts: but perfect habits will act a man with little thoughtfulness, as
coming near the natural way of operation. And indeed the imperfection of our
Habitual Godliness does make our serious thoughts and vigilance and industry to
be the more necessary to us.

6. There are some thoughts of God that are necessary to the very Being of a
Holy state; as that God be so much in our thoughts, as to be preferred before
all things else, and principally beloved and obeyed; and to be the end of our
lives, and the byas of our wills: And there are some thoughts of God that are
necessary only to acting and increase of grace.

7. So great is the weakness of our Habits, so many and great are the
temptations to be overcome, so many difficulties are in our way, and the
occasions so various for the exercise of each grace, that it behooves a
Christian to exercise as much thoughtfulness about his end and work, as has
any tendency to promote his work and to attain his end: But such a
thoughtfulness as hinders us in our work, by stopping, or distracting, or
diverting us, is no way pleasing unto God. So excellent is our end, that we can
never encourage and delight the mind too much in the forethoughts of it. So
sluggish are our hearts, and so loose and unconstant are our apprehensions and
resolutions, that we have need to be most frequently quickening them, and
lifting at them, and renewing our desires, and suppressing the contrary
desires, by the serious thoughts of God and Immortality. Our Thoughts are the
bellows that must kindle the flames of Love, desire, hope and zeal: Our
thoughts are the spur that must put on a sluggish tired heart. And so far as
they conduce to any such works and ends as these, they are desirable and good.
But what Master loves to see his servant sit down and Think when he should be
at work? Or to use his Thoughts only to grieve and vex himself for his faults,
but not to mend them? to sit down lamenting that he is so bad and unprofitable
a servant, when he should be up and doing his Masters business as well as he is
able. Such Thoughts are sins as hinder us from duty, or discourage or unfit us
for it, however they may go under a better name.

8. The Godly themselves are very much wanting in the holiness of their
thoughts, and the liveliness of their affections. Sense leads away the
thoughts too easily after these present sensible things; while faith being
infirm, the Thoughts of God and heaven are much disadvantaged by their
invisibility. Many a gracious soul cries out, O that I could think as easily
and as affectionately and as unweariedly about the Lord and the life to come,
as I can do about my friends, my health, my habitation, my business, and other
concernments of this life! But alas such thoughts of God and Heaven have far
more enemies and resistance, then the thoughts of earthly matters have.

9. It is not distracting, vexatious thoughts of God, that the holy Scriptures
call us to; but it is to such thoughts as tend to the healing and peace and
felicity of the soul; and therefore it is not to a melancholy, but a joyful
life. If God be better then the world, it must needs be better to think of him.
If he be more beloved then any friend, the thoughts of him should be sweeter to
us. If he be the everlasting hope and happiness of the soul, it should be a
foretast of happiness to find him nearest to our hearts. The nature and use of
holy thoughts, and of all Religion, is but to exalt and sanctify and delight
the soul, and bring it up to everlasting Rest: And is this the way to
melancholy or madness? Or is it not liker to make men melancholy, to think of
nothing but a vain, deceitful and vexatious world, that has much to disquiet
us, but nothing to satisfy us, and can give the soul no hopes of any durable
delight?

10. Yet as God is not equally related unto all, so is he not the same to all
men's thoughts. If a wicked enemy of God and godliness, be forced and frightened
into some thoughts of God, you cannot expect that they should be as sweet and
comfortable thoughts, as those of his most obedient children are. While a man
is under the guilt and power of his reigning sin, and under the wrath and curse
of God, unpardoned, unjustified, a child of the devil, it is not this man's duty
to think of God, as if he were fully reconciled to him, and took pleasure in
him as in his own. Nor is it any wonder if such a man think of God with fear,
and think of his sin with grief and shame. Nor is it any wonder if the
justified themselves do think of God with fear and grief, when they have
provoked him by some sinful and unkind behavior, or are cast into doubts of
their sincerity and interest in Christ, and when he hides his face, or
assaulteth them with his terrors. To doubt whether a man shall live for ever in
Heaven or Hell, may rationally trouble the thoughts of the wisest man in the
world; and it were but sottishness not to be troubled at it: David himself
could say [ In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran in the
night and ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted: I remembered God and was
troubled: I complained and my spirit was overwhelmed: Thou hold mine eyes
waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak. -- Will the Lord cast off for
ever? -- ] Psalm. 77. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7.

Yet all the sorrowful thoughts of God, which are the duty of either the godly
or the wicked, are but the necessary preparatives of their joy: It is not to
melancholy, distraction or despair that God calls any, even the worst: But it
is that the wicked would [ Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon
him while he is near: that he would forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his Thoughts; and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to
our God, and he will abundantly pardon] Isa. 55. 6, 7. Despair is sin; and the
thoughts that tend to it are sinful thoughts, even in the wicked. If worldly
crosses, or the sense of danger to the soul had cast any into melancholy, or
overwhelmed them with fears, you can name nothing in the world that in reason
should be so powerful a remedy to recover them, as the Thoughts of God, his
Goodness and Mercy and readiness to receive and pardon those that turn unto
him, his Covenant, and Promises, and Grace through Christ, and the everlasting
happiness which all may have that will accept and seek it in the time of grace,
and prefer it before the deceitful transitory pleasures of the world. If the
Thoughts of God and of the Heavenly everlasting joys, will not comfort the
soul, and cure a sad despairing mind, I know not what can rationally do it.
Though yet its true that a presumptuous sinner must needs be in a trembling
state, till he find himself at peace with God: And mistaken Christians, that
are cast into causeless doubts and fears, by the malice of Satan, are unlikely
to walk comfortably with God, till they are resolved and recovered from their
mistakes and fears.

CHAP. V.
Obj. BUt, it may be the objector will be ready to think, that [If it be indeed
our duty to walk with God, yet Thoughts are no considerable part of it: what
more uncertain or mutable then our Thoughts? It is Deeds and not Thoughts that
God regards: To do no harm to any, but to do good to all, this is indeed to
walk with God. You set a man upon a troublesome and impossible work, while you
set him upon so strict a guard, and so much exercise of his thoughts: what
cares the Almighty for my thoughts?

Answ. 1, If God know better then you, and be to be believed, then Thoughts are
not so inconsiderable as you suppose. Does he not say, that [ the Toughts of
the wicked are an abomination to the Lord? Prove. 15. 26. It is the work of the
Gospel by its power, to pull down strong holds, casting down imaginations and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4,
5. The unrighteous man's forsaking his thoughts, is part of his necessary
conversion, Isa. 55. 7. It was the description of the deplorate state of the
old world, Genesis 6. 5. [ God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only evil
continually; and it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart] Judge by this, whether Thoughts be so little regarded
by God, as you imagine. David says of himself [ I hate vain thoughts] Psalm.
119. 113. Solomon says, [ The thoughts of the righteous are right] Prove. 12.
5. Paul says that [ Charity thinks not evil] 1 Cor. 13. 5.

2. Thoughts are the issue of a rational soul. And if its operations be
contemptible, its essence is contemptible: If its essence be noble, its
operations are considerable. If the soul be more excellent then the body, its
operations must be more excellent. To neglect our Thoughts and not employ them
upon God, and for God, is to vilisie our noblest faculties, and deny God who is
a spirit that spiritual service which he requires.

3. Our Thoughts are commonly our most cordial voluntary acts, and show the
temper and inclination of the heart: And therefore are regardable to God that
searches the heart, and calls first for the service of the heart.

4. Our Thoughts are radical and instrumental acts: such as they are, such are
the actions of our lives. Christ tells us that out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies, which defile the man, Matthew. 15. 19.

5. Our Thoughts are under a Law, as well as words and deeds, Prove. 24. 9. The
thought of foolishness is sin] And Matthew. 5. 28, etc. Christ extends the Law
even to the thoughts and desires of the heart. And under the Law it is said,
Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, etc.] viz.
of unmercifulness toward thy brother.

6. Thoughts can reach higher much then sense, and may be employed upon the
most excellent and invisible objects, and therefore are fit instruments to
elevate the soul that would converse with God. Though God be infinitely above
us, our Thoughts may be exercised on him: Our persons never were in Heaven, and
yet our Conversation must be in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. And how is that but by our
thoughts? Though we see not Christ, yet by the exercise of believing thoughts
on him, we love him and rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Though
God be invisible, yet our Meditation of him may be sweet, and we may delight in
the Lord, Psalm. 104. 34. Say not that all this is but fantastical and delusory,
as long as Thoughts of things unseen are meeter to actuate and elevate the
love, desires and delights of the soul, and to move and guide us in a regular
and holy life, then the sense of lesser present good. The Thoughts are not vain
or delusory, unless the object of them be false and vain and delusory. Where
the object is great, and sure and excellent, the thoughts of such things are
excellent operations of the soul. If thoughts of vainglory, wealth and
pleasure, can delight the ambitious, covetous and sensual; no wonder if the
Thoughts of God and life eternal afford us solid high delights.

7. The Thoughts are not so liable to be counterfeit and hypocritical as are
the words and outward deeds: And therefore they show more what the man is, and
what is in his heart. For as Solomon says, Prove. 23. 7. as he thinks in his
heart, so is he.]

8. Our Thoughts may exercise the highest graces of God in man; and also show
those graces, as being their effects. How is our Faith, and Love, and Desire,
and Trust, and Joy, and Hope to be exercised but by our cogitations? If Grace
were not necessary and excellent, it would not be wrought by the spirit of God,
and called the Divine nature, and the image of God: And if Grace be excellent,
the use and exercise of it is excellent: And therefore our Thoughts by which it
is exercised must needs have their excellency too.

9. Our Thoughts must be the instruments of our improving all holy Truth in
Scripture, and all the mercies which we receive, and all the afflictions which
we undergo. What good will Reading a Chapter in the Bible do to any one that
never Thinks on it? Our delight in the Law of God must engage us to meditate
in it day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. What good shall he get by hearing a Sermon
that exercises not his Thoughts for the receiving and digesting it. Our
considering what is said, is the way in which we may expect that God should
give us understanding in all things, 2 Timothy 2. 7. What the better will he be
for any of the merciful providence of God, who never bethinks him whence they
come, or what is the use and end that they are given for? what good will he get
by any affliction that never bethinks him, who it is that chastises him and
for what, and how he must get them removed, and sanctified to his good? A man
is but like one of the pillars in the Church, or like the corpse which he
treads on, or at best but like the dog that follows him thither for
company, if he use not his Thoughts about the work which he has in hand, and
cannot say, as Psalm. 48. 9. We have thought of thy loving kindness O God in the
midst of thy Temple] He that bideth you Hear, does also bid you Take heed how
you hear, Luke 8. 18. And you are commanded to lay up the word in your heart
and soul, Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19. And to set your hearts to all the words which are
testified among you: for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your
life.]

10. Our Thoughts are so considerable a part of Gods service, that they are often
put for the whole. Mal. 3. 16. A book of remembrance was written for them that
feared the Lord and that Thought upon his Name] Our believing and loving God,
and trusting in him, and desiring him and his grace, are the principal parts of
his service, which are exercised immediately by our thoughts: And in praise and
prayer it is this inward part that is the soul and life of all. He is a foolish
hypocrite that thinks to be heard for his much babbling, Matthew. 6. 7.

And on the contrary the Thoughts are named as the sum of all iniquity, Isa.
59. 7. Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity] Isa. 65. 2. [ I have spread out
my hands all the day long unto a rebellious people, which walks in a way that
was not good, after their own thoughts*] Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thy
heart from wickedness that thou may be saved: how long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee! Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has said in his heart* there
is no God.]

11. A man's Thoughts are the appointed orderly way for the Conversion of a
sinner, and the preventing of his sin and misery. David says Psalm. 119. 59 I
thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.] The prodigal
Luke 15. 17, 18. Came to himself and returned to his Father, by the success of
his own Consideration. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways,] Hag.
1. 5. is a voice that every sinner should hear. Ezekiel. 18. 14. It is he that
Considers and does not according to his Fathers sins, that shall not die.
Therefore it is Gods desire, O that they were wise and understood this, and
that they would consider their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. It is either men's
inconsiderateness, or the error of their thoughts, that is the cause of all
their wickedness: Isa. 1. 3. My people does not consider] Paul [ verily thought
that he ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus] Act. 26. 9. Many
deceive themselves by thinking themselves something when they are nothing, Gal.
6. 3. They think it strange that we run not with them to excess of riot: and
therefore they speak evil of us, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Disobedient formalists Consider
not that they do evil, when they think they are offering acceptable sacrifices
to God: Eccles. 5. 1, 2. The very murder of Gods holy ones has proceeded from
these erroneous thoughts; They that kill you shall think they do God service,
Joh. 16. 2. All the ambition, and covetousness, and injustice, and cruelty
following thereupon, which troubles the world, and ruineth men's souls, is from
their erroneous thoughts, overvaluing these deceitful things. Psalm. 49. 11.
Their inward thought is that their houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwelling places to all generations.] The presumptuous and impenitent are
surprised by destruction, for want of thinking of it to prevent it: [ In such
an hour as you think not, the son of man comes.]

12. Lastly the Thoughts are the most constant actions of a man, and therefore
most of the man is in them. We are not always reading, or hearing, or praying,
or working: but we are always Thinking. And therefore it does especially
concern us to see that this constant breath of the soul be sweet, and that this
constant stream be pure and run in the right channel. Well therefore did David
make this his request, Psalm. 139. 23, 24. Search me O God and know my heart:
try me and know my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead
me in the way everlasting. I say therefore to those that insist on this
irrational objection, that these very Thoughts of theirs, concerning the
inconsiderableness of Thoughts, are so foolish and ungodly, that when they
understand the evil even of these, they will know that Thoughts were more to be
regarded. [ If therefore thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, or if
thou have thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.]

And though, after all this, I still confess that it is so exceeding hard a
matter to keep the thoughts in holy exercise and order, that even the best do
daily and hourly sin, in the omissions, the disorder or the vanity of their
thoughts, yet for all that we must needs conclude that the inclination and
design of our Thoughts must be principally for God, and that the Thoughts are
principal instruments of the soul, in acting it in his service, and moving it
toward him, and in all this holy work of our Walking with God: And therefore
to imagine that Thoughts are inconsiderable and of little use, is to unman us
and unchristen us. The labor of the mind is necessary for the attaining the
felicity of the mind, ^as the labor of the body is necessary for the things
that belong unto the body. As bodily idleness brings unto beggary, when the
diligent hand makes rich, so the idleness of the soul does impoverish the soul*
when the laborious Christian lives plentifully and comfortably through the
blessing of God upon his industry and labor. You cannot expect that God appear
to you in a bodily shape, that you may have immediate converse with him in the
body: The corporal eating of him in transubstantiate bread, supposed common to
men and mice or dogs, we leave to Papists, who have made themselves a singular
new Religion, in despite of the common sense and reason of mankind, as well as
of the Scriptures and the judgment of the Church: It is in the spirit that you
must converse with God who is a spirit. The mind sees him by faith, who is
invisible to the bodily eyes. Nay if you will have a true and saving knowledge
of God, you must not liken him to any thing that is visible, nor have any
corporal conceivings of him: Earthly things may be the glass in which we may
behold him, while we are here in the flesh. But our conceivings of him must be
spiritual, and Minds that are immerst in flesh and earth, are unmeet to hold
communion with him: The natural man knows him not, and the carnal mind is
enmity to him, aend they that are in the flesh cannot please him, Romans 8. It is
the pure abstracted elevated soul, that understands by experience what it is
to Walk with God.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. HAving in the foregoing Uses, reproved the Atheism and contempt of God,
which ungodly men are continually guilty of, and endeavored to convince them
of the necessity and desirableness of Walking with God, and in particular of
improving our Thoughts for holy converse with him, and answered the objections
of the impious and Atheists; I shall next endeavor to cure the remnants of
this disease, in those that are sincerely holy, who live too strangely to God
their Father in the World. In the performance of this, I shall first show you
what are the benefits of this holy life which should make it appear desirable
and delightful. 2. I shall show you why Believers should addict themselves to
it as doubly obliged, and how it appears that their neglect of it is a sin of
special aggravations. This is the remainder of my task.

. 2. I. To Walk with God in a Holy and Heavenly Conversation, is the employment
most suitable to humane nature, not to its corrupt disposition, nor to the
carnal interest and appetite; but to nature as nature, to man as man: It is the
very work that he was made for: The faculties and frame of soul and body were
composed for it by the wise Creator: They are restored for it by the gracious
Redeemer. Though in corrupted nature where sensuality is predominant, there is
an estrangedness from God, and an enmity and hatred of him, so that the wicked
are more a verse to all serious holy converse with him (in prayer,
contemplation, and a heavenly life) then they are to a worldly sinful life; yet
all this is but the disease of nature, corrupting its appetite, and turning it
against that proper food, which is most suitable to its sound desires, and
necessary to its health and happiness. Though sinful habits are become as it
were a second Nature to the ungodly, so depraving their judgments and desires,
that they verily think the business and pleasures of the flesh are most
suitable to them; yet these are as contrary to nature as nature, that is, to
the primitive tendencies of all our faculties, and the proper use to which they
were fitted by our Creator, and to that true felicity which is the end of all
our parts and powers, even as madness is contrary to the rational nature,
though it were hereditary.

1. What can be more agreeable to the nature of man, then to be rational and
wise, and to live in the purest exercise of Reason? And certainly there is
nothing more rational then that we should live to God, and gladly accept of all
that communion with him which our natures on earth are capable of. Nothing can
be more Reasonable then for the Reasonable soul to be entirely addicted to him
that did create it, that does preserve it, and by whom it does subsist and act.
Nothing is more Reasonable then that the Absolute Lord of nature be honored
and served wholly by his Own: Nothing is more Reasonable then that the
Reasonable creature do live in the truest dependence upon, and subordination to
the Highest Reason; and that derived, imperfect, defectible wisdom, be
subservient to, and guided by the primitive, perfect, indefectible wisdom: It
is most reasonable that the Children depend upon the Father, and the foolish be
ruled by the most wise, and that the Subjects be governed by the universal
King; and that they honor him and obey him, and that the indigent apply
themselves to him that is All sufficient, and is most able and ready to supply
their wants; and that the Importent rest upon him that is Omnipotent.

2. Nothing can be more Reasonable, than that the Reasonable Nature should
intend its End, and seek after its true and chief felicity: And that it should
Love Good as Good, and therefore prefer the chiefest Good before that which is
transitory and insufficient. Reason commands the Reasonable Creature to avoid
its own delusion and destruction, and to rest upon him that can everlastingly
support us, and not upon the creature that will deceive us and undo us: and to
prefer the highest and noblest converse before that which is inferior,
unprofitable and base, and that we rejoice more in the highest, purest, and
most durable delights, than in those that are fordid, and of short continuance.
And who knows not that God is the chiefest Good, and true felicity of man,
the everlasting Rock, the durable delight, and to be preferred before his
creatures? And who might not find that would use his Reason, that all things
below are vanity and vexation?

3. Nothing can be more Rational and Agreeable to Man's Nature, than that the
superior faculties should govern the inferior, that the brutish part be
subject to the Rational; and that the ends and objects of this higher faculty
be preferred before the objects of the lower, that the objects of sense be made
subservient to the objects of Reason. If this be not Natural and Rational, then
it is natural to Man to be no Man, but a Beast, and Reasonable to be
Unreasonable. Now it is evident that a Holy Living unto God, is but the
improvement of true Reason, and its employment for and upon its noblest object,
and its ultimate End: And that a sensual life is the exercise of the inferior
brutish faculties, in predominacy above and before the rational: And therefore
to question whether God or the Creature should be first sought, and loved, and
principally desired, and delighted in, and served, is but to question whether
we should live like Men or like Beasts, and whether D^gs or wise men be fitter
companions for us? and whether the Rider or the Horse should have the rule?
whether the Rational or Sensitive Powers be superior and proper to the nature
of a man?

Object. But there is a middle state of life betwixt the sensual and the Divine
or Holy Life which sober Philosophers did live, and this is the most Natural
Life, and most properly so called.

Answ. I deny this: There is no middle state of life, if you denominate the
several states of life, from the several Ends, or the several Powers. I grant
that the very sensitive powers in man, especially the imagination, is much
advanced by the conjunction of Reason, above that of a brute: And I grant that
the Delights of the Fantasy may be preferred before the immediate pleasure of
the senses: And I grant that some little distant knowledge of God, and things
Divine, and Hopes of attaining them, may affect an unsanctified man with an
answerable pleasure. But all this is nothing to prove that there is a third
sort of End, or of Powers, and so a third or middle state of life, specifically
distinct from the sensitive and the Holy life. Besides, the Vegetative man has
no other life or faculties, than the Sensitive and the Rational: And therefore
one of these must be in predominancy or rule. And therefore he can have no
middle sort or End; and therefore no middle state of life, that can be said to
be agreeable to his nature. Those that seek and take up their chief felicity in
Riches and plenty, and provisions for the flesh, though not in present pleasing
of the sense, do live but the life of sensuality. A Fox or Dog takes pleasure
when he has eaten his belly full, to hide and lay up the rest: And so does the
Be to fill the Hive, and make provision for the Winter. The Proud that delight
in Honor and applause, and making others subject to their lusts, do live but
the life of sensuality: A Dog, a Horse, and other brutes, have something of the
same. They that are grave through Melancholy, or because they can reach no
great matter in the world, and because their old or duller spirits are not much
pleased with juvenile delights, and so live retiredly, and seek no higher
pleasure or felicity, but only sit down with the weeping or the laughing
Philosopher, lamenting or deriding the Vanity of the world, do yet live no
other than a sensual life: as an old Dog that has no pleasure in hunting or
playfulness, as he had when he was a Whelp. Only he is less deluded and less
vain, than other sensualists that find more pleasure in their course.

All the doubt is concerning those that place their felicity in Knowledge, and
those that delight in Moral Virtues, or that delight in studying of God, though
they are no Christians.

Answ. The point is weighty, and has often unhappily fallen into injudicious
hands. I shall endeavor to resolve it as truly, clearly and impartially as I
can. 1. It is a great error against the Nature of man, to say, that Knowledge
as such, is fit to be any man's chief and ultimate End. It may be that act which
is next the Enjoying Act of the Will, which is it that indeed is next the End,
objectively considered: But it is not that Act which we call Ultimate Ultimus.
And this is plain 1. Because the Object of the Understanding, which is Truth,
is not formally the nearest object or matter of full felicity or delight: It is
Goodness that is the nearest object. 2. And therefore the office of the
Intellect is but introductive and subservient to the office of the Will, to
apprehend the Verity of Good, and present it to the will to be prosecuted or
embraced, or delighted in. There are many Truths that are ungrateful and
vexatious, and which men would wish to be no truths: And there is a knowledge
which is troublesome, useless, undesirable and tormenting, which even a wise
man would fain avoid if he knew how. Morality is but preparatively in the
intellect: and therefore intellectual acts as such are not morally Good, or
evil, but only participatively, as subject to the Will. And therefore knowledge
as such being not a Moral Good, can be no other than such a Natural Good as is
Bonum alicui, only so far as it tends to some Welfare or Happiness, or
pleasure of the possessor or some other: And this Welfare or Pleasure is either
that which is suited to the Sensitive Powers, or to the Rational (which is to
be found in the love of God alone.)

2. I add therefore that even those men that seem to take up their felicity in
common Knowledge, indeed do but make their Knowledge subservient to something
else which they take for their felicity. For Knowledge of Evil may Torment
them. It is only to know something which they take to be Good, that is their
Delight. And it is the Complacency or Love of that Good at the Heart, which
sets them on work, and causes the delight of Knowing. If you will say that
common Knowledge as Knowledge does immediately Delight, yet will it be found
but such a pleasing of the Fantasy, as an Ape has in spying marvels, which
if it have no end that is higher, is still but a sensitive Delight; but if it be
referred to a higher Delight (in God) does participate of the nature of it.
Delight in general is the common end of Men and Brutes: But in specie they are
distinguished as Sensual or Rational.

3. If you suppose a Philosopher to be Delighted in studying Mathematics, or
any of the works of God, either he has herein an End, or no End beyond the
Knowledge of the Creature: Either he terminateth his desires and delights in
the Creature, or else uses it as a means to raise him to the Creator. If he
study and delight in the Creature ultimately, this is indeed the Act of a
rational Creature, and an act of Reason, as to the faculty it proceeds from
(and so is a Rational Contrivance for sensual ends and pleasures:) But it is
but the error of Reason, and is no more agreeable to the Rational Nature, than
the deceit of the senses is to the sensitive. Nor is it finally to be numbered
with the operations felicitating humane nature, any more than an erroneous
dream of pleasure, or than that man is to be numbered with the lovers of
learning, who takes pleasure in the binding, leaves or letters of the book,
while he understands nothing of the sense. But if this Philosopher seek to
know the Creator in and by the Creatures, and take delight in the Makers
Power, Wisdom and Goodness, which appears in them, then this is truly a
Rational Delight, in it self considered, and beseeming a man. And if he reach
so far in it, as to make God his Highest desire and delight, overpowring the
desires and delights of sensuality, he shall be happy, as being led by the Son
unto the Father: But if he make but some little approaches toward it, and
drown all such desires in the sensual desires and delights, he is then but an
unhappy sensualist, and lives brutishly in the tenor of his life, though in
some acts in part he operate rationally as a man.

The like I may say of them that are said to place their delight in Moral
Virtues. Indeed nothing is properly a Moral Good (or virtue) but that which is
exercised upon God as our End, or upon the Creature as a Means to this End. To
study and know mere notions of God, or what is to be held and said of him in
discourse, is not to study or to know God, no more than to love the language
and phrase of holy writing, is to Love God. To study God as one that is less
regardable and desirable than our sensual delights, is but to blaspheme him. To
study seek and serve him as one that can promote or hinder our sensual
felicity, is but to abuse him as a means to your sensuality. And for the
virtues of Temperance, Justice or Charity, they are but Analogically and
secundum quid to be found in any ungodly person. Materially they may have them
in an eminent degree; but not as they are informed by the End which moralizeth
them. Jezabel's fast was not formally a virtue, but an odious way of Hypocrisy
to oppress the innocent: He that does works of Justice or Mercy, to Evil ends
only (as for applause, or to deceive, etc.) and not from the true principles of
Justice and Mercy, does not thereby exercise Moral Virtue, but hypocrisy, and
other vice. He that does works of Justice and Mercy, out of mere natural
compassion to others, and desire of their good, without respect to God, as
obliging, or rewarding, or desiring it, does perform such a natural good work,
as a Lamb or a gentle Beast does to his fellows, which has not the true form
of Moral Virtue, but the Matter only. He that in such works has some little
byrespect to God, but more to his carnal interest among men, does that which on
the by, participateth of Moral Good, or is such secundum quid, but not
simpliciter, being to be denominated from the part predominant. He that does
works of Justice or Charity principally to please God, and in true obedience to
his Will, and a desire to be conformed thereto, does that which is formally a
Moral Good, and Holy, though there may be abhorred mixtures of worse respects.

So that there are but two states of life here: One of those that walk after
the flesh, and the other of those that walk after the spirit: However the flesh
has several materials and ways of pleasure: And even the Rational actings
that have a carnal end, are carnal finally and morally, though they are acts of
Reason; For they are but the errors of Reason, and defectiveness of true
Rationality; and being but the acts of erroneous Reason as captivated by the
flesh, and subservient to the carnal Interest, they are themselves to be
denominated carnal: And so even the Reasonable soul as biased by sensuality,
and captivated thereto, is included in the name of [ Flesh] in Scripture.

How much Moral Good is in that course of Piety or Obedience to God, which
proceeds only from the Fear of Gods Judgments, without any Love to him, I
shall not now discuss, because I have too far digrest already.

All that I have last said, is to show you the Reasonableness of Living unto
God, as being indeed the proper and just employment of the superior faculties
of the soul, and their Government of the lower faculties. For if any other
called Moralists do seem to subject the Sensual life to the Rational, either
they do but seem to do so; the sensual interest being indeed predominant, and
their rational operations subjected thereto: or at the best, it is but some
poor and erroneous employment of the Rational faculties which they exercise, or
some weak approaches toward that high and holy life, which is indeed the life
which the Rational nature was created for, and which is the right improvement
of it.

4. Moreover, nothing is more beseeming the nature of man, than to aspire after
the highest and noblest improvement of it self; and to live the most excellent
life that it is capable of. For every nature tends to its own perfection. But
it is most evident that to Walk with God in Holiness, is a thing that humane
nature is capable of; and that is the highest life that we are capable of on
earth: And therefore it is the life most suitable to our natures.

5. And what can be more Rational and beseeming a Created Nature, than to live
to those ends, which our Creator intended in the fabrication of our Natures?
It is His Ends that are principally to be served. But the very composure of our
faculties plainly prove, that His End was that we should be fitted for His
Service: He gave us no powers or capacity in vain: And therefore to serve him
and walk with him, is most suitable to our natures.

Obj. That is Natural which is first, and born with us: But our enmity to
Holiness is first, and not our Holiness.

Answ. It may be called Natural indeed, because it is first, and born with us:
And in that respect we confess that sin and not Holiness is Natural to us. But
Holiness is called Natural to us, in a higher respect, because it was the
Primitive Natural constitution of man, and was before sin, and is the
perfection or health of nature, and the right employment and improvement of it,
and tends to its happiness. An hereditary leprosy may be called* Natural, as
it is first, and before health in that person: But health and soundness is
Natural, as being the well-being of Nature, when the Leprosy is unnatural, as
being but its desease, and tending to its destruction.

Obj. But Nature in its first constitution was not Holy, but Innocent only, and
it was by a superadded gift of Grace that it became Holy as some Schoolmen
think; and as others think, Adam had no Holiness till his restoration.

Answ. These are Popish improved fancies, and contrary to Nature and the Word
of God. 1. They are nowhere written, nor have no evidence in Nature, and
therefore are the groundless dreams of men.

2. The work of our recovery to God is called in Scripture a Redemption,
Renovation, Restoration, which imply that Nature was once in that Holy estate
before the fall. And it is expressly said, that the New man which we put on is
renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him] Col. 3. 10. And
after Gods Image Adam was created.

3. If it belong to the soundness and integrity of Nature to be Holy (that is,
disposed and addicted to live to God) then it is an abusive temerity, for men
out of their own imagination, to feign, that God first made Nature defective,
and then mended it by superadded Grace. But if it belong not to the soundness
and integrity of humane Nature to be Holy, then why did God give him Grace to
make him so? Nay then, it would follow that when God sanctified Adam, or any
since, he made him specifically another thing, another creature, of another
nature, and did not only cure the diseases of his nature.

4. It is yet apparent in the very Nature of man's faculties, that their very
usefulness and tendency, is to live to God, and to enjoy him: And that God
should make a Nature apt for such a use, and give it no disposedness to its
proper use, is an unnatural conceit. We see to this day that it is but an
unreasonable abuse of Reason, when it is not used Holily for God; and it is a
very disease of nature to be otherwise disposed. Therefore Primitive Nature had
such a Holy inclination.

5. The contrary opinion tends to Infidelity, and to brutifie humane Nature.
For if no man can believe that he must be Holy and live to God, and enjoy him
hereafter in Heaven, but he that also believes that Primitive Nature was never
disposed or qualified for such a life; and that God must first make a man
another creature in specie, of another nature (and consequently not a man) this
is not only so improbable, but so contrary to Scripture and Reason, that few
considerate persons would believe it. As if we must believe that God would turn
brutes into men. God heals, elevateth and perfecteth Nature, but does not
specificially change it, at least in this life.

Obj. But let it be granted that he gives not man specifically another Nature,
yet he may give him such higher gifts, as may be like another Nature to him so
far.

Answ. No doubt he may and does give him such gifts as actuate and perfect
Nature: but some Disposition to our ultimate end is essential to our Nature;
and therefore to assign man another ultimate end, and to give a Disposition to
it, of which he had no seed, or part, or principle before, is to make him
another creature. I confess that in lapsed man, the Holy Disposition is so far
dead, as that the change makes a man a New Creature in a Moral sense (as be is
a New Man that changes his mind and manners:) But still Nature has its
aptitude as Rational to be employed for its Maker; so that he is not a New
Creature in a Natural sense.

An actual or habitual willingness to this Holy employment, a promptitude to
it, and a due understanding of it, is the New Creature Morally so called which
is given in our sanctification: But the Natural aptitude that is in our
faculties as Rational, to this holy life, is essential to us as men, or as
Rational; even to have the Potentiam naturalem which must yet have further help
or moral life to actuate it. And Adam had both these: The one he retained, or
else he had not continued a man, The other he lost, or else he had not had need
of Renovation.

6. If Adams Nature had not been Disposed to God as to his End and Sovereign,
then the Law of Nature (to adhere to God, and obey and serve him) was not
written in his heart: And then it would not have been his duty to adhere to
God, and to obey and serve him; which is so false, that even in lapsed
unrenewed Nature, there is left so much aptitude hereto, as will prove him to
be still under the obligations of this Law of Nature, even actually to adhere
to God, and to obey him, which a dead man, a mad man, or an Infant is not
(immediately.)

By all this you see, that though the blindness and disease of Reason, is
contrary to faith and holiness, yet Reason it self is so much for it, as that
Faith it self is but the act of elevated well informed Reason; and supernatural
Revelation is but the means to inform our Reason, about things which have not a
natural evidence, discernable by us. And sanctification (actively taken) is but
the healing of our Reason and Rational appetite: And Holiness is but the health
or soundness of them. The error of Reason must be renounced by Believers; but
not the use of Reason: The sufficiency of Reason and Natural Light without
supernatural Light and Help, we must all deny: But to set Reason as Reason in
opposition to Faith or Holiness, or Divine Revelation, is as gross a piece of
foolery, as to set the visive faculty in opposition to the Light of the Sun, or
to its objects. It is the unreasonableness of sinners that is to be cured by
Illuminating Grace. They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge. Their Reason is wounded, depraved and corrupted about the matters of
God: They have Reason to serve the flesh, but not to Master it. God does renew
men by giving them wisdom, and bringing them to a sound mind; As Logic
helps Reason in discourse and arguing, so Theology informs Reason about the
matters of God and our salvation: and the Spirit of God does make his Doctrine
and Revelation effectual. Make Nature sound, and Reason clear, and then we will
consent that all men be persuaded to live according to their Nature and their
Reason. But if a Bedlam will rave and tear himself and others, and say, this is
according to my Nature or my Reason; it is fitter that chains and whips do cure
that Nature and Reason, than that he be allowed to live according to his
madness. If a Drunkard or Whoremonger will say, My Nature and Reason incline
me to please my appetite and lust, it is fit that the swinish Nature be
corrected, and the beast which rides and rules the man, be taken down* and
when indeed his Nature is the Nature of a man, and fitted to the use and ends
that it was made for, then let him live according to it and spare not. If a
malicious man will abuse or kill his neighbors, and say, This is according to
my Nature, let that Nature be used as the Nature of Wolves and Foxes, and other
noxious creatures are. But let humane Nature be cured of its blindness,
carnality and cortuption, and then it will need no external testimony to
convince it, that no employment is so natural and suitable to man, as to Walk
with God, in Love and Confidence, and reverent Worship, and cheerful Obedience
to his Will. A worldly fleshly sensual life, will then appear to be below the
rational nature of a man, as it is below us to go to grass with horses, or to
live as mere companions of brutes. It will then appear to be as natural for us
to Love and Live to our Creator and Redeemer, and to Walk with God, as for a
Child to love his Parents, and to live with them and serve them. When I say
that this is Natural, I mean not that it is Necessary by Natural Necessity, or
that Grace does operate per modum naturae, as the irrational motion is so
called. There is a Brutish or Inanimate Nature, and there is a Rational
Voluntary Nature: Grace works not according to the way of Inanimate or
Brutish Nature, but according to the way of Rational Nature, in free Agents. I
may well say that whatever is Rational, is Natural to a Rational Creature as
such, so far as he discerns it. Yea and Habits, though they effect not
necessarily, but freely in a Rational nature, yet they Incline Necessarily, and
per modum naturae. They contain in their being a Natural aptitude and
propensity to action.

Obj. But thus you confound Nature and Grace, Natural and supernatural
operations, while you make Grace Natural.

Answ. No such matter: Though walking with God be called Natural, as it is most
agreeable to Nature so far as it is sound, and is the felicity and meetest
employment of the rational nature as such; Yet 1. Diseased nature does abhor
it, as a diseased stomach the pleasantest and most wholesome food (as I said
before.) 2. And this disease of Nature cannot he cured without Divine
supernatural Grace. So that as to the efficient cause, our Holiness is
supernatural. But it is unsound doctrine of those that affirm that Adam in his
pure Natural state of innocence, had no Natural Holiness, or aptitude and
promptitude to Walk with God in order to everlasting happiness; but say that
all this was either wanting to him, and was a state specifically distinct,
which he fell short off by his sin, or that it was given him by superadded
Grace, and was not in his entire Nature.

And yet we deny not but as to Degrees, Adams nature was to grow up to more
perfection: and that his Natural Holiness contained not a sufficient immediate
aptitude and promptitude to every duty which might afterward be required of
him; but this was to be obtained in the exercise of that Holiness which he had:
Even as a Vine or other fruit tree, though it be Natural to it to bear its
proper fruit, yet has it not an immediate sufficient aptitude hereto, whilst
it is but appearing out of the seed, before it be grown up to just maturity. Or
as it is Natural to a man to discourse and reason; but yet his nature in
infancy, or untaught and unexercised, has not a sufficient immediate aptitude
and promptitude hereunto. Or as Grace inclines a renewed soul* to every holy
Truth and duty: and yet such a soul in its infancy of Grace, has not a
sufficient immediate aptitude or promptitude to the receiving of every holy
truth, or the doing of every holy duty; but must grow up to it by degrees. But
the addition of these degrees, is no specifical alteration of the nature of
man, or of that grace which was before received.

Having been so long upon this first Consideration (that Walking with God is
most agreeable to humane nature) I shall be briefer in the rest that follow.

II. TO Walk with God and live to him, is incomparably the Highest and Noblest
life. To converse with men only, is to converse with Worms: whether they be
Princes or poor men, they differ but as the bigger vermin from the lesser. If
they be Wise and Good, their Converse may be profitable and delightful, because
they have a beam of excellency from the face of God: (And O how unspeakable is
the distance between his Wisdom and Goodness, and theirs!) But if they be
foolish, ungodly and dishonest, how loathsome is their conversation? What
stinking breath is in their profane and filthy language? in their lies and
slanders of the just? in their sottish jears and scorns of those that Walk with
God? which expose at once their folly and misery to the pity of all that are
truly understanding. When they are gravely speaking evil of the things which
they understand not, or with a fleering confidence deriding merrily the holy
commands and ways of God, they are much more lamentably expressing their
infatuation, than any that are kept in chains in Bedlam: Though indeed with the
most they escape the reputation which they deserve, because they are attended
with persons of their own proportion of wisdom, that always reverence a silken
coat, and judge them wise that wear gold lace, and have the greatest
satisfaction of their wills and lusts, and are able to do most mischief in the
world: and because good men have learnt to honor the worst of their
superiors, and not to call them as they are. But God is bold to call them as
they are, and give them in his word, such names and characters by which they
might come to know themselves. And is it not a Higher* Nobler life to Walk with
God, then to Converse in Bedlam, or with intoxicated sensualists, that live in
a constant deliration?

Yea worse then so: ungodly men are children of the Devil, so called by Jesus
Christ himself, Joh. 8. 44. because they have much of the nature of the Devil,
and the lusts of their father they will do; yea they are taken captive by him
at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. They are the servants of sin, and do the drudgery
that so vile a Master sets them on, Joh. 8. 34. Certainly as the spirits of the
just are so like to Angels, that Christ says, we shall be as they and equal to
them; so the wicked are nearer kin to Devils then they themselves will easily
believe. They are as like him as children to their Father: He is a liar, and so
are they: He is a hater of God, and godliness, and godly men, and so are they:
He is a murderer, and would fain devour the holy seed; and such are they. He
envyeth the progress of the Gospel, and the prosperity of the Church, and the
increase of Holiness; and so do they. He has a special malice against the most
powerful and successful Preachers of the Word of God, and against the most
zealous and eminent Saints; and so have they. He cares not by what lies and
fictions he disgraceth them, nor how cruelly he uses them; No more do they,
(or some of them at least:) He cherishes licentiousness, sensuality and
impiety; and so do they. If they do seem better in their adversity and
restraint, yet try them but with prosperity, and power, and you shall see
quickly how like they are to devils. And shall we delight more to converse with
brutes and incarnate devils, than with God? Is it not a more high and excellent
conversation to Walk with God, and live to Him, then to be companions of such
degenerate men, that have almost forfeited the reputation of humanity? Alas,
they are companions so deluded and ignorant, and yet so wilful; so miserable,
and yet so confident and secure, that they are, to a believing eye, the most
lamentable sight that the whole world can show us out of hell. And how sad a
life must it then needs be, to converse with such, were it not for the hope
that we have of furthering their recovery and Salvation!

But to Walk with God is a word so high, that I should have feared the guilt of
arrogance in using it, if I had not found it in the holy Scriptures. It is a
word that imports so high and holy a frame of soul, and expresses such high
and holy actions, that the naming of it strikes my heart with reverence* as if
I had heard the voice to Moses [Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the
place whereon thou stand is holy ground] Exodus 3. 5. Methinks he that shall
say to me, Come see a man that walks with God, does call me to see one that is
next unto an Angel, or glorified soul! It is a far more reverend object in mine
eye, then ten thousand Lords or Princes considered only in their fleshly glory.
It is a wiser action for people to run and crowd together, to see a man that
Walks with God, then to see the pompous train of Princes, their entertainments,
or their triumphs. O happy man, that Walks with God, though neglected and
contemned by all about him! What blessed sights does he daily see! What
ravishing tidings, what pleasant melody does he daily hear, unless it be in his
swoons or sickness! what delectable food does he daily taste! He sees by faith
the God, the Glory, which the blessed Spirits see at hand by nearest intuition:
He sees that in a glass and darkly, which they behold with open face: He sees
the glorious Majesty of his Creator, the Eternal King, the Cause of Causes,
the composer, upholder, preserver, and governor of all the worlds: He
beholds the wonderful methods of his providence: And what he cannot reach to
see, he admireth, and waits for the time when that also shall be open to his
view! He sees by Faith the world of Spirits, the hosts that attend the throne
of God; their perfect righteousness, their full devotednesse to God; their
ardent love, their flaming zeal, their ready and cheerful obedience, their
dignity and shining glory, in which the lowest of them exceeds that which the
Disciples saw on Moses and Elias when they appeared on the holy Mount, and
talked with Christ. They hear by faith the heavenly consort, the high and
harmonious Songs of praise, the joyful triumphs of crowned Saints, the sweet
commemorations of the things that were done and suffered on earth, with the
praises of him that redeemed them by his blood, and made them Kings and Priests
to God: Herein he has sometime a sweet foretast of the everlasting pleasures,
which though it be but little, as Jonathans honey on the end of his rod, or as
the clusters of grapes which were brought from Canaan into the wilderness, yet
are they more excellent then all the delights of sinners. And in the beholding
of this celestial Glory, some beams do penetrate his breast, and so irradiate
his longing soul, that he is changed thereby into the same image from Glory to
Glory; the spirit of Glory and of God does rest upon him; And O what an
excellent holy frame does this converse with God possess his soul of! How
reverently does he think of him! what life is there in every Name and Attribute
of God which he hears or thinks on! The mention of his Power, his Wisdom,
his Goodness, his Love, his Holiness, his Truth, how powerful and how pleasant
are they to him! when to those that know him but by the hearing of the ear, all
these are but like common names and notions; and even to the weaker sort of
Christians, whose Walking with God is more uneven, and low, interrupted by
their sins and doubts and fears, this life and glory of a Christian course is
less perceived.

And the sweet appropriating and applying works of faith, by which the soul can
own his God, and finds it self owned by him, are exercised most easily and
happily in these near approaches unto God. Our doubts are cherished by our
darkness, and that is much caused by our distance: The nearer the soul does
approach to God, the more distinctly it hears the voice of mercy, the sweet
reconciling invitations of Love; and the more clearly it discerns that
goodness and amiableness in God, which makes it easier to us to believe that
he loves us, or is ready to embrace us; and banisheth all those false and
horrid apprehensions of him, which before were our discouragement, and made him
seem to us more terrible then amiable. As the Ministers and faithful servants
of Christ, are ordinarily so misrepresented by the malignant Devil, to those
that know them not, that they are ready to think them some silly fools, or
falsehearted hypocrites, and to shun them as strange undesirable persons; but
when they come to through acquaintance with them by a nearer and familiar
converse, they see how much they were mistaken, and wronged by their prejudice
and belief of slanderers misreports: Even so a weak believer that is under
troubles, in the apprehension of his sin and danger, is apt to hearken to the
enemy of God, that would show him nothing but his wrath, and represent God as
an enemy to him: And in this case it is exceeding hard for a poor sinner to
believe that God is reconciled to him, or loves him, or intends him good, but
he is ready to dread and shun him as an enemy, or as he would fly from a wild
beast or murderer, or from fire or water that would destroy him: And all these
injurious thoughts of God are cherished by strangeness and disacquaintance. But
as the soul does fall into an understanding and serious converse with God, and
having been often with him, does find him more merciful than he was by Satan
represented to him, his experience reconcileth his mind to God, and makes it
much easier to him to believe that God is reconciled unto him* when he has
found much better entertainment with God than he expected, and has observed
his benignity, and the treasures of his bounty laid up in Christ, and by him
distributed to believers, and has found him ready to hear and help, and found
him the only full and suitable felicitating Good, this banisheth his former
horrid thoughts, and makes him ashamed that ever he should think so
suspiciously, injuriously and dshonourably of his dearest God and Father.

Yet I must confess that there are many upright troubled souls, that are much
in reading, prayer and meditation, that still find it hard to be persuaded of
the Love of God, and that have much more disquietment and fear since they set
themselves to think of God, than they had before: But yet for all this, we may
well conclude, that to walk with God, is the way to consolation, and tends to
acquaint us with his love. As for those troubled souls whose experience is
objected against this, some of them are such as are yet but in their return to
God, from a life of former sin and misery, and are yet but like the needle in
the compass that is shaken, in a trembling motion toward their rest, and not
in any settled apprehensions of it. Some of them by the straying of their
imagination too high, and putting themselves upon more than their heads can
bear, and by the violence of fears or other passions, do make themselves
incapable of those sweet consolations which else they might find in their
converse with God; as a Lute when the strings are broken with straining, is
incapable of making any melody. All of them have false apprehensions of God,
and therefore trouble themselves by their own mistakes. And if some perplex
themselves by their error, does it follow that therefore the Truth is not
comfortable? Is not a Fathers presence consolatory, because some children are
afraid of their Fathers, that know them not because of some disguise? And some
of Gods children walk so unevenly and carelessly before him, that their sins
provoke him to hide his face, and to seem to reject them and disown them, and
so to trouble them that he may bring them home: But shall the comforts of our
Fathers Love and Family, be judged of by the fears or smart of those whom he is
scourging for their disobedience, or their trial? Seek God with understanding,
as knowing his essential properties, and what he will be to them that sincerely
and diligently seek him, and then you will quickly have experience, that
nothing so much tends to quiet, and settle a doubting, troubled, unstable
soul, as faithfully to walk with God.

But the soul that estrangeth it self from God, may indeed for a time have the
quietness of security; but (so far) it will be strange to the assurance of his
Love, and to true consolation. Expect not that God should follow you with his
comforts in your sinfulness and negligence, and cast them into your hearts
whilst you neither seek nor mind them, or that he give you the fruit of his
ways in your own ways. Will he be your joy when you forget him? will he
delight your souls with his goodness and amiableness, while you are taken up
with other matters, and think not of him? can you expect to find the comforts
of his family, among his enemies, out of doors? The experience of all the world
can tell you, that prodigals while they are straggling from their Fathers house,
do never taste the comfort of his embraces; The strangers meddle not with his
childrens joys: They grow not in the way of ambition, covetousness,
vainglory, or sensuality; but in the way of holy obedience, and of believing
contemplations of the Divine everlasting objects of delight. For, lo, they that
are far from him shall perish: he destroys them that go a whoring from him:
but it is good for us to draw nigh to God, Psalm. 73. 27, 28.

III. VVAlking with God, is the only course that can prove and make men truly
wise. It proves them wise that make so wise and good a choice, and are disposed
and skilled in any measure for so high a work. Practical Wisdom is the solid,
useful, profitable wisdom: And Practical Wisdom is seen in our Choice of
Good, and Refusal of Evil, as its most immediate and excellent effect. And no
Choosing or Refusing does show the Wisdom or Folly of man so much as that
which is about the Greatest matters, and which everlasting life or death
depends on. He is not thought so wise among men that can write a Volume about
the Orthography or Etymology of a word, or that can guess what wood the Trojane
Horse was made of, or that can make a chain to tie a Flea in, as he that can
bring home Gold and Pearls, or he that can obtain and manage Governments, or he
that can cure mortal maladies: For as in lading we difference Bulk and Value,
and take not that for the best commodity which is of greatest quantity or
weight, but that which in most precious and of greatest use: so there is a
bulky knowledge, extended far, to a multitude of words and things, which are
all of no great use or value; and therefore the Knowledge of them is such as
they: And there is a precious sort of Knowledge, which fixes upon the most
precious things; which being of greatest Use and Value, do accordingly prove
the Knowledge such. Nothing will prove a man simply and properly wise, but that
which will prove or make him Happy. He is wise indeed, that is wise to his own
and others good: And that is indeed his Good, which saves his soul, and makes
him for ever blessed. Though we may admire the Cunning of those that can make
the most curious engines, or by deceiving others advance themselves, or that
can subtly dispute the most curious niceties, or criticize upon the words of
several languages; yet I will never call them Wise, that are all that while the
Devils slaves, the enemies of God, the refusers of Grace, and are making haste
to endless misery: And I think there is not one of those in Hell who were once
the subtle men on earth, that now take themselves to have been truly wise, or
glory much in the remembrance of such Wisdom.

And as this Choice does prove men wise, so the practice of this Holy walking
with God, does make them much wiser than they were. As there must be some work
of the Spirit to draw men to believe in Christ, and yet the Spirit is promised
and given (in a special sort or measure) to them that do Believe; so must there
be some special Wisdom to make men Choose to walk with God; but much more is
given to them in this holy course. As Solomon was wiser than most of the world,
before he asked wisdom of God, or else he would not have made so wise a
Choice, and preferred wisdom before the riches and honors of the world: And
yet it was a more notable Degree of wisdom that was afterward given him in
answer to his prayer: so it is in this case.

There are many undeniable Evidences to prove, that walking with God does do
more to make men truly wise, than all other learning or policy in the world.

1. He that walks with God, does begin aright, and settle upon a sure
foundation: (And we use to say, that a work is half finished that is well
begun:) He has engaged himself to the best and wisest Teacher: He is a
Disciple to Him that knows all things. He has taken in infallible
principles, and taken them in their proper place and order: He has learnt
those Truths which will every one become a Teacher to him, and help him to that
which is yet unlearnt. Whereas many that thought they were Doctors in Israel,
if ever they they will be wise and happy, must become fools (that is, such as
they have esteemed fools) if ever they will be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. and must be
called back with Nicodemus to learn Christ's Cross, and to be taught that that
which is born of the flesh is but flesh, and that which is born of the spirit
is spirit: and that therefore they must be born again (not only of water, but
also of the spirit) if ever they will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh.
3. 3, 5, 6. O miserable beginning! and miserable progress! when men that never
soundly learnt the mysteries of Regeneration, and Faith, and Love, and
Self-denial, and Mortification, do proceed to study names and words, and to
turn over a multitude of Books, to fill their brains with airy notions, and
their Common-places with such sayings as may be provision and furniture for
their pride and ostentation, and ornament to their style and language; and know
not yet what they must do to be saved, and indeed know nothing as they ought to
know! 1 Cor. 8. 2. As every Science has its principles, which are supposed in
all the consequential verities; so has Religion as Doctrinal and Practical,
those Truths which must be first received before any other can be received as
it ought; and those things which must be first done, before any other can be
done so as to attain their ends. And these Truths and Duties are principally
about God himself, and are known and done effectually by those, and only those,
that walk with God, or are devoted to him. It is a lamentable thing to see men
immerst in serious studies, even till they grow aged, and to hear them
seriously disputing and discoursing about the controversies or difficulties in
Theology, or inferior Sciences, before ever they had any saving knowledge of
God, or of the work of the Holy Ghost in the converting and sanctifying of the
soul, or how to escape everlasting misery!

2. He that walks with God, has fixed upon a right end, and is renewing his
estimation and intention of it, and daily prosecuting it: And this is the first
and greatest part of Practical Wisdom. When a man once knows his End aright,
he may the better judge of the aptitude and seasonableness of all the means.
When we know once that Heaven contains the only felicity of man, it will
direct us to Heavenly cogitations, and to such spiritual means as are fitted to
that End: If we have the right mark in our eye, we are liker to level at it
than if we mistake our mark. He is the wise man, and only he, that has
steadily fixed his eye upon that blessedness which he was created and redeemed
for, and makes strait toward it, and bends the powers of soul and body, by
faithful constant diligence to obtain it. He that has rightly and resolvedly
determined of his end, has virtually resolved a thousand controversies that
others are unsatisfied and erroneous in: He that is resolved, that his End is
to Please and Glorify God, and to enjoy him for ever, is easily resolved
whether a holy life, or a sensual and worldly, be the way: whether the way be
to be Godly, or to make a mock at Godliness: whether Covetousness and Riches,
Ambition and Preferment, Voluptuousness and Fleshly pleasures, be the means to
attain his End: whether it will be attained rather by the studying of the Word
of God, and meditating on it day and night, and by holy conference, and fervent
prayer, and an obedient life; or by negligence, or worldliness, or drunkenness,
or gluttony, or cards and dice, or beastly filthiness, or injustice and deceit.
Know once but whither it is that we are going, and its easy to know whether
the Saint, or the Swine, or the Swaggerer be in the way. But a man that does
mistake his End, is out of his way at the first step; and the further he goes,
the further he is from true felicity; and the more he erreth, and the further
he has to go back again, if ever he return. Every thing that a man does in the
world, which is not for the right end (the Heavenly felicity) is an act of
foolishness and error, how splendid soever the Matter or the Name, may make it
appear to ignorant men. Every word that an ungodly person speaks being not
for a right End, is in him but sin and folly, however materially it may be an
excellent and useful Truth. While a miserable soul has his back upon God, and
his face upon the world, every step he goes is an act of folly* as tending
unto his further misery. It can be no act of wisdom, which tends to a man's
damnation. When such a wretch begins to enquire and bethink him where he is,
and whither he is going, and whither he should go, and to think of turning back
to God, then and never till then, he is beginning to come to himself, and to be
wise, Luke 15. 17. Till God and Glory be the End that he aims at, and
seriously bends his study, heart and life to seek, though a man were searching
into the mysteries of nature, though he were studying or discussing the notions
of Theology; though he were admired for his earning and wisdom by the world,
and cried up as the Oracle of the Earth, he is all the while but playing the
fool, and going a cleanlier way to Hell than the grosser sinners of the world!
For ^s he wise, that knows not whether Heaven or Earth be better? whether God
or his Flesh should be obeyed? whether everlasting joys, or the transitory
pleasures of sin, should be preferred? or that seems to be convinced of the
truth in these and such like cases, and yet has not the wit to make his
choice, and bend his life according to his conviction? He cannot be wise that
practically mistakes his End.

3. He that walks with God, does know those things, with a deep, effectual,
heart-changing knowledge, which other men know but superficially, by the
halves, and as in a dream. And true wisdom consists in the Intensiveness of
the knowledge subjectively, as much as in the extensiveness of it objectively.
To see a few things in a narrow room perspicuously and clearly, does show a
better eyesight, than in the open Air to see many things obscurely so as
scarce to discern any of them aright; (^^ke him that saw men walk like trees.)
The clearness and (...) of knowledge, which makes it effectual to its proper
use, (...) greatness and excellency of it: Therefore it is that unlearned men
that love and fear the Lord, may well be said to be incomparably more wise and
knowing men, than the most learned that are ungodly. As he has more riches
that has a little Gold or Jewels* than he that has many load of stones: so he
that has a deep effectual knowledge of God the Father, and the Redeemer, and
of the life to come, is wiser and more knowing than he that has only a
notional knowledge of the same things, and of a thousand more. A wicked man
has so much knowledge, as teaches him to speak the same words of God, and
Christ, and Heaven, which a true Believer speaks; but not so much as to work in
him the same affections and choice, nor so much as to cause him to do the same
work. As it is a far more excellent kind of knowledge which a man has of any
Country by travel and habitation there, than that which comes but by reading
or report; or which a man has of meat, of fruits, of wine, by eating and
drinking, than that which another has by hearsay; so is the inward
heart-affecting knowledge of a true believer, more excellent than the flashy
notions of the ungodly* Truth simply as Truth, is not the highest and most
excellent object of the mind: But Good as Good, must be apprehended by the
Understanding, and commended to the Will, which entertaineth it with
Complacency, adhereth to it with Choice and Resolution, prosecuteth it with
Desire and Endeavor, and Enjoys it with Delight: And though it be the
Understanding which apprehends it, yet it is the Heart or Will that
rellisheth it, and tastes the greatest sweetness in it, working upon it with
some mixture of internal sense (which has made some ascribe a knowledge of
Good as such unto the Will.) And it is the Wills intention that causes the
Understanding to be denominated Practical: And therefore I may well say, that
it is Wisdom indeed when it reaches to the heart. No man knows the Truth of
God so well as he that most firmly Believes him: And do man knows the
Goodness of God so well as he that Loves him most: No man knows his Power
and Mercy so well as he that does most confidently Trust him: And no man
knows his Justice and Dreadfulness so well as he that fears him: No man
knows or believes the Glory of Heaven so well as he that most esteems,
desires and seeks it, and has the most Heavenly Heart and Conversation: Ho
man believes in Jesus Christ so well as he that gives up himself unto him,
with the greatest Love and Thankfulness, and Trust and Obedience. As James
says [ Show me thy Faith by thy works] so say I, Let me know the measure and
value of my knowledge by my Heart and Life. That is wisdom indeed which
conformeth a man to God, and saves his soul: This only will be owned as
wisdom to eternity, when dreaming notions will prove but folly.

4. He that walks with God has an infallible Rule, and takes the right
course to have the best acquaintance with it, and skill to use it. The Doctrine
that informs him is Divine: It is from Heaven, and not of Men: And therefore
if God be wiser than man, he is able to make his Disciples wisest; and Teaching
will more certainly and powerfully illuminate. Many among men have pretended to
Infallibility, that never could justify their pretensions, but have confuted
them by their own mistakes and crimes: But none can deny the Infallibility of
God. He never yet was deceived, or did deceive: He erreth not, nor teaches
error. Nicodemus knew Christ was to believed, when he knew that he was a
Teacher come from God, Joh. 3. 2. Christ knew that the Jews themselves durst
not deny the truths of John's Doctrine, if he could but convince them that it
was [ from Heaven, and not of men] It is impossible for God to lie: It is the
Devil that was a Liar from the beginning, and is yet the Father of lies. No
wonder if they believe lies that follow such a Teacher. And those that follow
the flesh and the world, do follow the Devil: They that will believe what their
fleshly interest and lusts persuade them to believe, do believe what the Devil
persuades them to believe; For he persuades them by these, and for these.
What marvel then if there be found men in the world, that can believe that
Holiness is Hypocrisy, or a needless thing! that those are the worst men that
are most careful to please God; that the world is more worthy of their care and
labor, than their salvation is; that the pleasures of sin for a season are
more desirable, than the everlasting happiness of the Saints; that cards and
dice, and mirth and lust, and wealth and honor, are matters more delectable,
than Prayer, and meditating on the Word of God, and loving him, and obeying
him, and waiting in the hopes of life eternal; that gluttons and drunkards, and
whoremongers, and covetous persons, may enter into the Kingdom of God, etc.
What wonder if a thousand such damnable lies, are believed by the Disciples of
the Father of lies! what wonder if there are so many Saint-haters, and
God-haters in the world, as to fill the earth with persecutions and cruelties,
or make a scorn of that which God most highly valueth, and all this under
pretenses of Order, or Unity, or Justice, or something that is good, and
therefore fit to palliate their sin! Is there any thing so false, or foul, or
wicked, that Satan will not teach his followers? Is he grown modest, or
moderate, or holy, or just? Is he reconciled to Christ, to Scripture, to
Godliness, or to the Godly? Or is his Kingdom of darkness at an end? and has
he lost the earth? Or are men therefore none of the servants of the Devil,
because they were baptized (as Simon Magus was) and call and think themselves
the servants of Christ? As if still it were not the art by which he gets and
keeps Disciples, to suffer them to wear the livery of Christ, and to use his
name, that he may thus keep possession of them in peace, who else would be
frighted from him, and fly to Christ! He will give them leave to study Arts and
Sciences, and to understand things excellent of inferior use, so be it they
will be deceived by him in the matters of God and their salvation. He can allow
them to be learned Lawyers, excellent Physicians, Philosophers, Politicians, to
be skilful Artists, so be it they will follow him in sin to their damnation,
and will overlook the Truth that should set them free, (Joh. 8. 32. Yea he will
permit them (when there is no remedy) to study the holy Scriptures, if he may
but be the expounder and applyer of it: Yea he will permit them notionally to
understand it, if they will not learn by it to be converted, to be holy, and to
be saved: He can suffer them to be eminent Divines, so they will not be serious
Christians. Thus is the world by the grand Deceiver hurried in darkness to
perdition, being taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. But the
Sanctified are all illuminated by the Holy Ghost, by whom their eyes are so
effectually opened, that they are turned from darkness unto light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, Act. 26. 18. The Father of Glory has given them the
spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of Christ, that the eyes of
their understanding being enlightened, they may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the Glory of his inheritance in the Saints,
Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Certainly that illumination of the Holy Ghost which is so often
mentioned in Scripture as given to all true believers, is not a fancy, nor an
insignificant name: And if it signify any thing, it signifies somewhat that
is much above the teaching of man. All that walk with God are taught of God!
And can man teach like God? God has access unto the heart, and there he does
transcribe his Laws, and put them into our inward parts. And they that walk
with him have not only his Word to read, but his Spirit to help them to
understand it: and being with him, in his family (yea he dwells in them and
they in him) he is ready at hand to resolve their doubts: when he gave them his
fear, he gave them the beginning of wisdom, Psalm. 111. 10. He causes them to
incline their ear to wisdom, Prove. 2. 2, 6. and to apply their hearts unto it,
Psalm. 90. 12. and makes them to know it in the hidden parts, Psalm. 51. 6.

It is his Law that they have determined to make their rule: They live as under
his authority: They are more observant of his Will and Government, than of any
Laws or Government of man. And as they obey man in and for the Lord, so they do
it in subordination to him, and therefore not against him and his Laws, which
being the standard of Justice, and the Rule of Rulers, and of subjects both,
they are in the safest way of unerring wisdom, who walk with God according to
that Rule* and refuse to turn aside, though commanded by man, or enticed by
Satan, the world, or flesh.

5. He that walks with God is the most considerate person, and therefore has
great advantage to be wise. The frequent and serious thoughts of God, do awaken
all the powers of the soul, so that drowsiness does not hinder the
understanding, and so occasion its deceit: There is scarce a more common and
powerful cause of men's folly and delusion and perdition, in all the world, than
that sleepiness and stupidity which hinders Reason from the vigorous
performance of its office: In this senseless case, though a man both know and
consider of the same Truths, which in their nature are most powerful to cleanse
and govern and save his soul, yet sluggishness does enervate them: He knows
them as if he knew them not, and considers them as if he never thought of
them: They work little more upon him, then if he believed them not, or had
never heard of them: even as a dream of the greatest matters, moves not the
sleeper from his pillow: In this senseless state, the Devil can do almost any
thing with a sinner: He can make him sin against his knowledge: And when
Conscience has frighted him into some kind of Penitence, and made him cry out,
I have sinned and done foolishly, and caused him to promise to do so no more;
yet does the Devil prevail with him to go on, and to break his promises, as if
he had never been convinced of his sins, or confessed them, or seen any reason
or necessity to amend: He does but imprison the truth in unrighteousness, and
bury it in a senseless heart: whereas if you could but awaken all the powers of
his soul, to give this same truth its due entertainment, and take it deeper
into his heart, it would make him even scorn the baits of sin, and see that the
ungodly are beside themselves, and make him presently resolve and set upon a
holy life. And hence it is that sickness which causes men to receive the
sentence of death, does usually make men bewail their former sinful lives* and
marvail that they could be before so sottish as to resist such known and
weighty truths; and it makes them purpose and promise reformation and wish
themselves in the case of those that they were wont before to deride and scorn:
Because now the Truth is deeplier received and digested, by their awakened
souls, and appears in its proper evidence and strength. There is no man but
must acknowledge, that the same truth does at one time command his soul, which
at another time seems of little force: It is a wonder to observe how
differently the same consideration works with a man when he is awakened, and
when he is in a secure stupid case!

Now this is his advantage that walks with God: He is much more frequently then
others awakened, to a serious apprehension of the things which he
understands: The thoughts of the presence of the most Holy God, will not
suffer him to be as secure and senseless as others are, or as he is himself
when he turns aside from this Heavenly conversation. He has in God such
exceeding transcendent excellencies, such Greatness, such Goodness continually
to behold, that it keeps his soul in a much more serious lively state, than
any other means could keep it in: so that when ever any truth or duty is
presented to him, all his saculties are awake and ready to observe it and
improve it. A Sermon, or a good book, or godly conference, or a mercy, when a
man has been with God in prayer or contemplation, will relish better with him,
and sink much deeper, then at another time. Nay one serious thought of God
himself, will do more to make a man truly and solidly wise, then all the
reading and learning in the world, which shuts him out.

6. Walking with God does fix the mind, and keep it from diversions and
vagaries, and consequently much helps to make men wise. A straggling mind is
empty and unfurnished. He that has no dwelling, for the most part has no
wealth. Wandering is the beggars life. Men do but bewilder and lose themselves,
and not grow wise, whose thoughts are ranging in the corners of the earth, and
are like masterlesse dogs, that run up and down according to their fancy, and
may go any whether, but have business nowhere. The creature will not fix the
soul: But God is the center of all our cogitations: In him only they may unite
and fix and rest. He is the only loadstone that can effectually attract and
hold it steadfast to himself. Therefore he that walks with God is the most
constant and unmovable of men: Let prosperity or adversity come; let the world
be turned upside-down, and the mountains be hurled into the sea, yet he
changes not: Let men allure or threat, let them scorn or rage, let laws, and
customs, and governments, and interest change, he is still the same. For he
knows that God is still the same, and that his Word changes not. Let that be
death one year which was the way to reputation another, and let the giddy world
turn about as the seasons of the year, this changes not his mind and life
(though in things lawful he is of a yiedling temper:) For he knows that the
interest of his soul does not change, with the humors or interests of men: He
still fears sinning, for he knows that Judgment is still drawing on, in
all changes and seasons whatsoever: He is still set upon the pleasing of the
most Holy God, whoever be uppermost among men; as knowing that the God whom he
serves is able to deliver him from man, but man is not able to deliver him
from God. He still goes on in the Holy path, as knowing that Heaven is as sure
and as desirable as ever it was. Psalm. 112. 6, 7. Surely he shall not be moved
for ever: the Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance: He shall not be
afraid of evil tidings: His heart is fixed trusting in the Lord: His heart is
established, he shall not be afraid.]

7. He that walks with God, has the great master-truths upon his heart,
which are the standard of the rest, and the stock, as it were, out of which
they spring. The great truths about God, and Grace and Glory, have a greater
power then many hundred truths of an inferior nature. And moreover, such a one
is sure that he shall be wise in the greatest and most necessary points. He is
guilty of no ignorance or error that shall keep him out of heaven, or hinder
his acceptance with his God. And if he be wise enough to please God and to be
saved, he is wise indeed: (as before was ^inted.)

8. Walking with God does take off the vizar of deluding things, and keeps us
out of the reach and power of those objects and arguments which are the
instruments of deceit. When a man has been believingly and seriously with God,
how easily can he see through the sophistry of the tempting world! How easily
can he practically consute the reasonings of the flesh! and discern the dotage
of the seeming subtilties of wicked men, that will needs think they have reason
for that which is displeasing to their Maker, and tends to the damning of their
souls! so far as a man is conversant with God, so far he is sensible, that all
things are nothing, which can be offered as a price to hire him to sin: and
that the name of preferment, and honor and wealth, or of disgrace and
imprisonment and death, are words almost of no signification, as to the
tempters ends, to draw the soul from God and duty. It is men that know not God,
and know not what it is to walk with him, that think these words so big and
powerful, to whom wealth and honor signify more then God and Heaven; and
poverty, disgrace and death, do signify more then Gods displeasure and
everlasting punishment in hell. As it is easy to cheat a man that is far from
the light, so is it easy to deceive the learned man that is far from God.

9. Walking with God, does greatly help us against the deceitfulness and
erroneous disposition of our own hearts. The will has a very great power upon
the understanding: And therefore ungodly fleshly men will very hardly receive
any truth which crosses the carnal interest or disposition: And will hardly
let go any error that feeds them: because their corrupted wills are a byas
to their understandings, and make them desperately partial in all their reading
and hearing, and hypocritical in their prayers and enquiries after truth.
Interest and corruption locketh up their hearts from their own observation.
Whereas a man that walks with God, that is jealous and holy and just and a
searcher of the heart, is driven from hypocrisy, and forced to behave himself
as in the open light, and to do all as in the sight of all the world, as
knowing that the sight of God is of far greater concernment and regard. The
partiality, corruption and byas of the heart, is detected and shamed by the
presence of God. Therefore to walk with God is to walk in the light, and as
children of the light, and not in darkness. And he that does Truth comes to
the light, that his deeds might be manifest, that they are wrought in God: when
every one that does evil hates the light; neither comes to the light lest his
deeds should be reproved: And this is their condemnation, that light is come
into the world, and men love the darkness rather then the light, because their
deeds are evil, Joh. 3. 19, 20, 21. It tends therefore exceedingly to make
men wise, to Walk with God, because it is a walking in the light, and in such a
presence as most powerfully prevails against that hypocrisy, deceitfulness
and partiality of the heart, which is the common cause of damning error.

10. Lastly, they that walk with God are entitled by many promises, to the
guidance and direction of his spirit. And blessed are those that have such a
guide: at once a light in the world without them, and a light immediately from
God within them: For so far as he is received and works in them, he will lead
them into truth, and save them from deceit and folly; and having guided them by
his counsel, will afterward take them unto glory, Psalm. 73. 24. Whereas the
ungodly are led by the flesh, and often given up to their own hearts lusts, to
walk in their own counsels, Romans 8. 1, 13. Psalm. 81. 12. till at last the fools
do say in their hearts, there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. and they become corrupt
and abominable, eating up the people of the Lord as bread, and call not on his
Name, ver. 2. etc. Deceiving and being deceived: sensual, having not the
spirit, Jud. 19. who shall receive the reward of their unrighteousness, as
accounting it pleasure to riot in the day time, 2 Pet. 2. 13.

IV. ANother benefit of Walking with God, is, that it makes men good, as well
as wise: It is the most excellent means for the advancement of man's soul to the
highest degree of holiness attainable in this life. If conversing with Good men
does powerfully tend to make men good; conversing with God must needs be more
effectual; which may appear in these particulars.

1. The apprehensions of the presence and attributes of God, do most
effectually check the stirrings of corruption, and rebuke all the vicious
inclinations and motions of the soul: even the most secret sin of the heart, is
rebuked by his presence, as well as the most open transgression of the life:
For the thoughts of the heart are open to his view. All what is done before
God, is done as in the open light: nothing of it can be hid: no sin can have
the encouragement of secrecy to embolden it. It is all committed in the
presence of the Universal King and Lawgiver of the world, who has forbidden
it: It is done before him that most abhors it, and will never be reconciled
to it. It is done before him that is the Judge of the world, and will shortly
pass the sentence on us according to what we have done in the body. It stands
up in his presence who is of infinite Majesty and perfection, and therefore
most to be reverenced and honored; And therefore if the presence of a wise and
grave and venerable person, will restrain men from sin, the presence of God
apprehended seriously, will do it much more. It is committed before him that is
our dearest friend, and tender Father, and chiefest benefactor: And therefore
ingenuity, gratitude and love, will all rise up against it in those that walk
with God. There is that in God, before the eyes of those that walk with him,
which is most contrary to sin, and most powerful against it, of any thing in
the world. Every one will confess that if men's eyes were opened to see the Lord
in Glory standing over them, it would be the most powerful means to restrain
them from transgressing: The drunkard would not then venture upon his cups: the
fornicator would have a cooling for his lusts: the swearer would be afraid to
take his Makers name in vain: the profane would scarce presume to scorn or
persecute a holy life. And he that walks with God, though he see him not
corporeally, yet sees him by faith, and lives as in his presence; and
therefore must needs be restrained from sin, as having the means which is next
to the sight of God. If pride should begin to stir in one that walks with God,
O what a powerful remedy is at hand! How effectually would the presence of the
Great and Holy God rebuke it! and constrain us to say as Job 42. 5, 6. I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye sees thee: wherefore
I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes.] If worldly love or carnal lust
should stir ^n such a one, how powerfully would the terrors of the Lord
repress it? and his Majesty rebuke it? and his Love and Goodness overcome it?
If worldly cares or murmuring discontents begin to trouble such a one, how
effectually will the Goodness, the All sufficiency and the faithfulness of God
allay them, and quiet and satisfy the soul, and cause it to be offended at its
own offense, and to chide it self for its repinings and distrust? If Passion
arise and begin to discompose us, how powerfully will the presence of God
rebuke it? and the reverence of his Majesty, and the sense of his Authority and
pardoning grace will assuage it, and shame us into silent quietness; who dare
let out his passions upon man, in the presence of his Maker, that apprehends
his presence? The same I might say of all other sins.

2. The presence and attributes of God apprehended by those that walk with him,
is the potent remedy against Temptations. Who will once turn an eye to the gold
and glory of the world that is offered him to allure him to sin, if he see God
stand by? who would be tempted to lust or any sinful pleasure, if he observe
the presence of the Lord? Satan can never come in so ill a time with his
temptations, and have so little hope to speed, as when the soul is
contemplating the attributes of God, or taken up in prayer with him, or any way
apprehensive of his presence. The soul that faithfully walks with God, has
enough at hand in him to answer all temptations. And the further any man is
from God, and the less he knows him, the more Temptations can do upon him.

3. The presence of God, affords the most powerful motives unto Good, to
those that walk with him. There is no grace in man, but what is from God, and
may find in God its proper object or incentive. As God is God, above the
creature transcendently and infinitely in all perfections, so all the motives
to goodness which are fetched from him, are transcendently above all that may be
fetched from any creature. He that lives always by the fire or in the
Sunshine, is likest to be warm. He that is most with God, will be most like to
God in Holiness. Frequent and serious converse with him, does most deeply
imprint his communicable attributes on the heart, and make there the clearest
impression of his image. Believers have learned by their own experience, that
one hours serious prayer, or meditation, in which they can get nigh to God in
the Spirit, does more advance their grace, then any help that the creature can
afford them.

4. Moreover those that walk with God, have not only a Powerful, but an
universal incentive for the actuating and increasing of every grace. Knowledge,
and faith, and fear, and love, and trust, and hope, and obedience, and zeal,
and all have in God their proper objects and incentives: One Creature may be
useful to us in one thing, and another in another thing; but God is the most
effectual mover of all his graces: and that in a holy harmony and order. Indeed
he has no greater Motive to draw us to Love him, and Fear him, and Trust him,
and Obey him, than himself. It is life eternal to know him in his Son, Joh. 17.
3. And that is, not only because it entitleth us to life eternal, but also
because it is the beginning and incentive of that life of holiness which will
be eternal.

5. Moreover, those that walk with God, have a constant as well as a Powerful
and Universal incentive to exercise and increase their Graces. Othet helps may
be out of the way: Their Preachers may be silenced or removed: Their Friends
may be scattered or taken from them: Their Books may be forbidden, or not at
hand: But God is always ready and willing: They have leave at all times to
come to him, and be welcome. Whenever they are willing they may go to him by
prayer or contemplation, and find all in him which they can desire. If they
want not Hearts, they shall find no want of any thing in God. At what time
soever fear would torment them, they may draw near and put their trust in him,
Psalm. 56. 2, 3, 4. and 11. 1. and 18. 2, 30. and 31. 1, 6. He will be a sure
and speedy refuge for them, a very present help in trouble, Psalm. 46. 1. and
62. 7, 8. and 91. 2, 9 and 94. 22. Whenever coldness or lukewarmness would
extinguish the work of Grace, they may go to him, and find those streams of
flaming Love flow from him, those strong attractives, those wonderful mercies,
those terrible judgments, of which while they are musing, the fire may again
wax hot within them, Psalm. 39. 3.

6. Lastly, by way of encouraging reward, God uses to give abundantly of his
Grace, to those that walk most faithfully with him: He will show most Love to
those that most love him: He will be nearest to them that most desirously draw
nigh to him; while he forsakes those that forsake him, and turns away from
those that turn away from him, 2 Chro. 15. 2. Prove. 1. 32. Ezr. 8. 22. [ The
hand of our God is for good upon all them that seek him: but his power and his
wrath is against all them that forsake him.]

Thus it is apparent in all those evidences, that walking with God, is not only
a discovery of the Goodness that men have, but the only way to increase their
Grace, and make them better. O what a sweet humility and seriousness, and
spirituality appears in the conference, or conversation, or both, of those
that newly come from a believing close converse with God! When they that come
from men and Books, may have but a common mind or life! And those that come
from the business and pleasure of the world and flesh, and from the company of
foolish riotous gallants, may come defiled, as the Swine out of the mire!

V. LAstly, to walk with God, is the best preparation for times of suffering,
and for the day of death. As we must be judged according to what we have done
in the body; so the nearer we find our selves to judgment, the more we shall
be constrained to judge our selves according to what we have done, and shall
the more perceive the effects upon our souls.

That this is so excellent a preparative for sufferings and death, will appear
by the consideration of these particulars.

1. They that walk with God are safest from all destructive sufferings; and
shall have none but what are sanctified to their good, Romans 8. 28. They are
near to God, where destruction comes not; as the Chicken under the wings of
the Hen. They walk with him that will not lead them to perdition: that will not
neglect them, nor sell them for naught, nor expose them to the will of men and
devils, though he may suffer them to be tried for their good. No one can take
them out of his hands. Be near to him, and you are safe: The destroyer cannot
fetch you thence. He can fetch you (when the time is come) from the side of
your merriest companions, and dearest friends; from the presence of the
greatest Princes; from the strongest Tower, or most sumptuous Palace, or from
your heaps of riches, in your securest health: But he cannot take you from the
arms of Christ, nor from under the wings of your Creatours love. [ For there is
no God like him, in Heaven above, or on the earth beneath, who keeps Covenant
and Mercy with his servants, that walk before him with all their heart, 1 King.
8 23.] 1 King. 11. 38. However we are used in our Fathers presence, we are sure
it shall be for good in the latter end: For he wants neither Power nor Love
to deliver us, if he saw deliverance to be best.

2. Walking with God is the surest way to obtain a certainty of his special
love, and of our salvation: And what an excellent preparative for sufferings or
death such assurance is, I need not tell any considerate believer. How easy
may it be to us to suffer poverty, disgrace or wrongs, or the pains of sickness
or death, when once we are certain that we shall not suffer the pains of Hell!
How cheerfully may we go out of this troublesome world, and leave the greatest
prosperity behind us, when we are sure to live in Heaven for ever! Even an
Infidel will say, that he could suffer or dye, if he could but be certain to be
Glorified in Heaven when he is dead.

3. Walking with God does mortify the flesh, and allay the affections and
lusts thereof: The soul that is taken up with higher matters, and daily sees
things more excellent, becomes as dead to the things below: And thus it
weaneth us from all that is in the world which seems most desirable to carnal
men. And when the flesh is mortified, and the world is nothing to us, or but as
a dead and loathsome carcass, what is there left to be very troublesome in any
suffering from the world? or to make us loath by death to leave it? It is men
that know not God, that overvalue the profits and honors of the world; and men
that never felt the comforts of Communion with God, that set too much by the
pleasures of the flesh: And it is men that set too much by these, that make so
great a matter of suffering. It is he that basely overvalueth wealth, that
whineth and repineth when he comes to poverty: It is he that set too much by
his honor, and being befooled by his pride, does greatly esteem the thoughts
or applauding words of men, that swells against those that disesteem him, and
breaks his heart when he falls into disgrace. He that is cheated out of his
wits by the pomps and splendor of a high and prosperous estate, does think he
is undone when he is brought low. But it is not so with him that walks with
God: For being taken up with far higher things, he knows the vanity of these:
As he sees not in them any thing that is worthy of his strong desires, so
neither any thing that is worthy of much lamentation when they are gone. He
never thought that a shadow or feather, or a blast of wind could make him
happy: And he cannot think that the loss of these can make him miserable. He
that is taken up with God, has a higher interest and business, and finds not
himself so much concerned in the storms or calms that are here below, as others
are, who know no better, and never minded higher things.

4. Walking with God does much overcome the fear of man: The fear of him that
can destroy both soul and body in Hell fire, will extinguish the fear of them
that can but kill the body, Luke 12. 4. The threats or frowns of a worm are
inconsiderable to him that daily walks with the great and dreadful God, and
has his power and word for his security. As Moses esteemed the reproach of
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, because he had respect to
the recompense of reward; so he feared not the wrath of the King, for he
endured as seeing him that is invisible, Heb. 11. 27.

5. Walking with God does much prepare for sufferings and death, in that it
breeds quietness in the conscience: so that when all is at peace within, it
will be easy to suffer any thing from without. Though there is no proper merit
in our works to comfort us, yet it is an unspeakable consolation to a slandered
persecuted man to be able to say* These evil sayings are spoken falsely of me,
for the sake of Christ: and I suffer not as an evil doer, but as a Christian:
And it is matter of very great peace to a man that is hasting unto death, to be
able to say as Hezekiah, 2 King. 20. 3. [ Remember now, O Lord, how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight:] And as Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith* henceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc.] And as 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoicing
is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world:] such a testimony of conscience is a precious
cordial to a suffering or a dying man: The time that we have spent in a holy
and heavenly conversation, will be exceeding sweet in the last review, when
time spent in sinful vanity, and idleness, and in worldly and fleshly designs,
will be grievous and tormenting. The day is coming, and is even at hand, when
those that are now the most hardened Infidels, or obstinate presumptuous
sinners, or scornful malicious enemies of holiness, would wish and wish a
thousand times, that they had spent that life in a serious obedient walking
with God, which they spent in seeking worldly wealth, and saying up a treasure
on earth, and feeding the inordinate desires of their flesh. I tell you, it is
walking with God, that is the only way to have a sound and quiet conscience:
And he the is healing and settling his conscience upon the Love of God and the
Grace of Christ, in the time of his prosperity, is making the wisest
preparation. for adversity: And the preparation thus made so ^ong before
(perhaps twenty, or forty, or threescore years or more) is as truly useful and
comfortable at a dying hour, as that part which is made immediately before. I
know that besides this general preparation, there should be also a particular
special properation, for sufferings and death: But yet this general part is the
chiefest and most necessary part. A man that has walked in his life time with
God, shall certainly be saved, though death surprise him unexpectedly, without
any more particular preparation: But a particular preparation without either
such a life, or such a heart as would cause it if he had recovered, is no
sufficient preparation at all, and will not serve to any man's salvation. Alas
what a pitiful provisio^ does that man make for death and for salvation, who
neglects his soul, despises the commands of God, and disregardeth the
promises of eternal life, till he is ready to dye, and then cries out [ I
repent, I am sorry for my sin, I would I had lived better] and this only from
the constraint of fear, without any such love to God and holiness which would
make him walk with God if he should recover! what if the Priest absolve this
man from all his sins? Does God therefore absolve him? Or shall he thus be
saved? No, it is certain that all the Sacraments and Absolution in the world,
will never serve to save such a soul, without that grace which must make it new
and truly holy. The Absolution of a Minister of Christ, which is pronounced in
his name, is a very great comfort to the truly penitent: For such God has
first pardoned by his general Act of Oblivion in the Gospel, and it is God that
sends his Messenger to them* (in Sacraments and Ministerial Absolution) with
that pardon particularized and applied to themselves. But where the heart is
not truly penitent and converted, that person is not pardoned by the Gospel, as
being not in the Covenant, or a child of promise; and therefore the pardon of a
Minister, being upon mistake, or t^ an unqualified person can reach no further
than to admit him into the esteem of men, and to the Communion and outward
privileges of the Church (which is a poor comfort to a soul that must lie in
Hell:) But it can never admit him into the Kingdom of Heaven. God indeed may
approve the act of his Ministers, if they go according to his rule, and deal in
Church administrations with those that make A CREDIBLE PROFESSION of FAITH and
HOLINESS, as if they had true faith and holiness: but yet he will not
therefore make such Ministerial acts effectual to the saving of unbelieving or
unholy souls. Nay (because I have found many sensual ungodly people inclining
to turn Papists, because with them they can have a quick and easy pardon of
their sins, by the Pope, or by the Absolution of the Priest) let me tell such,
that if they understand what they do, even this cheat is too thin to quiet
their defiled consciences: For even the Papists Schooldoctors do conclude, that
when the Priest absolveth an impenitent sinner, or one that is not qualified
for pardon, such a one is not loosed or pardoned in Heaven ( Leg. Martin. de
Ripalda exposit. Liber. Magist. li. 4. did. 18. p. 654, 655. and p. 663, 664.
did. 20. Aquin. Did. 20. q 1. a. 5. Suar. Tom. 4. in 3. p. disp. 52. Greg.
Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 7. q. 20. p. 5. Tolet. lib. 6. cap. 27 Navar. Notab. 17.
and 18. Cordub. de indulg. li. 5. q. 23.) they deny not the truth of those
words of Origin. Hom. 14. ad cap. 24. Levit. [Exit quis a fide, perexit de
castris Ecclesiae etiamsi Episcopi Voce non abjiciatur: sicut contru interdum
fit, ut aliquis non recto judicio eorum qui praesunt Ecclesiae, for as
mittatur: sed si non egit ut mereretur exire, nihil laeditur: interdum enim
quod for as mittitur, intus est; and qui foris est, intus videtur retineri:]
And what he says of Excommunication, is true of Absolution: An erring Key does
neither lock out of Heaven, nor let into Heaven. A Godly Believer shall be
saved though the Priest condemn him: and an unbeliever or ungodly person shall
be condemned by God, though he be absolved by the Priest.

Nay if you have not walked with God in the spirit, but walked after the flesh,
though your repentance should be sound and true at the last, it will yet very
hardly serve to comfort you, though it may serve to your salvation: because you
will very hardly get any assurance that it is sincere. It is dangerous lest it
should prove but the effect of fear (which will not save) when it comes not
till death do fright you to it. As Augustine says, Nullus expectet, quando
peccare non potest: arbitrii enim libertatem quaerit Deus, ut deleri possint
commissa; non necessitatem, sed charitatem, non tantum timorem: quia non in
solo timore vivit homo. Therefore the same Augustine says, [ Siquis positus in
ultima necessitate voluerit accipere poenitentiam, and accipit; fateor vobis,
non illi negamus quod petit; sed non praesumimus quod been hinc exit: si
securus hinc exierit, ego nescio: Poenitentiam dare possumus, securitatem non
possumus. You see then how much it is needful to the peace of conscience at the
hour of death, that you walk with God in the time of life.

6. Moreover, to walk with God is an excellent preparation for sufferings and
death, because it tends to acquaint the soul with God, and to embolden it
both to go to him in Prayer, and to Trust on him, and expect salvation from
him. He that walks with God is so much used to holy Prayer, that he is a man
of Prayer, and is skilled in it, and has tried what prayer can do with God: so
that in the hour of his extremity, he is not to seek, either for a God to pray
to. or a Mediator to intercede for him, or a Spirit of Adoption to enable him
as a child to fly for help to his reconciled Father. And having not only been
frequently with God, but frequently entertained and accepted by him, and had
his prayers heard and granted, it is a great encouragement to an afflicted soul
in the hour of distress, to go to such a God for help. And it is a dreadful
thing when a soul is ready to go out of the world, to have ^^ comfortable
knowledge of God, or skill to pray to him, or encouragement to expect
acceptance with him: To think that he must presently appear before a God, whom
he never knew, nor heartily loved, being never acquainted with that communion
with him in the way of Grace, which is the way to communion in Glory, O what a
terrible thought is this! But how comfortable is it when the soul can say [ I
know whom I have believed? The God that afflicts me is he that loves me, and
has manifested his love to me by his daily attractive, assisting and accepting
Grace! I am going by death to see him intuitively, whom I have often seen by
the eye of Faith, and to live with him in Heaven, with whom I lived here on
earth; From whom, and Through whom, and To whom was my life! I go not to any
enemy, nor an utter stranger, but to that God who was the Spring, the Ruler,
the Guide, the Strength and the Comfort of my life. He has heard me so often,
that I cannot think he will now reject me: He has so often comforted my soul,
that I will not believe he will now thrust me into Hell: He has mercifully
received me so often, that I cannot believe he will now refuse me: Those that
come to him in the way of Grace, I have found he will in no wise cast out.] As
strangeness to God does fill the soul with distrustful fears, so walking with
him does breed that humble confidence, which is a wonderful comfort in the hour
of distress, and a happy preparations to sufferings and death.

7. Lastly, to walk with God, does increase that Love of God in the soul, which
is the heavenly tincture, and inclines it to lo^k upward, and being weary of a
sinful flesh and world, to desire to be perfected with God. How happy a
preparation for death is this, when it is but the passage to that God with whom
we desire to be, and to that place where we fain would dwell for ever! To love
the state and place that we are going to, being made connatural and suitable
thereto, will much overcome the fears of death. But for a soul that is
acquainted with nothing but this life, and favors nothing but Earth and
Flesh, and has no connaturality with the things above, for such a soul to be
surprised with the tidings of death, alas, how dreadful must it be!

And thus I have showed you the Benefits that come by walking with God, which
if you Love your selves with a rational love, me thinks should resolve every
impartial considerate Reader, to give up himself without delay, to so desirable
a course of life! or, if he have begun it, to follow it more cheerfully and
faithfully than he had done.

CHAP. VII.
I Am next to show you that Believers have special obligations to this holy
course of life, and therefore are doubly faulty if they neglect it: Though
indeed, to neglect it totally, or in the main drift of their lives, is a thing
inconsistent with a living Faith.

Consider, 1 If you are true Christians, your Relations engage you to walk with
God: Is he not your Reconciled Father, and you his Children in a special sense?
And whom should Children dwell with, but with their Father? You were glad when
he received you into his Covenant that he would enter into so near a Relation
to you, as he expresses, 2* Cor. 6. 17, 18. [ I will receive you, and will be
a Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty.] And do you draw back, as if you repented of your Covenant? and were
not only weary of the Duty, but of the Privileges and Benefits of your
Relation? You may have access to God, when others are shut out: Your Prayers
may be heard, when the prayers of the wicked are abominable: You may be
welcome, when the worldling, and ambitious, and carnal are despised: He that
dwells in the highest Heaven, is willing to look to you with respect, and
dwell with you, when he beholds the proud afar off, Isa. 66. 1, 2. and 57.
15, 16. And yet will you not come that may be welcome? Does he put such a
difference between you and others, as to feed you as his Children at his table,
while others are called Dogs, and are without the doors* and have but your
crumbs and leavings? and yet will you be so foolish and unthankful, as to run
out of your Fathers presence, and choose to be without, among the Dogs? How
came your Fathers presence to be so grievous to you? and the privileges of his
family to seem so vile? Is it not some unchildlike carriage? the guilt of some
disobedience or contempt that has first caused this? Or have you fallen again in
love with fleshly pleasures, and some vanity of the world? Or have you had
enough of God and Godliness? till you begin to grow aweary of him? If so, you
never truly knew him. However it be, if you grow indifferent as to God, do not
wonder if shortly you find him set as light by you: And believe it, the day is
not far off, in which the Fatherly Relation of God, and the privileges of
Children, will be more esteemed by you: when all things else forsake you in
your last distress, you will be loath that God should then forsake you, or seem
as a stranger to hide his face: Then you will cry out, as the afflicted Church,
Isa. 63. 15, 16. [ Look down from Heaven* and behold from the habitation of thy
holiness and of thy glory: Where is thy zeal and thy strength? the sounding of
thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained? Doubtless thou
art our Father: though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us
not, thou O Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, thy name is from everlasting]
Nothing but God, and his Fatherly Relation, will then support you: Attend him
therefore, and with reverent, obedient cheerfulness and delight, converse with
him as with your dearest Father. For since the beginning of the world, men have
not known by sensible evidence, either the ear or the eye, besides God himself,
what he has prepared for him that waits for him, Isa. 64. 4. Though he be
wroth with us because we have sinned, yet does he meet him that rejoices and
works rightcousness, that remembers him in his ways, verse. 5. Say not, I
have played abroad so long that I dare not now go home: I have sinned so
greatly, that I dare not speak to him, or look him in the face. Come yet but
with a penitent returning heart, and thou may be accepted through the Prince
of Peace: Prodigals find better entertainment than they did expect, when once
they do but resolve for home. If he allow us to begin with [ Our Father which
art in Heaven] we may boldly proceed to ask forgiveness of our trespasses, and
whatever else is truly good for us. But, alas, as our iniquities seduce us away
from God, so the guilt of them affrighteth some from returning to him, and the
love of them corrupts the hearts of others, and makes them too indifferent as
to their communion with him; so that too many of his children live as if they
did not know their Father, or had forgotten him: We may say as Isa. 64. 6, 7,
8, 9. [ But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind
have taken us away: and there is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs
up himself to take hold of thee; for thou have hid thy face from us, and have
consumed us because of our iniquities: But now, O Lord, thou art our Father; we
are the Clay, and thou our Potter, and we are all the work of thy hand. Be not
wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever: Behold, see, we
beseech thee, we are all thy people.] O do not provoke your Father to disown
you, or to withdraw his help, or hide his face, or to send the Rod to call you
home! for if you do, you will wish you had known the privileges of his
presence, and had kept nearer to him! Be not so unnatural, so unthankful, so
unkind, as to be weary of your Fathers presence (and such a Father's too) and
to take more delight in any others.

Moreover, you are related to God in Christ, as a Wife unto a Husband, as to
Covenant union, and nearness and dearness of affection, and as to his tender
care of you for your good: And is it seemly, is it wisely or gratefully done of
you, to desire rather the company of others, and delight in creatures more than
him? Isa. 54. 5, 6. How affectionately does thy Maker call himself the Husband
of his people? And can thy heart commit adultery. and forsake him: [ My
Covenant they brake, though I was an Husband to thee, says the Lord, Jer. 31.
32. O put not God to exercise his jealousy. It is one of his terrible
attributes, to be [ a jealous God.] And can he be otherwise to thee, when thou
love not his converse or company, and carest not how long thou art from him
in the world? Woe to thee if he once say as Hos. 2. 2. [ She is not my Wife,
neither am I her Husband.]

Nay more than this, if you are Christians, you are members of the body of
Christ: And therefore how can you withdraw your selves from him, and not feel
the pain and torment of so sore a wound or dislocation? you cannot live without
a constant dependence on him, and communication from him, Joh* 15. 1, 4, 5. I
am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman: Abide in me, and I in you.
-- I am the Vine, ye are the Branches: He that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit: for without me, ye can do nothing. -- If ye
abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall
be done unto you.

So near are you to Christ, that he delights to acquaint you with his
secrets: O how many mysteries does he reveal to those that walk with him, which
carnal strangers never know! Mysteries of Wisdom! Mysteries of Love and saving
Grace! Mysteries of Scripture, and Mysteries of Providence! Mysteries felt by
inward experience, and Mysteries revealed, foreseen by Faith! Not only the
strangers that pass by the doors, but eve^^ the common servants of the family
are unacquainted with the secret operations of the Spirit, and entertainments
of Grace, and Joy in believing, which those that walk with God either do or may
possess. Therefore Christ calls you friends as being more than servants, Joh.
15. 14, 15. Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you: Henceforth I
call you not servants; for the servant knows not what the Lord does: but I
have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have
made known unto you.] It is true, for all this, that every true Christian has
reason (and is apt) to complain of his darkness and distance from God. Alas,
they know so little of him, and of the Mysteries of his Love and Kingdom, that
sometimes they are apt to think that they are indeed but utter strangers to
him: But this is, because there is infinitely more still unknown to them than
they know! what! can the silly shallow creature comprehend his infinite
Creator? Or shall we know all that is to be known in Heaven, before we enjoy
all that is to be enjoyed in Heaven? It is no more wonder to hear a believer
pant and mourn after a fuller knowledge of God, and ne^r^r access to him, than
to seek after Heaven, where this will be his happiness. But yet, though his
Knowledge of God be small, compared with his Ignorance, that little Knowledge
of God which he has attained, i(...)ore mysterious, sublime and excellent,
than all the learning of the greatest unsanctified Scholars in the world. Walk
with him according to the neatness of your Relations to him, and you shall have
this excellent knowledge of his Mysteries, which no Books or Teachers alone can
give. You shall be effectually touched at the heart with the truths which
others do uneffectually hear: You shall be powerfully moved, when they are but
uneffectually exhorted. When they only hear the voice without them, you shall
hear the voice within you, and as it were behind you, saying, This is the way,
walk in it: O that you could duly value such a friend, to watch over you, and
for you, and dwell in you, and tell you faithfully of every danger, and of
every duty, and teach you to know good and evil, and what to choose, and what
to refuse! How closely and delightfully would you converse with such a blessed
friend, if you rightly valued him?

2. MOreover, you that are the servants of God, have by your Covenant and
Profession, renounced and forsaken all things else (as they stand in any
opposition to him, or competition with him) and have resigned your selves
wholly unto him alone: And therefore with him must you converse, and be
employed, unless you will forsake your Covenant. You knew first that it was
your interest to forsake the world and turn to God: You knew the world would
not serve your turn, nor be instead of God to you either in life, or at death:
And upon this Knowledge it was that you changed your Master, and changed your
minds, and changed your way, your work, your hopes: And do you dream now that
you were mistaken? Do you begin to think that the world is fitter to be your
God or Happiness? if not, you must still confess that both your Interest and
your Covenant do oblige you to turn your hearts and minds from the things which
you have renounced, and to walk with him that you have taken for your God, and
to obey him whom you have taken for your King and Judge, and to keep close to
him with purest Love, whom you have taken for your everlasting portion. Mark
what you are minding all the day, while you are neglecting God: Is it not
something that you have renounced? And did you not renounce it upon sufficient
cause? Was it not a work of your most serious deliberation? and of as great
wisdom, as any that ever you performed? if it were, turn not back in your
hearts again from God unto the renounced Creature. You have had many a
lightning from Heaven into your understandings, to bring you to see the
difference between them: You have had many a teaching, and many a warning, and
many a striving of the spirit, before you were prevailed with to renounce the
world, the flesh and the devil, and to give up your self entirely and
absolutely to God. Nay, did it not cost you the smart of some afflictions,
before you would be made so wise? And did it not cost you many a gripe of
conscience, and many a terrible thought of Hell, and of the wrath of God,
before you would be heartily engaged to him, in his Covenant? And will you now
live as strangely and neglectfully toward him, as if those days were quite
forgotten? and as if you had never felt such things? and as if you had never
been so convinced, or resolved? O Christians, take heed of forgetting your
former case! your former thoughts! your former convictions and complaints and
covenants! God did not work all that upon your hearts to be forgotten: He
intended not only your present change, but your after remembrance of it, for
your close adhering to him while you live; and for your quickening and constant
preservance to the end. The forgetting of their former miseries, and the
workings of God upon their hearts in their conversion, is a great cause of
mutability and revolting, and of unspeakable hurt to many a soul.

Nay, may you not remember also what sorrow you had in the day of your
Repentance, for your forsaking and neglecting God so long? And will you grow
again neglective of him? Was it then so heinous a sin in your eyes? and is it
not now grown less? Could you then aggravate it so many ways (and justly) and
now do you justify or extenuate it? Were you then ready to sink under the
burden of it? and were so hardly persuaded that it would be forgiven you? and
now do you make so small a matter of it? Did you then so much wonder at your
folly, that could so long let out your thoughts and affections upon the
creature, while you neglected God and Heaven! and do you begin to look that way
again? Do you now grow familiar with a life so like to that whirh was once your
state of death? and bear that easily that once was the breaking of your heart?
O Christians, turn not away from that God again, who once fetched you home, with
so much smart and so much grace! with such a twist of Love and Fatherly
severity! Methinks when you remember how you were once awakened, you should not
easily fall asleep again. And when you remember the thoughts which then were in
your hearts, and the tears that were in your eyes, and the earnest prayers
which you then put up, that God would receive you, and take you for his own,
you should not now forget him, and live as if you could live without him.
Remember that so far as you withdraw your hearts from God, and let them follow
inferior things, so far you contradict his works upon your hearts; so far you
violate your Covenant with him, or sin against it: so far you are revolters,
and go against the principal part of your professed Religion: Yea so far you are
ungodly, as you thus withdraw your hearts from God. Cleave to him, and
prosecute your Covenant, if you will have the saving benefits of his Love and
Covenant.

3. MOreover, the servants of God are doubly obliged to walk with him, because
they have had that experience of the goodness the safety and the sweetness of
it, which strangers have not. Do you not remember how glad you were, when you
first believed that he pardoned and accepted you? And how much you rejoiced in
his Love and entertainment? And how much better you found your Fathers house,
than ever you had found your sinful state? And how much sweeter his service was
than you did before believe? It Is like you can remember something like that
which is described in Luke 15. 20, 22, 23, 24. [ And he arose and came to his
Father: But when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him; And the Son said unto
him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Son; But the Father said to his servants Bring forth
the best Robe and put it on him, and put a Ring on his hand, and Shoes on his
feet, and bring hither the fatted Calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be
merry: for this my Son was dead and is alive again, he was lost, and is found.]
What would you have thought or said of this Prodigal, if after all this he
should have been weary of his Fathers house and company, and have taken more
pleasure in his former company? Would you not have said* he was a forgetful and
unthankful wretch, and worthy never more to be received? I do not speak to you
now as to Apostates, that are turned ungodly, and have quite forsaken God and
Holiness: But I beseech you consider what it is, after such experiences and
obligations as these, so much as to abate your love, and grow remiss, and
mindless, and indifferent, as if you were aweary of God, and were inclined to
neglect him, and look again to the world for your hope, and satisfaction, and
delight? As you love your souls, and as you would avoid the sorrows which are
greater than any that ever you felt, take heed of fleighting the Love that has
done such wonders for you, and of dealing so unthankfully with the everliving
God, and of turning thus away from him that has received you! Remember whilst
you live, the Love of your espousals: Was God so good to you at the first, and
holiness so desirable? and is it not so still?

And I am sure that your own experience will bear witness, that since that
time, in all your lives, it never was so well with you as when you walked most
faithfully with God. If you have received any falls and hurts, it has been
when you have stragled from him: If ever you had safety, peace or joy, it has
been when you have been nearest to him: your wounds, and grief, and death has
been the fruit of your own ways, and of your forsaking him: Your recovery, and
health, and life have been the fruit of his ways, and of your adhering to him:
Many and many a time you have confessed this, and have said, It is good for me
to draw near to God. He has helped you when none else could help you; and
comforted you when none else could comfort you. How far are you above the
worldlings happiness, when you are nigh to God? One lively thought of his
Greatness, and Excellency, and of his Love to you in Jesus Christ, will make
the name of wealth, and honor, and favor, and preferment, and sensual
pleasures, to seem to you as words of no signification: How indifferent will
you be, as to your prosperity in the world, when you feel what it is to walk
with God? If you are lively experimental Christians, you have found this to be
true: Have you not found that it is the very Health and Ease, and proper
employment of your souls to walk with God, and keep close to him? And that all
goes well with you while you can do thus, however the world does esteem or use
you? And that when you grow strange or disobedient to God, and mindless of his
Goodness, his presence and his authority, you are like the stomach that is
sick, and like a bone that is out of joint, that can have no ease till it be
healed, and restored to its proper place? No meats or drinks, no company nor
recreation, no wealth or greatness will serve to make a sick man well, or ease
the dislocated bones. Nothing will serve a faithful holy soul but God: This is
the cause of the dolor of his heart, and of the secret groans and complainings
of his life, because in this life of distance and imperfection, he finds
himself so far from God; and when he has done all that he can, he is still so
dark, and strange, and cold in his affections! when persecution drives him
from the Ordinances and public Worship, or when sin has set him at a greater
distance from his God, he bemoaneth his soul as David in his banishment from
the Tabernacle, Psalm. 42. 1, 2, etc. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God: My soul thirsts for God,
for the living God: When shall I come and appear before God? My tears have been
my meat day and night while they continually say unto me, Where is thy God?]
And it is no wonder if with his greatest joy, he be yet clouded with these
sorrows, because he yet wants more of God than he enjoys: and his enjoying
graces (Love and Joy) are yet imperfect. But when he has attained his nearest
approach to God, he will have fullness of Delight in fullness of fruition.

O Christians! Do I need to tell you, that after all the trials you have made
in the world, you have never found any state of life, that was worthy your
desires, nor that gave you any true content, but only this living upon God? If
you have not found such comfort here as others have done, yet at least you have
seen it afar off, within your reach: As men that in the Indies, in the
discovery of Plantations, expect Gold Mines, when they find those golden sands
that promise it. You have found a life which is certainly desirable, and
leads to joy in the midst of sorrow: And it is no small joy to have a certain
promise and prospect of everlasting joy. It is therefore more excusable in
those that never tasted any better than the pleasures of the flesh, to neglect
this sweeter Heavenly life, than it is in you that have been convinced by your
own experience, that there is no life to be compared with it.

4. YOur Walking with God is the necessary prosecution of your Choice and Hopes
of life eternal. It is your necessary preparation to your enjoying him in
Heaven. And have you fixed on those Hopes with so great reason and
deliberation, and will you now draw back and be slack in the prosecution of
them? Have you gone so far in the way to Heaven, and do you now begin to look
behind you, as if you were about to change your mind? Paul sets you a better
example, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. [ Yea doubtless I account all things
but loss for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom
I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may
win Christ, and be found in him -- If by any means I might attain to the
resurrection of the dead: Not as though I had already attained, either were
already perfect: But I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which
also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus: Brethren I count not my self to have
apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark
for the price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus.] He compares himself
to a runner in a race, that till be apprehend the price or mark, does still
make forward with all his might, and will not so much as mind or look at any
thing behind him, that would turn him back, or stop him in his course. The
world and the flesh are the things behind us: We turned our backs upon them at
our conversion, when we turned to God: It is these that would now call back our
thoughts, and corrupt our affections, when we should run on, and reach forward
to the heavenly price: It is God and Heaven and the remaining duties of a holy
life, that are the things before us! And shall we now look back? what we that
are running and striving for a Crown of endless glory! we, that if we lose it,
do lose our souls and hopes for ever! we, that have loitered in the morning of
our lives, and lost so much precious time as we have done! we, that have gone
so far in our way, and held out through so many difficulties and assaults!
Shall we now grow weary of walking with God, and begin to look to the things
behind us? Did he not tell us at the first, that Father and Mother, and house
and land, and life, and all things must be forsaken for Christ, if we will be
his Disciples? These are the things behind us, which we turned our back on when
we consented to the Covenant; and are they now grown better? or is God grown
worse, that we turn our hearts from him to them? when we first begun our
Christian race, it was upon supposition that it was for that immortal Crown,
which all the world is not to be compared to: And have we not still the same
consideration before us, to move us to hold on till we attain it? Hold on
Christians, it is for Heaven! Is there not enough in that word to drive back
all the cares and pleasures, that importune your minds to forget your God? Is
there not enough in that word to quicken you up in your greatest dullness? and
to call you home when you are wandering from God, and to make you again fall out
with all, that would reduce you, or divert you, and call it Vanity and Vexation
of spirit. Methinks the forethought of that life and work which you hope to
have with God for ever, should make you earnestly desire to have as much of the
like on earth, as is here to be attained! If it will he your Heaven and
Happiness then, it must needs be desirable now. It is not beseeming a man that
says he is seeking for perfect communion with God in Heaven, and that above
all things (as every Christian does) to live in a daily neglect or
forgetfulness of God on earth. Delightfully to draw near him, and exercise all
our faculties upon him, or for him, sometime in prayer and contemplation on
himself, and always in works of obedience to him; this is the life that
beseems those that profess to seek eternal life. O therefore let us make it
our daily work, to keep our God and Glory in our eye, and to spur on our dull
affections, and in the diligent attendance and following the Captain of our
salvation, to prosecute our expected End.

5. LAstly consider, that God does purposely provide you hard entertainment in
the world, and cause every creature to deny you the pleasure and satisfaction
which you desire, that so you may have none to walk with but himself, with any
heart-setling comfort and content. If you see not enough in him to allure you
to himself, you shall feel enough in the world to drive you to him: If his Love
and Goodness will not serve alone to make him your pleasure, and hold you to
him in the best, and most excellent way (of Love) at least the storms and
troubles that are abroad shall show you a Necessity of keeping close to God;
and the Love of your selves shall help you to do that, which was not done by
the attraction of his Love alone. If you will put him to it, to send out his
command to every creature, to cross and vex you, and disappoint all your
expectations from it, that so he may force you to remember your Father and your
home, deny not then but it is long of your selves that you were not saved in an
easier way. Would you wish God to make that condition pleasant to you, which he
sees you take too much pleasure in already (or seek and desire it, at least?)
When as it is the pleasantness of the Creature that is your danger, and which
detaineth your thoughts and affections from himself? If you could but learn to
walk with him, and to take up your pleasure in his Love appearing to you in his
Creatures, and to make their sweetness a means to your apprehension of the
sweetness of his favor, and of the everlasting joys, then you might say the
Creature does you good; and then it is like you might be permitted to possess
and use it for such pleasure. The jealous God will watch your hearts, though
you watch them not; and he will make you know that he sees which way they run
out from him, and what Creature it is that is minded and delighted in while he
is neglected, as if he were unsuitable, and scarce desirable. And you must
never look that he should long permit you those prohibited delights, or let you
alone in those idolatrous inclinations: If he Love you, he will cure that
Carnal Love, and recover your Love to himself that has deserved it. If he
intend* not your salvation, he may let you go, and try again whether the
Creature will prove better to you than himself: But you cannot think that he
will thus let go his Children that must live with him for ever. Have you not
perceived that this is the design and meaning of his afflicting and
disappointing providence? even to leave you no comfortable entertainment or
converse but with himself, and with his servants, and with those means that
lead you to himself? If you begin to desire to lodge abroad in strange
habitations, he will uncover those houses, and will not leave you a room that is
dry to put your head in; or he will throw open the doors, and leave all open to
the lust of ravenous beasts and robbers. He will have thy heart, and he will
have thy company, because thou art his child, and because he loves thee. He
will allow thee neither thy carnal Delights or Hopes. If he perceive thee
either taking that Pleasure in thy Prosperity which thou should take in him
alone, or Hoping at least that the world may hereafrer prove more amiable and
delightful to thee; the more he loves thee, the more his Providence shall
conspire with his Grace, to change thy mind, by depriving thee of thy
unwholesome dangerous delights, and of all thy Hopes of such hereafter. Use the
world as a traveller, for the ends to which it was ordained, to the service of
God, and the furtherance of thy salvation, and then thou shall find that God
will furnish thee with all that is necessary to these necessary ends: But if
the world must have your Love and Care, and must be your chiefest business and
delight, and your excuse for not attending upon God, murmr not, nor marvel
not if he dispose of it and you accordingly. If you are yet too healthful to
think with seriousness on your eternal state; If you are too Rich to part with
all for Christ, or openly to own his Cause; If you are too much esteemed in the
world to own a scorned slandered Religion; If you are so busy for Earth, that
you cannot have time to think of Heaven; If you have so much delight in House
or Land, or in your employments, or recreations, or friends, that God and
Godliness can have little or none of your delight: Marvel not then if God do
shake your Health, or waste your Riches, or turn your Honor into contempt, and
suffer men to slander and reproach you, and spit in your sace, and make you of
no reputation: Marvel not if he turn you out of all, or turn all to your grief
and trouble, and make the world a desert to you, and the inhabitants as wolves
and bears. The great Lesson that Christ has undertaken to teach you, is the
difference betwixt the Creator and the Creature, and the difference betwixt
Heaven and Earth. The great work that Christ has undertaken to do upon you, is
to recover your hearts from the world to God: And this Lesson he will teach
you, and this work he will do upon you, whatever it cost you: For it must be
done. Yet is not the world unjust enough, or cruel or vexatious enough to you,
to teach you to come home, and take up your content and rest in God? It may
then prove more cruel, and more vexatious to you, till you have better learned
this necessary Lesson. Yet is not your condition empty enough of carnal
delusory pleasures, to we^n you from the world, and make you look to surer
things? Yet are you keeping up your worldly hopes, that the world will again
prove better to you, and that you shall have happy days hereafter? It seems
you are not yet brought low enough: you must yet take another purge, and
perhap^ a sharper than you took before: You must have more blood letting, till
your del^ration cease, and your feverish thirst after creature-comorts do
abate. It is sad that we should be so foolish and unkind, as to stay from God,
as long as any preferments, or pleasures, or profits in the world, will
entertain us: But seeing it is so, let us be thankful both to that Grace and
that Providence which cures us. If you perceive it not better to dwell with
God, than with a flattering prospering world, he will try whether you can think
it better to dwell with God, than with a malicious, cruel, persecuting world:
And whether it be better to have your hearts in Heaven, than in poverty,
prison, banishment or reproach. If you find it not better to converse with God,
than with those that honor you, please you, or prefer you; he will try whether
you can think it better to converse with him, than with those that hate,
revile, belie, and persecute you. And are these the wise and wholesome methods
of our great Physician? And shall we not rather be ruled by him, than by our
brutish appetites? and think better of his counsels, than of the blind
concupiscence of the flesh? Let this be the issue of all our sufferings, and
all the cruelties and injuries of the world, to drive us home to converse with
God, and to turn our desires, and labors, and expectations, to the true
felicity that never will forsake us; and then, the Will of the Lord be done!
Let him choose his means, if this may be the end: Let us kiss the Rod, and not
revile it, if this may be the fruit of his corrections. Who will not pray that
God would deny us those contents, which keep us from seeking our content in
him? And that he would deny us all those hurtful pleasures which hinder us from
pleasing him, or from making him and his ways our chiefest pleasure? And that
he would permit us no such creature-converse, as hinderth our converse with
him? It is best living there (be it in prison or at liberty) where we may live
best to God. Come home, O suffering Christian, to thy God! take up thy Content
and Rest in him; be satisfied with him as thy Portion; and remember Where it is
that he is to be fully and perpetually enjoyed; and then it is good for thee
that thou wast afflicted; for all thy sufferings have their end.

This last Consideration will be further prosecuted in the following Part: And
the Directions for Walking with God, which I should here give you, I have
reserved for a peculiar Treatise, entitled A Christian Directory.

THE CHRISTIANS Converse with God: OR, The Insufficiency and Uncertainty OF
HUMANE FRIENDSHIP: AND THE Improvement of Solitude IN Converse with God.

With some of the Authors breathings after him.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleet Street, and
Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster. 1664.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Context opened. p. 298 Why Christ was forsaken by his Disciples. p. 300
Use 1. Expect by the forsaking of your friends to be conformed unto Christ:
Reasons for your Expectation. p. 302 The Aggravations of their forsaking you.
p. 313 Some quieting Considerations. p. 315 The order of forms in the School of
Christ. p. 322 The Disciples scattered every man to his own. p. 324 Selfishness
contrary to friendly fidelity. p. 325 Considerations to quiet us in the death
of faithful friends. p. 326 Whether we shall know them in Heaven. p. 331
Whether creatures be any matter of our Comfort in Heaven. p. 332 Quest. Shall I
have any more comfort in present friends than in others? p. 334 Doct. 3. When
all forsake us, and leave us (as to them) alone, we are far from being simply
alone, because God is with us. p. 336 The Advantages of having God with us.
ibid. Quest. How he is with us. p. 337 Use 1. Imitate Christ: Live upon God
alone, though men forsake you; yet thrust not your selves into Solitude
uncalled. p. 341 In what cases Solitude is lawful and good. p. 342 Reasons
against unnecessary Solitude. p. 343 The comfort of Converse with God in
necessary Solitude. The Benefits of Solitude. The Reasons from God, Improved
largely in some Meditations. p. 347, 351 Directions for conversing with God in
Solitude. p. 370 Concluded in further Meditation. p. 375 A Caution. p. 378
Joh. 16. 32. Behold the hour comes, yea is come, that ye shall be scattered
every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: And yet I am not alone, because
the Father is with me.
HAving treated of our Conformity to Christ in sufferings, in General, I since
came distinctly to treat of his particular sufferings in which we must be
conformed to him: And having gone over many of those particulars, I am this day
to handle the instance of [ Christ's being forsaken by his friends and
followers.]

He thought meet to foretell them how they should manifest their infirmity and
untrustiness in this temporary forsaking of him, that so he might fullyer
convince them, that he knew what was in man, and that he knew future
contingencies, (or things to come which seem most dependent on the will of man)
and that he voluntarily submitted to his deserted state, and expected no
support from creatures, but that man should then do least for Christ, when
Christ was doing most for man; that man by an unthankful forsaking Christ,
should then manifest his forsaken deplorate state, when Christ was to make
atonement for his Reconciliation to God, and was preparing the most costly
remedy for his recovery. He foretold them of the fruit which their infirmity
would produce, to humble them that were apt to think too highly of themselves
for the late free confession they had made of Christ, when they had newly said
[ Now we are sure that thou know all things: by this we are sure that thou
come forth from God, ver. 30]

He answers them [ Do ye now believe? Behold the hour comes, etc.] Not that
Christ would not have his servants know his graces in them, but he would also
have them know the corruption that is latent, and the infirmity consistent with
their grace. We are very apt to judge of all that is in us, and of all that we
shall do hereafter, by what we feel at the present upon our hearts. As when we
feel the stirring of some corruption we are apt to think that there is nothing
else, and hardly perceive the contrary grace, and are apt to think it will
never be better with us: so when we feel the exercise of faith, desire or love,
we are apt to overlook the contrary corruptions, and to think that we shall
never feel them more. But Christ would keep us both humble and vigilant, by
acquainting us with the mutability and unconstancy of our minds. When it goes
well with us, we forget that the time is coming when it may go worse. As Christ
said to his Disciples here in the case of Believing, we may say to our selves
in that and other cases: Do we now Believe? It is well: but the time may be
coming in which we may be brought to shake with the stirrings of our remaining
unbelief, and shrewdly tempted to question the truth of Christianity it self,
and of the holy Scriptures, and of the life to come. Do we now rejoice in the
persuasions of the Love of God? The time may be coming when we may think our
selves forsaken and undone, and think he will esteem and use us as his enemies.
Do we now pray with ferveur, and pour out our souls enlargedly to God? It is
well: but the time may be coming when we shall seem to be as dumb and
prayerless, and say, we cannot pray, or else we find no audience and acceptance
of our prayers. Christ knows that in us which we little know by our selves;
and therefore may foreknow that we will commit such sins, or fall into such
dangers, as we little fear.

What Christ here prophesies to them did afterward all come to pass. As soon
as ever danger and trouble did appear, they began to flag, and to show how ill
they could adhere unto him or suffer with him, without his special
corroborating grace: In the garden when he was sweating blood in prayer they
were sleeping; Though the spirit was willing, the flesh was weak: They could
not watch with him one hour, Matthew. 26* 40, 41. When he was apprehended, they
shifted each man for himself, Matthew. 26. 56. [ Then all the Disciples forsook
him and fled. And as this is said to be that the Scriptures might be fulfilled,
Matthew. 26. 54, 56. so it might be said to be, that this prediction of Christ
himself might be fulfilled. Not that Scripture Prophesies did cause the sin by
which they were fulfilled, nor that God caused the sin to fulfill his own
predictions, but that God cannot be deceived who foretold in Scriptures long
before that thus it would come to pass: when it is said that [ thus it must be
that the Scripture may be fulfilled] the meaning is not, that [ thus God will
make it be] or [ thus he causes men to do] that he may fulfill the Scriptures:
It is not necessitas consequentis vel causata that is inferred from
predictions; but only necessitas consequentiae; a Logical Necessity in ordine
cognoscendi and dicendi; not a Natural Necessity in ordine essendi: not a
Necessity of the Thing it self as caused by the prediction or decree; but a
necessity of the truth of this conclusion in arguing; [such a thing will be,
because God has decreed, foreknown or foretold it:] or [ whatever God
foretells, must necessarily come to pass; (that is, will certainly come to
pass: but this God has foretold: therefore this will come to pass.]

Here are three observable points in the Text, that are worthy our distinct
consideration, though for brevity ^ake I shall handle them together.

1. That Christ was forsaken by his own Disciples and left alone. 2. When the
Disciples left Christ, they were scattered every one to his own. They returned
to their old habitations, and old acquaintance, and old employment, as if their
hopes and hearts had been almost broken, and they had lost all their labor in
following Christ so long: Yet the root of faith and and love that still
remained, caused them to enquire further of the end, and to come together in
secret to confer about these matters. 3. When Christ was forsaken of his
Disciples and left alone, yet was he not forsaken of his Father, nor left so
alone as to be separated from him or his love.
We are now to consider of this not only as a part of Christ's humiliation, but
also as a point in which we must expect to be conformed to him. It may possibly
seem strange to us that Christ would suffer all his Disciples to forsake him in
his extremity; and I doubt it will seem strange to us, when in our extremity,
and our suffering for Christ (and perhaps for them) we shall find our selves
forsaken by those that we most highly valued, and had the greatest familiarity
with. But there are many Reasons of this permissive providence open to our
observation.

1. No wonder if when Christ was suffering for sin, he would even then permit
the power and odiousness of sin to break sorth, that it might be known he
suffered not in vain. No wonder if he permitted his followers to desert him,
and to show the latent unbelief, and selfishness, and unthankfulness that
remained in them, that so they might know that the death of Christ was as
necessary for them as for others; and the universality of the disease might
show the need that the remedy should be universal. And it is none of Christ's
intent to make his servants to seem better then they are, to themselves or
others, or to honor himself by the hiding of their faults, but to magnify his
pardoning and healing grace, by the means or occasion of the sins which he
pardons and heals.

2. Hereby he will bring his followers to the fuller knowledge of themselves,
and show them that which all their days should keep them humble, and watchful,
and save them from presumption and trusting in themselves: When we have made
any full confession of Christ, or done him any considerable service, we are apt
to say with the Disciples, Matthew. 19. 27. [ Behold we have forsaken all and
followed thee; What shall we have?] As if they had rather been Givers to
Christ, then Receivers from him; and had highly merited at his hands: But when
Peter forsweareth him, and the rest shift for themselves, and when they come to
themselves, after such cowardly and ungrateful dealings, then they will better
understand their weakness, and know on whom they must depend.

3. Hereby also they shall better understand what they would have been, if God
had left them to themselves, that so they may be thankful for grace received,
and may not boast themselves against the miserable world, as if they had made
themselves to differ, and had not received all that grace by which they excel
the common sort: when our falls have hurt us and shamed us, we shall know to
whom we must be beholden to support us.

4. Christ would permit his Disciples thus far to forsake him, because he would
have no support from man, in his sufferings for man: This was part of his
voluntary humiliation, to be deprived of all earthly comforts, and to bear
affliction even from those few, that but lately were his faithful servants:
that men dealing like men, and sinners, while he was doing like God, and as a
Savior, no man might challenge to himself the honor of contributing to the
Redemption of the world, so much as by encouraging the Redeemer.

5. Christ did permit the Faith and courage of his Disciples thus far to fail,
that their witness to him might be of the greater credit and authority, when
his actual Resurrection and the Communication of the Spirit should compel them
to believe: when all their doubts were dissipated, they that had doubted
themselves, and yet were constrained to believe, would be received as the most
impartial witnesses by the doubting world.

6. Lastly, by the desertion and dissipation of his Disciples, Christ would
teach us whenever we are called to follow him in suffering, what to expect from
the best of men; Even to know that of themselves they are untrusty, and may
fail us: and therefore not to look for too much assistance or encouragement
from them. Paul lived in a time when Christians were more self-denying and
steadfast than they are now: And Paul was one that might better expect to be
faithftlly accompanied in his sufferings for Christ, than any of us: And yet he
says, 2 Timothy 4. 16. [ At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men
forsook me:] and prays, that it be not laid to their charge: Thus you have
seen some Reasons why Christ consented to be left of all, and permitted his
Disciples to desert him in his sufferings.

Yet note here, that it is but a partial temporary forsaking that Christ
permits; and not a total or final forsaking or Apostasy. Though he will let
them see that they are yet men, yet will he not leave them to be but as other
men: Nor will he quite cast them off, or suffer them to perish.

Nor is it all alike that thus forsake him; Peter does not do as Judas: The
sincere may manifest their infirmity; but the Hypocrites will manifest their
hypocrisy.

And accordingly in our sufferings our familiars that were false-hearted (as
being worldlings and carnal at the heart) may perhaps betray us, and set
against us, or forsake the cause of Christ, and follow the way of gain and
honor: when our tempted shrinking friends that yet may have some sincerity,
may perhaps look strange at us, and seem not to know us, and may hide their
heads, and show their fears; and perhaps also begin to study some
self*deceiving arguments and distinctions, and to stretch their consciences,
and venture on some sin, because they are afraid to venture on affliction; till
Christ shall cast a gracious rebuking quickening aspect on them, and shame them
for their sinful shame, and fear them from their sinful fears, and inflame
their Love to him by the motions of his Love to them, and destroy the Love that
turned them from him: And then the same men that dishonourably failed Christ
and us, and began to shrink, will turn back and reassume their arms, and by
patient suffering overcome, and win the Crown as we have done before them.

Use. CHristians, expect to be conformed to your Lord in this part of his
Humiliation also: Are your friends yet fast and friendly to you? For all that
expect that many of them at least should prove less friendly: and promise not
your selves an unchanged constancy in them: Are they yet useful to you? expect
the time when they cannot help you: Are they your comforters and delight, and
is their company much of your solace upon earth? Be ready for the time when
they may become your sharpest scourges, and most heart-peircing griefs, or at
least when you shall say, We have no pleasure in them. Have any of them, or
all, already failed you? what wonder? Are they not men, and sinners? To whom
were they ever so constant as not to fail them? Rebuke your selves for your
unwarrantable expectations from them: And learn hereafter to know what man is,
and expect that friends should use you as follows.

1. Some of them that you thought sincere, shall prove perhaps unfaithful and
dissemblers, and upon fallings out, or matters of self-interest may seek yout
ruin. Are you better than David that had an Achitophel? or than Paul that had
a Demas? or than Christ that had a Judas? Some will forsake God: what wonder
then if they forsake you? Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall
wax cold, Mat. 24. 12. Where pride and vainglory, and sensuality and
worldliness are unmortified at the heart, there is no trustiness in such
persons: For their wealth, or honor, or fleshly interest, they will part with
God and their salvation; much more with their best deserving friends. Why may
not you as well as Job have occasion to complain, [ He has put my Brethren far
from me, and my acquaintance are very estranged from me: My kinsfolk have
failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me: They that dwell in my house,
and my Maidens count me for a stranger: I am an alien in their sight: I called
my servant, and he gave me no answer: I entreated him with my mouth: My breath
is strange to my wife; though I entreated for the childrens sake of my own
body: Yea young children despised me: I arose, and they spoke against me: All
my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned against me, Job
19. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Why may not you as well as David be put to say
Yea mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread has
lift up his heel against me!] Psalm. 41. 9. Those that have been most acquainted
with the secrets of your soul, and privy to your very thoughts, may be the
persons that shall betray you, or grow strange to you. Those that you have most
obliged by benefits, may prove your greatest enemies. You may find some of your
friends like birds of prey, that hover about you for what they can get, and
when they have caught it, fly away* If you have given them all that you have,
they will forsake you, and perhaps reproach you, because you have no more to
give them. They are your friends more for what they yet expect from you, than
for what they have already received. If you cannot still be helpful to them, or
feed their covetous desires, or supply their wants, you are to them but as one
that they had never known. Many a faithful Minister of Christ has studied, and
preached, and prayed, and wept for their peoples souls, and after all have been
taken for their enemies, and used as such; yea even because they have done so
much for them. Like the Patient, that being cured of a mortal sickness, sued
his Physician at Law for making him sick with the Physic (But it is indeed our
uncured patients only that are offended with us.) Paul was accounted an enemy
to the Galathians, because he told them the truth. Ungrateful truth makes the
faithfullest Preachers most ungrateful. Is must seem no wonder to a Preacher of
the Gospel, when he has entreated, prayed and wept night and day for miserable
souls, and laid his hands as it* were under their seet in hopes of their
conversion and salvation, to find them after all, his bitter enemies, and
seeking his destruction, that could have laid down his life for their
salvation. Jeremy seemed too impatient under this affliction, when he said [
Give heed to me O Lord, and hearken to the voice of them that contend with me:
Shall evil be recompensed for good? Remember that I stood before thee to speak
good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them: Therefore deliver up their
children to the famine, and pour out their blood by the force of the sword,
etc. Jer. 18. 19, 20.

Thus may ingratitude afflict you, and kindness be requited with unkindness,
and the greatest benefits be forgotten, and requited with the greatest wrongs:
your old familiars may be your foes: and you may be put to say as Jeremy [ For
I heard the defaming of many: fear on every side: Report, say they, and we will
report it: All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he
will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our
revenge on him.] Jer. 20. 10. Thus must the servants of Christ be used, in
conformity to their suffering Head.

2. And some that are sincere, and whose hearts are with you, may yet be drawn
by temptation to disown you: when malice is slandering you, timorous friendship
may perhaps be silent, and afraid to justify you, or take your part: when a
Peter in such imbecility and fear can disown and deny his suffering Lord, what
wonder if saint-hearted friends disown you, or me, that may give them too much
occasion or pretense? why may not you and I be put to say as David did, Psalm.
38. 11, 12. [ My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore, and my kisnmen
stand afar off: They that seek after my life lay snares for me: and they that
seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long!]
They that in fearfulness will fail their Maker and Redeemer, and hazard their
salvation, may by a smaller temptation be drawn to fail such friends as we.

3, Moreover, a hundred things may occasion fallings out, even amongst
unfeigned friends: Passions may cause inconvenient actions or expressions, and
these may cause passions in their friends; and these may grow so high till
friends do seem to one another to be like enemies: Paul and Barnabas may grow
so hot, as to fall out to a parture. How easily can Satan set fire on the
tinder which he finds in the best and gentlest natures, if God permit him? No
friends so near and dear, that passionate weaknesses may not either alienate or
make a grief to one another, How apt are we to take unkindnesses at one
another, and to be suspicious of our friends, or offended with them? And how
apt to give occasion of such offense? How apt are we to censure one another,
and to misinterpret the words and actions of our friends? And how apt to give
occasion of such mistakes and cutting censures? And the more kindness we have
found in, or expected from our friends, the more their real or supposed
injuries will affect us. We are apt to say, [ Had it been a stranger, I could
have born it: But to be used thus by my bosom or familiar friend, goes near my
heart.] And indeed the unkindnesses of friends is no small affliction; the
suffering going usually as near the heart, as the person that caused it was
near it: especially when our own weakness causes us to forget the frailty and
infirmities of man, and with what allowances and expectations we must choose
and use our friends; and when we forget the Love that remains in the midst of
passions.

4. Also cross-interests and unsuitableness may exceedingly interrupt the
fastest friendship. Friendship is very much founded in suitableness, and
maintained by it: And among mortals, there is no perfect suitableness to be
found; but much unsuitableness still remains. That which pleases one, is
displeasing to another: One likes this place, and the other that: One likes
this habit, and the other that: One is for mirth, and the other for sadness:
One for talk, and the other for silence: One for a public, and the other for a
private life. And their personality or individuation having self-love as
inseparable, will unavoidably cause a contrariety of interests. The Creature is
insufficient for us: If one have it, perhaps the other must want it: Like a
covering too narrow for the bed. Sometimes our Reputations seem to stand cross,
so that one man's is diminished by another: and then how apt is envy to create
a grudge, and raise unfriendly jealousies and distastes! Sometimes the
commodity of one is the discommodity of the other: And then [ Mine and Thine]
(which are contrary to the community of friendship) may divide, and alienate,
and make Two of those that seemed One. The instances of Abraham and Lot (upon
the difference among their servants) and of Isaac and Ishmael, and of Jacob and
Esau, and of Laban and Jacob, and of Leah and Rachel, and of Joseph and his
Brethren, and of Saul and David, and of Ziba, Mephibosheth and David, with many
others tell us this. It is rare to meet with a Jonathan, that will endearedly
love that man to the death, who is appointed to deprive him of a Kingdom. If
one can but say [ I suffer by him, or I am a looser by him] it seems enough
to excuse unfriendly thoughts and actions. When you can gratify the desires of
all the covetous, ambitious, self-seeking persons in the world, or else cure
their diseases, and possess their minds with perfect Charity, then all the
world will be your friends.

5. Cross opinions also are like to alienate many of your friends. This age
has over and over again given the world as full and sad demonstrations of the
power of Cross opinions, to alienate friends, and make divisions, as most ages
of the world have ever had. If your friend be proud, it is wonderful how he will
slight you, and withdraw his Love, if you be not of his mind. If he he zealous,
he is easily tempted, to think it a part of his duty to God, to disown you if
you differ from him, as taking you for one that disowneth the truth of God, and
therefore one that God himself disowneth; or at least to grow cold in his
affection toward you, and to decline from you, as he that thinks you do from
God. As agreement in opinions does strangely reconcile affections; so
disagreement does secretly and strangely alienate them; even before you are
well aware, your friend has lost possession of your hearts, because of an
unavoidable diversity of apprehensions: When all your friends have the same
intellectual complexion and temperature, and measure of understanding with your
selves, then you may have hope to escape the ruptures which unlikeliness and
differences of apprehensions might else cause.

6. Moreover, some of your friends may so far overgrow you in wisdom, or
wealth, or honor, or worth in their own conceits, that they may begin to take
you to be unsuitable for them, and unmeet for their further special friendship.
Alas poor man, they will pity thee that thou art no wiser, and that thou have
no greater light to change thy mind as fast as they, or that thou art so weak
and ignorant as not to see what seems to them so clear a truth; or that thou
art so simple to cast away thy self by crossing them that might prefer thee, or
to fall under the displeasure of those that have power to raise or ruin thee:
But if thou be so simple, thou may be the object of their lamentation, but
art no familiar friend for them. They think it fittest to close and converse
with those of their own rank and stature, and not with such shrubs and
children, that may prove their trouble and dishonor.

7. And some of your friends will think that by a more through acquaintance
with you, they have found out more of your infirmities or faults; and therefore
have found that you are less amiable and valuable than at first they judged
you: They will think that by distance, unacquaintedness, and an overhasty love
and judgment, they were mistaken in you; and that now they see reason to
repent of the love which they think was guilty of some errors and excess: when
they come nearer you, and have had more trial of you, they will think they are
fitter to judge of you than before: And indeed our defects are so many, and all
our infirmities so great, that the more men know us, the more they may see in
us that deserves pity or reproof; and as pictures, we appear less beautiful
at the nearest view: Though this will not warrant the withdrawing of that Love
which is due to friends, and to virtue even in the imperfect: nor will excuse
that alienation and decay of friendship that is caused by the pride of such as
overlook perhaps much greater failings and weaknesses in themselves, which need
forgiveness.

8. And perhaps some of your friends will grow weary of their friendship,
having that infirmity of humane nature, not to be much pleased with one thing
long. Their Love is a flower that quickly withers: It is a short-lived thing
that soon grows old. It must be novelty that must feed their love and their
delight.

9. And perhaps they may have got some better friends in their apprehensions,
that may have so much interest as to take them up, and leave no room for
ancient friends. It may be they have met with those that are more suitable, or
can be more useful to them: that have more learning, or wit, or wealth, or
power, than you have, and therefore seem more worthy of their friendship.

10. And some of them may think when you are in a low and suffering state, and
in danger of worse, that it is part of their duty of self-preservation to be
strange to you (though in heart they wish you well.) They will think they are
not bound to hazard themselves upon the displeasure of superiors, to own or
befriend you or any other: Though they must not desert Christ, they think they
may desert a man for their own preservation.

To avoid both extremes in such a case, men must both study to understand which
way is most serviceable to Christ, and to his Church, and withal to be able to
deny themselves, and also must study to understand what Christ means in his
final sentence [ In as much as you did it (or did it not) to one of the least
of these my brethren, you did it (or did it not) to me.] As if it were to visit
the contagious, we must neither cast away our lives to do no good, or for that
which in value holds no proportion with them; nor yet must we deny to run any
hazard when it is indeed our duty: So is it in our visiting those that suffer
for the cause of Christ: (but that here the owning them being the confessing of
him, we need more seldom to fear being too forward.)

11. And some of your friends may cover their unfaithfulness with the pretense
of some fault that you have been guilty of, some error that you hold, or some
unhansome or culpable act that you have done, or some duty that you have left
undone or failed in. For they think there is not a better shelter for their
unfaithfulness, then to pretend for it the Name and Cause of God, and so to
make a duty of their sin. Who would not justify them, if they can but prove,
that God requires them, and Religion obliges them to forsake you for your
faults? There are few crimes in the world that by some are not fathered on God
(that most hates them) as thinking no name can so much honor them. False
friends therefore use this means as well as other Hypocrites: And though God is
Love, and condemns nothing more then uncharitableness and malice, yet these
are commonly by falshearted Hypocrites, called by some pious virtuous names,
and God himself is entitled to them: so that few worldlings, ambitious persons
or timeservers; but will confidently pretend Religion for all their falsehood to
their friends, or bloody cruelty to the servants of Christ, that comply not
with their carnal interest.

12. Perhaps some of your friends may really mistake your case, and think that
you suffer as evil doers, and instead of comforting you may be your sharpest
censurers: This is one of the most notable things set out to our observation in
the book of Job: It was not the smallest part of his affliction, that when the
hand of God was heavy upon him, and then if ever was the time for his friends
to have been his comforters, and friends indeed, on the contrary they became
his scourge, and by unjust accusations, and misinterpretations of the
providence of God, did greatly add to his affliction! when God had taken away
his children, wealth and health, his friends would take away the reputation and
comfort of his integrity; and under pretense of bringing him to repentance, did
charge him with that which he was never guilty of; They wounded his good-name,
and would have wounded his conscience, and deprived him of his inward peace:
Censorious false accusing friends do cut deeper then malicious slandering
enemies: It is no wonder if strangers or enemies do misjudge and misreport our
actions: But when your bosom friends, that should most intimately know you,
and be the chief witness of your innocence against all others, shall in their
jealousy, or envy, or peevishness, or falling out, be your chief reproachers
and unjust accusers, as it makes it serve more credible to others, so it will
come nearest to your selves. And yet this is a thing that must be expected: yea
even your most self-denying acts of obedience to God, may be so misunderstood
by godly men, and real friends, as by them to be taken for your great
miscarriage, and turned to your rebuke: As David's dancing before the Ark was by
his wife; which yet did but make him resolve to be yet more vile. If you be
cast into poverty, or disgrace, or prison, or banishment, for your necessary
obedience to Christ, perhaps your friend or wife may become your accuser for
this your greatest service, and say, This is your own doing: your rashness, or
indiscretion, or self-conceitedness, or willfulness has brought it upon you:
what need had you to say such words, or to do this or that? why could not you
have yielded in so small a matter?] Perhaps your costliest and most excellent
obedience shall by your nearest friends be called the fruits of pride, or
humor, or passion, or some corrupt affection, or at least of folly and
inconsiderateness. When flesh and blood has long been striving in you against
your duty, and saying, [Do not cast away thy self: O serve not God at so dear a
rate: God does not require thee to undo thy self: why should thou not avoid
so great inconveniences?] When with much ado you have conquered all your carnal
reasonings, and denied your selves and your carnal interest, you must expect
even from some religious friends, to be accused for these very actions, and
perhaps their accusations may fasten such a blot upon your names, as shall
never be washed out till the day of judgment. By difference of interests, or
apprehensions, and by unacquaintedness with your hearts, and actions, the
righteousness of the righteous may be thus taken from him, and friends may do
the work of enemies, yea of Satan himself the accuser of the brethren; and may
prove as thorns in your bed, and gravel in your shoes, yea in your eyes, and
wrong you much more then open adversaries could have done. How it is like to go
with that man's reputation, you may easily judge, whose friends are like Jobs,
and his enemies like David's that lay snares before him, and diligently watch
for matter of reproach: yet this may befall the best of men.

13. You may be permitted by God to fall into some real crime, and then your
friends may possibly think it is their duty to disown you, so far as you have
wronged God: When you provoke God to frown upon you, he may cause your friends
to frown upon you: If you will fall out with him, and grow strange to him, no
marvel if your truest friends fall out with you, and grow strange to you. They
love you for your godliness, and for the sake of Christ; and therefore must
abate their love if you abate your godliness; and must for the sake of Christ
be displeased with you for your sins. And if in such a case of real guilt, you
should be displeased at their displeasure, and should expect that your friend
should befriend your sin, or carry himself toward you in your guilt as if you
were innocent, you will but show that you understand not the nature of true
friendship, nor the use of a true friend; and are yet your selves too friendly
to your sins.

14. Moreover, those few friends that are truest to you, may be utterly unable
to relieve you in your distress, or to give you ease, or do you any good. The
case may be such that they can but pity you and lament your sorrows, and weep
over you: you may see in them that man is not as God, whose friendship can
accomplish all the good that he desires to his friends. The wisest and
greatest and best of men are silly comforters, and uneffectual helps: you may
be sick, and pained, and grieved, and distressed, notwithstanding any thing
that they can do for you: Nay perhaps in their ignorance, they may increase
your misery, while they desire your relief* and by striving indirectly to help
and ease you, may tie the knot faster and make you worse. They may provoke
those more against you that oppress you, while they think they speak that which
should tend to set you free: They may think to ease your troubled minds by such
words as shall increase the trouble: or to deliver you as Peter would have
delivered Christ, and saved his Savior, first by carnal counsel, Matthew. 16.
22. [ Be it far from thee Lord; this shall not be unto thee] And then by carnal
unjust force, (by drawing his sword against the officers.) Love and good
meaning will not prevent the mischiefs of ignorance and mistake. If your friend
^ut your throat while he thought to cut but a vein to cure your disease, it is
not his friendly meaning that will save your lives. Many a thousand sick people
are killed by their friends, that attend them with an earnest desire of their
life; while they ignorantly give them that which is contrary to their disease,
and will not be the less pernicious for the good meaning of the giver. Who have
more tender affections then Mothers to their children? And yet a great part of
the calamity of the world of sickness, and the misery of man's life, proceeds
from the ignorant and erroneous indulgence of Mothers to their children, who to
please them, let them eat and drink what they will, and use them to excess and
gluttony in their childhood, till nature be abused and mastered and clogged
with those superfluities and crudities, which are the dunghill matter of most
of the following diseases of their lives.

I might here also remember you how your friends may themselves be overcome
with a temptation, and then become the more dangerous tempters of you, by how
much the greater their interest is in your affections. If they be infected with
error, they are the likest persons to ensnare you: If they be tainted with
Covetousness or Pride, there is none so likely to draw you to the same sin: And
so your friends may be in effect your most deadly enemies, deceivers and
destroyers.

15. And if you have friends that are never so firm and constant, they may
prove (not only unable to relieve you, but) very additions to your grief. If
they are afflicted in the participation of your sufferings, as your troubles
are become theirs (without your case) so their trouble for you will become
yours, and so your stock of sorrow will be increased. And they are mortals, and
liable to distress as well you. And therefore they are like to bear their share
in several sorts of sufferings: And so friendship will make their sufferings to
be yours: Their sicknesses and pains, their fears and griefs, their wants and
dangers, will all be yours. And the more they are your hearty friends, the more
they will be yours. And so you will have as many additions to the proper burden
of your griefs, as you have suffering friends: When you do but hear that they
are dead, you say as Thomas, Joh. 11. 16. [ Let us also go that we may die with
him.] And having many such friends you will almost always have one or other of
them in distress; and so be seldom free from sorrow; besides all that which is
properly your own.

16. Lastly, if you have a friend that is both true and useful, yet you may be
sure he must stay with you but a little while. The godly men will cease, and
the faithful fail from among the children of men; while men of lying flattering
lips, and double hearts survive, and the wicked walk on every side while the
vilest men are exalted, Psalm. 12. 1, 2, 8. while swarms of false malicious men,
are left round about you, perhaps God will take away your dearest friends: If
among a multitude of unfaithful ones, you have but one that is your friend
indeed, perhaps God will take away that one. He may be separated from you into
another Country; or taken away to God by death. Not that God does grudge you
the mercy of a faithful friend; but that he would be your All, and would not
have you hurt your selves with too much affection to any Creature, and for
other reasons to be named anon.

And to be forsaken of your friends, is not all your affliction: but to be so
forsaken is a great aggravation of it. 1. For they use to forsake us in our
greatest sufferings and streights, when we have the greatest need of them.

2. They fail us most at a dying hour, when all other worldly comfort fails:
As we must leave our houses, lands and wealth, so must we for the present leave
our friends: And as all the rest are silly comforters, when we have once
received our citation to appear before the Lord, so also are our friends but
silly comforters: They can weep over us, but they cannot with all their care,
delay the separating stroke of death, one day or hour.

Only by their prayers, and holy advice, remembering us of everlasting things,
and provoking us in the work of preparation, they may prove to us friends
indeed. And therefore we must value a holy, heavenly, faithful friend, as one
of the greatest treasures upon earth. And while we take notice how as men they
may forsake us, we must not deny but that as Saints they are precious, and of
singular use to us; and Christ uses by them to communicate his mercies; and if
any creatures in the world may be blessings to us, it is holy persons, that
have most of God in their hearts and lives.

3. And it is an aggravation of the cross, that they often fail us, when we are
most faithful in our duty, and stumble most upon the most excellent acts of our
obedience.

4. And those are the persons that ofttimes fail us, of whom we have deserved
best, and from whom we might have expected most.

Review the experiences of the choicest servants that Christ has had in the
world, and you shall find enough to confirm you of the vanity of man, and the
instability of the dearest friends. How highly was Athanasius esteemed? and yet
at last deserted and banished even by the famous Constantine himself! How
excellent a man was Gregory Nazianzene, and highly valued in the Church? and
yet by reproach and discouragements driven away from his Church at
Constantinople whither he was chosen: and envied by the Bishops round about
him. How worthy a man was the eloquent Chrysostom, and highly valued in the
Church! And yet how bitterly was he prosecuted by Hierome and Epiphanius; and
banished, and dyed in a second banishment, by the provocation of factious
contentious Bishops, and an Empress impatient of his plain reproofs? What
person more generally esteemed and honored for learning, piety and
peaceableness then Melanchthon? and yet by the contentions of Illyricus and his
party, he was made aweary of his life. As highly as Calvin was (deservedly)
valued at Geneva, yet once in a popular lunacy and displeasure, they drove him
out of their City, and in contempt of him some called their dogs by the name of
Calvin; (though after they were glad to entreat him to return.) How much our
Grindal and Abbot were esteemed, it appears by their advancement to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury: and yet who knows not that their eminent piety
sufficed not to keep them from dejecting frowns! And if you say, that it is no
wonder if with Princes through interest, and with people through levity, it be
thus; I might heap up instances of the like untrustiness of particular friends:
But all History and the experiences of the most, do so much abound with them,
that I think it needless. Which of us must not say with David that [ all men
are lyars] Psalm. 116. that is, deceitful and untrusty, either through
unfaithfulness, weakness or insufficiency that either will forsake us, or
cannot help us in the time of need?

Was Christ forsaken in his extremity by his own Disciples, to teach us what to
expect, or bear? Think it not strange then to be conformed to your Lord, in
this, as well as in other parts of his humiliation. Expect that men should
prove deceitful: Not that you should entertain censorious suspicions of your
particular friends: but remember in general that man is frail, and the best too
selfish and uncertain; and that it is no wonder if those should prove your
greatest grief, from whom you had the highest expectations. Are you better then
Job, or David, or Christ? and are your friends more firm and unchangeable then
theirs?

Consider, 1* That Creatures must be set at a sufficient distance from their
Creator. Allsufficiency, Immutability and indefectible fidelity, are proper to
Jehovah. As it is no wonder for the Sun to set or be ecclipsed, as glorious a
body as it is; so it is no wonder for a friend, a pious friend, to fail us, for
a time, in the hour of our distress. There are some that will not: but there is
none but may, if God should leave them to their weakness. Man is not your Rock:
He has no stability but what is derived, dependant, and uncertain, and
defectible. Learn therefore to rest on God alone, and lean not too hard or
confidently upon any mortal might.

2. And God will have the common infirmity of man to be known, that so the
weakest may not be utterly discouraged, nor take their weakness to be
gracelesness, whilst they see that the strongest also have their infirmities,
though not so great as theirs. If any of Gods servants lives in constant
holiness and fidelity, without any shakings or stumbling in their way, it would
tempt some self*accusing troubled souls, to think that they were altogether
graceless, because they are so far short of others. But when we read of a
Peter's denying his Master in so horrid a manner, with swearing and cursing that
he knew not the man, Matthew. 26. 74. and of his dissimulation and not walking
uprightly, Gal. 2. and of a David's unfriendly and unrighteous dealing with
Mephihosheth, the seed of Jonathan; and of his most vile and treacherous
dealing with Uriah, a faithful and deserving subject; it may both abate our
wonder and offense at the unfaithfulness of our friends, and teach us to
compassionate their frailty, when they desert us; and also somewhat abate our
immoderate dejectedness and trouble, when we have failed God or man our selves.

3. Moreover, consider, how the odiousness of that sin, which is the root and
cause of such unfaithfulness, is greatly manifested by the failing of our
friends. God will have the odiousness of the remnants of our self-love and
carnalmindedness, and cowardice appear: we should not discern it in the seed
and root, if we did not see, and taste it in the fruits. Seeing without tasting
will not sufficiently convince us: A crab looks as beautiful as an apple; but
when you taste it, you better know the difference. When you must your selves be
unkindly used by your friends, and forsaken by them in your distress, and you
have tasted the fruits of the remnants of their worldliness, selfishness and
carnal fears, you will better know the odiousness of these vices, which thus
break forth against all obligations to God and you, and notwithstanding the
light, the conscience, and perhaps the grace, that does resist them.

4. Are you not prone to overvalue and overlove your friends? If so, is not
this the meetest remedy for your disease? In the loving of God, we are in no
danger of excess; and therefore have no need of any thing to quench it. And in
the loving of the godly purely upon the account of Christ, and in loving Saints
as Saints, we are not apt to go too far. But yet our understandings may
mistake, and we may think that Saints have more of sanctity then indeed they
have; and we are exceeding apt to mix a selfish common love with that which is
spiritual and holy; and at the same time, when we Love a Christian as a
Christian, we are apt not only to Love him (as we ought) but to overlove him
because he is our friend, and Loves us. Those Christians that have no special
Love to us, we are apt to undervalue and neglect, and Love them below their
holiness and worth: But those that we think entirely Love us, we Love above
their proper worth, as they stand in the esteem of God: Not but that we may
Love those that Love us, and add this Love to that which is purely for the sake
of Christ; but we should not let our own interest prevail and overtop the
interest of Christ, nor Love any so much for Loving us, as for Loving Christ:
And if we do so, no wonder if God shall use such remedies as he sees meet, to
abate our excuse of selfish love.

O how highly are we apt to think of all that Good which is found in those who
are the highest esteemers of us, and most dearly love us; when perhaps in it
self it is but some ordinary good, or ordinary degree of goodness which is in
them! Their Love to us unresistibly procures our Love to them: And when we
Love them, it is wonderful to observe, how easily we are brought to think well
of almost all they do, and highly to value their judgments, graces, parts and
works: when greater excellencies in another perhaps are scarce observed, or
regarded but as a common thing: And therefrre the destruction or want of Love,
is apparent in the vilifying thoughts and speeches, that most men have of one
another; and in the low esteem of the judgments, and performances and lives of
other men: (much more in their contempt, reproaches and cruel persecutions.)
Now though God will have us increase in our Love of Christ in his members, and
in our pure Love of Christians as such, and in our common charity to all, yea
and in our just fidelity to our friend; yet would he have us suspect and
moderate our selfish and excessive Love, and inordinate partial esteem of one
above another, when it is but for our selves, and on our own account. And
therefore as he will make us know, that we our selves are no such excellent
persons, as that it should make another so laudable, or advance his worth,
because he Loves us; so he will make us know, that our friends whom we
overvalue, are but like other men: If we exalt them too highly in our esteem,
it is a sign that God must cast them down. And as their Love to us was it that
made us so exalt them; so their unkindness or unfaithfulness to us, is the
fittest means to bring them lower in our estimation and affection. God is very
jealous of our hearts, as to our overvaluing and overloving any of his
Creatures: what we give inordinately and excessively to them, is some way or
other taken from him, and given them to his injury, and therefore to his
offense. Though I know that to be void of natural, friendly or social
affections, is an odious extreme on the other side; yet God will rebuke us if
we are guilty of excess. And it is the greater and more inexcusable fault to
over-love the Creature, because our Love to God is so cold, and hardly kindled
and kept alive: He cannot take it well to see us dote upon dust and frailty
like our selves, at the same time when all his wondrous kindness, and
attractive goodness, do cause but such a faint and languid Love to him, which
we our selves can scarcely feel. If therefore he cure us by permitting our
friends to show us truly what they are, and how little they deserve such
excessive Love (when God has so little) it is no more wonder, than it is that
he is tender of his glory, and merciful to his servants souls.

5. By the failing and unfaithfulness of our friends, the wonderful Patience of
God will be observed and honored, as it is showed both to them and us. When
they forsake us in our distress (especially when we suffer for the cause of
Christ) it is God that they injure more than us: And therefore if he bear with
them, and forgive their weakness upon repentance, why should not we do so that
are much less injured? The worlds persidiousness should make us think, How
great and wonderful is the patience of God, that bears with, and bears up
so vile, ungrateful, treacherous men that abuse him to whom they are infinitely
obliged? And it should make us consider, when men deal treacherously with us,
How great is that mercy that has born with, and pardoned greater wrongs which
I my self have done to God, than these can be which men have done to me! It was
the remembran^e of David's sin, that had provoked God to raise up his own Son
against him (of whom he had been too fond) which made him so easily bear the
curses and reproach of Shimei. It will make us bear abuse from others, to
remember how ill we have dealt with God, and how ill we have deserved at his
hands our selves.

6. And I have observed another of the Reasons of Gods permitting the failing
of our friends, in the season and success. It is, that the Love of our friends
may not hinder us when we are called to suffer or dye. When we over-love them,
it teareth our very hearts to leave them: And therefore it is a strong
temptation to draw us from our duty, and to be unfaithful to the cause of
Christ, lest we should be taken from our too-dear friends, or lest our
suffering cause their too-much grief. It is so hard a thing to dye with
willingness and peace, that it must needs be a mercy to be saved from the
impediments which make us backward: And the excessive Love of friends and
relations, is not the least of these impediments: O how loath is many a one to
dye, when they think of parting with wife, or husband, or children, or dear and
faithful friends! Now I have often observed, that a little before their death or
sickness, it is ordinary with God to permit some unkindness between such
too-dear friends to arise, by which he moderated and abated their affections,
and made them a great deal the willinger to dye. Then we are ready to say, It
is time for me to leave the world, when not only the rest of the world, but my
dearest friends have first forsaken me! This helps us to remember our dearest
everlasting friend, and to be grieved at the heart that we have been no truer
our selves to him, who would not have forsaken us in our extremity. And
sometime it makes us even aweary of the world, and to say as Elias, Lord take
away my life, etc. 1 King. 19. 4, 10, 14. when we must say, I thought I had one
friend left, and behold even he forsakes me in my distress.] As the Love of
friends intangleth our affections to this world, so to be weaned by their
unkindnesses from our friends, is a great help to loosen us from the world, and
proves often a very great mercy to a soul that is ready to depart.

And as the friends that Love us most, and have most interest in our esteem and
Love, may do more than others, in tempting us to be unfaithful to our Lord, to
entertain any error, to commit any sin, or to flinch in suffering; so when God
has permitted them to forsake us, and to lose their too great interest in us,
we are fortified against all such temptations from them. I have known where a
former intimate friend has grown strange, and broken former friendship, and
quickly after turned to such dangerous ways and errors, as convinced the
other of the mercifulness of God, in weakening his temptation by his friends
desertion; who might else have drawn him along with him into sin. And I have
often observed, that when the husbands have turned from Religion to Infidelity,
Familism, or some dangerous heresy, that God has permitted them to hate and
abuse their wives so inhumanely, as that it preserved the poor women from the
temptation of following them in their Apostasy or sin: When as some other
women with whom their husbands have dealt more kindly, have been drawn away
with them into pernicious paths.

Therefore still I must say, we were undone if we had the disposing of our own
conditions. If would be long before we should have been willing our selves to
be thus unkindly dealt with by our friends: And yet God has made it to many a
soul, a notable means of preserving them from being undone for ever. Yea the
unfaithfulness of all our friends, and the malice and cruelty of all our
enemies, does us not usually so much harm, as the Love and Temptation of some
one deluded erring friend, whom we are ready to follow into the gulf.

7. Lastly, consider that it is not desirable or suitable to our state, to have
too much of our comfort by any creature: Not only because it is most pure and
sweet which is most immediately from God; but also because we are very prone to
overlove the Creature; and if it should but seem to be very commodious to us,
by serving our necessities or desires, it would seem the more amiable, and
therefore be the stronger snare: The work of mortification does much consist in
the annihilation or deadness of all the Creatures as to any power to draw away
our hearts from God, or to entangle us and detain us from our duty. And the
more excellent and lovely the creature appears to us, the less it is dead to
us, or we to it; and the more will it be able to hinder or ensnare us.

When you have well considered all these things, I suppose you will admire the
wisdom of God in leaving you under this kind of trial, and weaning you from
every creature, and teaching you by his providence as well as by his word, to
Cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be
accounted of?] And you will see that it is no great wonder that corrupted souls,
that live in other sins, should be guilty of this unfaithfulness to their
friends: and that he that dare unthankfully trample upon the unspeakable
kindness of the Lord, should deal unkindly with the best of men. You make no
great wonder at other kind of sins, when you see the world continually commit
them; why then should you make a greater or a stranger matter of this than of
the rest? Are you better than God? Must unfaithfulness to you be made more
heinous, than that unfaithfulness to him, which yet you daily see and slight?
The least wrong to God is a thousandfold more than the greatest that can be
done to you, as such. Have you done that for your nearest friend, which God
has done for him and you, and all men? Their obligations to you are nothing in
comparison of their great and manifold obligations to God.

And you know that you have more wronged God, your selves, than any man ever
wronged you: And if yet for all that he bear with you, have you not great
reason to bear with others?

Yea, you have not been innocent toward men your selves: Did you never wrong
or fail another? Or rather, are you not apter to see and aggravate the wrong
that others do to you, than that which you have done to others? May you not
call to mind your own neglects, and say, as Adonizebeck, Judge. 1. 7. [
Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and their great toes cut off,
gathered their meat under my table: As I have done, so God has requited me.]
Many a one have I failed or wronged: and no wonder if others fail and wrong me.]

Nay you have been much more unfaithful and injurious to your selves, than ever
any other has been to you. No friend was so near you, as your selves: None had
such a charge of of you: None had such helps and advantages to do you good or
hurt: And yet all the enemies you have in the world, even in Earth or Hell,
have not wronged and hurt you half so much as you have done your selves. O,
methinks the man or woman that knows themselves, and knows what it is to
Repent; that ever saw the greatness of their own sin and folly, should have no
great mind or leisure to aggravate the failings of their friends, or the
injuries of their enemies, considering what they have proved to themselves!
Have I forfeited my own salvation, and deserved everlasting wrath, and sold my
Savior and my soul for so base a thing as sinful pleasure, and shall I ever
make a wonder of it, that another man does me some temporal hurt? Was any
friend so near to me as my self? Or more obliged to me? O sinful soul, let thy
own, rather than thy friends deceit and treachery, and neglects, be the matter
of thy displeasure, wonder and complaints!

And let thy Conformity herein to Jesus Christ, be thy holy ambition and
delight: Not as it is thy suffering, nor as it is caused by men's sin: but as it
is thy Conformity and fellowship in the sufferings of thy Lord, and caused by
his Love.

I have already showed you that sufferers for Christ, are in in the highest
form among his Disciples. The order of his followers usually is this; 1. At our
entrance, and in the lowest form, we are exercised with the fears of Hell, and
Gods displeasure, and in the works of Repentance for the sin that we have done.
2. In the second form, we come to think more seriously of the remedy, and to
enquire what we shall do to be saved, and to understand better what Christ has
done and suffered, and what he is and will be to us; and to value him and his
love and grace: And here we are much enquiring how we may know our own
sincerity, and our interest in Christ, and are laboring for some assurance,
and looking after signs of grace. 3. In the next form or order we are searching
after further knowledge, and laboring better to understand the mysteries of
Religion, and to get above the rudiments and first principles: And here if we
escape turning bare Opinionists or Heretics by the snare of controversy or
curiosity, it is well. 4. In the next form we set our selves to the fuller
improvement of all our further degrees of knowledge; and to digest it all, and
turn it into stronger Faith, and Love, and Hope, and greater Humility,
Patience, Self-denial, Mortification, and contempt of earthly vanities, and
hatred of sin; and to walk more watchfully and holily, and to be more in holy
duty. 5. In the next form we grow to be more publick-spirited: to set our
hearts on the Churches welfare, and long more for the progress of the Gospel,
and for the good of others; and to do all the good in the world that we are
able, for men's souls or bodies, but especially to long and lay out our selves
for the conversion and salvation of ignorant, secure, unconverted souls. The
counterfeit of this, is, An eager desire to proselyte others to our opinions or
that Religion which we have chosen, by the direction of flesh and blood, or
which is not of God, nor according unto Godliness, but does subserve our carnal
ends. 6. In the next form we grow to study more the pure and wonderful Love of
God in Christ, and to relish and admire that Love, and to be taken up with the
Goodness and tender mercies of the Lord, and to be kindling the flames of holy
Love to him that has thus Loved us; and to keep our souls in the exercise of
that Love: And withal to live in Joy, and Thanks, and Praise to him that has
redeemed us and Loved us. And also by Faith to converse in Heaven, and to live
in holy contemplation, beholding the Glory of the Father and the Redeemer in
the Glass which is fitted to our present use, till we come to see him face to
face. Those that are the highest in this form, do so walk with God, and burn in
Love, and are so much above inferior vanities, and are so conversant by Faith
in Heaven, that their hearts even dwell there, and there they long to be for
ever. 7. And in the highest form in the School of Christ, we are exercising
this confirmed Faith and Love, in sufferings, especially for Christ: In
following him with our Cross, and being conformed to him, and glorifying God in
the fullest exercise and discovery of his Graces in us, and in an actual
trampling upon all that stands up against him, for our hearts: and in bearing
the fullest witness to his Truth and Cause, by constant enduring, though to the
death. Not but that the weakest that are sincere, must suffer for Christ if he
call them to it: Martyrdom it self is not proper to the strong Believers:
Whoever forsakes not all that he has for Christ, cannot be his Disciple, Luke
14. 33. But to suffer with that Faith and Love forementioned, and in that
manner, is proper to the strong: And usually God does not try and exercise his
young and weak ones with the trials of the strong; nor set his Infants on so
hard a service, nor put them in the front or hottest of the battle, as he does
the ripe confirmed Christians. The sufferings of their inward doubts and fears
does take up such: It is the strong that ordinarily are called to sufferings
for Christ, at least in any high degree; I have digrest thus far to make it
plain to you, that our Conformity to Christ, and fellowship with him in his
sufferings, in any notable degree, is the lot of his best confirmed servants,
and the highest form in his School among his Disciples: and therefore not to
be inordinately feared or abhorred, nor to be the matter of impatiency, but of
holy joy: and in such infirmities we may glory. And if it be so of sufferings
in the general, (for Christ) then is it so of this particular sort of
suffering, even to be forsaken of all our best and nearest, dearest friends,
when we come to be most abused by the enemies.

For my own part, I must confess that as I am much wanting in other parts of my
conformity to Christ, so I take my self to be yet much short, of what I expect
he should advance me to, as long as my friends no more forsake me. It is not
long since I found my self in a low (if not a doubting) case, because I had so
few enemies and so little sufferings for the cause of Christ (though I had much
of other sorts:) And now that doubt is removed by the multitude of furies which
God has let, loose against me. But yet, methinks, while my friends themselves
are so friendly to me, I am much short of what I think I must at last attain to.

BUt let us look further into the Text, and see what is the cause of the
failing and forsaking Christ in the Disciples; and what it is that they betake
themselves to, when they leave him.

[ Ye shall be scattered every man to his Own.]

Self-denial was not perfect in them, selfishness therefore in this hour of
temptation did prevail. They had before forsaken all to follow Christ; they had
left their Parents, their Families, their Estates, their Trades, to be his
Disciples: But though they believed him to be the Christ, yet they dreamt of a
visible Kingdom, and did all this with too carnal expectations of being great
men on earth, when Christ should begin his reign. And therefore when they saw
his apprehension and ignominious suffering, and thought now they were frustrate
of their hopes, they seem to repent that they had followed him (though not by
apostasy and an habitual or plenary change of mind, yet) by a sudden
passionate frightful apprehension, which vanished when grace performed its
part. They now began to think that they had lives of their Own to save, and
families of their Own to mind, and business of their Own to do: They had before
forsaken their private interests and affairs, and gathered themselves to Jesus
Christ, and lived in communion with him, and one another. But now they return
to their trades and callings, and are scattered every man to his own.

Selfishness is the great enemy of all societies, of all fidelity and
friendship: There is no trusting that person in whom it is predominant. And the
remnants of it where it does not reign, do make men walk unevenly and
unsteadfastly toward God and men. They will certainly deny both God and their
friends, in a time of trial who are not able to deny themselves: Or rather he
never was a real friend to any, that is predominantly selfish. They have always
some interest of their own, which their friend must needs contradict, or is
insufficient to satisfy. Their houses, their lands, their moneys, their
children, their honor or something which they call their Own, will be
frequently the matter of contention; and are so near them, that they can for
the sake of these cast off the nearest friend. Contract no special friendship
with a selfish man: nor put no confidence in him, whatever friendship he may
profess. He is so confined to himself, that he has no true love to spare for
others: If he seem to love a friend, it is not as a friend, but as a servant,
or at best as a benefactour: He loves you for himself, as he loves his money,
or horse, or house, because you may be serviceable to him: Or as a horse or dog
does love his keeper, for feeding him: And therefore when your provender is
gone, his love is gone: when you have done feeding him, he has done loving
you. When you have no more for him, he has no more for you.

Object. But (some will say) it is not the falseness of my friend that I
lament, but the separation, or the loss of one that was most faithful: I have
found the deceitfulness of ordinary friends; and therefore the more highly
prize those few that are sincere. I had but one true friend among abundance of
self-seekers; and that one is dead, or taken from me, and I am left as in a
wilderness, having no mortal man* that I can trust or take much comfort in.

Answ. Is this your case? I pray you answer these few Questions, and suffer the
truth to have its proper work upon your mind.

Quest. 1. Who was it that deprived you of your friend? was it not God? Did not
he that gave him you take him from you? Was it not his Lord and owner that
called him home? And can God do any thing injuriously or amiss? will you not
give him leave to do as he list with his own? Dare you think that there was
wanting either wisdom or goodness, justice or mercy in Gods disposal of your
friend? Or will you ever have Rest, if you cannot have Rest in the will of God?

2. How know you what sin your friend might have fallen into, if he had lived
as long as you would have him? You Will say, that God could have preserved him
from sin: It Is true: but God preserves sapientially, by means, as well as
omnipotentially: And sometime he sees that the temptations to that person are
like to be so strong, and his corruption like to get such advantage, and that
no means is so fit as Death it self, for his preservation. And if God had
permitted your friend by temptation to have fallen into some scandalous sin, or
course of evil, or into errors or false ways, would it not have been much
worse then death to him and you? God might have suffered your friend that was
so faithful, to have been sifted and shaken as Peter was, and to have denied
his Lord; and to have seemed in your own eyes, as odious as he before seemed
amiable.

3. How know you what unkindness to your self, your dearest friend might have
been guilty of? Alas there is greater frailty and inconstancy in man, then you
are aware of. And there are sadder roots of corruption unmortified, that may
spring up into bitter fruits, then most of us ever discover in our selves. Many
a Mother has her heart broken by the unnaturalness of such a child, or the
unkindness of such a husband, as if they had died before, would have been
lamented by her, with great impatience and excess. How confident soever you may
be of the future fidelity of your friend, you little know what trial might have
discovered. Many a one has failed God and man that once were as confident of
themselves, as ever you were of your friend. And which of us see not reason to
be distrustful of our selves? And can we know another better then our selves?
or promise more concerning him?

4. How know you what great calamity might have bifallen your friend, if he had
lived as long as you desired? When the Righteous seem to men to perish, and
merciful men are taken away, it is from the evil to come that they are taken,
Isa. 57. 1. How many of my friends have I lamented as if they had died
unseasonably, concerning whom some following providence quickly showed me, that
it would have been a grievous misery to them to have lived longer! Little know
you what calamities were eminent on his person, his family, kindred,
neighbors, country, that would have broke his heart: What if a friend of yours
had died immediately before some calamitous subversion of a Kingdom, some
ruins of the Church, etc. and if ignorantly he had done that which brought
these things to pass, can you imagine how lamentably sad his life would have
been to him, to have seen the Church, the Gospel, and his Country in so sad a
case? especially if it had been long of him? Many that have unawares done that
which has ruined but a particular friend, have lived in so much grief and
trouble, as made them consent that death should both revenge the injured on
them, and conclude their misery. What then would it have been to have seen the
public good subverted, and the faithful overwhelmed in misery, and the Gospel
hindered, and holy worship changed for deceit and vanity; and for conscience to
have been daily saying, [I had a hand in all this misery: I kindled the fire
that has burned up all!]

What comfort can you think such friends if they had survived, would have found
on earth? Unless it were a comfort to hear the complaints of the afflicted, to
see and hear such odious sins as sometimes vexed righteous Lot to see and hear;
or to hear of the scandals of one friend, and the apostasy of another, and the
sinful compliances and declinings of a third; and to be under temptations,
reproaches and afflictions themselves? Is it a matter to be so much lamented
that God has prevented their greater miseries and woe?

5. What was the world to your friends while they did enjoy it? Or what is it
now, or like to be hereafter to your selves? was it so good and kind to them,
as that you should lament their separation from it? was it not to them a place
of toil and trouble, of envy and vexation, of enmity and poison? of successive
cares and fears and griefs? and worst of all, a place of sin? Did they groan
under the burden of a sinful nature, a distempered, tempted, troubled heart of
languishings and weakness of every grace; of the rebukes of God, the wounds of
conscience, and the malice of a wicked world? And would you have them under
these again? Or is their deliverance become your grief? Did you not often join
in prayer with them, for deliverance from malice, calamities, troubles,
imperfections, temptations and sin? and now those prayers are answered in their
deliverance: and do you now grieve at that which then you prayed for!

Does the world use your selves so well and kindly, as that you should be sorry
that your friends partake not of the feast? Are you not groaning from day to
day your selves? and are you grieved that your friends are taken from your
griefs? you are not well pleased with your own condition: when you look into
your hearts you are displeased and complain: when you look into your lives, you
are displeased and complain: when you look into your families, into your
neighbourhoods, unto your friends, unto the Church, unto the Kingdom, unto the
world, you are displeased and complain: And are you also displeased that your
friends are not under the same displeasedness and complaints as you? Is the
world a place of Rest or trouble to you? And would you have your friends to be
as far from Rest as you?

And if you have some Ease and Peace at present, you little know what storms
are near! you may see the days, you may hear the tidings, you may feel the
griping griefs and pains, which may make you call for Death your selves, and
make you say that a life on earth is no felicity, and make you confess that
they are Blessed that are dead in the Lord, as resting from their labors, and
being past these troubles, griefs and fears. Many a poor troubled soul is in so
great distress, as that they take their own lives to have some taste of Hell:
and yet at the same time, are grieving because their friends are taken from
them, who would have been grieved for their griefs, and for ought they know
might have fallen into as sad a state as they themselves are now lamenting.

6. Do you think it is for the Hurt or the Good of your friend, that he is
removed hence? It cannot be for his Hurt unless he be in Hell. (At least, it is
uncertain whether to live would have been for his Good, by an increase of
Grace, and so for greater Glory.) And if he be in Hell, he was no fit person
for you to take much pleasure in upon earth: He might be indeed a fit object
for your compassion, but not for your complacency. Sure you are not undone for
want of such company as God will not endure in his sight, and you must be
separated from for ever. But if they be in Heaven, you are scarce their friends
if you would wish them thence. Friendship has as great respect to the good of
our friends as of our selves. And do you pretend to friendship, and yet lament
the removal of your friend to his greatest happiness! Do you set more by your
own enjoying his company, then by his enjoying God in perfect blessedness! This
shows a very culpable defect either in Faith or Friendship; and therefore
beseems not Christians and friends. If Love teaches us to mourn with them
that mourn, and to rejoice with them that rejoice; can it be an act of rational
Love to mourn for them that are possessed of the highest everlasting joys?

7. God will not honor himself by one only, but by many: He knows best when
his work is done: When our friends have finished all that God intended them
for, when he put them into the world, is it not time for them to be gone, and
for others to take their places, and finish their work also in their time? God
will have a succession of his servants in the world. Would you not come down,
and give place to him that is to follow you, when your part is played, and his
is to begin? If David had not died, there had been no Solomon, no Jehoshaphat,
no Hezekiah, no Josiah, to succeed him and honor God in the same throne. You
may as wisely grudge that one day only takes not up all the week, and that the
clock strikes not the same hour still, but proceeds from one to two, from
two to three, etc. as to murmur that one man only con^inueth not, to do the
work of his place excluding his successors.

8. You must not have all your Mercies by one messenger or hand: God will not
have you consine your Love to one only of his servants: And therefore he will
not make one only useful to you: but when one has delivered his message and
done his part, perhaps God will send you other mercies by another hand: And it
belongs to him to choose the messenger who gives the gift. And if you will
childishly dote upon the first messenger, and say you will have all the rest of
your mercies by his hand, or you will have no more, your frowardness more
deserves correction than compassion: and if you be kept fasting till you can
thankfully take your food, from any hand that your Father sends it by, it is a
correction very suitable to your sin.

9. Do you so highly value your friends for God, or for them, or for your
selves, in the final consideration? If it was for God, what reason of trouble
have you, that God has disposed of them, according to his wisdom and unerring
will? should you not then be more pleased that God has them, and employeth
them in his highest service, than displeased that you want them?

But if you value them and love them for themselves, they are now more lovely
when they are more perfect; and they are now fitter for your content and joy,
when they have themselves unchangeable content and joy, than they could be in
their sin and sorrows.

But if you valued and loved them but for your selves only, it is just with God
to take them from you, to teach you to value men to righter ends, and upon
better considerations: and both to prefer God before your selves, and better to
understand the nature of true friendship, and better to know that your own
felicity is not in the hands of any creature, but of God alone.

10. Did you improve your friends while you had them? or did you only Love
them, while you made but little use of them for your souls? If you used them
not, it was just with God for all your Love to take them from you. They were
given you as your candle, not only to Love it, but to work by the Light of it:
And as your garments; not only to Love them, but to wear them; and as your
meat, not only to Love it, but to feed upon it. Did you receive their counsel,
and hearken to their reproofs, and pray with them, and conser with them upon
those holy truths that tended to elevate your minds to God, and to inflame your
breasts, with sacred Love? If not, be it now known to you, that God gave you not
such helps and mercies only to talk of, or look upon and Love, but also to
improve for the benefit of your souls.

11. Do you not seem to forget both where you are your selves, and where you
must shortly and for ever live? Where would you have your friends, but where
you must be your selves? Do you mou^n that they are taken hence? Why, if they
had staid here a thousand years, how little of that time should you have had
their company? when you are almost leaving the world your selves, would you not
send your treasure before you to the place where you must abide? How quickly
will you pass from hence to God, where you shall find your friends that you
lamented as if they had been lost, and there shall dwell with them for ever! O
foolish mourners! would you not have your friends at home! at their home and
your home, with their Father and your Father; their God and your God! Shall you
not there enjoy them long enough! Can you so much miss them for one day, that
must live with them to all eternity? And is not eternity long enough for you to
enjoy your friends in?

Obj. But I do not know whether ever I shall there have any distinct knowledge
of them, or love to them, and whether God shall not there be so far All in All,
as that we shall need or fetch no comfort from the creature.

Answ. There is no reason for either of these doubts. For, 1. You cannot justly
think that the knowledge of the Glorified shall be more confused or imperfect
then the knowledge of natural men on earth. We shall know much more, but not so
much less. Heaven exceeds earth in knowledge, as much as it does in joy.

2. The Angels in Heaven have now a distinct particular knowledge of the least
believers; rejoicing particularly in their conversion, and being called by
Christ himself [ Their Angels.] Therefore when we shall be equal to the Angels,
we shall certainly know our nearest friends that there dwell with us, and are
employed in the same attendance.

3. Abraham knew the Rich man in Hell, and the man knew Abraham and Lazarus:
Therefore we shall have as distinct a Knowledge.

4. The two Disciples Knew Moses and Elias in the mount, whom they had never
seen before: Though it is possible Christ told them who they were, yet there is
no such thing expressed: and therefore it is as probable that they knew them by
the communication of their irradiating glory. Much more (...) we be then
illuminated to a clearer knowledge.

5. It is said expressly, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 11, 12. that our present knowledge
shall be done away only in regard of its imperfection; and not of it self,
which shall be perfected: [ when that which is perfect is come, then that which
is in part shall be done away:] As we put away childish thoughts and speeches,
when we become men: The change will be from [ seeing in a glass] to [ seeing
face to face] and from [ knowing in part] to [ knowing even as we are known.]

2. And that we shall both Know, and Love and rejoice in creatures even in
Heaven, notwithstanding that God is all in all, appears further thus.

1. Christ in his glorified humanity is a Creature: and yet there is no doubt
but all his members will there Know and Love him in his glorified humanity,
without any derogation from the glory of the Deity.

2. The Body of Christ will continue its unity, and every member will be so
nearly related, even in Heaven, that they cannot choose but Know and Love each
other. Shall we be ignorant of the members of our Body? and not be concerned in
their felicity with whom we are so nearly one?

3. The state and felicity of the Church hereafter, is frequently described in
Scripture as consistent in society. It is a Kingdom, the City of God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem: and it is mentioned as part of our happiness to be of that
society, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24, etc.

4. The Saints are called Kings themselves: and it is said that they shall
judge the world, and the Angels (And Judging in Scripture is frequently put for
Governing) Therefore, (whether there will be another world of moreals which
they shall Govern as Angels now Govern men; or whether the Misery of damned men
and Angels will partly consist in as base a subjection to the glorified Saints,
as dogs now have to men, or wicked reprobates on earth to Angels; or whether in
respect of both these together the Saints shall then be Kings, and Rule and
Judge; or whether it be only the participation of the Glory of Christ, that is
called a Kingdom, I will not here determine, but) it is most clear that they
will have a distinct particular Knowledge of the world, which they themselves
must judge; and some concernment in that work.

5. It is put into the description of the Happiness of the Saints, that they
shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. Therefore they shall know them, and
take some comfort in their presence.

6. Love (even to the Saints as well as unto God) is one of the graces that
shall endure for ever, 1 Cor. 13. It is exercised upon an Immortal object (the
Image and Children of the Most High) and therefore must be one of the Immortal
Graces. For Grace in the Nature of it dies not: and therefore if the Object
cease not, how should the Grace cease, unless you will call it is perfecting a
ceasing?

It is a state too high for such as we, and I think for any mere Creature to
live so Immediately and only upon God, as to have no use for any fellow
Creature, nor no comfort in them. God can make use of Glorified Creatures, in
such subserviency and subordination to himself, as shall be no diminution to
his All sufficiency or Honor, nor to our glory and felicity. We must take
heeed of fancying even such a Heaven it self, as is above the capacity of a
Creature; as some very wise Divines think they have done, that tell us we shall
immediately see Gods Essence (his Glory being that which is provided for our
intuition and felicity, and is distinct from his Essence; being not everywhere
as his Essence is.) And as those do that tell us because that God will be All
in All, therefore we shall there have none of our comfort by any creature.
Though flesh and blood shall not enter into that Kingdom, but our Bodies will
then be Spiritual Bodies; yet will they be really the same as now, and distinct
from our souls: and therefore must have a felicity suitable to a Body
glorified: And if the soul did immediately see Gods Essence, yet as no reason
can conclude that it can see nothing else, or that it can see even Created
Good, and not Love it, so the Body however must have objects and felicity fit
for a Body.

Obj. But it is said, If we knew Christ after the flesh, henceforth know we him
no more.

Answ. No doubt but all the carnality in principles, matter, manner and ends of
our knowledge will then cease as it is imperfection: But that a carnal knowledge
be turned into a spiritual, is no more a diminution to it, than it is to the
glory of our Bodies, to be made like the stars in the Firmament of our Father.

Obj. But then I shall have no more comfort in my present friends than in any
other.

Answ. 1. If you had none in them, it is no diminution to our happiness, if
indeed we should have all in God immediately and alone. 2. But if you have as
much in others that you never knew before, that will not diminish any of your
comfort in your ancient friends. 3. But it is most probable to us, that as
there is a twofold object for our love in the Glorified Saints; one is their
Holiness, and the other is the Relation which they stood in between God and us,
being made his instruments for our conversion and salvation, so that we shall
Love Saints in Heaven in both respects: And in the first respect (which is the
chiefest) we shall love those most that have most of God, and the greatest
Glory (though such as we never knew on earth) And in the second respect we
shall Love those most that were employed by God for our greatest good.

And that we shall not there lay by so much respect to our selves, as to forget
or disregard out benefactours, is manifest, 1. In that we shall for ever
remember Christ, and Love him, and Praise him, as one that formerly Redeemed
us, and washed us in his blood, and has made us Kings and Priests to God: And
therefore we may also in just subordination to Christ, remember them with Love
and Thankfulness, that were his Instruments for the collation of these benefits.

2. And this kind of Self-Love (to be sensible of Good and Evil to our selves)
is none of the sinful or imperfect selfishness to be renounced or laid by, but
part of our very Natures, and as inseparable from us as we are from our selves.

Much more, were it not digressive, might be said on this subject; but I shall
only add, that as God does draw us to every holy duty by showing us the
excellency of that duty; and as perpetuity is not the smallest excellency; so
he has purposely mentioned that Love endures for ever (when he had described
the Love of one another) as a principal motive to kindle and increase this
Love. And therefore those that think they shall have no personal Knowledge of
one another, nor personal Love to one another (for we cannot Love personally,
if we know not personally) do take a most effectual course to destroy in their
souls all holy special Love to Saints, by casting away that principal or very
great motive given them by the Holy Ghost. I am not able to Love much where I
foreknow that I shall not Love long. I cannot Love a comely Inn, so well as a
nearer dwelling of my own, because I must be gone to morrow. Therefore must I
love my Bible better than my Law books, or Physic books, etc. because it
leads to Eternity. And therefore I must Love Holiness in my self and others,
better than meat and drink, and wealth and honor, and beauty and pleasure;
because it must be Loved for ever, when the Love of these must needs be
transitory, as they are transitory. I must profess from the very experience of
my soul, that it is the belief that I shall Love my friends in Heaven, that
principally kindles my Love to them on Earth: And if I thought I should never
know them after death, and consequently never love them more, when this life is
ended, I should in reason number them with temporal things, and Love them
comparatively but a little; even as I Love other transitory things (allowing
for the excellency in the nature of Grace) But now I converse with some delight
with my Godly friends, as believing I shall converse with them for ever, and
take comfort in the very Dead and Absent, as believing we shall shortly meet in
Heaven: and I Love them, I hope, with a Love that is of a Heavenly Nature,
while I Love them as the Heirs of Heaven, with a Love which I expect shall
there be perfected, and more fully and for ever exercised.

12. The last Reason that I give you, to move you to bear the Loss or Absence
of your friends, is, that it gives you the loudest call to retire from all the
world, and to converse with God himself, and to long for Heaven, where you
shall be separated from your friends no more. And your forsaken state will
somewhat assist you to that solitary converse with God, which it calls you to:
But this brings us up to the third part of the Text.

AND yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.] Doct. When all forsake
us, and leave us (as to them) alone, we are far from being simply alone;
because God is with us.

He is not without company, that is with the King, though twenty others have
turned him off. He is not without Light that has the shining Sun, though all
his Candles be put out. If God be our God, he is our All, and is enough for us:
And if he be our All, we shall not much find the want of creatures while he is
with us.

For 1. He is with us, who is Everywhere, and therefore is never from us; and
knows all the ways and projects of our enemies; being with them in wrath, as
he is with us in mercy.

2. He is with us who is Almighty, sufficient to preserve us, conquerable by
none; and therefore while he is with us, we need not fear what man can do unto
us: For they can do nothing but what he will: No danger, no sickness, no
trouble or want can be so great as to make it any difficulty to God to deliver
us when and how he please.

3. He is with us who is Infinitely wise, and therefore we need not fear the
subtilty of enemies; nor shall any of his undertaken works for his Church or us
miscarry for want of foresight, or through any oversight. We shall be preserved
even from our own Folly, as well as from our Enemies subtilty: For it is not
our own wisdom that our greatest concernments do principally rest upon, nor
that our safety and peace are chiefly secured by; but it is the Wisdom of our
great Preserver. He knows what to do with us, and what paths to lead us in,
and what is best for us in all conditions. And he has promised to Teach us,
and will be our sure infallible Guide.

4. He is with us who is Infinitely Good, and therefore is only sit to be a
continual delight and satisfaction to our souls: that has nothing in him to
disaffect us, or discourage us: whom we may love without fear of overloving;
and need not set any bounds to our Love, the object of it being infinite.

5. He is with us, who is most nearly related to us, and most dearly loves us;
and therefore will never be wanting to us in any thing that is fit for us to
have. This is he that is with us, when all have left us, and as to man we are
alone; and therefore we may well say that we are not alone. Of this I shall say
more anon in the application.

Quest. But how is he with us?

Answ. 1. He is with us not only in his Essential presence, as he is
everywhere, but as by his Gracious Fatherly presence: We are in his Family,
attending on him: even as the eye of a servant is to the hand of his Master: We
are always with him, and (as he phraseth it himself in the Parable Luke 15.)
all that he has in ours, that is, all that is fit to be communicated to us,
and all the provisions of his bounty for his children. When we awake, we should
be still with him: When we go abroad we should be always as before him: Our
life and works should be a Walking with God.

2. He is always with us efficiently to do us Good; Though we have none else
that cares for us, yet will he never cast us out of his care, but bids us
cast our care on him, as promising that he will care for us. Though we have
none else to provide for us, he is alwiaes with us, and our Father knows what
we want, and will make the best provision for us, Mat. 6. 32, 33. Though we
have none else to defend us against the power of our enemies, he is always
with us to be our sure defense: He is the Rock to which we fly, and upon which
we are surely built. He gathers us to himself as the Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, Mat. 23. 37. And sure while Love is thus protecting
us, we may well say that the Father himself is with us. Though in all our wants
we have no other to supply us, yet he is still with us to perform his promise,
that no good thing shall be wanting to them that fear him. Though we may have
none else to strengthen and help us, and support us in our weakness, yet he is
always with us, whose Grace is sufficient for us, to manifest his strength in
weakness. Though we have no other to Teach us, and to resolve our doubts, yet
he is with us that is our chiefest Master, and has taken us to be his
Disciples, and will be our Light and Guide, and will lead us into the Truth.
Though we have none else to be our Comforters, in our agony, darkness or
distress; but all forsake us, or are taken from us, and we are exposed as Hagar
with Ishmael in a wilderness; yet still the Father of all consolations is with
us; his Spirit who is the Comforter is in us: And he that so often speaks the
words of Comfort to us in his Gospel, and says [ Be of good cheer; let not
your hearts be troubled, neither be afraid, etc.] will speak them (in the
season and measure which is fittest for them) unto our hearts. Though all
friends turn enemies, and would destroy us, or turn false accusers, as Job's
friends, in their ignorance or passion; though all of them should add
affliction to our affliction, yet is our Redeemer and Justifier still with us,
and will lay his restraining hand upon our enemies, and say to their proudest
fury [Hitherto and no further shall thou go] He is angry with Job's accusing
friends, notwithstanding their friendship and good meaning, and though they
seemed to plead for God and Godliness against Job's sin: And who shall be
against us while God is for us? or who shall condemn us when it is he that
justifies us? Though we be put to say as David, Psalm. 142 4. [ I looked on my
right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would know me; refuge failed
me; no man cared for my soul:] Yet we may say with him, verse. 5. and 3. [ I
cried unto thee, O Lord; I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion in the Land
of the Living: Bring my soul out of prison that I may praise thy Name: The
righteous shall compass me about: for thou shall d^al bountifully with me: 2, 3
I poured out my complaint before him; I showed before him my trouble: When my
spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my path: in the way wherein
I walked have they privily laid a snare for me.] Thus [ God is our refuye and
strength; a very present help in trouble.] Psalm. 46. 1. Therefore should we not
fear though the earth were removed, and though the mountains were carried into
the midst of the Sea; though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, etc.
verse. 2, 3. Though as David says, Psalm. 41. 5, 6, 7. [ Mine enemies speak evil
of me: when shall he dye, and his name perish? And if he come to see me, he
speaks vanity: his heart gathers iniquity to it self; when he goes abroad
he tells it: All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they
devise my hurt: An evil disease, say they, cleaves fast unto him; and now that
he lies, he shall rise up no more: Yea my own familiar friend in whom I
trusted, that did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me -- ] Yet we
may add as he, v. 12. [ And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and
set me before thy face for ever.] Though (as Psalm. 35. 7, etc. Without
cause they have hid for me their net in a pit, which without cause they have
dug for my soul: 11. And false witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge
things that I knew not; they rewarded me evil for good: 15, 16. In my adversity
they rojoyced, and gathered themselves together; the abjects gathered
themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear and ceased
not; with hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their
teeth: 20. For they speak not peace, but they devise deceitful matters against
them that are quiet in the Land.] Yet verse. 9. [ My soul shall be joyful in the
Lord; it shall rejoice in his salvation: 10. All my bones shall say, Lord, who
is like unto thee, who deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him,
yea the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him.] Though friends be far
off, the Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be
of a contrite spirit: Many are the afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord
delivers him out of them all.] Psalm. 34 18, 19. The Lord redeemeth the soul
of his servants; and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate.] v. 22.
Therefore [ I will be glad and rejoice in his Mercy, for he has considered my
trouble, and has known (and owned) my soul in adversity: and has not shut me
in the hand of the enemy -- When my life was spent with grief, and my years
with sighing; my strength failed because of mine iniquity, and my bones were
consumed; I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my
neighbors, and a fear to mine acquaintance; they that did see me without fled
from me: I was forgotten, and as a dead man out of mind: I was like a brokrn
vessel: I heard the slander of many: fear was on every side; while they took
counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life: But I trusted
in thee O Lord: I said, Thou art my God: my times are in thy hand: deliver me
from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me: Make thy face
to shine upon thy servant: Save me for thy mercies sake. -- O how great is thy
goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou have
wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men! Thou shall hide
them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man: thou shall keep them
secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues, Psalm. 31.] Thus God is with
us when men are far from us, or against us: His people find by happy
experience that they are not alone. Because he is nigh them, evil shall not
come nigh them, unless as it works for their good. He is their hiding place
to preserve them from trouble: the great water-floods shall not come nigh them:
he will compass them about with songs of deliverance.] Psalm. 32. 6, 7.

3. And as God is with us thus Relatively and Efficiently, so also Objectively
for our holy converse. Wherever our friends are, God is still at ^and to be
the most profitable, honorable and delightful Object of our thoughts. There is
enough in him to take up all the faculties of my soul. He that is but in a well
furnished Library may find great and excellent employment for his thoughts many
years together: And so may he that lives in the open world, and has all the
visible works of God to meditate upon: But all this were nothing if God were
not the sense of Books and Creatures, and the matter of all these noble
studies: He that is alone, and has only God himself to study, has the matter
and sense of all the Books and Creatures in the world, to employ his thoughts
upon. He never need to want matter for his meditation, that has God to
meditate on. He need not want matter of discourse (whether mental or vocal)
that has God to talk of, though he have not the name of any other friend to
mention. All our Affections may have in him the highest and most pleasant work.
The soul of man cannot have a more sweet and excellent work than to Love him:
He wants neither work nor pleasure, that in his solitude is taken up in the
believing contemplations of Eternal Love, and of all his blessed Attributes and
works. O then what happy and delightful converse may a Believer have with God
alone! He is always present, and always at leisure to be spoken with; and
always willing of our access and audience: He has no interest cross to our
felicity, which should move him to reject us (as worldly great ones often have)
He never misunderstandeth us, nor charge that upon us which we were never
guilty of: If we converse with men, their mistakes, and interests, and
passions, and insufficiencies, do make the trouble so great, and the benefit so
small, that many have become thereby aweary of the world, or o^ humane society,
and have spent the rest of their days alone in desert places. Indeed so much
of God as appears in men, so much is their converse excellent and delightful:
and theirs is the best that have most of God: But there is so much of vanity,
and self, and flesh, and sin in the most or all of us, as very much darkneth
our Light, and dampeth the pleasure, and blasteth the fruit of our societies
and converse. O how often have I been solaced in God, when I found nothing but
deceit and darkness in the world! How often has he comforted me, when it was
past the power of man! How often has he relieved and delivered me, when all the
help of man was vain! It has been my Stay and Rest, to look to him, when the
creature has been a broken staff, and deceitful friends have been but as a
broken tooth, or a foot that is out of joint (as Solomon speaks of confidence
in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, Prove. 25. 29.) Verily as the world
were but an horrid dungeon without the Sun, so it were a howling wilderness, a
place of no considerable employment or delight, were it not that in it we may
live to God and do him service, and sometime be refreshed with the light of his
countenance, and the communications of his Love. But of this more anon.

Use 1. WE see our Example, and our encouragements. Let us now as followers of
Christ, endeavor to imitate him in this, and to Live upon God, when men
forsake us, and to know that while God is with us, we are not alone, nor indeed
forsaken while he forsakes us not.

I shall, 1. Show you here Negatively, what you must not do. 2. Affirmatively,
what you must do; for the performance of your duty in this imitation of Christ.

1. You must not make this any pretense for the undervaluing of your useful
friends; nor for your unthankfulness for so great a benefit as a godly friend:
nor for the neglect of your duty in improving the company and help of friends:
Two is better then one: The communion of Saints, and help of those that are
wise and faithful, is a mercy highly to be esteemed. And the undervaluing of
it, is at least a sign of a declining soul.

2. You must not hence fetch any pretense to slight your friends, and disoblige
them, or neglect any duty that you owe them, or any means therein necessary to
the continuation of their friendship.

3. You must not causelessly withdraw from humane society into Solitude. A
weariness of converse with men, is often conjunct with a weariness of our duty:
And a retiring voluntarily into solitude, when God does not call or drive us
thither, is often but a retiring from the place and work which God has appointed
us: And consequently a retiring rather from God, than to God. Like some idle
servants, that think they should not work so hard, because it is but Worldly
business, and think their Masters deal not Religiously by them, unless they let
them neglect their labor, that they may spend more time in serving God: as if
it were no serving God to be faithful in their Masters service.

I deny not but very holy persons have lived in a state of retirement from
humane converse: In such cases as these i^ may become a duty, 1. In case of
such persecution as at present leaves us no opportunity of serving or
honoring God so much in any other place or state.

2. In case that natural infirmity or disability or any other accident shall
make one less serviceable to God and his Church in society than he is in
solitude.

3. In case he has committed a sin so heinous and of indelible scandal and
reproach, as that it is not fit for the servants of Christ any more to receive
him into their local communion, though he repent: (For as to Local communion, I
think, such a case may be.)

4. In case a man through custom and ill company be so captivated to some
fleshly lust, as that he is not able to bear the temptations that are found in
humane converse; but falls by them into frequent heinous sinning: In this
case the right hand or eye is rather to be parted with, than their salvation.
And though a mere restraint by distance of temptations and opportunities of
sinning, will not prove a man sanctified, nor save the soul that loves the sin
and fain would live in it; Yet, 1. Grace may sometime appear in the strength
and self-denial which is exercised in the very avoiding of temptations, when
yet perhaps the person has not strength enough to have stood against the
temptation if it had not been avoided. And, 2. The distance of temptations, and
opportunity of serious and frequent consideration, may be a means to help them
to sincerity that want it.

5. In case a man by age or sickness find himself so near to death, as that he
has now a more special call to look after his present actual preparation, than
to endeavor any more the good of others; and find withal, that solitude will
help him in his preparations, his society being such as would but hinder him.
In these five cases I suppose it lawful to retire from humane converse into
solitude.

But when there is no such necessity or call, it usually proceeds from one of
these vicious distempers: 1. From Cowardice and fear of suffering, when the
soldiers of Christ do hide their heads, instead of confessing him before men.

2. From a laziness of mind and weariness of duty: when slothful unprofitable
servants hide their talents, pretending their fear of the austerity of their
Lord. Its easier to run away from our work, then do it: and to go out of the
reach of ignorance, malice, contradiction and ungodliness, than to encounter
them, and conquer them by Truth and Holy lives. So many persons as we converse
with, so many are there to whom we owe some duty: And this is not so easy as
it is to overrun our work, and to hide our selves in some Wilderness or Cell,
whilst others are fighting the battles of the Lord. 3. Or it may proceed from
mere impatience: When men cancannot bear the frown, and scorns, and violence of
the ungodly, they fly from sufferings, which by patience they should overcome.
4. Or it may come from humor and mutability of mind, and discontent with ones
condition: Many retire from humane converse to please a discontented passionate
mind; or expecting to find that in privacy, which in public they could not
find, nor is anywhere to be found on earth. 5. And some do it in Melancholy,
merely to please a sick imagination, which is vexed in company, and a little
eases it self in living as the possessed man among the Tombs. ^. And sometimes
it proceeds from self-ignorance, and an unhumbled state of a soul: When men
think much better of themselves than others, they think they can more
comfortably converse with themselves than with others: Whereas if they well
understood that they are the worst or greatest enemies, or troubles to
themselves, they would more fear their own company than other men's: They would
then consider what proud, and fleshly, and worldly, and selfish, and disordered
hearts they are like to carry with them into their solitude, and there to be
annoyed with from day to day: And that the nearest enemy is the worst, and the
nearest trouble is the greatest.

These vices or infirmities carry many into solitude; and if they live where
Popish vanity may seduce them, they will perhaps imagine, that they are serving
God, and entering into perfection, when they are but sinfully obeying their
corruptions: and that they are advanced above others in degrees of grace, while
they are pleasing a diseased fancy, and entering into a dangerous course of sin.
No doubt but the duties of a public life are more in number, and greater in
weight, and of more excellent consequence and tendency (even to the most
public good, and greatest honor of God) than the duties of privacy or
retirement. Vir bonus est commune bonum: A good man is a common good. And
(says Seneca) Nulla essent communia nisi pars illorum pertineret ad singulos]
If every one have not some share or interest in them, how are they common? Let
me add these few Considerations, to show you the evil of voluntary unnecessary
Solitude.

1. You less contribute to the honor of your Redeemer, and less promote his
Kingdom in the world, and less subserve his death and office, while you do good
but to few, and live but almost to your selves.

2. You live in the poorest exercise of the grace of Charity; and therefore in
a low undesirable condition.

3. You will want the communion of Saints, and benefit of public ordinances
(for I account not a College life a Solitary life.) And you will want the help
of the Charity, Graces and Gifts of others, by which you might be benefited.

4. It will be a life of smaller comfort, as it is a life of smaller benefit to
others. They that do but little good (according to their ability) must expect
but little comfort. They have usually most peace and comfort to themselves,
that are the most profitable to others. [ Non potest quisquam been degere qui
se tantum intuetur: Alteri vivas oportet, si tibi vi^ vivere: Sen.] No man can
live well, that looks but to himself: Thou must live to another, if thou will
live to thy self.]

O the delight that there is in doing good to many! None knows it that has
not tried it: Not upon any account of Merit; but as it Pleases God, and as
Goodness it self is amiable and sweet; and as we receive by communicating; and
as we are under promise; and as Charity makes all the good that is done to
another to be to us as our own!

5. We are dark and partial, and heedless of our selves, and hardly brought or
kept in acquaintance with our hearts; and therefore have the more need of the
eye of others: And even an enemies eye may be useful, though malicious; and may
do us good while he intends us evil, says Bernard [Malum quod nemo videt nemo
arguit: Ubi autem non timetur reprehensor, securus accedit tentator; licentius
perpetratur iniquitas] [The evil that none sees, none reproves: and where the
reprover is not feared, the tempter comes more boldly, and the sin is
committed the more licentiously.] It Is hard to know the spots in our own faces,
when we have no glass or beholder to acquaint us with them. Says Chrysostom
[Solitude is velamen omnium vitiorum] the cover of all vices] In company this
cover is laid aside, and vice being more naked, is more ashamed. It is
beholders that cause shame; which Solitude is not acquainted with: And it is a
piece of impenitency not to be ashamed of sin.

6. And we are for the most part so weak and sickly, that we are unable to
subsist without the help of others. Sen. Nemo est ex imprudentibus qui relinqui
sibi debet] unwise men (or infants, or sick-like men) must not be left to
themselves.] And God has let some impotency, insufficiency and necessity upon
all that should keep men sociable, and make them acknowledge their need of
others, and be thankful for assistance from them, and be ready to do good to
others, as we would have others do to us. He that feels not the need of
others, is so unhumbled as to have the greater need of them.

7. Pride will have great advantage in private, and Repentance great
disadvantage, while our sins seem to be all dead, because there is not a
temptation to draw them out, or an observer to reprove them. [ Tam diu pations
quisque sibi videtur and humilis, donec nullius hominum consortio commiscetur;
ad naturam pristinam reversurus quum interpellaverit cujuslibet occasionis
commotio, inquit Cassianus] Many a man seems to himself patient and humble,
while he keeps out of company; who would return to his own nature if the
commotion of any occasion did but provoke him.] It Is hard to know what sin or
grace is in us, if we have not such trials as are not to be found in Solitude.

8. Flying from the observation and judgment of others, is a kind of
self-accusation; as if we confessed our selves so bad as that we cannot stand the
trial of the Light. [ Bona conscientia turbam advocat: Mala in solitudine anxia
est and sollicita: si honesta sunt quae facis, omnes sciant: si turpia, quid
refert neminem scire: cum tu scias! O te miserum si contemnis hunc testem:
inquit Seneca.] That is [ A good conscience will call in the crowd (or
witnesses, not caring who sees:) A bad conscience is anxious and sollicitous
even in solitude: If they be things honest which thou do, let all men know:
If they be dishonest, what good does it thee that no man else knows it, when
thou know it thy self! O miserable man if thou despise this witness!
Something is suspected to be amiss with those that are always in their
Chambers, and are never seen. Tell not men that you cannot bear the light: It
is he that does evil that hates the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

9. Solitude is too like to Death, to be desirable: He lives that does good;
and he is dead that is useless. [Vivit is qui multis usui est: Vivit is qui
sentitur: qui vero latitant and torpent, mortem suam antecesserint, inquit
Sen.] [He lives that is profitable to many: He lives that is observed or
perceived: but they that lie hid and drowsy do anticipate their death.] And it
is the most culpable death, and therefore the worst, to have Life, and not to
use it.

10. A life of holy Communion is likest unto Heaven, where none shall be
solitary, but all as members of the Heavenly Jerusalem, shall in harmony Love
and Praise their Maker.

These Reasons seem to me sufficient to satisfy you that no man should choose
a Solitude without a special necessity or call: nor yet should it be taken for
a life of greater perfection, then a faithful serving of God in public, and
doing good to more.

I Shall now come to the Affirmative, and tell you for all this, that [ If God
call us into Solitude, or men forsake us, we may rejoice in this, that we are
not alone, but the Father is with us.] Fear not such Solitude, but be ready to
improve it, if you be cast upon it. If God be your God, reconciled to you in
Christ, and his Spirit be in you, you are provided for Solitude, and need not
fear if all the world should cast you off. If you be banished, imprisoned, or
left alone, it is but a Relaxation from your greatest labors; which though you
may not cast off your selves, you may lawfully be sensible of your ease, if God
take off your burden. It is but a cessation from your sharpest conflicts, and
removal from a multitude of great temptations. And though you may not cowardly
retreat or shift your selves from the sight and danger, yet if God will
dispense with you, and let you live in greater peace and safety, you have no
cause to murmr at his dealing. A fruit tree that grows by the highway
side, does seldom keep its fruit to ripeness, while so many passengers have
each his stone or cudgel to cast at it: Seneca could say [ Nunquam a turba
mores quos extuli refero: Aliquid ex eo quod composui turbatur; aliquid ex his
quae fugavi redit: inimica est multorum conversatio] I never bring home well
from a crowd the manners which I took out with me: something is disordered of
that which I had set in order: something of that which I had banished does
return: the conversation of many I find an enemy to me.] O how many vain and
foolish words corrupt the minds of those that converse with an ungodly world,
when your ears and minds who live in Solitude, are free from such temptations!
You live not in so corrupt an Air as they: You hear not the filthy ribbald
speeches, which fight against modesty and chastity, and are the bellows of
lust: You hear not the discontented complaining words of the impatient; nor the
passionate provoking words of the offended; nor the wrangling quarrelsome words
of the contentious; nor the censorious, or slanderous, or reproachful words of
the malicious, who think it their interest to have their brethren taken to be
bad, and to have others hate them, because they themselves hate them; and who
are as zealous to quench the charity of others, when it is destroyed in
themselves, as holy persons are zealous to provoke others to Love, which
dwells and rules in themselves. In your Solitude with God, you shall not
hear the lies and malicious revilings of the ungodly against the generation of
the just: nor the subtle cheating words of Hetericks, who being themselves
deceived, would deceive others of their faith, and corrupt their lives. You
shall not there be distracted with the noise and clamours of contending
uncharitable professors of Religion, endeavoring to make odious first the
opinions, and then the persons of one another: one saying, Here is the Church,
and another, There is the Church: one saying, This is the true Church
Government, and another saying, Nay, but that is it: One saying, God will be
worshipped thus, and another, Not so, but thus or thus: You shall not there be
drawn to side with one against another, nor to join with any faction, or be
guilty of divisions* You shall not be troubled with the oaths and blasphemies
of the wicked, nor with the imprudent miscarriages of the weak; with the
persecutions of enemies, or the falling out of friends: You shall not see the
cruelty of proud oppressors, that set up lies by armed violence, and care not
what they say or do, nor how much other men are injured or suffer, so that
themselves may tyrannize, and their wills and words may rule the world, when
they do so unhappily rule themselves. In your Solitude with God, you shall not
see the prosperity of the wicked to move you to envy, nor the adversity of the
just to be your grief: You shall see no worldly pomp and splendor to besool
you; nor adorned beauty to entice you, nor wasting calamities to afflict you:
You shall not hear the laughter of fools, nor the sick man's groans, nor the
wronged man's complaints, nor the poor man's murmurings, nor the proud man's
boastings, nor the angry man's abusive ragings. As you lose the help of your
gracious friends, so you are freed from the fruits of their peevishness and
passions; of their differing opinions and ways and tempers; of their
inequality, unsuitableness, and contrariety of minds or interests; of their
levity and unconstancy, and the powerful temptations of their friendship, to
draw you to the errors or other sins which they are tainted with themselves. In
a word, you are there half delivered from the VANITY and VEXATION of the world;
and were it not that you are yet undelivered from your selves, and that you
take distempered corrupted hearts with you, O what a felicity would your
solitude be! But, alas, we cannot overrun our own diseases, we must carry with
us the remnants of our corrupted nature; our deadness, and dullness, our
selfishness and earthly minds, our impatience and discontents; and worst of
all, our lamentable weakness of faith and love and heavenly mindedness, and our
strangeness to God, and backwardness to the matters of eternal life. O that I
could escape these, though I were in the hands of the cruellest enemies! O that
such a heart could be left behind! How gladly would I overrun both house, and
land, and honor, and all sensual delights, that I might but overrun it! O
where is the place where there is none of this darkness, nor disaffection, nor
distance, nor estrangedness from God! O that I knew it! O that I could find it!
O that I might there dwell! though I should never more see the face of mortals;
nor ever hear a humane voice, nor ever taste of the delights of flesh! Alas,
foolish soul! such a place there is, that has all this and more than this: but
it is not in a wilderness, but in Paradise, not here on earth, but above with
Christ! And yet am I so loath to die? yet am I no more desirous of the blessed
day, when I shall be unclothed of flesh and sin? O death, what an enemy art
thou even to my soul! By affrighting me from the presence of my Lord, and
hindering my desires and willingness to be gone, thou wrongest me much more,
than by laying my flesh to rot in darkness. Fain I would know God, and fain I
would more love him and enjoy him: but O this hurtful love of life! O this
unreasonable fear of dying, detaineth my desires from pressing on to the happy
place where all this may be had! O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death! this carnal unbelieving heart, that sometime can think
more delightfully of a Wilderness then of Heaven; that can go seek after God in
desert solitude, among the birds and beasts and trees, and yet is so backward
to be loosed from flesh that I may find him and enjoy him in the world of
glory! Can I expect that heaven come down to earth! and that the Lord of Glory
should remove his Court, and either leave the retinue of his celestial
Courtiers, or bring them all down into this drossy world of flesh and sin, and
this to satisfy my fleshly foolish mind! Or can I expect the translation of
Henoch or the Chariot of Elias? Is it not enough that my Lord has conquered
Death, and sanctified the passage, and prepared the place of my perpetual abode!

Well! for all this, though a Wilderness is not Heaven, it shall be sweet and
welcome for the sake of Heaven, if thence I may but have a clearer prospect of
it: and if by retiring from the crowd and noise of folly I may but be more
composed and better disposed to converse above, and to use my faith (alas, my
too weak languid faith) until the beatifical vision and fruition come. If
there may be but more of God, or readier access to him, or more
heart-quickening flames of Love, or more heart-comforting intimations of his
favor, in a wilderness then in a City, in a prison then in a Palace, let that
wilderness be my City, and let that prison be my Palace, while I must abide on
earth. If in solitude I may have Henochs walk with God, I shall in due season
have such a translation as shall bring me to the same felicity which he
enjoys: and in the mean time as well as after, it is no incommodity, if by
mortal eyes I be seen no more. If the Chariot of contemplation will in solitude
raise me to more believing affectionate converse with heaven, than I could
expect in tumults and temptations, it shall reconcile me unto solitude, and
make it my Paradise on earth, till Angels instead of the Chariot of Elias,
shall convey me to the presence of my glorified Head, in the Celestial Paradise.

Object. But it is grievous to one that has been used to much company, to be
alone.

Answ. Company may so use you, that it may be more grievous to you not to be
alone. The society of waspes and serpents may be spared; and Bees themselves
have such stings as make some that have felt them think they bought the honey
dear.

But can you say you are alone while you are with God? Is his presence nothing
to you? Does it not signify more then the company of all men in the world?
says Hierome, [Sapi^ns nunquam solus esse potest: habet enim secum omnes qui
sunt, and qui fuerunt boni -- and si hominum sit inopia, loquitur cum Deo] viz.
A wise man cannot be alone: for he has with him the good men that are or have
been -- And if there be a want of men, he speaks with God.] He should rather
have said, There can be no want of man, when we may speak with God: And were it
not that God is here revealed to us as in a glass, and that we do converse with
God in man, we should think humane converse little worth.

Object. O but solitude is disconsolate to a sociable mind.

Answ. But the most desirable society is no solitude: says Hierome [Infinita
eremi vastitas te terret? sed tu Paradisum mente deambula: Quotiescunque
cogitatione ac mente illuc conscenderis, toties in eremo non eris] that is [
Does the infinite vastness of the wilderness terrify thee? But do thou
(ascend) in mind and walk in Paradise: As often as thou ascendest thither in
thought and mind, so often thou shall not be in the wilderness.] If God be
nothing to thee, thou art not a Christian but an Atheist. If God be God to
thee, he is All in all to thee; and then should not his presence be instead of
all? O that I might get one step nearer unto God, though I receded many from
all the world! O that I could find that place on earth where a sou^ may have
nearest access unto him, and fullest knowledge and enjoyment of him, though I
never more saw the face of friends! I should cheerfully say with my blessed
Savior [ I am not alone, for the Father is with me.] And I should say so for
these Reasons following.

1. If God be with me, the Maker, and Ruler, and Disposer of all is with me: so
that all things are virtually with me in him. I have that in Gold and Jewels
which I seem to want in Silver, Lead and Dross. I can want no friend if God
vouchsafe to be my friend; and I can enjoy no benefit by all my friends, if God
be my enemy: I need not fear the greatest enemies, if God be reconciled to me.
I shall not miss the light of the Candle, if I have this blessed Sun. The
Creature is nothing but what it is from God, and in God: And it is worth
nothing, or good for nothing, but what it is worth in order unto God, as it
declares him, and helps the soul to know him, serve him, or draw nearer to
him: As it is Idolatry in the unhappy worldling, to thirst after the Creature
with the neglect of God, and so to make the world his God; so does it savor of
the same heinous sin to lament our loss of Creatures more than the displeasure
of God. If God be my enemy, or I am fallen under his indignation, I have then
so much greater matters to lament than the loss, or absence, or frowns of man,
as should almost make me forget that there is such a thing as man to be
regarded: But if God be my Father, and my friend in Christ, I have then so much
to think of with delight, and to recreate and content my soul, as will proclaim
it most incongruous and absurd to lament inordinately the absence of a worm,
while I have his Love and presence who is All in All. If God cannot content me,
and be not enough for me, how is he then my God? or how shall he be my Heaven
and everlasting Happiness?

2. If God be with me, he is with me to whom I am absolutely devoted. I am
wholly his, and have acknowledged his interest in me, and long ago disclaimed
all usurpers, and repented of alienations, and unreservedly resigned my self to
him: And where should I dwell but with him that is my owner, and with whom I
have made the solemnest Covenant that ever I made? ^ never gave my self to any
other, but in subordination to him, and with a salvo for his highest inviolable
right. Where should my goods be but in my own house? with whom should a Servant
dwell but with his Master? and a Wife but with her Husband? and Children but
with their Father? I am nearlier related to my God and to my Savior, than I am
to any of my Relations in this world. I owe more to him than to all the world:
I have renounced all the world, as they stand in any competition or comparison
with him: And can I want their company then while I am with him? How shall I
hate Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brother and Sister for his
sake, if I cannot spare them, or be without them to enjoy him? To hate them is
but to use them as men do hated things, that is, to cast them away with
contempt as they would al^enate me from Christ, and to cleave to him, and be
satisfied in him alone. I am now married to Christ, and therefore must
cheerfully leave Father and Mother, and my native place, and all to cleave to
him: And with whom should I now delight to dwell, but with him who has taken
me into so near relation, to be, as it were, one flesh with him! O my dear
Lord, hide not thou thy face from an unkind an unworthy sinner! Let me but
dwell with thee and see thy face, and feel the gracious embracements of thy
Love, and then let me be cast off by all the world, if thou see it meetest for
me; or let all other friends be where they will, so that my soul may be with
thee: I have agreed for thy sake to forsake all, even the dearest that shall
stand against thee; and I resolve by thy grace to stand to this agreement.

3. If God be with me I am not alone, for he is with me that Loves me best.]
The Love of all the friends on earth is nothing to his Love. O how plainly has
he declared that he loves me, in the strange condescension, the sufferings,
death, and intercession of his Son? What Love has he declared in the
communications of his Spirit, and the operations of his Grace, and the near
relations into which he brought me? What Love has he declared in in the course
of his providence? in many and wonderful preservations and deliverances? in
the conduct of his wisdom, and in a life of mercies? What Love appears in
his precious promises, and the glorious provisions he has made for me with
himself to all eternity? O my Lord, I am ashamed that thy Love is so much lost;
that it has no better return from an unkind unthankful heart; that I am not
more delighted in thee, and swallowed up in the contemplation of thy Love; I
can contentedly let go the society and converse of all others, for the converse
of some one bosom friend, that is dearer to me than they all, as Jonathan to
David: And can I not much more be satisfied in thee alone, and let go all if I
may continue with thee? My very Dog will gladly for sake all the Town, and all
persons in the world, to follow me alone! And have I not yet found so much Love
and Goodness in thee my dear and blessed God, as to be willing to converse
alone with thee? All men delight most in the company of those that Love them
best: They choose not to converse with the Multitude when they look for solace
and content, but with their dearest friends: And should any be so dear to me as
God? O were not thy Love unworthily neglected by an unthankful heart, I should
never be so unsatisfied in thee, but should take up, or seek my comforts in
thee: I should then say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on
earth that I desire besides thee! Though not only my friends, but my flesh and
heart themselves should fail me, it is thou that will still be the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever: it is good therefore for me to draw near to
thee, how far soever I am from man: O let me there dwell where thou will not be
strange, for thy loving kindness is better than life: instead of the multitude
of my turmoiling thoughts, let me be taken up in the believing views of thy
reconciled face, and in the glad attendance upon thy Grace: or at least in the
multitude of my thoughts within me, let thy celestial comforts delight my soul.
Let me dwell as in thy family; and when I awake, let me be still with thee! Let
me go no whither but where I am still following thee: Let me do nothing but thy
work, nor serve any other but when I may truly call it a serving thee: Let me
hear nothing but thy voice, and let me know thy voice by whatever instrument
thou shall speak: Let me never see any thing but thy self and the glass that
represents thee, and the books in which I may read thy name: And let me never
play with the outside, and gaze on words and letters as insignificant, and not
observe thy name which is the sense. Whether it be in company or in solitude,
let me be continually with thee, and do thou vouchsafe to hold me by my right
hand: And guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me unto thy glory,
Psalm. 73. 23, 24, 25, 26, 28. Psalm. 63. 3.

4. If God be with me I am not alone; for I shall be with him whose Love is of
greater use and benefit to me, than the Love of all my friends in the world.
Their Love may perhaps be some little comfort, as it flows from His: But it
is His Love by which and upon which I Live. It is His Love that gives me Life
and Time, and health and food, and preservation; that gives me books and gives
me understanding: that gives me provision, and saves me from turning it to
pernicious fleshliness and excess; that gives me even my friends themselves,
and saves me from that abuse which might make them to me worse than enemies.
The Sun, the Earth, the Air is not so useful or needful to me as his Love. The
Love of all my friends cannot make me well when I am sick: it cannot forgive
the smallest of my sins; nor yet assure me of Gods forgiveness: it cannot heal
the maladies of my soul, nor give a solid lasting peace to the conscience which
is troubled: if all my friends stand about me when I am dying, they cannot take
away the fears of death, nor secure my passage to everlasting life: Death will
be Death still, and danger will be danger, when all my friends have done their
best. But my Almighty friend is Allsufficient: He can prevent my sickness, or
rebuke and cure it, or make it so good to me, that I shall thank him for it: He
can blot out my transgressions, and forgive all my sin; and justify me when
the world and my conscience do condemn me: He can teach me to believe, to
repent, to pray, to hope, to suffer, and to overcome: He can quiet my soul in
the midst of trouble, and give me a well grounded everlasting peace, and a joy
which no man can take from me. He can deliver me from all the corruptions and
distempers of my froward heart; and ease me and secure me in the troublesome
war which is daily managed in my breast. He can make it as easy a thing to
dye, as to lie down and take my rest when I am weary, or to undress me at night
and go to bed. He can teach Death to lay by its terrible aspect, and to speak
with a mild and comfortable voice, and to bring me the joyfullest rydings that
ever came unto my ears; and to preach to me the last and sweetest Sermon, even
the same that our Savior preached on the Cross [ Luke 23. 43. Verily I say
unto thee, To day shall thou be with Christ in Paradise.]

And is this the difference between the Love of man and of God? And yet do I
lament the loss of man! And yet am I so backward to converse with God, and to
be satisfied in his Love alone! Ah my God, how justly may thou withhold that
Love which I thus undervalue; and refuse that converse which I have first
refused? and turn me over to man, to silly man, to sinful man, whose converse I
so much desire, till I have learnt by dear experience the difference between
man and God, and between an Earthly and an Heavenly friend! Alas, have I not
tried it often enough, to have known it better before this day! Have I not often
enough sound what man is in a time of trial! Have I not been told it over and
over, and told it to the quick, by deceitful friends, by self-seeking friends,
by mutable, erroneous, deceived, scandalous, backsliding friends, by proud and
selfconceited friends; by passionate, quarrelsome, vexatious friends, by
self-grieving troubled friends that have but brought me all their calamities
and griefs to be additions to my own; by tempting friends, that have drawn me
to sin more effectually than enemies; by tender, faithful, but unable friends,
rhat have but fetched fire from my calamities and sorrows to kindle their own,
not equally sharing, but each one taking all my trouble entirely to himself:
that have been willing, but insufficient to relieve me; and therefore the
greater was their Love, the greater was their own, and consequently mine
affliction: that would have been with me, but could not; that would fain have
eased my pain, and strengthened my languishing body, but could not; that would
fain have removed all my troubles, and comforted my cast-down mind, but could
not. O how often have I found that humane friendship is a sweet desired
addition to our woe; a beloved calamity, and an affliction which nature will
not be without, not because it Loves evil, nor because it is wholly deceived
in its choice (for there is Good in friendship, and delight in holy Love) but
because the Good which is here accompanied with so much evil, is the beginning
of a more high and durable friendship, and points us up to the blessed
delightful society and converse which in the heavenly Jerusalem we shall have
with Christ!

But O how much better have I found the friendship of the Allsufficient God!
His Love has not only pitied me, but relieved me: He has not only been as it
were afflicted with me in my afflictions, but he has delivered me seasonably,
and powerfully, and sweetly has he delivered me: And when he had once told me
that my afflictions were his own, I had no reason to doubt of a deliverance. My
burdened mind has been eased by his Love, which was but more burdened by the
fruitless Love of all my friends. Often have I come to man for help, and ease,
and comfort, and gone away as from an empty Cistern, that had no water to cool
my thirst; but God has been a present help: Could I but get near him, I was
sure of Light, how great soever was my former darkness: Could I but get near
him, I was sure of warming quickening Life, how dead soever I had been before:
But all my misery was that I could not get near him! My darkened estranged
guilty soul, could not get quieting and satisfying acquaintance: My lumpish
heart lay dead on earth, and would not stir, or quickly fell down again, if by
any celestial force it began to be drawn up, and move a little toward him: My
carnal mind was entangled in diverting vanities: And thus I have been kept from
communion with my God. Kept! not by force or humane tyranny; not by bars or
bolts, or distance of a place, or by the lowness of my condition; nor by any
misrepresentations or reproach of man; but, alas, by my self, by the darkness
and deadness, aad sluggishness, and earthliness, and fleshliness, and passions
of a naughty heart. These have been my bars, and bolts, and jaylors; These are
they that have kept me from my God: Had it not been for these I might have got
nearer to him; I might have walked with him, and dwelt with him; yea dwelt in
him, and he in me: and then I should not have mist any friends, nor felt mine
enemies: And is it my sinful distance from my God that has been my loss, my
wilderness, my woe! And is it a nearer admittance to the presence of his Love
that must be my recovery and my joy, if ever I attain to joy! O then my soul,
lay hold on Christ the Reconciler, and in him and by him draw near to God: and
cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils: Love God in his Saints, and
delightfully converse with Christ in them, while thou have opportunity. But
remember thou Live not upon them, or on their Love, but upon God: and
therefore desire their Company but for His: and if thou have His, be content if
thou have not theirs. He wants not man that enjoys God. Gather up all the
Love, and Thoughts, and Desires which have been scattered and lost upon the
Creatures, and set them all on God himself, and press into his presence, and
converse with him, and thou shall find the mistake of thy present discontents,
and sweet experience shall tell thee thou have made a happy change.

5. If God be with me, I am not alone, because he is with me with whom my
greatest business lies: And what company should I desire, but theirs with whom
I have my daily necessary work to do? I have more to do with God, than with all
the world: Yea more and greater business with him in one day, than with all the
world in all my life. I have business with man about house, or lands, or food,
or raiment, or labor, or journying, or recreations, about society and public
peace: But what are these to my business with God! Indeed w^^h holy men I have
holy business; but that is but as they are M^ssengers from God, and come to me
on his business, and so they must be dearly welcome: But even then my business
is much more with God then with them; with him that sent them, then with the
Messenger. Indeed my business with God is so great, that if I had not a
Mediator to encourage and assist me, to do my work and procure me acceptance,
the thoughts of it would overwhelm my soul.

O therefore my soul, let man stand by: It is the Eternal God that I have to do
with: and with whom I am to transact in this little time the business of my
endless life. I have to deal with God through Christ, for the pardon of my
sins, of all my great and grievous sins; and woe to me if I speed not that ever
I was born: I have some hopes of pardon, but intermixed with many perplexing
fears: I have evidences much blotted, and not easily understood: I want
assurance that he is indeed my Father and reconciled to me, and will receive me
to himself when the world forsakes me: I have many languishing graces to be
strengthened; and alas, what radicated, obstinate, vexatious corruptions to be
cu^ed! Can I look into my heart, into such an unbelieving, dead, and earthly
heart, into such a proud, and peevish and disordered heart, into such a
trembling, perplexed, self-accusing heart, and yet not understand how great my
business is with God! Can I peruse my sins, or feel my wants, and sink under my
weaknesses, and yet not discern how great my business is with God! Can I look
back upon all the time that I have lost, and all the grace that I unthankfully
resisted, and all the mercies that I trod under foot, or fooled away, and can I
look before me and see how near my time is to an end, and yet not understand
how great my business is with God! Can I think of the malice and diligence of
Satan, the number, power and subtilty of mine enemies, the many snares and
dangers that are still before me, the strength and number of temptations, and
my ignorance, unwatchfulness and weakness to resist, and yet not know that my
greatest business is with God! Can I feel my afflictions and lament them, and
think my burden greater then I can bear, and find that man cannot relieve me;
can I go mourning in the heaviness of my soul, and water my bed with tears, and
fill the air with my groans and lamentations, or feel my soul overwhelmed
within me, so that my words are intercepted, and I am readier to break then
speak, and yet not perceive that my greatest business is with God? Can I think
of dying? Can I draw near to judgment? Can I think of everlasting joys in
Heaven? and of everlasting pains in Hell, and yet not feel that my greatest
business is with God? O then, my soul, the case is easily resolved, with whom
it is that thou must most desirously and seriously converse. Where should
thou be but where thy business is, and so great business! Alas, what have I to
do with man! what can it do but make my head ache, to hear a deal of senseless
chat, about preferments, lands and dignities; about the words and thoughts of
men, and a thousand toys that are utterly impertinent to my great employments,
and signify nothing but that the dreaming world is not awake! What pleasure is
it to see the bussles of a Bedlam world? what a stir they make to prove or make
themselves unhappy? How low and of how little weight, are the learned
discourses about syllables and words, and names and notions, and mood and
figure, yea or about the highest planets, when all are not referred unto God?
Were it not that some converse with men, does further my converse with God; and
that God did transact much of his business by his messengers and servants, it
were no matter whether ever I more saw the face of man: were it not that my
Master has placed me in society, and appointed me much of my work for others,
and with others, and much of his mercy is conveyed by others, man might stand
by, and solitude were better then the best society* and God alone should take
me up. O nothing is so much my misery and shame, as that I am no more willing,
nor better skilled in the management of my great important business! That my
work is with God, and my heart is no more with him! O what might I do in holy
meditation, or Prayer one hour, if I were as ready for prayer, and as good at
prayer, as one that has so long opportunity and so great necessity to converse
with God, should be! A prayerless heart, a heart that flies away from God, is
most unexcusable in such a one as I, that has so much important business with
him: It is work that must be done; and if well done, will never be repented of:
I use not to return from the presence of God (when indeed I have drawn near
him) as I do from the company of empty men, repenting that I have lost my time,
and trembled that my mind is discomposed or depressed by the vanity and earthly
savor of their discourse: I often repent that I have prayed to him so coldly,
and conversed with him so negligently, and served him so remisly; but I never
repent of the time, the care, the affections or the diligence employed in his
holy work. Many a time I have repented that ever I spent so much time with man,
and wished I had never seen the faces of some that are eminent in the world,
whose favor and converse others are ambitious of: But it is my grief and shame
that so small a part of all my life, has been spent with God; and that fervent
prayer and heavenly contemplations, have been so seldom and so short. O that I
had lived more with God, though I had been less with the dearest of my friends!
How much more sweet then would my life have been! How much more blameless,
regular and pure! How much more fruitful, and answerable to my obligations and
professions! How much more comfortable to my review! How many falls, and hurts,
and wounds, and griefs, and groans might I have escaped! O how much more
pleasing is it now to my Rememberance, to think of the hours in which I have
lain at the feet of God, though it were in tears and groans, than to think of
the time which I have spent in any common converse with the greatest, or the
learnedest, or the dearest of my acquaintance!

And as my Greatest business is with God, so my daily business is also with
him: He purposely leaves me under wants, and suffers necessities daily to
return, and enemies to assault me, and affliction to surprise me, that I may be
daily driven to him: He loves to hear from me: He would have me be no stranger
with him: I have business with him every hour, I need not want employment for
all the faculties of my soul, if I know what it is to converse in Heaven. Even
prayer, and every holy thought of God, has an Object so great and excellent,
as should wholly take me up. Nothing must he thought or spoken lightly about
the Lord. His name must not be taken in vain: Nothing that is common beseems
his worshippers. He will be sanctified of all that shall draw near him: He must
be Loved with all the Heart and Might. His servants need not be wearied for
want of employment, nor through the lightness or unprofitableness of their
employment: If I had Cities to build, or Kingdoms to govern, I might better
complain for want of employment for the faculties of my soul, than I can when I
am to converse in Heaven. In other studies the delight abateth when I have
reached my desire, and know all that I can know: But in God there is infinitely
more to be known when I know the most. I am never satiated with the easiness of
knowing, nor are my desires abated by any unusefulness or unworthiness in the
Object; but I am drawn to it by its highest excellencies, and drawn on to
desire more and more by the infiniteness of the Light which I have not yet
beheld, and the infiniteness of the Good which yet I have not enjoyed. If I be
idle, or seem to want employment, when I am to contemplate all the Artributes,
relations, mercies, works, and revealed perfections of the Lord, its sure for
want of eyes to see, or a Heart inclined to my business: if God be not enough
to employ my soul, then all the persons and things on earth are not enough.

And when I have Infinite Goodness to delight in, where my soul may freely let
out it self, and never need to fear excess of Love, how sweet should this
employment be? As Knowledge, so Love is never stinted here, by the narrowness
of the Object: We can never Love him in any proportion either to his Goodness
and amiableness in himself, or to his Love to us. What need have I then of any
other company or business, when I have infinite Goodness to delight in, and to
Love (further than they subserve this greatest work?)

Come home then, O my soul, to God: Converse in Heaven: Turn away thine eyes
from beholding vanity: Let not thy affections kindle upon straw or briars, that
go out when they have made a flash or noise, and leave thee to thy cold and
darkness: But come and dwell upon celestial beauties, and make it thy daily and
most diligent work, to kindle thy affections on the infinite everlasting Good;
and then they will never be extinguished or decay for want of fuel; but the
further they go, and the longer they burn, the greater will be the flame.
Though thou find it hard while Love is but a spark to make it burn, and
complain that thy cold and backward heart is hardly warmed with the Love of
God, yet when the whole pile has taken fire, and the flame ascends, fire
will breed fire, Love will cause Love; and all the malice of Hell it self shall
never be able to suppress or quench it unto all eternity.

6. And it is a great encouragement to my converse with God, that no
misunderstanding, no malice of enemies, no former sin or present frailty, no
nor the infinite distance of the most Holy Glorious God, can hinder my access
to him, or turn away his Ear or Love, or interrupt my leave and liberty of
converse. If I converse with the poor, their wants afflict me, being greater
than I can supply: Their complaints and expectations which I cannot satisfy,
are my trouble. If I would converse with Great ones, it is not easy to get
access: and less easy to have their favout, unless I would purchase it at too
dear a rate: How strangely and contemptuously do they look at their inferiors!
Great friends must be made for a word or smile: And if you be not quickly gone,
they are aweary of you: And if you seek any thing of them, or would put them to
any cost or trouble, you are as welcome to them as so many vermin or noisome
creatures. They please them best that drive you away. With how much labor and
difficulty must you clime, if you will see the top of one of these mountains?
And when you are there, you are but in a place of barrenness, and have nothing
to satisfy you for your pains, but a larger prospect and vertiginous despect
of the lower grounds which are not your own: it is seldom that these Great
ones are to be spoken with: And perhaps their speech is but a denial of your
requests, if not some snappish and contemptuous rejection, that makes you glad
when you are got far enough from them, and makes you the better like and love
the accessible, calm and fruitful plains.

But O how much greater encouragements has my soul to converse with God!
Company never hinders him from hearkening to my suit: He is infinite and
Omnipotent, and as sufficient for every individual soul, as if he had no other
to look after in the world: when he is taken up with the attendance and praises
of his Heavenly Host, he is as free and ready to attend and answer the groans
and prayers of a contrite soul, as if he had no nobler creatures, nor no higher
service to regard. I am often unready, but God is never unready: I am unready to
pray, but he is not unready to hear: I am unready to come to God, to walk with
him, and to solace my soul with him; but he is never unready to entertain me.
Many a time my conscience would have driven me away, when he has called me to
him, and rebuked my accusing fearful conscience. Many a time I have called my
self a prodigal, a companion of Swine, a miserable hard-hearted sinner,
unworthy to be called his Son, when he has called me Child, and chid me for my
questioning his Love. He has readify forgiven the sins which I thought would
have made my soul the fuel of Hell: He has entertained me with joy, with
music and a feast, when I better deserved to have been among the Dogs without
his doors. He has embraced me in his sustaining consolatory arms, when he
might have spurned my guilty soul to Hell, and said, Depart from me thou worker
of iniquity, I know thee not. O little did I think that he could ever have
forgotten the vanity and villainy of my youth; yea so easily have forgotten my
most aggravated sins. When I had sinned against light; when I had resisted
conscience; when I had frequently and wilfully injured Love, I thought he would
never have forgotten it: But the greatness of his Love and Mercy, and the blood
and intercession of his Son, has cancelled all. O how many mercies have I
tasted since I thought I had sinned away all mercies! How patiently has he
born with me, since I thought he would never have put up more? And yet besides
my sins and the withdrawings of my own heart, there has been nothing to
interrupt our converse. Though he be God, and I a worm, yet that would not have
kept me out: Though he be in Heaven, yet he is near to succor me on Earth, in
all that I call upon him for: Though he have the Praise of Angels, he
disdaineth not my tears and groans: Though he have the perfect Love of perfect
soul^, he knows the little spark in my breast, and despises not my weak and
languid Love: Though I injure and dishonor him by Loving him no more; though I
often forget him, and have been out of the way when he he has come or called me;
though I have disobediently turned away mine ears, and unkindly refused the
entertainments of his Love, and unfaithfully played with those whose company he
forbad me, he has not divorced me, nor turned me out of doors. O wonderful!
that Heaven will be familiar with Earth! and God with man! the Highest with a
worm! and the most Holy with an unconstant sinner! Man refuses me, when God
will entertain me: Man, that is no wiser or better than my self. Those that I
never wronged or deserved ill of, reject me with reproach: And God whom I have
unspeakably injured does invite me, and entreat me, and condescendeth to me, as
if he were beholden to me to be saved: Men that I have deserved well of, do
abhor me: And God that I have deserved Hell of, does accept me. The best of
them are briars, and as a thorny hedge, and he is Love, and Rest, and Joy: And
yet I can be more welcome to him, though I have offended him, than I can to
them whom I have obliged: I have freer leave to cast my self into my Fathers
arms, than to tumble in those briars, or wallow in the dirt. I upbraid my self
with my sins, but he does not upbraid me with them. I condemn my self for them,
but he condemns me not: He forgiveth me sooner than I can forgive my self: I
have peace with him, before I can have peace of conscience.

O therefore my soul, draw near to him that is so willing of thy company! That
frowneth thee not away, unless it be when thou have fallen into the dirt, that
thou may wash thee from thy filthiness, and be fitter for his converse. Draw
near to him that will not wrong thee, by believing misreports of enemies, or
laying to thy charge the things thou knew not: but will forgive the wrongs
thou have done to him, and justify thee from the sins that conscience lays
to thy charge. Come to him that by his Word and Spirit, his Ministers and
Mercies calls thee to come; and has promised that those that come to him he
will in no wise shut out. O walk with him that will bear thee up, and lead thee
as by the right hand ( Psalm. 73. 23.) and carry his Infants when they cannot
go! O speak to him that teaches thee to speak, and understands and accepts
thy stammering; and helps thine infirmities when thou know not what to
pray for as thou ought; and gives thee groans when thou have not words, and
knows the meaning of his spirit in thy groans: that cannot be contained in
the Heaven of Heavens, and yet has respect to the contrite soul, that
trembles at his word, and fears his displeasure: that pittieth the tears,
and despises not the sighing of a broken heart, nor the desires of the
sorrowful. O walk with him that is never weary of the converse of an upright
soul! that is never angry with thee but for flying from him, or for drawing
back, or being too strange, and refusing the kindness and felicity of his
presence. The day is coming when the proudest of the sons of men would be glad
of a good look from him that thou have leave to walk with: Even they that would
not look on thee, and they that injured and abused thee, and they that
inferiors could have no access to, O how glad would they be then of a smile,
or a word of hope and mercy from thy Father! Draw near then to him, on whom the
whole Creation does depend; whose favor at last the proudest and the worst
would purchase with the loudest cries, when all their pomp and pleasure is
gone, and can purchase nothing. O walk with him that is Love it self, and think
him not unwilling or unlovely; and let not the deceiver by hideous
misrepresentations drive thee from him: when thou have felt a while the storms
abroad, methinks thou should say, How go^d, how safe, how sweet is it to
draw near to God!

1. With whom should I so desirously converse, as with him whom I must Live
with for ever? If I take pleasure in my house, or land, or country, my walks,
my books, or friends themselves as clothed with flesh, I must possess this
pleasure but a little while; Henceforth know we no man after the flesh: Had we
known Christ himself after the flesh, we must know him so no more for ever.
(Though his Glorified spiritual Body we shall know.) Do you converse with
Father or Mother? with Wives or Children? with Pastors and Teachers? Though you
may converse with these as Glorified Saints* when you come to Christ, yet in
these Relations that they stand in to you now, you shall converse with them but
a little while: For the Time is short: It remains that both they that have
wives be as though they had none; and they that weep as though they wept not;
and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy as though
they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing it (or as
though they used it not:) for the fashion of this world does pass away.] 1 Cor.
7. 29, 30, 31.

Why then should I so much regard, a converse of so short continuance? why
should I be so familiar in my Inn, and so in love wi^h that familiarity, as to
grieve when I must but think of leaving it, or talk of going home, and look
forward to the place where I must dwell for ever? shall I be fond of the
company of a passenger that I travel with (yea perhaps one that does but meet
me in the way, and goes to a contrary place) and shall I not take more
pleasure to remember home? I will not be so uncivil as to deny those I meet a
short salute, or to be friendly with my fellow-travellers: But remember O my
soul, that thou do not dwell but travel here, and that it is thy Fathers
house where thou must abide for ever: yea and he is nearer thee than man
(though invisible) even in thy way. O see him then that is invisible: Hearken
to him when he speaks: Obey his voice: Observe his way: Speak to him boldly,
though humbly and reverently, as his child, about the great concernments of thy
State: Tell him what it is that aileth thee: And seeing all thy smart is the
fruit of thy own sin, confess thy folly and unkindness, crave his forgiveness,
and remember him what his Son has suffered, and for what: Treat with him about
thy future course: Desire his Grace, and give up thy self to his conduct and
his cure: Weep over in his ears the history of thy misdoings and unthankful
course: Tell it him with penitential tears and groans: But tell him also the
advantage that he has for the honoring of his grace, if it may now abound
where sin abounds: Tell him that thou art most offended with thy self, for
that which he is most offended with: That thou art angry with thy disobedient
unthankful heart: that thou art even aweary of that heart that loves him no
more: and that it shall never please thee, till it love him better and be more
desirous to please him: Tell him of thy enemies, and crave the protection of
his love: Tell him of thy frailties, infirmities and passions, and crave not
only his tender forbearance, but his help: Tell him that without him thou can
do nothing; and crave the Grace that is sufficient for thee, that through him
that strenghteneth thee thou may do all things: when thou fallest, despair
not, but crave his helping hand to raise thee. Speak to him especially of the
everlasting things, and thank him for his Promises, and for thy hopes: for what
thou shall be and have and do among his Holy Ones for ever. Express thy joys
in the promise of those joys; that thou must see his Glory, and love him and
praise him better then thou can now desire! Begin those praises, and as thou
walk with him, take pleasure in the mention of his perfections; be thankful
to him and speak good of his Name: Solace thy self in remembering what a God,
what a desence and portion all believers have: and in considering whither he is
now conducting thee, and what he will do with thee, and what use he will make
of thee for ever: Speak with Rejoicing of the glory of his works, and the
righteousness of his judgments, and the holiness and evenness of his ways:
sing forth his praises with a joyful heart, and pleasant and triumphing voice;
and frown away all slavish fears, all importune malicious suggestions or
doubts, all peevish hurtful nipping griefs, that would mar or interrupt the
melody; and would untune or unstring a raised well composed soul. Thy Father
loves thy very moans and tears: but how much more does he love thy Thanks and
Praise? Or if indeed it be a winter time, a stormy day with thee, and he seem
to chide or hide his face because thou have offended him, let the cloud that is
gathered by thy folly come down in tears, and tell him* Thou have sinned
against Heaven and before him, and art no more worthy to be called his Son; but
yet fly not from him, but beg his pardon and the privileges of a servant: And
thou will find embracements, when thou fear condemnation: and find that he
is merciful and ready to forgive: Only return, and keep closer to him for the
time to come. If the breach through thy neglect be gone so far, as that thou
seem to have lost thy God, and to be cast off, and left forsaken; despair
not yet; for he does but hide his face till thou repent: He does not forsake
thee, but only tell thee what it is to walk so carelessly as if thou would
forsake him: Thou art faster and surer in his Love and Covenant then thou can
believe or apprehend. Thy Lord was as dear as ever to his Father, when he cried
out, My God, why have thou forsaken me. But yet neglect him not, and be not
regardless of his withdrawings and of thy loss: Lift up thy voice and cry but [
Father;] in despite of unbelief, cry out [ My Father, my Savior, my God] and
thou shall hear him answer thee at last [ My Child:] Cry out [ O why do thou
hide thy face? and why have thou forsaken me! O what shall I do here without
thee! O leave me not, lose me not in this howling wilderness! Let me not be a
prey to any ravening beast! to my sin, to Satan, to my foes and thine!] Lift up
thy voice and weep, and tell him, they are the tears and lamentations of his
Child: O beg of him, that thy wanderings and childish folly, may not be taken
as acts of enmity, or at least that they may be pardoned; and though he correct
thee, that he will return and not forsake thee, but still take thee and use
thee as his child. Or if thou have not words to pour out before him, at least
smite upon thy breast, and though thou be ashamed or afraid to look up toward
heaven, look down and say, [ O Lord be merciful to me a sinner,] and he will
take it for an acceptable suit, that tends to thy pardon and justification,
and will number such a sentence with the prayers which he cannot deny. Or if
thou cry and can not hear of him, and have long called out upon thy Fathers
Name, and hear not his voice and have no return; enquire after him of those
thou meetest: Ask for him of them that know him and are acquainted with his
way! Make thy moan unto the watchmen; and ask them, where thou may find thy
Lord. And at last he will appear to thee, and find thee first that thou may
find him, and show thee where it was that thou did lose him, by losing thy
self and turning from him I seek him and thou shall find him: wait and he will
appear in kindness: For he never fails or forsakes those that wait upon him.

This kind of Converse, O my soul, thou have to prosecute with thy God. Thou
have also the concernments of all his servants; his afflicted ones, his broken
hearted ones, his diseased enes, his persecuted ones, to tell him of: Tell him
also of the concernments of his Kingdom, the fury of his enemies, the
dishonor they cast upon his Name, the matters of his Gospel, cause and
interest in the world: But still let his Righteous Judgment be remembered, and
all be terminated in the glorious everlasting Kingdom.

Is it not much better thus to converse with him that I must be with for ever,
about the place, and the company, and work, and concernments of my perpetual
abode, then to be taken up with strangers in my way, and detained by their
impertinencies?

I have formed my self so long in these meditations, that I will but name the
rest and tell you what I had further to have treated on, and leave the
enlargement to your own meditations.

8. I have no reason to be weary of converse with God, seeing it is that for
which all humane converse is regardable. Converse with man is only so far
desirable as it tends to our Converse with God: And therefore the end must be
preferred before the means.

9. It is the office of Christ, and the work of the Holy Ghost, and the use of
all the means of Grace, and of all creatures, mercies and afflictions, to
reduce our straying souls to God, that we may converse with him and enjoy him.

10. Converse with God is most suitable to those that are so near to death; It
best prepares for it: It is likest to the work that we are next to do. We had
rather when death comes, be found conversing with God then with Man: It is God
that a dying man has principally to do with: It is his judgment that he is
going to; and his mercy that he has to trust upon: And therefore it concerns
us to draw near him now, and be no strangers to him, lest strangeness then
should be our terror.

11. How wonderful a condescension is it that God should be willing to converse
with me! with such a worm and sinful wretch: And therefore how unexcusable is
my crime, if I refuse his company, and so great a mercy!

12. Lastly, Heaven it self is but our Converse with God and his Glorified
ones, (though in a more perfect manner then we can here conceive.) And
therefore our holy converse with him here is the state that is likest Heaven,
and that prepares for it, and all the Heaven that is on earth.

IT remains now that I briefly tell you, what you should do to attain and
manage this Converse with God, in the improvement of your solitude. (For
Directions in general for Walking with God, I reserve for another place.) At
present let these few suffice.

Direct. 1. If you would comfortably Converse with God, make sure that you are
Reconciled to him in Christ, and that he is indeed your friend and Father. Can
two walk together except they be agreed? Can you take pleasure in dwelling with
the consuming fire? or conversing with the most dreadful enemy? Yet this I must
add, that every doubting or self-accusing soul may not find a pretense to fly
from God. 1. That God cease not to be a Father when ever a fearful soul is
drawn to question it or deny it. 2. That in the Universal Love and Grace of God
to miserable sinners, and in the universal act of conditional pardon and
oblivion, and in the offers of Grace, and the readiness of God to receive the
penitent, there is Glad tidings that should exceedingly rejoice a sinner; and
there is sufficient encouragement to draw the most guilty miserable sinner to
seek to God, and sue for mercy. But yet the sweetest converse is for children,
and for those that have some assurance that they are children.

But perhaps you will say, that this is not easily attained: How shall we know
that he is our friend?

In brief, I answer, If you are unfeignedly friends to God, it is because he
first loved you. Prefer him before all other friends, and all the wealth and
vanity of the world; Provoke him not by wilfulness or neglect: use him as your
best friend, and abuse him not by disobedience or ingratitude; own him before
all, at the dearest rates, whenever you are called to it: Desire his presence:
Lament his absence: Love him from the bottom of your hearts: Think not hardly
of him: Suspect him not: Misunderstand him not: Hearken not to his enemies:
Receive not any false reports against him: Take him to be really Better for you
than all the world: Do these, and doubt not but you are friends with God, and
God with you: In a word, Be but heartily willing to be friends to God, and that
God should be your chiefest friend, and you may be sure that it is so indeed,
and that you are and have what you desire. And then how delightfully may you
converse with God!

Direct. 2. Wholly depend on the Mediation of Christ, the great Reconciler:
Without him there is no coming near to God: But in his Beloved you shall be
accepted. Whatever fear of his displeasure shall surprise you, fly presently
for safety unto Christ: Whatever guilt shall look you in the face, commit your
self and cause to Christ, and desire him to answer for you: When the doors of
mercy seem to be shut up against you, fly to him that bears the keys, and can
at any time open to you and let you in: Desire him to answer for you to God, to
your consciences, and against all accusers: By him alone you may boldly and
comfortably converse with God: But God will not know you out of him.

Direct. 3. Take heed of bringing particular Guilt into the presence of God, if
you would have sweet communion with him: Christ himself never reconciled God to
sin: And the sinner and sin are so nearly related, that for all the death of
Christ, you shall feel that iniquity dwells not with God, but he hates the
works of it, and the foolish shall not stand in his sight; and that if you will
presume to sin because you are his Children, be sure your fin will find you
out. O what fears, what shame, what self-abhorrence and self-revenge will guilt
raise in a penitent soul, when it comes into the light of the presence of the
Lord! it will unavoidably abate your boldness and your comforts: When you
should be sweetly delighting in his pleased face, and promised Glory, you will
be befooling your selves for your former sin, and ready even to tear your
flesh, to think that ever you should do as you have done, and use him as you
would not have used a common friend, and cast your selves upon his wrath. But
an innocent soul, or pacified conscience, does walk with God in quietness and
delight, without those frowns and fears which are a taste of Hell to others.

Direct. 4. If you would comfortably converse with God, be sure that you bring
not Idols in your hearts: Take heed of inordinate affection to any Creature.
Let all things else be nothing to you, that you may have none to take up your
thoughts but God. Let your Minds be further separate from them than your
Bodies: Bring not into solitude or to contemplation, a proud, or lustful, or
covetous mind: It much more concerns thee, what Heart thou bring, that
what Place thou art in, or what work thou art upon. A mind that is drowned in
ambition, sensuality or passion, will scarce find God any sooner in a
wilderness than in a crowd (unless he be there returning from those sins to
God) wherever he sees him, God will not own and be familiar with so foul a
soul. Seneca could say [ Quid prodest totius regionis silentium, si affectus
fremunt?* What good does the silence of all the Country do thee, if thou have
the noise of raging affections within?] And Gregory says [ Qui corpore remotus
vivit, etc. He that in body is far enough from the tumult of humane
conversation, is not in solitude, if he busy himself with earthly cogitations
and desires: and he is not in the City that is not troubled with the tumult of
worldly cares or fears, though he be pressed with the popular crowds.] Bring
not thy house, or land, or credit, or carnal friend along with thee in thy
heart, if thou desire and expect to walk in Heaven, and to converse with God.

Direct. 5. Live still by Faith: Let Faith lay Heaven and Earth as it were
together: Look not at God as if he were far off: set him always as before you,
even as at your right hand; Psalm. 16. 8. Be still with him when you awake,
Psalm. 1 39. 18. In the morning thank him for your rest; and deliver up your
self to his conduct and service for that day. Go forth as with him, and to do
his work: Do every action, with the Command of God, and the Promise of Heaven
before your eyes, and upon your hearts: Live as those that have incomparably
more to do with God and Heaven, than with all this world; That you may say with
David, Psalm. 37. 25, 26. (as aforecited) Whom have I in Heaven but thee! and
there is none on Earth that I desire besides thee:] And with Paul, Phil. 1. 21.
[ To me to Live is Christ, and to Dye is gain] You must shut up the eye of
sense (save as subordinate to Faith) and live by Faith upon a God, a Christ,
and a World that is unseen, if you would know by experience what it is to be
above the brutish life of sensualists, and to converse with God. O Christian,
if thou had rightly learned this blessed life, what a high and noble
soul-conversation would thou have! How easily would thou spare, and how
little would thou miss the favor of the greatest, the presence of any
worldly comfort! City or Solitude would be much alike to thee, saving that the
place and state would be best to thee, where thou have the greatest help and
freedom to converse with God. Thou would say of humane society as Seneca
[Unus pro populo mihi est, and populus pro uno: Mihi satis est unus, satis est
nullus] [One is instead of all the people to me, and the people as one: One is
enough for me, and none is enough.] Thus being taken up with God, thou might
live in prison as at liberty, and in a wilderness as in a City, and in a place
of banishment as in thy native Land: For the Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof: and everywhere thou may find him, and converse with him,
and lift up pure hands unto him: In every place thou art within the sight of
home; and Heaven is in thine eye, and thou art conversing with that God, in
whose converse the highest Angels do place their highest felicity and delight.

How little cause then have all the Churches enemies to triumph, that can never
shut up a true believer from the presence of his God? nor banish him into such
a place where he cannot have his conversation in Heaven? The stones that were
cast at holy Stephen, could not hinder him from seeing the Heavens opened, and
Christ sitting at the right hand of God. A Patmos allowed holy John Communion
with Christ, being there in the Spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 9, 10. Christ
never so speedily and comfortably owneth his servants, as when the world
disowneth them, and abuses them for his sake, and hurls them up and down as
the scorn and offscouring of all. He quickly found the blind man that he had
cured, when once the Jews had cast him out, Joh. 9. 35. Persecutors do but
promote the blessedness and exceeding joy of sufferers for Christ, Mat. 5. 11,
12.

And how little Reason then have Christians, to shun such sufferings, by
unlawful means, which turn to their so great advantage? and to give so dear as
the hazard of their souls by wilful sin, to escape the honor, and safety, and
commodity of Martyrdom?

And indeed we judge not, we Love not, we Live not as sanctified ones must do,
if we judge not that the truest Liberty, and Love it not as the Best Condition,
in which we may Best converse with God. And O how much harder is it to walk
with God, in a Court, in the midst of sensual delights, than in a prison or
wilderness where we have none to interrupt us, and nothing else to take us up?
It is our prepossessed minds, our earthly hearts, our carnal affections and
concupiscence, and the pleasures of a prosperous state that are the prison and
the Jaylors of our souls. Were it not for these, how free should we be, though
our bodies were confined to the straightest room! He is at Liberty that can
walk in Heaven, and have access to God, and make use of all the Creatures in
the world, to the promoting of this his Heavenly conversation. And he is the
prisoner whose soul is chained to flesh and earth, and confined to his lands
and houses, and feeds on the dust of worldly riches, or walloweth in the dung
and filth of gluttony, drunkenness and lust: that are far from God, and desire
not to be near him; but say to him, Depart from us, we would not have the
knowledge of thy ways: that Love their prison and chains so well, that they
would not be set free, but hate those with the cruellest hatred that endeavor
their deliverance. Those are the poor prisoners of Satan, that have not liberty
to believe, nor to Love God, nor converse in Heaven, nor seriously to mind or
seek the things that are high and honorable: that have not liberty to meditate
or pray, or seriously to speak of holy things, nor to love and converse with
those that do so: that are tied so hard to the drudgery of sin, that they have
not liberty one month, or week, or day, to leave it, and walk with God so much
as for a recreation! But he that lives in the family of God, and is employed
in attending him, and does converse with Christ, and the Host of Holy ones
above, in reason should not much complain of his want of friends, or company or
accommodations, nor yet be too impatient of any corporal confinement.

Lastly, be sure then most narrowly to watch your hearts, that nothing have
entertainment there, which is against your Liberty of converse with God. Fill
not those Hearts with worldly trash, which are made and new-made to be the
dwelling place of God. Desire not the company which would diminish your
heavenly acquaintance and correspondency. Be not unfriendly, nor conceited of a
self-sufficiency; but yet beware lest under the honest ingenuous title of a
friend, a special, faithful, prudent, faithful friend, you should entertain an
Idol, or an enemy to your Love of God, or a corrival and competitor with your
highest friend: For if you do, it is not the specious title of a friend that
will save you from the thorns and briars of disquietment, and from greater
troubles than ever you found from open enemies.

O blessed be that High and everlasting friend, who is every way suited to the
upright souls! To their Minds, their Memories, their Delight, their Love, etc.
by surest Truth, by fullest Goodness, by clearest Light, by dearest Love, by
firmest Constancy, etc. -- O why has my drowsy and dark-sighted soul been so
seldom with him! why has it so often, so strangely, and so unthankfully
passed by, and not observed him, nor hearkened to his kindest calls! O what is
all this trash and trouble* that has filled my memory, and employed my mind,
and cheated and corrupted my affections, while my dearest Lord has been days
and nights so unworthily forgotten, so contemptuously neglected and
disregarded, and loved as if I loved him not! O that these drowsy and those
waking nights, those loitered, lost, and empty hours had been spent in the
humblest converse with him, which have been dreamed and doted away upon -- now
I know not what! O my God, how much wiser and happier had I been, had I rather
chosen to mourn with thee, than to rejoice and sport with any other! O that I
had rather wept with thee, than laughed with the creature! For the time to come
let that be my friend, that most befriendeth my dark, and dull, and backward
soul, in its undertaken progress, and heavenly conversation! Or if there be
none such upon earth, let me here take no one for my friend! O blot out every
Name from my corrupted heart, which hinders the deeper engraving of thy Name!
Ah Lord, what a stone, what a blind ungrateful thing, is a Heart not touched
with celestial Love! yet shall I not run to thee, when I have none else that
will know me! shall I not draw near thee, when all fly from me! When daily
experience cries out so loud [NONE BUT CHRIST: GOD OR NOTHING.] Ah foolish
Heart, that have thought of it [Where is that place, that Cave or Desert, where
I might soonest find thee, and fullest enjoy thee? is it in the wilderness that
thou walk, or in the crowd: in the Closet, or in the Church? where is it
that I might soonest meet with God?] But alas, I now perceive, that I have a
Heart to find, before I am like to find my Lord! O Loveless, Lifeless, stony
heart! that is dead to him that gave it Life! and to none but him! Could I not
Love, or Think, or Feel at all, methinks I were less dead than now? Less dead,
if dead, than now I am alive? I had almost said [Lord, let me never Love more
till I can Love thee? Nor think more on any thing till I can more willingly
think of thee?] But I must suppress that wish; for Life will act: And the
mercies and motions of Nature are necessary to those of Grace. And therefore in
the life of Nature, and in the glimmerings of thy Light, I will wait for more
of the Celestial life! My God, thou have my consent! It is here attested under
my hand: Separate me from what and whom thou will so I may but be nearer thee!
Let me Love thee more, and feel more of thy Love, and then let me Love or be
beloved of the world, as little as thou will.

I thought self-love had been a more predominant thing: But now I find that
Repentance has its Anger, its Hatred and its Revenge! I am truly Angry with
that Heart that has so often and foolishly offended thee! Methinks I hate that
Heart that is so cold and backward in thy love, and almost grudge it a dwelling
in my breast! Alas when Love should be the life of Prayer, the life of holy
meditation, the life of Sermons and of holy conference, and my soul in these
should long to meet thee, and delight to mention thee, I straggle Lord, I know
not whither! or I sit still and wish, but do not rise and run and follow thee,
yea I do not what I seem to do. All Is dead, all is dead, for want of Love! I
often cry, O where is that place, where the quickening beams of Heaven are
warmest, that my frozen soul might seek it out! But whither ever I go, to City
or to Solitude, alas, I find it is not Place that makes the difference. I know
that Christ is perfectly replenished with Life and Light and Love Divine: And I
hear him as our Head and Treasure proclaimed and offered to us in the Gospel!
This is thy Record, that he that has the Son has Life! O why then is my
barren soul so empty! I thought I had long ago consented to thy offer; and then
according to thy Covenant, both He and Life in him are mine! And yet must I
still be dark and dead!

Ah dearest Lord, I say not that I have too long waited! but if I continue thus
to wait, will thou never find the time of Love? and come and own thy gasping
worm? will thou never dissipate these clouds, and shine upon this dead and
darkened soul? Has my Night no Day? Thrust me not from thee O my God! For
that is a Hell, to be thrust from God. But sure the cause is all at home, could
I find it out, or rather could I cure it! It is sure my face that is turned from
God, when I say, His face is turned from me. But if my Life must here be out of
sight, and hidden in the Root (with Christ in God,) and if all the rest be
reserved for that better world, and I must here have but these small
beginnings, O make me more to Love and long for the blessed day of thine
appearing, and not to fear the time of my deliverance, nor unbelievingly to
linger in this Sodom, as one that had rather stay with sin, then come to thee!
Though sin has made me backward to the fight, let it not make me backward to
receive the Crown; Though it has made me a loiterer in thy work, let it not
make me backward to receive that wages, which thy Love will give to our
pardoned, poor, accepted services. Though I have too often drawn back, when I
should have come unto thee, and walked with thee in thy ways of Grace, yet
heal that unbelief, and disaffection, which would make me to draw back, when
thou call me to possess thy Glory? Though the sickness and lameness of my
soul have hindered me in my journey, yet let their painfulness help me to
desire to be delivered from them and to be at home, where (without the
interposing nights of thy displeasure) I shall fully feel thy fullest Love, and
walk with thy Glorified ones in the Light of thy Glory, triumphing in thy
Praise for evermore,

Amen.
BUT now I have given you these few Directions for the improvement of your
solitude for converse with God, lest I should occasion the hurt of those that
are unfit for the Lesson I have given, I must conclude with this Caution (which
I have formerly also published,) That it is not melancholy or weak-headed
persons, who are not able to bear such exercises, for whom I have written these
Directions. Those that are not able to be much in serious solitary
thoughtfulness, without confusions and distracting suggestions, and hurrying
vexatious thoughts, must set themselves for the most part to those duties which
are to be done in company by the help of others; and must be very little in
solitary duties: For to them whose natural faculties are so diseased or weak,
it is no duty, as being no means to do them the desired good; but while they
strive to do that which they are naturally unable to endure, they will but
confound and distract themselves, and make themselves unable for those other
duties which yet they are not utterly unfit for. To such persons therefore
instead of ordered, well-digested Meditations, and much time spent in secret
thoughtfulness, it must suffice that they be brief in secret Prayer, and take
up with such occasional abrupter Meditations as they are capable of, and that
they be the more in reading, hearing, conference, and praying and praising God
with others: until their melancholy distempers are so far overcome, as that
(by the direction of their Spiritual Guides) they may judge themselves fit for
this improvement of their Solitude.

FINIS.

