THE DUTY OF HEAVENLY MEDITATION, Reviewed by RICHARD BAXTER, At the Invitation
of Mr. GILES FIRMIN'S EXCEPTIONS; In his Book Entitled The Real Christian.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Sign of the three Crowns, near
Holborn Conduit. 1671.

Dear and much honored Brother,
I Have lately perused your judicious Treatise called The Real Christian, in
which you seek to deliver the Church from the danger of the Errors of Mr.
Daniel Rogers, Mr. Hooker Mr. Shephard, and Mr. Perkins; (And I think Mr.
Shephard's Sound Believer needs more Medication to make it sound, than you
have yet used.) Among the rest, I find you have endeavored in the End, to save
the Church also from the trouble and danger of my Directions for Heavenly
Meditation in my Saints Rest. And though my own opinion be, that seeing we have
formerly had some converse by Writing, it would have been better to have
attempted to convince me by Letters, of my Errors, before you had warned the
World to take heed of them, that you might have heard first what I had to say
for my self; yet I confess those are punctilio's, not to be stood upon in this
age; in which no great exactness of foresight, prudence or justice is to be
expected: Nor have I a desire to abridge you of your liberty of speaking as
publicly as you have a list. But taking your writings as I find them, I shall
take the boldness to tell you, I. How far my judgment does concur with yours,
which shall be answered by my endeavors: II. How far I am unsatisfied in your
Writings on this point.

I. I am glad, 1. That you are tender of the peace of troubled tender
Christians, and would have Ministers take heed lest they should break the
bruised reed.

2. I am glad that you would have Ministers accurate in their words and
writings, and not by heedless unwarrantable expressions wrong the Church.

3. I am glad that you are sensible that extremes are to be avoided, and that
over-doing in doctrines of piety, and pretending to go beyond the Church of
God, even farther than God would have us, is one way of injuring truth and
piety.

4. I am glad that you are for keeping close to that rule of Truth and duty,
and against making a Religion, or any part of it to our selves.

5. I am glad that you are for a free and faithful opening and disowning the
Errors and failings of the most esteemed Divines; that weak Christians may not
be injured by the reverence of their names. And that you are not of the
pernicious opinion of a multitude of Professors of Religiousness in this age,
who think that none of their faults or weaknesses should be opened, lest it
give matter to their Adversaries to reproach them; and that all that is said
against them, is said against Religion; and that to call them to Repentance, is
to disgrace Religion, and to strengthen the hands of wickedness. I am glad that
you see the horrid blindness and wickedness of this conceit; and how odious a
thing it is to prefer our selfish personal reputation, before the honor of
Christ and true Religion; or else to think that it is an honor to Christ and
Religion to justify our sins. I am glad that you have the wisdom of a
Christian, rather to disown the Errors of the Godlyest Divines, than to leave
it to angry contentious Adversaries to open them in another manner, and to
other ends and uses: And that you think not as our selfish blind ones do, that
we may dance naked unseen and undisgraced, if we are but in the net of
self-flattery; and that angry Adversaries will see none of our errors or
faults, unless we tell them of them by our Repentance. In all this, you and I
are of a mind.

6. And in particular, I am afraid as well as you of screwing weak ones too
high in this duty of meditation on the Glory of Heaven. And therefore lest I
should injure the weak, or any others, 1. In the Book it self (The Saints Rest)
I have given the Reader these warnings, Page 703. Ed. 9. [ Yet be cautious in
understanding this. I know this will not prove every man's duty: some have not
themselves and their time at command; and therefore cannot set their hours:
such are most servants, and many Children of poor and carnal Parents; and many
are so poor that the necessities of their families will deny them this
freedom. I do not think it the duty of such, to leave their labors for this
work, just at certain set times; no nor for prayer or other necessary worship.
No such duty, is a duty at all times: Affirmatives bind not semper and ad
semper. When two duties come together, and cannot both be performed, it were
then a sin to perform the lesser. Of two duties we must choose the greater (i.
e. consideratis considerandis) though of two sins we must choose neither. I
think such persons were best to be watchful, to redeem time as much as they
can, and take their vacant opportunities as they fall; and especially to join
Meditation and Prayer as much as they can with the very labors of their
Callings. There is no such enmity between laboring and Meditating, or Praying
in the Spirit, but that both may conveniently be done together. Yet I say, as
Paul in another case, If thou can be free, use it rather. Those that have
more spare time from worldly necess^ries, and are Masters to dispose of
themselves and their time, etc.

And page 704, [ Just how often it should be, I cannot determine, because men's
several conditions may vary it: But in general, That it be frequent, the
Scripture requires, when it mentions meditating continually, or day and
night, Psalm. 1.2. and 119.97. and 148.19. Circumstances of our conditions may
much vary the circumstances of our duty. It may be one man's duty to hear, or
pray ofter than another; and so it may be in this of Meditation: But for those
that can conveniently omit other business, I advise that it be once a day at
least: So also page 707. and 709.

And being afraid lest I should injure unable persons, in many books since, I
have over and over (lest it should be overlookt) repeated (I feared ad nauseam
Lectoris) these Cau^ions; As Method for Peace of Consc. p. 12. [ studying and
serious meditating be not duties for the deeply Melancholy -- You must let
those alone till you are better able to perform them, lest by attempting those
duties which you cannot perform, you utterly disable your self from all, etc.

And I thus conclude my Treat. of The Divine Life, [But now I have given you
these few Directions for the improvement of your solitude for converse with
God, lest I should occasion the hurt of those that are unfit for the Lesson I
have given, I must conclude with this caution which I have formerly also
published: that it is not Melancholy or Weak headed persons who are not able to
bear such exercises, for whom I have written these Directions. Those that are
not able to be much in serious solitary thoughtfulness, without confusions and
distracting suggestions, and hurrying vexations thoughts, must set themselves
for the most part to those duties, which are to be done in company by the help
of others; and must be very little in solitary duties; For to them whose
natural faculties are so diseased and weak it is no duty; as being no means to
do them the desired good: But while they strive to do that which they are
naturally unable to endure, they will but confound and distract themselves, and
make themselves unable for those other duties, which yet they are not utterly
unfit for: To such persons therefore instead of ordered, well digested
Meditations, and much time spent in secret thoughtfulness, it must suffice that
they be brief in secret prayer; and take up with such occasional abrupter
Meditations, as they are capable of, and that they be the more in reading,
hearing, conference, Praying, and praising God with others, etc.] More such I
omit.

I now add more particularly (lest I should injure any.) 1. That I take it not
to be the duty of a Minister to leave his necessary Study, Preaching, Prayer,
etc. for this set Meditation: 2. Nor for a Magistrate to leave his necessary
work of Government for it. 3. Nor for any man in an Active life, to leave a
necessary duty of his place for it: 4. Nor for any weak persons to stretch
their brains beyond their ability, to do what they cannot do. Greatest Duties
must be preferred, and men must endeavor prudently according to their capacity
and power. And God will have mercy and not sacrifice and would not have
Religion crack our brains, nor turn out our duties toward men, or of our
particular Callings.

But for all this I am of the same mind expressed in the Book which you find
fault with. 1. That Heavenly mindedness is essential to Holiness. 2. That
Heavenly thoughts or Meditations, are much of the exercise of Heavenly
mindedness. 3. And that it is every man's duty to exercise his Thoughts or
Meditations in the most clear, methodical, affecting, practical way that his
Abilities and opportunities (consideratis considerandis) will reach to. For
which useful Method I gave the best directions I could. But I will not justify
my weakness, nor deny that it is injurious to the Church of God, nor deny the
pre-eminence of my Brethrens understandings, nor the greater usefulness of
their labors. And it is not unlikely that mine may have more faults that I
discern, which are soon discerned by more judicious men; for whose correction I
would not be unthankful.

II. And now I shall tell you wherein I differ from you.

1. It seems to me unrighteous dealing, when you undertake in Print to save
Christians from my Errors, to overpass all the limitations before recited
which I gave them; and to carry it as if I had made that Manner which you
except against, to be all men's, or most men's duty. Yea not only by your
preterition of my words, but by your own, to persuade the Reader that so indeed
it was: When you say, page 314. [ This I see is the Meditation strongly urged,
upon Christians: A duty very hard I am sure; And if our salvation lie upon this
being performed after this manner as this learned and Reverend Author has set
down, then most Christians that I meet with, forty to one, and those whom I
esteem good Christians, must never come at Heaven, but must to that dark place.]

Did you not intimate in these words, that I make it as necessary to salvation
as these words import? If so, Truth and Candor should have prevailed with you,
to have left out all such passages. You see I make it not so much as a duty to
any that have not ability and convenience: much less that the mode is of
necessity to salvation.

But yet I must add, that our Salvation is not unconcerned in any of our
duties, though I will not say that our salvation lies on it, so as we must
else be damned.

What if I had given you a scheme of the admirably accurate Method of Prayer,
which is found in the Lords Prayer? I would have said that the observation of
this Method is a Duty; and that our salvation is not unconcerned in that duty;
I would have said that all men should do their best to come up to that accurate
Method in their Prayers; But so, as not to crack their brains, nor hinder them
in the Matter, nor neglect any greater duty, to do this; But with moderate,
just endeavors, according to their abilities and opportunities. I would not
have said that their salvation so lies on it, that none that use not this
method can be saved; nor would I be so rough and cursed, (as you speak) to those
that cannot use this Method, as to deprive them of their comfort: But I would
tell them what is their Rule and pattern. Even so do I in this case of
Meditation.

2. And I like not reducing the Rule to our impotent sinful natures, nor to our
crooked lives, when our Hearts and lives should be measured by, and reduced to
the Rule. I grant that not one of forty does Pray in the Method of the Lords
prayer: no not of Godly People, no nor Ministers; no not in their studied
Liturgies. What then? Is it therefore no duty, because few perform it? Were it
not enough to have said that methodical, set Meditation is a high pitch of
duty, which every weak Christian cannot ^each; or which few can reach; or that
it is not so much as a duty to all, as to the circumstances of Time, etc? As I
like not the Papists making Gods Law imperfect, that they may make man perfect,
and sin Venial, or Vnivocally no sin; so I as little like it in our selves, to
say that Duty, is no Duty, and so deny the perfection of the Law, because that
every one cannot reach it, and few good people perform it. God forbid I should
deny all duty which few good people perform, any more than justify all sin
which most, or all, good People commit.

3. You say [ If I should humbly desire a Text or two from Holy Writ, to prove
that is the Meditation that God requires of Christians; if the Reverend Author
will answer me, it is a ridiculous question, (as he has said in another case,)
I must be silent.]

Answ. The case which I call ridiculous, you vainly silence, seeing any
understanding Reader (at least of the Book you blame) will see it: They were
ridiculous Sectaries, Seekers, and such like, that I then had to do with: If
you, or your most skilful Casuist whom you mention, had called for a Text of
Scripture to prove that we must pray twice a day in our families, its like I
should have given you more Reverent language: though I had thought never the
better of the Question: nor do I think sure that you can judge it ever the less
a duty, because your Father used it not (which yet I think you were not obliged
to have so far told the world.) But why did you not heartily recite those
reasonings, by which in that place I manifested the question to be ridiculous?
Nay does not your saying that if I do but say [It is ridiculous, you must be
silent] imply that I do but barely say so? I will not injure the Reader by the
tedious recitation of my words. But to your self I may say, I suppose you are
not for Veronius new way of arguing from express Texts of Scripture containing
both propositions: If you are, I referr you to Vedelius his Rationale, Theolog.
but specially to Dalleus, de fidei ex Script. demonst. Part. 1. Cap. 10, 11,
12, 13.

1. To prove Meditation or frequent Meditation day and night a duty, is
needless; You confess it. 2. To prove Methodical Meditation a duty to them that
have Ability and opportunity, it suffices to cite, 1 Cor. 14.26.40. Let all
things be done to edifying, and in Order; that is, Right order, not Wrong: and
that is, Method. But whether this or that Method be really true and most
orderly and edifying, you need not the words of Scripture to tell you: That
Cogitationes, judicia and verba, rebus sunt aptanda; that the Verity of
Judgment and Speech lies in their Congruity to things] are points known by
the Light of Reason, and you should not call for a Text to prove them. The
Light of nature is not contemptible: The Law of Nature is Gods Law. If
Scripture had never spoke it, yet by the Law of Nature it had been a duty to do
all things in Order and to Edifying. What is Orderly, the Nature of the subject
meditated on, with the end, will declare.

Preaching is the expressing of those thoughts to others, which by meditation
we exercise for our selves. Therefore if it may be known what is Orderly
Preaching, by the agreeableness of the expressions to the matter in order to
the true End, then so it may be in Meditation, which is a Preaching to our
selves. Therefore that Explication and Confirmation should go before
Application, that Examination should be furthered by Signs, that Reproof
should be furthered by Aggravations of sin, that Exhortation should be
furthered by Motives, that Practice should be helped by Directions, the nature
of the thing does prove: And you may as well call for a Text of Scripture for
most points in Metaphysics, or Physics, or Logic, as for these.

Meditation should be done in Order to Edification: But Order to Edification
(in them that have Ability, and Opportunity) requires that Understanding go
first, application after, and that the application intended be furthered with
convenient helps, as aforesaid. Therefore Meditation should be done in this
order, etc.

The Major is found in Nature and Scripture: The Minor is a naturally-known
truth, exemplified throughout the Scripture, which is written in that Method
(and in all Theological writings) And yet must you have a Text for the
Conclusion?

As for Family Prayer I have by me a long Disputation which I think fully
proves it to be a duty; and to most Christian families twice a day. But if the
Law of nature must make up neither Major nor Minor, but you must have the
Conclusion in express Texts of Scripture, its like if you saw it, you would not
be satisfied with it: But it satisfyeth me, as very full proof. But so that
there also I believe not that there are no exceptions: Or that no family may
have business so urgent as to exempt them from this as a duty; or that all
families are bound t^ the same hours, or the same proportion of time.

I will not tell you that it is ridiculous to ask what Text of Scripture makes
it a man's duty, to give meat to his family twice a day: (with the other
instances which I laid down.) But if those ridicula capita that then thus
pleaded against family Prayer did ask me the same question again, I would tell
them so. And I would think this argument might prove a Divine obligation.

[ God requires us to give food to our Families (if we are able and have
opportunity) as often as is for the benefit or necessity of their natures. But it
is for the benefit and necessity of their natures to have food twice a day,
(ordinarily, and as to most persons:) Therefore God requires us to give food,
to most families, and ordinarily, twice a day. Or suppose I put in but once at
least, if you think I cannot prove the twice.

I am not now determining whether famil^ prayer must be as often, but whether
this arguing be faulty for want of a Conclusion in the words of a Text of
Scripture. I think that Scripture is so admirably suited to the Nature of
things, that the far greatest part of its precepts are found also in the true
Law of nature; And that even most of the Gospel precepts may be called,
(supposing the History and Doctrine) Lex naturae lapsae reparandae, a Law
suited to Natures reparation.

4. But I am utterly ignorant of your meaning, when you say, that they that can
Meditate thus ten hours, etc. are the happier men, and have great cause to
bless God for such a mercy. Either you take it to be a Duty to such men (to any
men) or no duty: If you take it to be their (or any men's) duty, then 1. You
would not call for a Text of Scripture to prove it a duty. 2. Nor you would not
pretend to differ from me; For I know your Candor abhors calumny; And
therefore (notwithstanding your forementioned unhandsome intimations) I suppose
it is none of your purpose to persuade your Reader that I make it a duty for
all men, and you only for some? For as your Piety and your friendship satisfy
me that you have no such intent, so I know you would discern it to be against
the interest of your own reputation, which would suffer when the contrary is
seen in my writings. Therefore I cannot understand whether you take it to be
any man's duty.

And if not, then you seem to hold the Popish doctrine of Evangelical Councils
of perfection, and of works of supererrogation or perfection which are no
duties. Which yet I will not believe you hold, till I needs must: And therefore
having no third exposition of your words, I must leave them all as
unintelligible to me.

If you should say that my Limitations are not in the same Book (the Saints
Rest) where the Duty is described, I should answer, 1. That is not so; They are
in the same. 2. He that confuteth a man twenty years after his Writings are
published, is obliged to take notice of what he has written since: Else if a
man reform or correct his own Writings it will signify nothing; but others are
obliged to do it still, as supposing it undone. 3. And this Book of yours is
not in the same Volume as my supposed Error is: Therefore if my own will not
serve turn, because they are not the same Book, neither will yours.

Or may I doubt lest you did for want of leisure, confound the several parts of
my Writing? And take that which I wrote of the common necessity of a Heavenly
mind, or of Meditation of Heaven, to be written also to prove or urge the same
necessity of the Length or Method? No; I must not be so injurious to you; For
though you are not obliged to read my writings till you understand them; yet I
know you cannot forget that you are obliged to understand them, if they are
intelligible, before you deliberately oppose them. Therefore I have no way left
but to conclude, that you are not intelligible to me.

5. What I have said all this while of the Method, I say also of the Time of
Meditation, which is part of your exception.

It is a duty to spend so much Time in Meditation as is best to Edification to
attain its End. But to them that have Ability and opportunity, at least a
quarter or half an hour, if not more, is best to Edification to attain the End.
Therefore to such it is a duty to spend so much time herein.

I will give you no Text of Scripture for the Conclusion, nor for the Minor.
The nature of the thing, and common experience proves it.

Christ's Sermons recited in Scripture seem to be very short: You may call for a
Text now to prove it a duty that a Sermon or Prayer should be an hour or a
quarter of an hour long. It is enough that I prove it from the Aptitude of the
Means to its end. Experience tells us, that very few words and short time
serve not to inform men's understandings. And after that, the Will and
Affections must have time to be duly excited, and resolved; And more time is
necessary yet to drive the nail to the head, and to settle the soul against the
force of all objections that may be produced to the contrary; And yet more time
to settle it in the right way of Practice. In a word, If short and seldom
Preaching to others, be all that is any Preachers duty, murmur not that you are
silenced, but write to Ministers to spare the Bishops the labor and odium, and
to silence themselves, as to their long unnecessary Sermons.

If you say that Preaching is more of Divine Institution than Meditation, I
deny it. There is here no magis or minus: If God have instituted both, it
cannot be said that he has instituted one more than the other; Though it may
be said that one (which ever it is) be of greater necessity than the other. And
though I confess that he that Preaches to himself, may omit and abbreviate
much, which must be distinctly expressed to others, yet that does but show that
Preaching must ordinarily be longer than such set meditations; but not that
these also must not have that Time, which Method and the Ends require, when it
may be so done.

Do you not think it as presumptuous to define the Time of a man's Conference
about Scripture, with his Children and Servants daily, as to define the time of
his Meditation? I suppose you will judge the case much like. Suppose then that
I should say to a Master of a Family, [ Besides your little occasional
reflections, you that have Ability and Opportunity may do well (yea must take
it for your duty) often times (even once a day, if no greater duty hinder you) to
set some time apart to speak Methodically and seriously to your Families, first
by way of explication and then of Application to convince them, and resolve
them, and to drive all home to Practice, etc.] Would you call for a Text to
prove this a duty? I would give you then, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9. and Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19,
20. for the Major; Ye shall teach them your Children, speaking of them when
thou sit in thy house, etc. With Genesis 18.19. and 1 Cor. 14. 26, 40. And the
Minor I would prove by the Light of Nature and experience. The case is the same
in the main, as to the exhorting of our selves.

Truly, Brother, if your soul be not much more Heavenly than mine, it needs a
considerable time of holy exercise, to habituate it to converse above; and to
bring it to the benefits of Meditation which we must desire. As I cannot get
met heat with walking, no nor running neither, by the violence of the motion
alone, unless I continue some considerable time; no more can I in Prayer and
Meditation; though my lazy humor too often inclines me, to sit down and content
my self with a short Cogitation or wish; (Like the Prayers of those that wash
them and button their Doublets and interpose other talk, and yet pray on.) And
the warmth which I have once got, is quickly abated, if I give over the duty,
and be short and seldom in it. Short and seldom thoughts of Heaven, will not
serve with so bad a heart as mine, to keep up the Habit, much less to exercise
a Heavenly mind, in that degree as all true Christians must confess desirable.
And I suppose God has therefore appointed us such variety of Ordinances and
helps, and such long and frequent use of them in their several turns and
times, which profane men count but unnecessary preciseness, that so our hearts
may be habituated to a holy and Heavenly frame, by the frequent and much use of
holy and Heavenly exercises. For surely we add nothing unto God, nor do we
change him, by our words or hours of Religious exercise; But we wait for his
grace in the use of those means, which tend to prepare us both for Grace and
Glory. And by the same reasonings as you will shift off, or shuffle this
Meditation into some cursory thoughts on the by, the world would do so by
Prayer, Preaching, Holy Conferences, Sacraments, and all Religion.

But that several men must allow several proportions of Time for this duty, and
that all cannot allow it the same Time, again I say, I will not suspect you to
suppose and affirm me to deny.

6. Another thing that you often mention is, that I say, Other thoughts should
not be intermixed. And without giving you a Text for the Conclusion, the same
kind of arguing will prove this, as proved the rest: Adding Eccles. 9.10. and
such like. If a man have Ability and Opportunity, will not attending wholly to
the work in hand, best Edify him and further the success? If not, intermix
other thoughts also with your greatest studies, your Prayers, your Preaching,
and do all diviso vel prae-occupato animo. Let the People when you are
preaching to them, talk in the Church to one another. Reprove them not for
thinking of other things. Or give them a Text of Scripture for the Conclusion,
saying you may not think or talk of other matters at Sermon time.

If you say, that Meditation is not to be a set duty as Preaching is, and
therefore may lawfully be interrupted; I answer, If it be a duty commanded of
the same God, it must in its place be regulated by the same General Laws, Let
all be done to Edifying and in order. For my part, intermixing thoughts do
hinder the success with me; But what they may do with stronger heads and better
hearts I know not.

You say, p. 320. [ But when I come to impose duties, as Meditation, etc. upon
Christians to be performed by them in such a manner, and for such a time, and
their soundness or unsoundness, seriousness or sleightness is determined
according to their performance according to that manner which I set down,
surely I had need bring clear Scripture proof. --

Answ. But if there be no word in my Writings that say any such things as
determining of soundness or unsoundness by that manner of performance, what do
you think the Reader that tries it, will think and say of you, and of such
passages as these? I will not tell you lest I offend you. But only I tell you,
This is not well done: And you had need to have proved what you intimate by
some clear words of mine, if you would be believed.

But p. 319. you argue a fine and effectu, and say that Meditation is then
rightly performed when the affections are wrought up unto a suitableness with
the Object I am Meditating on -- Now let this Meditation be performed how it
will, let it be in what length or shortness of time, what is that to the
essence of the ^u^y.

Answ. 1. But, do you regard nothing in duty but the Essence? Nothing at all
the Integrity? Nothing the Degree? Why these also are Duty. He that binds us
to Sacrifice forbids us to offer the halt and the blind and requires the
best we have.

2. How happy a heart have you, that will so easily be got up to a suitableness
to God and Heaven! Is it not you now that forget the case of weak Christians?
Verily such hearts as mine will need more ado. It is not [ performing
Meditation how it will, in shortness] that will serve the turn, to bring my
heart to such a suitableness. And I doubt all the weak ones whose case you seem
to plead, are not much better.

3. This savoureth much like the saying of a late Learned Physicion of ours,
that said, What need all this ado in Preaching and talking of Religion, when
all is dispatched in three words, Think well, and Speak well, and Do well. O
but a great many words are necessary to bring us up to these three things: And
so are a great many thoughts to bring our hearts to a suitableness to God, to
Christ, to Heaven. Tell me if you can, why the same arguing is not as strong
against long Conference, or long Preaching? All that Sermons and Conference are
to do is, to bring up our hearts to a suitableness to the Object: And if this
will be done by one sentence, what needs there a quarter of an hours Preaching
or Catechizing or Discourse: (And so away with this Preaching office;) But it
is a false supposition that one sentence will do this, so well as more.

4. And when I think my heart is somewhat well affected, there is much yet to
be done, to fix, and settle, and habituate, and direct it, which may be lost by
hasty breaking off, and slubbering over so great a business.

One work of Meditation is self-examination. I may say as you, If I can but
know my spiritual state, Let examination be performed how it will for length or
shortness, what is that to the essence of the duty? But it is not such
performance that will acquaint me with my Condition. If I have not Time to
consider of Evidences, and then of my heart and life, etc. yea and this with
serious uninterrupted thoughts, it will not do. I could put off Religious
exercises as cursorily as another, if cursory brevity would attain the end, and
serve turn with such a heart as mine.

But by all this, I conjecture, that you will be a gentle censurer of Ministers
that Preach short and seldom, and of Parents that are short and seldom in
family instructions, and of all Christians that are so in their Religious
Conferences, unless your Censures bear no due proportion among themselves.

7. But yet you have somewhat to say of the Object of Meditation, The Joys of
Heaven, p. 315. and say [ It must be supposed as they must have a title to
Heaven, so they must know and be assured of that Title to Heaven; there must be
no dark cloud, etc.]

Answ. Now I perceive we differ indeed* Do you think that neither unconverted
nor unassured doubting persons, are called to Meditate much of Heaven? I think
that none have greater need, and that nothing will be more powerful to do their
work.

1. That Meditation is most profitable to the unconverted which tends most to
bring their hearts to the Love of God. But the Meditation of the Infinite
Goodness of God revealed in the Heavenly Glory, and offered to all, tends
most to bring their hearts to the Love of God, -- Ergo --

That which represents God most amiable tends most to bring the soul to
Love him. But the explication of the Heavenly Glory where he is enjoyed in the
fullest Love, represents God most amiable -- Ergo --

2. That Meditation is most profitable to the unconverted, which tends most
to destroy all carnal concupiscence and worldly Love, by drawing their hearts
to better things. But such is the Meditation of Everlasting Glory -- Ergo --

3. That Meditation is most profitable to a sinners Conversion, which draws
him most effectually to consent to the Covenant of Grace (For that consent is
Conversion.) But such is the Meditation of the Heavenly felicity -- Ergo --

4. That Meditation is most profitable which tends most to make men Repent of
sin, and be fully willing of a holy life. But such is the Meditation of Heaven
(when they see what sin depriveth men of, and what they are like to get by
Holiness) --

5. That Meditation is most profitable to conversion, which fullyest shows
men the excellency of Christ and of all his Grace. But such is the Meditation
of Heaven, (as being the highest benefit of Christ and Grace) -- Ergo --

6. That Meditation is most profitable to the wicked, which tends most to
save them from Temptations: But such is the Meditation of Heaven, (as setting
that in the balance which alone can weigh down all that can be offered by the
tempter) --.

7. That is the most profitable Meditation which is exercised on God in his
fullest Revelation -- But, etc.

8. That is the most profitable and powerful Meditation which is about the
ultimate End; Because that it is the End that is Loved for it self, and all
means but for the End: And the End guides us in the choice, the estimation and
the use of means, and is the very life of them all -- But, etc -- Ergo.

John Preached the Kingdom of Heaven, more expressly than the Person of the
Messiah: And Christ sent his Disciples to Preach the Kingdom of God, when he
forbad them to tell men that he was the Christ, (because the Miracles,
Resurrection, and other Proofs of it, must first be made, and then be Preached
to win belief) Luke 9.2, 21. And by the Kingdom of God he meant that of Grace,
as related to Glory, verse. 27, 28.

It is the want of thinking more seriously what Heaven is, and the certainty of
it to all believers, that causes men to follow the flesh and world, and to
lose it by contempt or gross neglect. Ungodliness consists much in a neglect
of Heaven, for want of convincing, quickening Meditations of it. And when you
bring a sinner to be but soberly thoughtful of Heaven, you have done much
toward his true Conversion. So that in this, you and I do vastly differ, if
you think as you write.

I will crave your pardon for my over-passing all the rest of your opposition
(supposing that I have spoken to the main,) and shall shut up all with these
three professions and admonitions to the Reader.

I. Since I find that this judicious worthy man has made these exceptions, I
have considered again whether there be not cause; And I find what long ago I
found, that I was too blame that I observed no more, the weakness and danger of
melancholy persons, when I first wrote it; and that I was not more large in
dissuading them from taking that to be their work which they cannot do. For I
believe I have spoken with far more than ever this Reverend Brother has done
(though he be a Physicion) who have been disabled by Melancholy and other
weakness of brain from this work: which made me so often since give them such
warning. And I do here again desire, most Women and all Melancholy persons, to
take up more with shorter and occasional Meditations, and with such holy
thoughts as good Books and Conference do more easily bring into their minds;
and not to over-stretch their brains, by striving to do more than they are
able, and so disable themselves yet more.

II. The review of these things does convince me, that Learned men, and all men
of Opportunity and Ability to bear Meditation, should use this duty much more
than they do; And that much of our ignorance, unbelief, ungodliness and
uncomfortableness is for want of making a set and serious business of it. And I
think that few men that Labor in their Shops, or ever walk or travel abroad,
can truly say, that they are wholly destitute of leisure. And I think that
poverty and crosses in the world, should make the thoughts of Heaven the more
welcome to them; And that it should be so far from being taken for an
ungrateful burden, that it should be the sweetest pleasure in this World; and
far more delightful, than to think of Lands or dearest Friends. And I admonish
all that have Ability and Opportunity to take heed lest short and seldom and
slight thoughts of Heaven, do harden them in that unacquaintedness above, which
will be the unho^iness of their lives, and their terror at death.

III. Though I said it not before, I will now say, that even Methodical
Heavenly Meditation is a Duty to all that have the free use of Reason; But not
a Duty which they are presently fit, and able to perform; And therefore it is
(as the Sacrament to the unprepared) a mediate duty: They sin in not doing it,
because they sin in being unprepared for it. But yet it is not Immediately to
be done, till shorter and easier Meditations have first prepared them. But Gods
Law cease not to be perfect because we are imperfect, nor to oblige us to
duty, because we are mo^ally undisposed. I will not say, The highest ^orme in
the School must not Learn Greek, because the lowest are unfit for it; nor that
^he lowest are not Mediately to be brought up to it. It is every weak
Christians sin, that he Prays not Methodically, because his disability is
sinful; though it be a sin that God forgiveth to all that are sincere. But as I
will not be one that shall rob the sincere of the comfort of that forgiveness,
so neither will ^ be one that shall persuade them to impeni^ence by saying, It
is no sin, nor accuse Gods Law of imperfection.

Understand and Practice these two Texts, and I desire no more of you as to
this meditation; Matthew. 6.21. Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be
also. Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven. The Lord forgive my neglect of
this duty, and yet help me to perform it, with more Heavenly Life, and Light,
and Love, till I shall be above the Life of Faith.

IV. Not meddling now with the reason^ of other men, against either Method or
length of Prayer, Preaching, or heavenly Meditation, my own sad experience
commandet^ me to give this caution to all Christians, wit^ a special
earnestness; Take heed of a slothful omission or cursory performance o^ such
holy duties; lest when you have los^ the Life and Sweetness of them, you los^
next the sense and belief of their excellenc^ and necessity. When you cannot
perswad^ your self to them, you will be much more unapt to persuade others to
them. And when you have suffered your hearts to grow i^ different to them, you
will too easily b^ drawn to take them for things that are (...) indifferent.
Practice helps us to an experience and taste of the goodness of Duty which
will do more to draw us to it, th^^ bare reasoning alone will do. And wh^^
Practice is neglected, Love, willingness an^ pleasure first abateth; and next
the Understanding it self is in danger of judging it no better or more
necessary than we feel it.

For my own part, when my Conscience commands me to omit Meditation, because
of some greater and more urgent duty, forbidding it at that time, I usually
find that it is my affliction to fall under any such diversions, that both may
not be done. And I find that whatever else I think of, of Christ, of Scripture,
of Promises, of Threatenings, of sin, of Grace, etc. if I leave out Heaven and
make it not the chief part of my Meditation, I leave out the sense and Life of
all. Thence must I fetch my Light, or I must be in Darkness; Thence must I
fetch my Life, or I must be Dead, and my Motives or I must be Dull, or not
sincere; and my daily Comforts, or I must be uncomfortable or worse. My
Hearing, and Reading, and Studies grow to Common things, if Heaven be not the
principal part: My life grows toward a common and a carnal Life, when I
begin to leave out Heaven: Death grows terrible to my thoughts, and Eternity
strange and dreadful to me, if I live not in such frequent and serious thoughts
of the Heavenly Glory, as may render it familiar and grateful to my soul. Yea I
cannot think with any due Knowledge, Love or Pleasure, of the ever-blessed God
himself, if I think of him only as he is revealed to us in this World, and not
as we shall see him in the World of Light. I find my self but a common man, if
Heavenliness make me not to differ: And I find my self unfit to Live or to Die,
and that my soul is void of the true Consolation, that is needful both in Life
and at Death, when I grow a stranger to Heavenly Thoughts, and consequently to
Heavenly Affections: And that as nothing will serve turn instead of Heaven to
be my Happiness; so nothing will serve turn instead of Heaven to make up the
end of my Religion, and form my Heart and Life to Holiness. And therefore by
experience I counsel all Christians that are able to perform it, especially
Ministers, and Learned men, to be much in the serious fore-thoughts of Heaven,
and to Comfort themselves and others with these words, that We shall for ever
be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17, 18.

And I adjure the Reader, not to conceive of the worthy person to whom I write
this, as any Adversary to a Heavenly Life: For he is a Sober, Godly, faithful
Minister (though silenced) who has been in New England; and brought back with
him a great deal of Judgment and Moderation, in Church Matters, as having seen
the experience of the evil of extremes (as his former Writings witness.) And as
he opposes not Mr. Rogers, Hooker, Shephard, out of any ill will to their
Persons, but lest those whom he best loved should wrong the Church, so I have
reason to believe that he does with the same Candor, deal with me. And if we
do differ at all (which I am not sure of) it is so little as is not like to
cause the least disaffection. I would all our differences made no wider a
distance than is betwixt this faithful Brother and Me. --

October. 1. 1670.
FINIS.

