Mr. Baxter's JUDGMENT AND REASONS Against Communicating with the
Parish-Assemblies, As by LAW Required. Impartially Stated and Proposed.

Great Men are not always Wise, etc. Job 32. 9. Surely in vain the Net is
spread in the sight of any Bird Prove. 1. 17. Happy is he that condemns not
himself in that thing which he allows, Romans 14. 22. Printed in the Year 1684.

TO THE READER*
THou art desired to consider, That the Reason why the Author of these Papers
has given thee the Judgment of Mr. Baxter against communicating with the
Parish-Assemblies, as by Law required, is to undeceive those who think, that he
has been of late writing for it; whereas that which he has written does hold
good only on Supposition, the Parish Assemblies are Congregational Churches,
independent on the Diocesane Bishop, who is for our holding Communion with them
only as such.

It has very much grieved the Author to see how many have been led from their
Principles by some men, who though otherwise Dissenters, have since the late
vigorous Execution of the paenal Laws, not only gone themselves to Church, but
done their best to engage Others to do so too; and to that end have observed
the Rule of the Politician, To press the Examples and Practices of some Eminent
Men, as a good means to draw on the rest. Thus have they published the Names of
Nigh, Robinson, Owen, and Goodwin to countenance their Commnnicating with the
Parish Assemblies in the Liturgy-Worship, which is manifest Abusing those
Persons, while they are made to plead for a Practice they Disavow.

The Design of the Publisher of Mr. Nigh, Robinson, etc. ( as he himself
professes) Is as well to satisfy those that scruple Communion with the Church
[ To wit, with the Parish Assemblies in their Liturgy-Worship] as to vindicate
those who have complied; whereas there is not one of these men that spoke a
word in favor of Parish Communion.

Mr. Nye's and Mr. Robinson's Rapers are ONLY for the Lawfulness of Hearing the
Conformist Ministers preach, not for Communicating with the Parish in their
Liturgy-Worship. Besides, it must be noted, That what they wrote was confined
to private Manuscript, until some Years after their Death, and never, it may
be, designed for public view. And the Author of A speedy Remedy against
Spiritual Incontinency, page 4. does assure us, That at Leyden, Mr. Robinson
being confuted in the presence of above Three Hundred People, did revoke his
Opinion about Hearing, and acknowledged that Hearing was a sinful partaking
with that Ministry. That this was Nine Years before Mr. Robinson's Death, and
that Mr. Robinson's Papers were not published in some years after his Death,
and had not been published then neither, had they not through Inadvertency
escaped the Flames, and fell into the hands of an Inverterate Enem^ who printed
them. Soon after they were printed, Mr Cann wrote an Answer; notwithstanding
which, these Papers are now Re-published, and Mr. Robinson's Authority urged to
justify the LAWFULNESS Communicating with the Parish Assemblies in the
Liturgy-Worship.

In like manner, Dr. Owen, who did grant that Forms of Pra^ers, in Thesi, may
be lawful, is introduced as an Approver of the Lawfulness of the imposed
Liturgy and Ceremonies in particular; than which there cannot be a greater
Abuse.

Dr. Goodwin likewise, after the Diocesane Episcopacy was laid aside, did say,
That in some of the Parishes in this Kingdom there are many Godly Men, that do
constantly give up themselves to the Worship of God in public, and meet
together in one place, to that end in a constant Way, under a Godly Ministry,
whom they themselves have chosen to cleave unto (though they did not choose him
at first) These ( says the Doctor) notwithstanding their Mixture, and want of
Discipline, I never thought for my part, but that they were true Churches of
Christ, and Sister Churches, and so ought to be acknowledged; And as for
holding Communion with them, I say, as Sister-Churches, occasionally, as
Strangers, men might hold Communion with them. So far Dr. Goodwin.

Note here, 1 st. That he describes a Church, which for its kind is
Congregational, though in it there is a Mixture and want of Discipline. His
Discourse is of a complete Congregational Church, not of an incomplete part of
the Diocesane. 2 dly. He writes for our acknowledging 'em to be Sister
Churches, and communicating with them occasionally as Strangers; but speaks not
of our communicating with such Parish-Assemblies as are of the Diocesane Frame,
nor of fixing our Communion there, as the Law now requires. 3 dly, He insists
only on the Faultiness of Mixture, and want of Discipline, not on the
Liturgy-Worship, which sufficiently evinceth that he meant it of the
Presbyterian Congregations, which had no Liturgy; not of the Episcopals which
have. For whoever consults what he has in his Exposition on the Revelations,
will find enough that shows how much he was against the Liturgy-Worship. But
yet this Doctor's Judgment must be produced for the justifying our
communicating with the Parish-Assemblies, that are but incomplete parts of a
Diocesane single Church in their Liturgy-Worship, as by Law required.

Much after the same manner does the Reverend Mr. Baxter deal with us, when he
refers us to the Judgment of the Old Nonconformists, who though they were for
Communion with the Parish Assemblies then in being, yet esteemed the Diocesane
kind of Churches, Ministry and Ceremonies to be Violations of the second
Commandment, Idolatrous and Antichristian. And as to the controverted
Ceremonies (for instance, Kneeling at the Sacrament) Mr. Baxter knows best how
much he differs from several of them, to whom he refers us; for they assert
these Ceremonies to be Antichristian and Idolatrous. But Mr. Baxter,
notwithstanding the high Applauses he gives 'em, has openly relinquished their
Doctrine, and fallen in with Morton and Burgess, having also espoused that
very Distinction of Primary and Secondary Worship, which they received from
Bellarmine and Suarez; the insufficiency whereof has been long a go detected by
Doctor Ames in his Reply and Fresh Suite.

Moreover, it must be observed, that Mr. Baxter has not given us so full and
distinct a state of the present Controversy, between him and those he calls
Separatists, as was necessary; for, his Discourses for Communion with the
Parish-Assemblies, without fuller Explanation, will (as now they are) be
generally taken as if he meant it of the Parish Assemblies by Law established,
which are in a kind destructive of Christ's Churches, Ministry and Discipline,
as Mr. Baxter himself avers; whereby the weaker sort mistaking Mr. Baxter, are
induced to conclude the established Constitution to be good. But what is this
less than the casting a stumbling Block in the way of his weak Brethren?

These things then being so, it is become necessary that somewhat be done to
undeceive the World; and seeing Mr. Baxter is the Person on whose Authority
most of those Dissenters who are now for Parish Communion, do lean, I have
thought it expedient to lay before them an impartial state of Mr. Baxter's
Judgment, as I find it in some of his late Writings, together with those
Reasons that he does furnish us with, (as Arrows which we may gather up to
shoot back upon him) against communicating with the Parish Assemblies, as by
Law required. The giving a just Account of Mr. Baxter's Judgment against
Parish-Communion is, I acknowledge, but Argumentum ad hominem, adapted chiefly
for the silencing Mr. Baxter; but the Reasons that are couched in what is given
out of Mr. Baxter, are more than so, and such as must receive another Answer
than merely the saying* That Mr. Baxter is grown wiser, and has changed his
Judgment; for until Mr. Baxter or some other do validly answer what Mr. Baxter
has said in his Five Disputations against Episcopacy and Ceremonies, and in his
late Treatise against Episcopacy, what I have here urged will abide in its
strength, and carry also with it the Authority and Weight of the Unanswerable
Mr. Richard-Baxter.

Mr. Baxter's Judgment and Reasons against Communicating with the Parish
Assemblies, as by Law required, impartially stated and proposed.
THere has been of late no little stir about going to the Parish Assemblies,
and communicating with them in their Liturgy-Worship, and in special Mr. Baxter
has been warmely engaged in the Defense, (as he himself will have it) of his
own, and the Practice of those that are for Parish-Communion, and cannot suffer
a little Manuscript, said to be Dr. Owens, to escape his Annimadversions and
Opposition. It is at this time no part of my Province to examine Mr. Baxter's
Answer to Dr. Owen's Arguments; I call the Manuscript Dr. Owens, not only
because common Fame directs me to do so, but because in the Arguments there is
the Doctor's wonted Accuracy and Strength. There are very many
Scripture-Reasons couched in a few Lines, and such as are too strong to receive
any harm from Mr. Baxter's Answer, as I could by divine Assistance clearly
evince: but at this time it shall be no part of my Work. In this, my aim is to
show, What it is Mr. Baxter is really for, that he is as much against holding
Communion with the Parish-Assemblies, as by Law required, as those are, against
whom he writes, and that we are furnished with unanswerable Arguments against
such Parish-Communion, by Mr. Baxter.

Thus much will be made very manifest to a common Capacity, by showing what are
Mr. Baxter's avowed Principles about the Institution, Ministry and Discipline
of Christ's Churches, and what are the natural consequences of those Principles
he holds, and wherein lies the point, in which he differs from his Brethren. In
doing which I will give you Mr. Baxter's sense, for the most part in his own
words, directing you to the very pages of those Books of his I make use of.

. 1. All Christians (says Mr. Baxter) are agreed, that Christ is the Author of
the Universal Church (considered both as Baptized or Externally Covenanting,
called Visible, and as Regenerate and sincerely Covenanting, called, Mystical)
as it is headed by Christ himself, and called his Body and special Kingdom.

. 2. We doubt not but Christ has instituted the Office of the sacred Ministry,
to be under him as a Teacher, Ruler and High Priest of the Church, in Teaching,
Guiding and Worshipping, and that he has instituted holy Assemblies and
Societies, for these things to be exercised in. And that [a Society of
Neighbor Christians, associated with such a Pastor or Pastors, for Personal
Communion, even in such Doctrine, Discipline and Worship] is a Church-form of
divine Institution.

. 3. We know not of any proof that ever was produced that many Churches of the
first Rank, must (of duty) make one fixed greater Compound Church by
Association, whether Classical, Diocesane, Provincial, Patriarchal or National,
and that God has instituted any such form, vide Mr. Baxter's Nonconformists
plea for peace, p. 8. 12.

. 4. Christ has stated on the Pastors of his Instituted Churches, the Power of
Teaching Assemblies, and particular persons of leading them in public Worship,
and Sacraments, and of Judging by the power of the Keys, whom to receive into
their Communion by Baptism, and profession of Faith, and whom to admonish, and
for Obstinate Impenitance reject; and this Institution none may Alter.

. 5. He has Instituted Ordinary Assemblies, and stated particular Churches, as
is aforesaid, for these Holy Exercises, and forbad all Christians to forsake
them, and he and his Apostles, have appointed and separated the Lords day
hereunto. None therefore may abrogate, or suspend those Laws; all this is
proved, Mat. 28. 19, 20. and 16. 19. and 18. 18, 19. Joh. 20. 23. Luke 12. 37,
38. Mat. 21. 36. and 22. 4, 5. etc. And 24. 45, 46. Heb. 11. 25, 26. Acts 11.
26. 1 Cor. 14. Ephesians. 4. 4. to 17. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 7. 24. Tit. 1.
5, 6. etc. 1 Timothy 3. Acts 14. 23. Acts. 20. 1 Cor. 16. 1. etc. Mr. Baxter Vbi
supra, p. 24.

. 6. The Diocesane kind of particular Churches, which has only One Bishop over
many score or hundred fixed parochial Assemblies, I take (says Mr. Baxter) to
be it self a Crime: Which in its very Constitution, overthrows the Office,
Church and Discipline, which Christ by himself, and his Spirit in his Apostles,
Instituted: For 1. Parishes are made by them no Churches, as having no ruling
Pastors, that have the power of judging whom to Baptize, or admit to Communion,
or Refuse, but only are Chapels, having preaching Curates. 2. All the first
Order of Bishops in single Churches are deposed. 3. The Office of Presbiters,
is changed into Semi-presbiters. 4. Discipline is made impossible; Mr. Baxter'
s Church History of Bishops and Council abridged, chapter 1.. 54. The like he
affirms in his five Disputa. of Church Government, page 19. As to the eight
sort of Bishops ( viz.) [The Diocesane, who assumeth the sole Government of
many Parish Churches, both Presbiters and People,] as ten, or twelve, or
twenty, or more, as they used to do, even a whole Diocese, I take them (says
Mr. Baxter) to be Intolerable and Destructive to the peace and happiness of
the Church, and therefore not to be admitted under Pretense of Order or Peace,
if we can hinder them.

. 7. This Diocesane Church Government, being de facto, established in this
Kingdom, the parish Assemblies are not complete particular Churches of the
first Rank and Order, they are but parts of a Diocesane, which is de facto,
established as a single Church, Infime speciei. That parish Assemblies are not
particular Churches, is manifested from Mr. Baxters principles. For 1. That
Cement which is necessary to the being of a Church, is wanting. And it is
impossible (says Mr. Baxter in his Cathol. Concord, p. 231.) to be a Church
without the Cement of Consent. If many be forced into a Temple, not Consenting,
it is a Prison, they are not a Church if they Consent only to Meet on other
Occasions, as for some Occasional Act of Religion, it is not thereby made a
Church. If they be commanded to consent, and do not, and if it only be their
Duty, it makes them not a Church, but only proves that they ought to be one:
So far Mr. Baxter. And it is manifest, that in pursuance of Canon and Statute
Law, the Parishes are de facto, settled as parts of a Diocesane Church; and
whoever join themselves unto the Parish assemblies, as by Law required, consent
to be of the Parish assembly, as It is a part of the Diocesane Church; this
does every Parish Minster, who swears Canonical Obedience, that is, Obedience
to his Ordinary secundum Canones, and who is to rest so fully satisfied in the
Diocesane Government, as to declare he will not endeavor, on any pretense
whatever the alteration of it. But to form the Parish assembly into a complete
particular Church, is to make a Substantial Alteration in the Diocesane
Constitution. Besides the Vesteries, who (as Mr. Baxter says) do after a sort
represent the Parish Assembly, are also sworn to the Diocesane Constitution and
Government, and therefore cannot be justly interpreted to consent to the Parish
Assemblies, being a complete particular Church; Whatever consent there is
between the Minister and People, it must be supposed to be no other than what
is agreeable to the Diocesane Rule, (i. e.) to be parts of the Diocesane
Church, taking none for their Pastor but the Diocesane Bishop.

2. This Parish-Assembly does not only want consent to make it a Church, but it
has no Parochial Pastor, though the Pastor and Flock are the essential
constitutive parts of a particular organized Church, yet its not to be found in
our Parishes. It may be a Community (says Mr. Baxter, ubi su^r.) without a
Pastor; not a Polity, not an Ecclesiastical Society. That the Parish Minister
is not a Pastor, is manifest; for he is deprived of what is essential to the
Pastoral Office. This is evident (according to the Principles of Mr. Baxter)
who distinguishing between the Old and New Episcopacy, and who though he had
more favorable thoughts of the Old than of the New, and knows that the present
is more like the new than the old, and consequently worse; yet writing against
the restoring the Old, he lays down his fourth Argument thus, -- 4. That
Episcopacy, which degradeth all the Presbyters in the Diocese, or causes them
to suspend an Essential part of their Office, is not to be restored under any
pretense of the right Order of Peace. But such was the late English Episcopacy;
And in his Advertisement to his Five Disp. p. 13, 14, etc. to satisfy those
that make some doubt of the truth of the Minor, he says, All men in England
that knew but twenty years ago what belonged to these matters, are past doubt
of it. And I have no mind to dispute against them that contradict the common
knowledge of the Nation, as if they should doubt whether ever we had a King in
England. 2. Read over the Canons, and the yearly Visitation Articles, which the
Churchwardens swear to present by, before they had ever read the Book, or
heard what was in it. And then judge, 3. Their Arguing for the sole
Jurisdiction of Bishops, and that they only were properly Pastors, and that
Presbyters had not the Key of Discipline, but of Doctrine, is some Evidence.

It is known to the Nation, that the Pastors of the Parish-Churches had no
power by their Laws, (or sufferance) to castout any the most erroneous Sinner
or Heretic from the Church, nor to bring them to open confession of their sin,
nor to absolve the Penitent, but by reading of their Sentences, and publishing
what they sent from their Courts, and consequently could do nothing of all the
means hereunto; for the means cannot be used where the end is known to be
impossible. All the obstinate scandalous Persons and scorners of a holy Life,
we must take as Members of our Churches, having no power to cast them out.
Indeed we had the same Power as the Churchwardens, to put our Names to the
Presentiments, but a power of Accusing to a Chancellors Court, is not a Power of
Governing, especially when Piety, under the Name of Preciseness and
Puritainism, was so hated and persecuted, that to have accused a man for mere
Profaneness, would have been so far from obtaining the end, as that it was
like to have been the undoing of the Accuser.

Obj. But is not the power of Discipline given them in their Ordination?

Answ. 1 st. In their Ordination, the Bishop said to them [ Receive the holy
Ghost, whose Sins thou do remit, they are remitted; whose Sins thou do
retain, they are retained] and in the Book of Ordination it was asked them, [
Whether they would give their faithful Diligence always to administer the
Doctrine and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as the Realm
has received the same, according to the Commandments of God?] And the Rubric
of the Common Prayer Book enables the Curate to admonish open and notorious
evil Livers, by whom the Congregation is offended; and those that have wronged
their Neighbors, that they come not till they have openly declared, That they
have repented and amended. But, 1. This does but serve to leave them
inexcuseable that acknowledge Discipline to belong to the Office of a
Presbyter, when yet he might not excuse it. The Bishops in the Ordination of
Presbyters enabled them to Preach the Gospel, and yet they were after that
forbidden to preach, till they had a License, and it was put into the
visitation Article, to present those Ministers, that preached without a
License. If they will deny us the exercise of the power, that they first
confess belongs to our Office, we are not answerable for, their
self-contradictions. 2. By Discipline, I suppose they mean but our Instruction,
and our publishing their Orders for Penance, Excommunication, or Absolutions.
3. They were the Judges of the sense, of the Laws as far as the Execution
required, and the universal practice of England; which their Writings showed
us, to our cost, their Judgment; what good would it do us, if the Law had been
on our side, while the Concurrent Judgment and Practice of the Governors
denied it, and went aganist it? 4. He that has kept a man from the Sacrament,
according to the plain Words of the Rubric, was to have been acountable for it
at their Courts, and so likely to have been undone by it: So far Mr. Baxter.
Which sufficiently shows that the Parish Minister is in his Judgment degraded
and deprived of what is essential to the Pastors Office; for by taking from
them the power of Church Government they destroy the very Office of the
Presbyters; for Ruling is as Essential to their Office as preaching;
notwithstanding which, as Mr. Baxter proves, and expressly asserts, the English
Episcopacy, takes from the Presbyters the Power of Church Governing; see his
five Disput. p. 39.

But if it had been only the Exercise of the Parish Presbyters Power that had
been suspended, yet considering the Suspension is statedly established by* Law
or Custom, during the Life of the Minister, its a destroying his Office; says
Mr. Baxter; Though an Office may be Unexercised for a time on some special
Reason, yet if it be statedly suspended, and that suspension established by Law
or Custom during the Life of the Minister; this is plainly a destroying or
nulling the Office it self, and not to be endured. And surely, the Exercise of
the Pastoral power is statedly suspended, and the suspension is by Law or
Custom established, during the Ministers Life, and therefore the Office is
nulled and destroyed; that is, the parish Minister is not a Pastor, nor has the
Parish Assembly any Pastor, it is not a particular Church.

All this Mr. Baxter says, of the Old English Prelacy, and yet thinks that
the present is much worse than the Old. In his second Defense of the
Nonconformists, p. 64. Dr. Still. saying, That t^ere is no other reason of our
Separation, because of the Terms of our Communion, than what was from the
beginning of the Reformation. Mr. Baxter Answers, To say, that we grant that
there are no more Reasons now, than were then, is too bold an untruth, there is
more reason (1.) From the Quality of the things imposed (2.) From the designs
and drifts of the Imposition. (3.) From the effects. (4.) From the Aggravation
of Conformity, as in the Church that we must communicate with. (5.) From the
things which give us a fuller cause for our Preaching and Assemblies, viz. The
late general contrary Church state and Engagement to it, etc. On these
particulars Mr. Baxter enlarges; I will but just intimate what he says on
some of them. (1.) As to things imposed now which were not then. 1o. The Vestry
Act was not then made, by which so considerable part of the Parish Churches as
the Vestries are, are to renounce all Obligations, to endeavor any alteration
of the Government of the Church, from the Oath and Vow, called the Covenant; so
that all Reformation of Church Government, as so sworn, was renounced by them,
who in a sort represent the Parish Church. 5. The Reordination of Ministers,
Ordained by Presbyters, was not then required, and made a Necessary condition
of their Ministration and Church relation, (even by them that confess
Reordination Unlawful.) And therefore Plainly intimates the Nullity, of the
first. -- 9o. The Word [ Pastor] as applied to Parish Ministers, distinct from
[ Curates] was not then blotted out of most places in the Liturgies, nor the
20th of the Acts, as applied to Presbyters left out [ Take heed to your selves,
and to the Flock etc.] in plain design to Alter the Office and Parish Churches.
To all this let us add.

. 8. That he that will hold Communion with a Church, must consent to the
Ministry, Discipline and Worship of that Church, see Cathol. Concord, ubi
supra. So that he that will Communicate with the Parish Assemblies must consent
to the Ministry, Discipline and Worship of their Assemblies; that is, he must
consent to the Diocesane Pastor, to the Parish Semi-presbyters, and to the
Parish Assemblies, as being a part of the Diocesane Church, and to the
Diocesane Discipline; for de facto, this is the Constitution and Frame of
Parish Assemblies, they are but parts of the Diocesane Church, they are under
no other Pastor but the Diocesane Bishop, have no other Minister than a
Semi-Presbyter, who wants what is essential to the Pastoral Office, and the
Assembly wants that Cement of consent that is necessary to the making them a
complete particular Church.

This being so, May we by any Act or Deed contribute to the fixing and
establishing the Diocesane Episcopacy amongst us? I Will Answer according to
sound Reason, in conjunction with Mr. Baxter's own Principles: If it were
unlawful to restore the old English Episcopacy, its unlawful to give
countenance and strength to it, once restored; for the strengthening it, is but
the continuation of the thing restored: and if we might not lawfully help
forward, nor consent unto the Restoration of it, we may not lawfully fix it,
when once restored; for all these Mischiefs that are said to be the Fruits of
its Restoration, will be continued by a fixing it.

But according to Mr. Baxter, it was not lawful to restore the Old English
Prelacy, much less Lawful to settle the New, which (he says) is worse. His
Reasons are many, e. g. It destroys the end of Government, and is certainly
inconsistent with the necessary Government and Discipline, to be exercised in
the Churches; It unavoidably causes Separations and Divisions in the Church;
it degradeth all the Presbyters in the Diocese, and destroys and nulls their
Office; it is the product of proud Ambition and Arrogance, contrary to the
express command of Christ: It so far gratifieth lazy Ministers, as to ease them
of the most painful part of their Work: It is contrary to the Word of God, and
Apostolical Institution, according to their own Interpretation. Moreover, it
gratifieth the Devil and Wicked Men, not by an unavoidable Accident, but by a
natural Necessity; therefore (says Mr. Baxter in his five Disput. page 32, to
50.) not to be restored under any pretense of the Order or Peace of the Church:
And for the same Reason (say I, according to Mr. Baxters principles) not to be
complied with, not to be countenanced, not to be fixed and strengthened by us,
though now restored. Though the Order and Peace of the Church be pretended, yet
we must do nothing that countenanceth or stregthens the English Episcopacy, we
must not hold communion with them; for that is to consent to the uninstituted
species of their Church, Ministry, Discipline and Worship. What then must we
do? May we separate without contracting the guilt of Schism? Take Mr. Baxter's
own Answer.

. 9. If any Prince would turn his Kingdom, or a whole Province, Diocese or
Country, into one only Church, and thereby overthrow all the first Order of
Churches, of Christ's Institution, which are associated for personal present
Communion, allowing them no Pastors, that have the power of the Keys, and all
essential to their Office, though he should allow parochial Oratories or
Chapels, which should be no true Churches, but parts of a Church, it were no
Schism to gather Churches, within such a Church, against the Laws of such a
Prince; see Nonconformists first plea for peace. p. 52.

Thus according to Mr. Baxters principles, a separation from the Parish
Assemblies, and an erecting particular Churches, according to Gospel Order, is
not Schism. Our separation from the Diocesane Constitution, and from the Parish
Churches, as but parts of the Diocesane, is justifyable, and not to be
Condemned. Now the Lay-Nonconformists are fully persuaded, that the Law of the
Land requires our coming to Church, our going to the parish Assemblies, as they
are parts of the Diocesane Church, which Mr. Bax. says they must not do.

This being so manifest, I presume the Reader will be querying about Mr.
Baxters Practice, and late Writings, and say, Why then does Mr. Baxter go to
Church? Why does he write so much for it, and cannot suffer a few Lines in
Manuscript to pass without a public Confutation? What! does Mr. Baxter say and
unsay, or is his Conscience against communicating with the parish Churches, and
his Practice for it? God forbid I should think so of one, whose Goodness and
Learning both seem above the size of what is Ordinary: Really therefore that I
might find out the Notion on which Mr. Baxter insists to satisfy himself, in
holding communion with the parish Assemblies, even when he is so very much
against them, as they are but parts of the Diocesane Church, I have taken some
pains, and have been impartial in my Search, and I think I have found out the
Notion he builds on, which I take to be this.

Mr. Baxter distinguishes between the many Parish Churches, and the Diocesane,
and the Church of England, as constituted of such Diocesane Churches. The old
Nonconformists commonly owned the Parish Churches, (and the Church of England,
as made up of such) but not the Diocesane. It is therefore a Mistake, that
owning the Parish Churches and Worship, is an owning of the present Diocesane
Constitution. Mr. B. against Dr. O. p. 9.

So that Mr. Baxter distinguishes between the Church of England, as it is made
up of many particular complete Churches that are Parochial, and as it is made
up of many particular Diocesane Churches. And here it must be Noted,

1. That though Mr. Baxter supposes the National Church of England to fall
under these two distinct considerations, yet de facto, its notorious that there
are not two such National Churches of England existent; and in truth, its
impossible that there should be two such Churches, simul and semel, existent in
one Nation; for a National Church made up of many complete Parochial Churches,
is in its very constitution destructive of a National Church made up of many
particular Diocesane Churches. Mr. Baxter himself confesses, that the
Diocesane Church made up of many Parochial Assemblies, and established as a
single Church, Infimae speciei, of the lowest Rank and Order, is destructive of
the very constitution of Parochial Churches, and the Diocesane Episcopacy and
Discipline destructive of the Parochial; and the same may be said, e contra, of
the Parochial, it is destructive of the Diocesane. So that its impossible there
should be in this Nation two distinct National Churches, the one made up of
many Parochial complete single Churches, the other made up of many Diocesane
single Churches. If then the National Church be in pursuance of the Laws, de
facto, settled as made up of many Diocesane single Churches (whether this be of
Divine or Humane Right, matters not) its impossible to join our selves to the
Parish-Assemblies, as to complete particular Churches. For whatever Mental
Notions we may have of the Church of England, our Notions cannot make the
Constitution to be de facto, otherwise than it is; and all know that the
National Church is de facto, a National Church made up of several single
Diocesane Churches, and that there is no National Church of England existent
made up of many complete Parochial Churches. But,

2. Suppose one Parish Assembly, or more, should form and frame themselves into
complete single Churches, and the People should consent to take the Parish
Minister for their Pastor, and the Minister should exercise the whole power of
a Pastor in this Parish Church. If this be so, it is acknowledged that Mr.
Baxter may hold communion with this Parish Church, and not own the present
Diocesane Constitution: But then it will also unavoidably follow, that this
Parish Church cuts it self off from the National settled Order, it is a
Dissenting Church; for it hereby ceases to be a part of the Diocesane
Constitution, it is no more under the Pastoral Oversight of the Diocesane
Bishop, but assumes to it self all that Pastoral Power that in pursuance of
Canon and Statute Law is fixed in the Bishop; so that this Parish Church is not
established or allowed by the Law, but is a Dissenting Congregation, of the
same Nature, Form and Constitution with that of other Dissenting Churches; for
the species of these Parochial Churches Constitution, Ministry and Discipline
is the same with theirs, and as perfectly inconsistent with that of the
Diocesane, and by the Church of England's Representative declared to be No True
Church, and the Minister and Vestry, who consent to this Alteration, do act
contrary to their several Declarations and Oaths, and are by the Canons
Excommunicate, and their Assemblies declared Conventicles.

In the 11 th Canon, whose Title is [ Maintainers of Conventicles censured] its
express, That whosoever shall hereafter affirm or maintain, that there are
within this Realm Other Meetings, Assemblies or Congregations of the King's
born Subjects, than such as by the Laws of the Land are held and allowed, which
may rightly challenge to themselves the Name of true and lawful Churches, let
him be Excommunicated, and not Restored, but by the Archbishop, after his
Repentance and public Revocation of such his Wicked Errors. And in Can. 12.
Whosoever shall affirm, That it is lawful for any sort of Ministers and
Lay-Persons, or either of them to join together and make Constitutions in
causes Ecclesiastical, without the King's Authority, and shall submit
themselves to be ruled and governed by them, Let them be Excommunicated, ipso
facto, and not be restored until they Repent, and publicly revoke those their
Wicked and Anabaptistical Errors. And in Canon 73. where the Title is [
Ministers not to hold private Conventicles] it is thus ordained; For as much as
all Conventicles and secret Meetings of Priests and Ministers, have been ever
justly accounted very hurtful to the state of the Church wherein they live, We
do now ordain and constitute, That no Priests or Ministers of the Word of God,
nor any other Persons shall meet together in any private House, or elsewhere,
to consult upon any matter or course to be taken by them, or upon their motion
or direction by any other, which may any way tend to the impeaching or
depraving of any part of the Government and Discipline now established in the
Church of England, under pain of Excommunication, ipso facto.

So that those Parish Assemblies that are erected in other manner than
according to the Diocesane Constitution, and made complete particular Churches,
they are as such no more a part of the settled National Order, than the present
dissenting Congregations, but are by the Canons declared to be Conventicles,
and the Ministers and People that have had a hand in the framing their Parishes
into this Order, are ipso facto, excommunicated. This then being so, I desire
it to be observed, that when Mr. B. joins with these Parish-Assemblies, Thus
constituted, his Communion is still confined unto the Dissenters Congregations,
he does not hereby hold any Communion with the Church of England, any more than
the Dissenters do; for his Communion with these Parish Churches, is with them
as they are erected, in Opposition unto and destruction of the National settled
Order, which is Diocesane.

To undeceive the World then, I must tell them (and Mr. Baxter cannot deny it,)
that Mr. Baxter is no more for the joining with the Parish Assemblies, as they
are parts of the settled National Church, than the congregational Dissenters
are, That when he goes to Church, he holds no other Communion with the Church
of England than they do who go not to Church; for his Communion is still
confind to a dissenting Parish Church, erected as much contrary to the Law of
the Land, as their Congregations are. Its true, he joins with them in some part
of the Liturgy, and so goes farther then they, but he holds not Communion with
the Church of England, as it is a Church of Legal Establishment, any farther
than they do. For he Esteems the Church of England, as by Law established, to
be destructive of that kind or Species of those Churches, Ministry and
Discipline, which is of Christ's Institution, and Parochial or Congregational.
Mr. Baxter and they (I say) are agreed in their dissent and separation from the
Parish Assemblies, as they are parts of the settled National Order, and differ
about the Frame of Parochial Assemblies; for Mr. Baxter supposes them to be
what ( consideratis considerandis) other Dissenters judge Impossible.

To make this as plain as possible I can, it must be observed, that Mr. Baxter
affirms the Parish Assemblies to fall under a Twofold Consideration; They must
be looked on, either as they are complete particular Congregational Churches,
independent on the Diocesane, or as they are incomplete parts of, and dependant
on the Diocesane. Now as the Parish Assemblies are parts of the Diocesane; they
are not by any means to be owned or approved, but as they are particular
Congregational Churches, so they are to be communicated with and owned.

This is Mr. Baxter's Judgment; but on the other hand, his Dissenting Brethren
hold, that though Parochial Assemblies may be actually formed and framed
according to the Congregational Constitution, that is, an Assembly of good
Christians living in a Parish, may give up themselves to God, and associate
themselves for personal Communion in the Doctrine, Discipline and Worship of
Christ, choosing a Pastor and other Officers; for this end the parish Assembly
may consent to be of such a Constitution, and may choose a Pastor, and in this
Assembly all the Ordinances of Christ may be regularly Administered, and
Discipline duly exercised. This may be, but though it may be so, yet they
affirm that the Parish Assemblies are not thus constituted, their Constitution
is not Congregational, but Diocesane. They are not a complete Church, but
incomplete parts of the Diocesane; there is no such consent as is necessary to
Constitute such a Church; but a consent to be what the Law directs 'em to be;
they have no Pastor amongst them, as a Congregational Church has, nor are they
independent on the Diocesane, as the Congregational is. They are not a
particular Church of Christ's Institution: Though they may be a sound part of
the Catholic Church, or of the Christian Kingdom, yet they are not an
Instituted Church, they are not a true particular Church, and therefore it is
impossible any should communicate with them, as with such a Church. Whatever we
may fancy them to be they always remain the same, our Imaginations cannot make
any change on their Constitution, our Mental Conceptions are but Iminanent
Acts, Et Nihil penunt in esse. Think any man what he will of the Church of
England, de facto, it remains the same, viz. A National Church made up of many
single Diocesane Churches, Infimae speciei, of the lowest Rank and Order; for
which reason its Impossible for any to join with the Church of England, as made
up of many single complete Parochial Churches; we cannot Communicate with it as
such, because it is not so made; there is not any one Parish thus Constituted.
Let Mr. Baxter direct them to that Parish, that is thus framed, that is, a
particular complete Church of Christ's Institution, and he would do somewhat,
but till then, although there be some such Parish Churches, it is to them as if
there were none such; for [ de non Apparentibus et non existentibus eadem est
ratio.] Besides they say, That if there be any such Parochial Congregational
Church actually existent in this Kingdom, and the Minister and People privately
declare so much, they think, that if without an open profession of their Church
constitution, as different from the National established Order, their
Commuunicating with them must be interpreted a Communicating with them as they
are a part of the settled National Order, which is Diocesane, which cannot be
done without an owning the present Diocesane Constitution. But if such a
profession be made, they communicate not with the Church of England, but with a
Congregation of Dissenters, from the National Constitution. Farthermore, some
are afraid, that the erecting such Parish Assemblies, cannot be without the
Ministers and Vestry Men's contracting the guilt of Perjury. In fine, I must
again beseech the Reader to fix it in his thoughts, That the Church of England,
as made up of many single Diocesane Churches, is not in Mr. Baxter's Judgment a
true Church; Though it be a sound part of the Church Universal; yet the
Diocesane Churches, which make up the National, and which in pursuance of the
Law are, de facto, settled and established, are not true Churches. Mr. Baxter
does hold that the Parish Assemblies, as parts of Diocesane Churches, are not
true Churches; for they have not Pastures, as has been largely proved, and its
no Schism to deny 'em, the Communion proper to a true particular Church. What
Mr. Baxter says of a Parish, that wants a Pastor, on the account of the
Peoples not consenting to one imposed on 'em, the same may be said of that
Parish, whose Minister wants what is essential to the Pastoral Office; and This
all Parish Ministers according to the settled National Order do want, and
therefore it may be said, That that Parish Church is no Parish Church, in the
proper political Organized sense, as we now speak of a Church, as constituted
by the Governing and Governed part. For that which wants an essential part
wants the Essence. And therefore it is no Schism to pronounce it no such
Church, [i e. no true Church of Christ's Institution] and to deny it the
Communion proper to such a Church. Mr. Baxters Nonconformist plea for peace, p.
82.

This then is Mr. Baxters Judgment, touching the Diocesane Churches, as by Law
established. He cannot consent unto them, nor hold Communion with them as such.
For the very kind and frame of their Churches is false, so is their Ministry,
and Discipline, even- destructive of Christ's Churches, Ministry and Discipline.

. 10. A Congregation or Nation of Men (says Mr. Baxter) of eminent Sanctity
and Order, sound Doctrine and Worship, may by humane frailty take some one
Falsehood or Uncertain thing to be necessary to Ministry or Communion, (as they
say, some Churches unhapily of late reject all that own not the Antiquity of
the Hebrew points) I cannot have local Communion with that Church, (says he)
for they will not receive me, unless I subscribe either a falsehood, or that
which I judge false) but yet I highly honor and Love 'em, and have mental
Catholic Communion with them, when perhaps necessity makes me join with a
Church of far worse Men and Order, that will impose no sin on me. Mr. Baxter's
Schism Detected, page 56.

In pursuance of this principle Mr. Baxter lays down, his Brethren separate
from the Church of England; for there are several things which they Judge
unsound, that are made necessary to their Communion with them. By Cannon 27. No
Minister, when he celebrateth the Communion shall wittingly Administer the same
to any but such as Kneel, under pain of Suspension, nor under the like pain to
any that refuse to be present at public Prayers, according to the Orders of
the Church of England; that it is according to the 18 th. Canon, The Communion
must not be administered to him, that will cover his Head in the Church or
Chapel, in time of Divine Service, or that does not Reverently Kneel, when the
general Confession, Lettany and other Prayers are read, and shall not stand up
at the saying of the Belief, or refuse to make due and lowly Reverence, when
the Name of the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, in time of Divine Service, or
refuse to say in due place, and audibly with the Minister, the Confession, the
Lords Prayer, and the Creed, or not make such other Answers, to the public
Prayers, as are appointed in the Book of Common Prayer. Whoever refuses these
things, he is one who though present at the public Prayers, yet not according
to the Orders of the Church, is not to be admitted to the Communion, that is,
all those things are made necessary to the Communion: And here it must be
observed, that though the admitting notorious Offenders to the Comunion be
forbiden by the 26 th Canon, yet not under the penalty of Suspension, as it is
in this case of admitting those who refuse to Kneel, or to be present at the
public Prayers, according to the Orders of the Church of England.

But these things several Dissenters for great Reasons refuse to do, I Will at
this time only insist on the Ceremony of Kneeling at the Sacrament, and give
the Reasons of some Learned Men against it. 1st. Let us hear Mr. Baxter in his
five Disput. p. 410, 411. As for Kneeling at the Sacrament, I doubt not at all
but the Imposing it, and that on such Rigorous Terms, tying all to it, and
easting all out of the Communion of the Church, or from the participation of
the Sacrament, that durst not use it, was a very grevious Sin, and tended to
Persecution, and Injustice, and Church dividing. It is certainly in a doubtful
case the safest way to do as Christ, and his Apostles, and the Universal Church
did for many hundred Years; either the Gesture is Indifferent in it self, or
not; If it be, how dare they thus divide the Church by it, and cast out
Christians that scruple it, when they have these and many other Reasons of
their Scruples (which for brevities sake I omit)? If they say, That Kneeling is
of it self Necessary, and not Indifferent, because it is Reverent. [Now if the
Reader considers the Rubric added in the New Common Prayer Book, he will find
that Kneeling is enjoined for a Signification of our humble and grateful
Acknowledgment of the Benefits of Christ therein received, and for avoiding
such Profanation and Disorder in the holy Communion, as might otherwise ensue.
Thus we see the Gesture of Kneeling is made a Reverent Gesture, necessary to
avoid Disorder and Profanation. But says Mr. Baxter, if Kneeling is of it
self necessary, and not indifferent, because it is Reverent] Then, 1 st, They
make Christ an imperfect Lawgiver. 2 dly, They make himself or his Apostles,
or both, to have been Sinners. 3 dly, They condemn the Catholic Church of Sin.
4 thly, They condemn the Canons of the chief General Councils. All which are
Consequents that I suppose they will disown. What a perverse preposterous
Reverence is this! when they have leave to lie in the Dust before and after the
very Act of Receiving, through all their Confessions and Prayers; yet they will
at other times stand, and many of them sit at Prayer, and sit at singing Psalms
of Prayer and Praise to God, and yet when Christ does invite them to a Feast,
they dare not imitate his Apostles and Universal Church in their Gesture, lest
they should be sinfully Irreverent. So sar Mr. Baxter.

Now though Mr. Baxter is accurate in distinguishing, and as to the part of the
Receiver, may yet see how to answer all these Arguments, and satisfy himself
in kneeling, yet he cannot but believe, that Godly and Judicious men may be so
far under the powerful Convictions of such Arguments against the Imposition, as
to be unable to satisfy their Consciences in complying with the Gesture of
Kneeling. Surely Mr. Baxter tells the World so much in his first Nonconformists
plea for Peace, p. 150, 151, 152.

Some Nonconformists (says he) Lay and Clergy, judge Kneeling, as things now
stand, Unlawful: Their Reasons are, 1. In Doubtful cases Duty lies on the
surest side; but this to them is a doubtful case on one side, and to imitate
Christ's Institution by such sitting, as men use to do at Meat, is certainly
lawful.

2. Because they think Kneeling violateth the Reasons of the second
Commandment, being used where by whole Countries of Papists round about us, and
many among us, it signifies Bread-Worship, or Idolatry by the same Action, at
the same Season used. For they suppose that the second Commandment forbids
Images, as being external corporal Idolatry, and symbolizing scandalously with
Idolaters, though the Mind intend the Worship of God alone: And such they think
this Kneeling is, and that encourages the Papists. So far Mr. Baxter.

2. I Will only add one Argument more, which I find in a Proposition concerning
Kneeling, joined to Mr. Bradshaw's Twelve Arguments, which is taken from the
Abuse of Kneeling in this Ordinance, by the Papists. It Is there said, That the
Apostle, to Reform an Abuse which crept (even in their Times) into Love Feasts,
which were immediately before or after the Lords Supper, did banish them
thence, and reduced the manner of Admistring the Lords Supper to the first
Institution, saying, Shall I praise you in this? I praise you not; for I have
received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you, etc. 1 Cor. 11. verse. 22,
23. Whereby it is apparent, That that form of Administration which differs
from the first Institution, is worthy no Praise, and therefore no acceptable
Service to God. For if the Apostle would not tolerate an Indifferent thing (as
was a Love-Feast till then) to continue so near the Lords Supper, when it was
abused, how would they allow the change of Sitting into Kneeling, especially in
these two Considerations?

First, Because the abuse of Love Feasts ( viz. Superstuity) was never so great
and scandalous in the Apostles time, as the abuse of Kneeling ( viz. Idolatry)*
was and is in the Synagogue of Rome. And besides, Love Feasts were either
before or after the Lords Supper; whereas Kneeling is in the principal part of
the Holy Communion. Therefore if the Apostle banished Love Feasts from the
Lords Supper, because of the Abuse, and brought the Church to the Simplicity of
the first Institution, is it not a tempting Sin to retain the Idolatrous
Kneeling of Papists, and reject the exemplary Sitting of our Master Christ? And
the rather because it is in that Sacrament, and in that part of the Sacrament
which especially sets forth our communion with Christ and his Church, and is
therefore called the Communion -- Does not God strictly forbid us to serve him
as Idolaters do their Godds? The which considered, can Kneeling, wherewith
Papists honor their Breaden God, be honorable to Christ in his holy
Sacrament?

For such Reasons, many are convinced, that Kneeling at the receiving the
Communion is Unlawful; and seeing without Kneeling they cannot have Communion
with the Church of England, they cannot locally communicate with her, but yet
highly honor her for the soundness of her Doctrine, and do mentally hold
Catholic Communion with her, so far as she agrees with the Catholic Church;
but Necessity makes them to withold local Communion from them. To make this
yet more clear, the Reader must Observe, that the Argument Mr. Baxter does
furnish them with, runs thus, It is not lawful to communicate with those that
impose Sinful Terms of Communion: This Mr. Baxter affirms. But the Church of
England imposes many things as Terms of Communion with them, which they think
are sinful. Ergo They must not communicate with them. Now in the Minor Mr.
Baxter and they differ; he thinks the things they scruple (for instance,
Kneeling) are Lawful, but yet proposes strong Arguments against the Lawfulness
of Kneeling; which Arguments, though not Convincing unto him, yet are so unto
them. And therefore whatever is his Liberty, it is their Duty to withold
their Communion from the Church of England, still honoring her for the
soundness of her Doctrine, etc.

. 11. Mr. Baxter in his Schism detected, p. 40. affirms, That he who is
unjustly cast out of the Church, and by its very Laws Excommunicated, ipso
facto, is no damned nor sinful Schismatic, for Worshipping God in a Church,
that will receive him.

But according to the Judgment of Mr. Baxter, Protestant Dissenters, are
unjustly cast out of the Church of England, and by its very Laws, ipso facto,
Excommunicated. Ergo they are not Sinful Schismatics.

When Mr. Baxter speaks of going to another Church, Mr. Baxter must be
understood to mean a withholding Communion from the Excommunicating Church,
and commuicating with another, whose Laws do not, ipso facto, Excommunicate.
The which being so, the Argument against Mr. Baxter is valid for the acquitting
their Separation from the Guilt of Sin.

. 12. There is another Argument which Mr. Baxter, in Conjunction with Dr.
Sherlock gives us, and which will acquit the Lay-Dissenter from Sin, (...) no
Sin, but a Duty to withold Communion from a Schismatical Church: This Dr.
Sherlock does over and over assert. But the Church of England is a Schismatical
Church, says Mr. Baxter. It is a Schismatical Church, it is guilty of haneous
and aggravated Schism. Mr. Baxter in his first Plea, p. 41. says,

. 14. If any Proud, or Passionate, or Erronoous Person do, as Diotrephes, cast
out the Brethren undeservedly, by unjust Suspensions, Silencings or
Excommunications, it is TYRANNICAL SCHISM, what better Name soever cloaks it.
If any should make sinful Terms of Communion by Laws or Mandates, imposing
things forbidden by God, on those that will have communion with them, and
expelling those that will not so* sin; this wore HANEOUS SCHISM; And the
further those Laws extend, and the more Ministers or People are cast out by
them, the greater is the Schism.

. 15. If any should not only Excommunicate such Persons for not complying with
them in sin, but also prosecute them with Mulcts, Imprisonments, Banishments,
or other Prosecution, to force them to transgress; this were yet more haneously
aggravated Schism.

. 16. All those would be deeply guilty of such Schism, who by Talk, Writing or
Preaching justify it, and cry it up, and draw others into the Guilt, and
reproach the Innocent as Schismatics, for not offending God. [Then look to
your self, good Mr. Baxter, reflect on your Talk and Writing, and clear your
self from the guilt of Reproaching the Innocent as Schismatics, if you can.]
But I Will proceed:

. 17. If any should corrupt such a Church, or its Doctrine, Worship or
Discipline, in the very Essentials, by setting up forbidden Officers and
Worship, or casting out the Officers, Worship or Discipline instituted by
Christ, and then prosecute others for not communicating with them, would be yet
the more Haneous Schism.

. 18. If either of the last named sorts would not be contented with men's
communion with them, but would also silence and prosecute such as will not own,
justify and consent to all that they do by Subscriptions, Declarations,
Covenants, Promises or Oaths, this would be yet more aggravated Schism. So far
Mr. Baxter.

Now let any impartial Reader compare what is here said, with what elsewhere
Mr. Baxter accuses the Church of England of, and he will find all this to be but
his Description of the Church of England, which according to the general import
of his Writings, must be looked on as guilty of Haneous, Aggravated and
Tyrannical Schism, that is, to be deeply Schismatical; and therefore, according
to Dr. Sherlock, not to be communicated with.

But I Will draw to a close, beseeching the Reader to consider well what Mr.
Baxters judgment is, about communicating with the Parish-Assemblies, by Law
established, how much he is against it, and what are some of his Reasons, and
he will find,

I. That Mr. Baxter is as much against communicating with the
Parish-Assemblies, as by Law required, as his Brethren are. The
Parish-Assemblies, by Law established, are Diocesane, and with them, as such,
Mr. Baxter communicates not. But first fancies the Parish Assembly to be a
Congregational Church, and the Parish Minister to be an Independent Pastor,
exempt from the spiritual Jurisdiction of the Diocesane Bishop, and then holds
communion with it as such, that is, he either communicates with it as if it
were what indeed it is not, or if it be really such a Church as he fancies it
to be, his communion with it is only as it is a Church separated from the
National settled Order: For the Parish Assembly, as a part of the National
settled Order, is no Church, it has no Pastor, etc.

II. That Mr. Baxter's communion is no more Catholic than theirs; though he
talks more of the Name, he has no more of the thing than they have. Does he
hold Catholic Communion mentally with the Universal Church? so do they. Do
they withold mental communion from Parish-Assemblies, as by Law established (
i. e.) as they are parts of the Diocesane ^nstitution? So does Mr. Baxter. Are
the Con^^^^^tions, to which their local Communion is confined, of a
Constitution different from, and independent on the Diocesane? So is the Parish
Church with which Mr. Baxter communicates, if it be really what he fancieth it
to be; so that his Local Communion is as much confined to Dissenting Assemblies
as theirs is.

This is on a Supposition that Mr. Baxters Imaginations were operative, ad
extra, and would make a real change on the Constitution. But if the Parish
Assembly continues, de facto, as established, then I must say,

III. That Mr. Baxter holds both those Premises, from which a conclusion
(justifying their separation) does naturally follow. The Premises are these; It
is our undoubted Duty to separate from the Corruptions that are in the Parish
Assemblies. But the very Constitution of the Parish Assemblies and Ministry, by
Law established, are Corruptions. These are Mr. Baxter's Premises. And let the
World judge whether this Conclusion [namely, That it is our undoubted Duty to
separate from the Parish Assemblies and Ministry, as by Law established] does
not naturally flow from them, justifying a withholding Communion from the
Parish Assemblies. In fine, it must be observed, that if the Parish Assemblies
be really de facto, but parts of the Diocesane Church, and no complete
Churches, Mr. Baxter must justify the Separation, and that he does so, I will
give you his own words, as I find 'em in his Schism detected, p. 28. Either our
Parish Churches (says he) are true Churches, or not; if not, the Separatists
are so far in the Right, and separate not from true Churches, eo nomine,
because they separate from them: so far Mr. Baxter; who, if the Parish.
Assemblies be but parts of the Diocesane Constitution and not true complete
particular Churches, justifies the separation from 'em; And who knows not, that
the Parish Assemblies, as by Law established, are but parts of the Diocesane?

FINIS.

