One Sheet against the QUAKERS.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller, in
Kederminster, Anno Dom. 1657.

One Sheet against the QUAKERS.
THE lamentable ignorance and ungodliness of too many of the common people, and
the pride and self-conceitedness of many Professors of godlyness, and the
weakness, unsettledness and giddiness of others, does give advantage to all
sorts of Heretics and Deceivers to make their attempts with hope of success.
And to our wonder, grief, and shame we see, that scarce any of them are so
grossly unreasonable and vile, but they get some followers in most places where
they come: And when this wind arises to try our Congregations, and neighbors,
the light, unstable, chassie Professors are carried away. And though one sect
have carried away some of them, and another has risen and condemned that, and
carried away more; and another and another have done the like by them; yet
still the next sect that rises up, is as confident that they are in the right,
and as zealously vent their own conceits, and condemn all others, as if they
had never been warned by the examples of so many before them, whose confidence
has left them in contempt, like Prognosticators, Wizards and false Prophets,
that will be bold to prophecy of uncertain events, though so many of their
predecessors have lest their names to the derision of posterity; We cannot
wonder therefore, if among other sects, the Quakers (with their German
Brethren, the Paracelsians, Behmenists, and Seekers) do step in and take their
turns in the game; who will come down with greater shame then most that have
gone before them, when they have played their part.

The man that will stand safe, and look on the folly and misery of all these
sects, with prudence to his own advantage, must be A sincere Catho^^ck
Christian, saved from Infidelity and Impiety: Having one God, one Mediator
between God and man, one holy Spirit; being a member of that one Catholic
Church, which is not confined to the sect of Papists, or the sect of
Anabaptists, or any sect, but contains all the true Christians in the world,
though some parts of it be Reformed and pure, and others more deformed and
corrupt: having one Catholic Rule, the Word of God; and a Catholic Love to
all Christians in the world, with a care and desire of their welfare,
proportionable to their several degrees of loveliness, Being my self a member
of this Catholic Church, and finding my self on the Rock which the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against, the security of my station encourages me the
more boldly to do my part in defending the cause of God, against the assaults
of all these deluded ones; and particularly the Quakers. And if any man find in
himself the least temptation to like of their way, I shall here give him those
Reasons in a little room that move me to conceive, that no Christian, or
reasonable man, should be a Quaker, or approve of, or excuse their way.

Reason 1. The Quakers (with the Seekers) deny and revile the Church and
Ministers of Christ, and yet cannot tell us of any Church or Ministry which is
indeed the right, and to be preferred before these that they do despise. If the
Quakers are of no Church themselves, they are no Christians; and then they are
Infidels, Atheists or Heathens. If they be of the Church, let them tell us
which is the Church that they are of. They renounce the Church that we are of:
and that is the only Church on earth, containing all true believers in Christ.
They have not told us of any sect but their own, which they take to be the true
Church: And he that takes the Quakers to be the only Catholic Church, must
deny the Church and Christ himself, if he understand what he says. For the
Quakers are but of a few years standing: They rose from among the Papists,
Seekers, Ranters, and Anabaptists but a while ago. And if Christ had not a
Catholic Church before then, and ever since his Ascension, he ceased to be
Christ in Office, the Head and Savior of the Church: For no Church, no
Savior; No body, no Head: No School, no Teacher: No Kingdom, no King: No Wife,
no Husband. So that its all one to say, that the Quakers have made a new
Catholic Church, when there was none before; and to say, they have made a new
Christ, where was no Christ before. This Argument the Papists abuse upon false
suppositions; but it is only the Catholic that can make just advantage of it,
and may better ask the Papists, [Where was your Roman Catholic Church before
400. or 500. or 600. years after Christ?] then they can ask us, [Where was your
Church before Luther:] Where there were visible Societies of Christians, there
was a visible Church. I dare not be of so narrow a Catholic Church as the
Papal is, much less as the Quakers or any upstart sect; I profess my self a
member of a far wider Catholic Church then all of them set together; in which
I hope to live and die.

Reason 2. No wise man can be a Quaker, because their Religion is an uncertain
thing; And so is not that Religion that must save us. The things that they
agree in, besides the furious opposition of others, are but a few broken scraps
of Doctrine, which they never yet set together, as making the substance of
their faith: I never met with man that heard of any sum or body of their
Divinity, Faith or Religion, which they have published: No not so much as in
Catechism, or short Confession: Nor did I ever hear that one of their Speakers
did ever recite the substance of their belief. If they know not yet the
contents of their own Religion, they are too blame to be so zealous for it, and
thrust that upon others, which they know not themselves: and well may we stay
till they know it better, before we become their followers for we know not
what. The Christian faith is known long ago, even this 1600 years, and more. If
they say that they wait till the Spirit reveals it; I answer, The Spirit has
revealed and sealed the Christian Faith long ago: though it must transcribe it
out of the Scripture into the heart of every believer. The Spirit is not given
now to make us a new Religion, or new Gospel, Gal. 1. 8, 9. but to cause us to
believe and receive the old one. I abhor any Gospel or Religion that was not
made 1600. years ago at least. If they look for a Spirit to make them a new
Religion or belief, they have not, and expect not the Christian Religion or
belief. Well, and will any but a mad man let go his Christian Faith, before he
know where to have a better? or for he knows not what? shall we turn Quakers
merely because they bark and bawl at our Religion, Ministry and Church, before
they once tell us where to find a better, or give us so much as a Catechism, or
Confession to tell us what their own Religion is, which they would have us to
receive? We know not but the fag-end of it that is yet out of sight, may be so
abominable as to shame all the rest; I am resolved to be of no Religion that is
kept in the pockets of men, and must not be all made known to the Church, as
the Papists keep things undetermined, to make us new Articles of says (quoad
nos, as they speak) when they please.

Reason 3. No man of Reason should be a Quaker, considering that among those
scraps of their Religion which is made known, there is so much notorious
falsehood and ungodliness. Its like to have a good end that has such a
beginning. This falsehood and wickedness, cannot soder with saving truth. The
very person of Jesus Christ many of them blaspheme, and speak allegorically and
equivocally when they mention his name and nature, and so show that indeed they
are not Christians. One of them lately spoke to a Christian in these words, [I
deny the God that thou worshippest.] The Scriptures, many of them in my hearing
and in others, have denied to be the rule of Faith and Life, and the Hebrew and
Greek text they expressly said, they do deny. They reproach the Catholic
Church, and the Ministers: They deny many of Gods Ordinances; not only the
Baptism of Infants, but of any; and use not the Lords Supper: They deprave the
Doctrine of Justification, denying the imputed righteousness of Christ, and
trusting to that which is in them only: Many more such abominations they
maintain, which certainly tell us they are not of God. If any man say that all
of them are not of these opinions: I answer, What a fair distracted company are
they already then, when they are of so many minds, and we are never the nearer
knowing what they hold by hearing and reading the sayings of so many!

Reason 4. Besides their false pernicious Doctrines, their Practical Religion
does much consist in notorious wickedness, injustice and uncharitableness. I
shall here instance but in three parts of it. 1. Their very preaching and
zealous talk is much, if not most of it, malicious prating against Gods
servants, (3 John 10.) and railing accusations and reviling words; yea lies and
slanders; impudently charging that upon the Ministers of Christ, which they
have not so much as a reasonable pretense to accuse them of. There is scarce a
scold heard among us in seven years time, that uses so many railing words to
the basest that they quarrel with, as these people will use familiarly in their
Religious exercises against the faithful servants of Christ. Nay I have had
more railing language from one of them in one letter, then I ever heard from
all the scolds in the Country to my remembrance this twenty years. And no
servant of Christ who has learnt of him to be meek and lowly, can believe (if
he be well in his wits) that this is the language of the Spirit of Christ. He
that being himself reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2. 23. and has commanded
us not to eat with a railer, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and has given such an odious
Character of such, 2 Pet. 2. 10, 11, 12. Jude 8, 9, 10, etc. will hardly own
them for his best servants. If we may judge what Country men are of by their
language, these are not of heaven, nor fellow-Citizens with the Saints, that so
reproach and rail at Saints. And it is the more impious in that they entitle
God to it, and think they do him service, by reviling his servants: yea, and
abuse the phrases of Scriptures to it; as if they might call such by any names
which God has called the worst of men by; Even dogs, wolves, greedy dogs and
hirelings, children of the Devil, and enemies of all righteousness, hypocrites,
Devils, with abundance such. 2. They break the fifth Commandment by open
dishonouring of Magistrates and Ministers, and impenitently justify themselves
in all. They will not only deny civil honor to the Magistrate, but revile him
if he displease them. Their language is like the rebellious followers of Corah,
Numb. 16. 3. Ye take too much upon you -- wherefore list ye up your selves
above the Congregation of the Lord?] 3. Many of them live idly and disorderly,
going up and down the Country, and living on the bread of others, and not
working with their hands, contrary to 2 These. 3. 6, 11.

Reason 5. The worst of all is, that they behave themselves like Malignant
enemies to the very Cause, and Church, and Gospel, and Servants of Jesus
Christ. And if they be of the Serpentine brood, they cannot be the only
servants of Christ sure. Most of them that I have seen, have an altered
countenance, looking upon every man that they suspect to be a Minister or a
friend to the Ministry, with such detestation and hatred, as if malice it self
had chosen their faces to demonstrate its complexion in. Their very design,
Religion and work, is, to make the people hate the Ministers and revile them as
they do, as if this were a mark of a converred man. And besides this Ministry
(as much as they revile them) who have we to carry on the work of the Gospel? A
mean wit may easily see what would come of the Gospel, and of the Church, and
the souls of men, if the Ministry were hated, rejected or cast out. Does it go
well with any Nation on earth without them? Name me the place. Will the Gospel
be propagated without Preachers? Or have you better enough if all these were
down? Where be they? that we may see and know them. He that would destroy the
Commanders, and Magistrates, is like to be an enemy to the Army and the
Commonwealth. They take the same course against the Church and Cause of God,
as the malicious enemies in all ages have done; even to oppose the best and
painfullest Ministers. Such as the Heathens tormented, and the Papists burnt,
and others silenced, these men choose out to vilify and oppose. Mark when they
come to any Town, whether they do not ten times more oppose the Ministers that
spend themselves in private and public labors against sin, then they do the
most ignorant or vicious men. Cannot we see whose servants they are, when we
see who they fight against, even the choicest servants of Christ! It is a
wonderful thing that even Malignant enemies shall be thought to be Christ's only
servants by any that know what it is to serve him, or what an enemy differs
from a friend.

Reason 6. Moreover that part of the Quakers peculiar Religion, which
consists not in error and Malignant impiety, is very much of it made up of
childish unreasonable fopperies. When they have called me Dog and Devil, and
abundance of such names, and I have asked them what was my fault? forsooth, it
was that I was called Master, that I stood above the people in a pulpit, that I
preached by an hourglass, that I preached by Doctrine, and Use, and such like.
And does the Christian Religion consist in such ridiculous accusations as
these? Does God lay men's salvation upon an hourglass, or a Pulpit, or being
called Master? Little do I care what they call me, or where I stand, so I may
but be heard: or whether I have glass or clock. As for the grounds of these
silly cavils, I have showed in [The Quakers Catechism] how weak they are.
Christ does no more forbid the title of [Master] then of [Father] or then
[sitting in the uppermost seat] as you may see in Mat. 23. And seriously would
these wise men have no man called Father, or sit uppermost? It is the proud
affectation of honor, and the abuse of it that Christ does forbid, and not the
thing; when he has made it the first Commandment with promise, that children
(and so all subjects and inferiors) must honor their parents and superious in
the Lord. See what a difference there is between this sort of prophetical
people, and the ancient Prophets and Apostles of Christ. The Apostles of Christ
did preach up Faith, and Hope, and Love, and a Kingdom consisting in
Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost, and not in meats or drinks,
Circumcision or uncircumcision. But see now a new generation of preachers; and
what is their message? I am ashamed to mention it. They go about the world to
preach down hour-glasses, and pulpits, and tithes, and the title of Master; Do
you think that the salvation of the world does lie upon this Doctrine? They
come to preach down ribbons, and lace, and points, and cuffs: O glorious and
excellent Doctrine, for children to make sport with!

Reason 7. Moreover their Malignity does blind them to make that the principal
Cause of their rage and revilings against the Ministry, which is plainly
agreeable to the will of God, and necessary to the Churches good. The principal
sin which we must be hated, reproached and cast out for, is, that we take
either Tithes or other set maintenance. And where is this forbidden? They liken
us to the covetous Priests among the Jews who neglected the work of the Lord,
and looked every one for his gain from his Quarters: And do they believe that
God was then against paying Tithes, or that this was the sin of those Priests
that they took Tithes? Let them read Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10. and judge, and be
ashamed [Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we
robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have
robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring ye all the Tithes into the
Storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith,
says the Lord, if I will not open the windows of heaven, and pour you out a
blessing.] And Christ himself says of them that ^ithed Mint and Annise, [These
things ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone, Mat. 23. 23.]
And Paul says, 1 Cor. 9. 6, 7, 11, 12, 13. [Have not we power to forbear
working? Who goes a warfare any time at his own charge? who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? or, says not
the Law the same also? -- If we have sown to you spiritual things, is it a
great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? Do ye not know that they which
minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple; and they which
wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.] God
ordains it, and the Quakers make a new Religion of railing at it. The Law of
the Land ordains it: and God bids every soul be subject to the higher powers,
and says, the resisters receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. and yet the
Quakers expect salvation by resisting. The tenths are the Churches, and not the
peoples: And God says, Thou shall not steal: And yet the Quakers make a
Religion of teaching the people to steal or defraud others of the tenths. In
the Apostles days men sold all and devoted it to God, and laid it down at the
Apostles feet; But now we ask not men for a penny, they are taught by the
Quakers to deny those tenths which be none of their own; forgetting that
A^anias and Sapphira were struck dead, for retaining half their own, when they
had devoted it to God and the Church. But I have said enough of this to them in
two Books already, viz. The Defense of the Worcestershire Petition, and the
Quakers Catechism.

Reason 8. The Quakers way is too cruel and uncharitable to be the way of God.
They damn the most humble, holy, faithful servants of God; to whom God has
promised salvation. All the Ministers and Churches of Christ that adhere to the
Ministry, they pronounce them, children of the Devil: and as soon as they do
but hear a man speak for the Ministry, though they know nothing of his life,
they can presently tell that he is an Hypocrite and child of the Devil; so
quick and sagacious they are in damning men, as if they were as forward to it
as Christ to save, and pleased as much in cursing, as good men in blessing. Yea
they must venture into the Throne of God, and ordinarily take on them to know
men's hearts, to judge them hypocrites. Those that dwell and walk with God, and
have lain longer at his feet in prayers and tears, then any of them, and walk
in uprightness in the midst of a malicious world, and spend themselves in the
work of God; even these must be damned at a word by a boy or wench that is but a
Quaker, as confidently as if God had bid them speak it. And thus they repeal
the Gospel it self, the ground of our salvation, which says, that Whosoever
believes shall not perish.

Reason 9. After all their sins, they most impudently pretend to a sinless
perfection. They are not content that we allow of a perfection in kind, which
is our sincerity, or a perfection of parts, which is our integrity, or a
perfection of eminency or high degree: all these we do allow of; and we desire
an absolute sinless perfection, and confess it is our commanded duty. But they
maintain that many of them are without sin altogether. Though James says, In
many things we offend all, James 3. 2. and John says [If we say that we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: If we say that we
have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us, 1 John 1. 8,
10. And Christ says, that the whole have no need of the Physician, but the
sick, Mat. 9. 12. So that by this you may see that the Quakers suppose
themselves to have no need of Christ, and so the word and truth is not in them.
They dare say it seems, to God or to the Redeemer, We will not be beholden to
thee for the patdon of any more sin, or for the blood of Christ to that end.
They will not say, Forgive us our trespasses: For what need they a Christ and
pardon that have no sin? And thus they suppose themselves to be in heaven
already! For if they are perfect and sinless, what is that but a great part of
heaven? and how is it that they have not the beatifical vision, and be not with
the Angels! for what can hinder them but sin? Nay it seems, they take
themselves to be as perfect as Christ himself. For what can they have more then
a sinless perfection? And see here what an unhumbled people these are that dare
think so highly of themselves; and how shameless, to boast of finless
perfection, even with railing and other sin in their mouths, or open in their
practices and Doctrine.

Reason 10. And in this and many other Doctrines, they do so openly comply with
the Papists, that we may plainly see that the Jesuits and Friars are their
Leaders. This has been proved by many Confessions, as I have showed elsewhere.
The Papists make the Scripture a dead letter, no sufficient Rule of faith, or
Judge of Controversies; and so do they. The Papists cry down our Church and
Ministry, and so do they. The Jesuits cry up free will and sufficient grace to
all, and a common sufficient Light, and so do they. The Papists do extenuate
imputed righteousness, in setting up inherent: and so do they. The Papists
place most in external abstinence, and observances, and seeming austerity; and
so do they. The Papists say the Pope is not the Antichrist; and so do they. The
Papists say that they can keep all Gods Commandments, and have a sinless
perfection; and so do they. Many other of their Doctrines they maintain. So
that you may easily conjecture, that Quakers do but prepare you to be either
Papists or open Infidels, at last.

Reason 11. Their Doctrines are self-contradictory, and therefore they cannot
be of God. They say that all men have a sufficient light within them. And yet
they go up and down preaching with great zeal and violence. And what do they
preach? is it light or darkness? If darkness, who would have such Preachers? If
light, what needless labor is this, when all men have sufficient Light
already? And they will revile the Ministers as blind guides, and tell their
people they are all in darkness, and the way to damnation? And yet all have
sufficient Light within them? If all, why not the Ministers, and their people?
Are not they men?

Reason 12. Consider also how suitable their Doctrine is to the Interest and
Pleasure both of the Papists and the Devil? When they damn all the Ministers
and Churches of Christ, how can they please the Devil better? O what would he
give them that this were but true? Now the Kings of France and Spain are
striving for part of Italy or Flanders; if you say, This Country is all the
King of Spains, and none of it the Kings of France, is not this for the
interest of Spain? So Christ and the Devil are striving about the souls of men,
and you step in and say of almost all the Church of Christ, yea of the most
eminent godly Christians, [all these are hypocrites, and the children of the
Devil] is not this for the Devils interest, and are you not the Patrons of his
cause against Christ? And if you do but unchurch all the Reformed Churches, the
Papists will give you a see.

Reason 13. The Doctrine and practice of the Quakers is contrary to the
experience and holy nature of the Saints. They have found a renewing light and
life by this Scripture and Ministry which the Quakers make so light of. They
tell our people, that our Ministry does no good, and none are the better for
it: which the experience of many thousands does confute, who can say as the man
in John 9. 25. One thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see.]
Moreover, the Christians nature contains in it a Catholic Love to all the
Saints, and they honor them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4. And therefore it
is quite against their holy nature to damn and reproach the Saints, and call
them the children of the Devil; and to dishonor and spit in the faces of them
that are their fathers or guides in Christ, that watch for their souls as men
that must give an account, 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17. They cannot be so
barbarously ungrateful, and so rebellious.

Reason 14. The Quakers are unlikely to be better then other men, seeing they
are so notoriously Proud. Pride is an high esteem of our selves, with a desire
to be highly esteemed by others. And this they manifest openly without all
shame: some may take them to be humble that judge by their clothes and crying
down high titles. But alas it is a childish Pride to be Proud of fine clothes.
This is too low a game for them to play. The greater the matter is that men are
proud of, usually the greater is their pride: It is the supposed Spirit of God,
and extraordinary holiness and inspiration and abilities that they are Proud
of. Do you need any proof? How could the Devil himself show Pride more
notoriously? when they proclaim themselves perfect without sin; can they yet
think highlier of themselves, or speak highlier of themselves, then this? What
is proud boasting if this be not? And when they pretend to know men's hearts,
which is the prerogative of God; and to speak by inspiration: when they condemn
almost all the Church of God, and vilify the holiest of his people; as if they
should say, [Stand by; we are more holy then you; you are all ungodly in
comparison of us] When they revile the ablest godly Ministers, as if they said,
[Come down thou deceiver; thou ignorant man, thou hypocrite, thou dog; and let
us be the Speakers that can do it far better then thou; that are more
understanding, holy, self-denying and sincere.] Is not one half of this their
ordinary speech, and the other half their practice, when they set up themselves
to speak in the stead of Ministers, yea and proclaim their own goodness to the
world? I confess I never saw greater appearance of Pride in men.

Reason 15. They plainly discover a persenting spirit. For what man can in
reason think but that they that run up and down the world to bring the Ministry
into hatred, and call them greedy dogs and Devils, and judge them to damnation,
and call on the Magistrates and people to cast them out as dung, would quickly
use them thus themselves, if it were in their power? Will they persuade others
with such exceeding pains and zeal to that which they would not do themselves?
And they that so damn our godly hearers, would not they persecute them also: I
confess I make no doubt of it, but if they had power, many of them would do
more then silence the ministry, even persecute them to death as their Ancestors
have done.

Reason 16. What reasonable man would turn Quaker that sees the common fruit
of their Doctrine? What good do they where they come? but make people hare both
godly Teachers and people whom they loved? and doubtless Love is Christ's work
and Sheep-mark; and envy, strife and hatred is the Devils. They break people
into Divisions, and set them a reviling, and cast their spirit into a
malicious mould and tincture of bitterness, and bring in confusion and
abominable error: And to say that this wisdom is from above is to glory and lie
against the truth: No, it it earthly, sensual, devilish. For the wisdom from
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, etc. Jam.
3. 13, 14, 15, 17. The fruit of their labor is to make some silly professors
turn Malignant enemies of the Church, and to show themselves humble, to cast
off some points or lace, and wander about the Country, and at last many of them
fall into distraction.

Reason 17. And its no great encouragement to us to turn Qua^ers, when we
consider who are their followers and society that make all this ado in the
world. Very few experienced, humble, so^er Christians, that ever I heard of
that turn to them? but its ^he young raw professors, and women, and ignorant
ungrounded people that were but novices and learners in the principles, and
such as are notorious for self-conceitedness and pride, being wise in their own
eyes. And most of all these that ever I heard of, were Anabaptists or the
members of some such Sect, that by their division and error were prepared
before.

Reason 18. So that it is an evident judgment of God upon those people that turn
Quakers; and a punishment for their former sin. Because they received not the
truth in the love of it, that they might be saved, God gives them up to
believe a lie, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. Because they were false to the light
revealed, and unprofitable under precious helps, and proudly disobeyed and
slighted their faithful guides, God gives them up as a prey to these
devourers: And who would choose that for his Religion, which is nothing but a
dreadful judgment of God upon proud, dividing, self-conceited, ignorant men,
especially of the Anabaptists?

Reason 19. They are already in Divisions among themselves, as few as they are:
As the contention between Naylor and his followers, and Fox and his followers,
and others of them show.

Reason 20. And to make all their delusion a more odious wickedness, they
father it upon the holy Ghost, and would persuade the world that they speak all
their most wicked speeches by his inspiration or command: and say [Thus says
the Lord:] and [the Spirit of God within me says thus or thus.] O horrible
impiety! when they dishonor the very Word of God, the Righteousness, yea the
^erson of Christ, they say, God bids them do it, and indite all as from the
Spirit of the Lord, when they speak against the Doctrine of the Spirit. They
cry down the union and love of the Saints, and ^he Ministers and Ordinances of
Christ, and say, the Spirit bids them do it. When they pronounce damnation
against Gods Church or holy servants to whom Christ has promised salvation,
and the Spirit sealed it, yet do they profanely make the Holy Ghost the author
of their wickedness. I think there is not a whore or thief, or swearer in the
Town or Country, but might as justly say, The Holy Ghost commands them to
whore, or steal, or swear. Yea when some of them preach another Gospel, they
father it on the Spirit: when Paul says, If an Angel from heaven preach other
Gospel then had been preached, he should be accursed, Gal. 18.

Reason 21. The Quakers themselves renounce (in words) the Ranters and the
Papists, as a deluded sort: But the Ranters and Papists hold the substance or
greatest part of the Quakers Doctrine, in which they differ from us. Yea the
Ranters did fall into trances as they do; and spoke just as they against the
Ministry and Scripture: Yea the Drunkards and all Profane ungodly Malignants
cry out against the same Ministers, and same exercises and ordinances, and same
Churches and godly people as the Quakers do. Now let any man judge that has
not forsworn all wit and reason, whether it be likely that the Holy Ghost would
inspire a generation of new Prophets, to acquaint them with the same points,
which Ranters, Papists, and Drunkards knew before, and could have taught them
without the Spirit? Or whether the same point be Heavenly in a Quaker, and
Hellish in a Ranter, Papist or Drunkard? And whether the Quakers have not
condemned themselves in condemning these sects that hold their opinions? And
whether it be likelyer that Ranters, Drunkards and all Malignants, or the holy
and faithful Ministers and people of Christ should in these points be in the
right?

Reason 22. And if I had any cause to be weary of the Christian Catholic
Reformed Religion, what reason have I to turn Quaker any more then to any other
sect? why not to the sect of Papists as well? or to the Anabaptists, or the
Antinomians, or Libertines, or Familists, or Socinians, or such like? How do
they prove that they are more in the right then all these? What do they bring
to satisfy a wise man that they only among all these and many other sects are
in the right?

Reason 23. Moreover, the way by which they prevail, is not by producing any
evidence: For they renounce that, and offer you all on the Authority of the
Spirit within them; and therefore they must prove that Authority, and their
Revelations and Divine Mission by Miracles, or such supernatural means, before
any reasonable man can believe them: Unless you will believe every man that
says, he is sent of God. I have asked them to show their Commission from God,
or prove that he sent them, and not one of them would ever do it, but tell me I
was blind, and he had the witness in himself: But why must I believe him that
says this more then other men? Can I see the witness in him? He must be a
witness to me if he will have credit. The Ministers of Christ do not call you
to receive their Doctrine upon the Authority of themselves or their own
Mission, but of the Apostles and their Mission, from whom they prove they had
it, and who sealed it with Miracles long ago: And therefore whether we were
Ministers or no, you have reason to believe us, when we prove our Doctrine to
be from God, as delivered by Apostles in Scripture, and Sealed by the Spirit:
But Quakers that give us their Doctrine on a new Authority within them (and so
Behmenists, Paraceisians and all Enthusiasts) and Papists that give it us on
their own Authority as above or before the Scripture Authority, these are bound
to prove their pretended Authority by Miracles, if they will be believed by
wise men that love their salvation.

And we see that it is by the Novelty, and the seriousness and earnestness of
speech, and threatening Hell to poor people, that frightneth-in their followers
to them, and not by evidence of truth. I have urged many of them to name one
truth which the Quakers held, but what we hold as well as they: and I could
never yet hear of any one.

Reason 24. Lastly, they teach but such like Doctrines, and take the like
course as many of the ancient Heretics did (of whom Epiphanius, Irenaeus, and
other Ancients will give you a full account.) Presently after the Apostles
days just such Heretics as these arose and troubled the Church: And they
brought themselves to shame by their wickedness, folly and division, and God
was still against them, and brought them to confusion! And so all along through
most ages have they sped, even down to the David-Georgians, Wegelians,
Familists, aad the like of late. And shall we play an old game as if it were a
new one, where all have sped so ill before? And shall we run our selves into
the fire, which has consumed such Heresies through former ages?

To conclude, as I am sure it is not an unwillingness to be informed, but the
knowledge of their gross deceits, that has caused me to oppose the Quakers; So
I beseech all young and raw Professors, to consider impartially of these 24
REASONS; and withal to bethink themselves, 1. What a doleful case it is that
Professors of Religion should be so ignorant, loose and unstable; and God and
his word should have no more hold of them, but that any confident sect that
rises up shall presently carry them away, even with nonsense, or that which a
child might see through? O what a shame is this to your profession? 2. What an
heavy judgment is it to your selves to be self-condemned and self-divided from
the Church, Tit. 3. 10, 11. and carried away as chaff with every wind of
Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. and to prove rotten in a day of trial! Know you not
that Heresies must arise, that those that are approved may be made manifest? 1
Cor. 11. 19. 3. Would you not turn Jews and Infidels, and renounce Christ
himself, if you had but some body to ^ry you? Its most likely that you would.
For an Infidel can put a far greater show of reason upon his cause, in opposing
Christ, then these Quakers have yet put on theirs! Well Sirs, as ever you would
stand fast and be saved, 1. See that you be serious Christians, and true to the
light received; and prepare not by unholy hearts and lives, to be forsaken of
God. 2. Stick close to the Word of God. 3. And to a faithful Ministry; and obey
their Doctrine. 4. And to the Unity and Catholic Peace of the Church. 5. And
to the communion of Saints. 6. And to the Spirit which still concur's with
these.

Sept. 5. 1657.
FINIS.

