More PROOFS OF INFANTS Church Membership AND Consequently their Right to
BAPTISM: Or a SECOND DEFENSE of our Infant Rights and Mercies.

In Three Parts.

The First is, The plain Proof of Gods Statute, or Covenant for Infants
Church Membership from the Creation, and the Continuance of it till the
Institution of Baptism; with the Defense of that Proof against the Frivolous
Exceptions of Mr. Tombs.

And a Confutation of Mr. Tombs his Arguments against Infants
Church Membership.

The Second is, A Confutation of the Strange Forgeries of Mr. H. Danvers
against the Antiquity of Infant Baptism, And of his many Calumnies against my
Self and Writings.

With a Catalogue of fifty six New Commandments and Doctrines, which He, and
the Sectaries who join with Him in those Calumnies seem to own.

The Third Part is, Animadversions on Mr. Danvers's Reply to Mr. Wills.

Extorted by their unquiet Importunity from an earnest Desirer of the Love and
Peace of all True Christians.

By Richard Baxter.

London, Printed for N. Simmons at the Princes Arms, and J. Robinson at the
Golden-Lyon in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1675.

The PREFACE.
Reader,
THe first year of my Ministry I fell into a doubt about Infant Baptism; and I
was so ignorant as not to understand the nature of that solemn Covenant and
Investiture, and the Parents duty of entering the Child into the Covenant with
God, and what the Vow was which then was made: when time, and light had
satisfied me, I retained as charitable thoughts of the Anabaptists, as of
almost any that I differed from. About 1646, 1647, 1648. they made more stir
among us than before: Mr. Tombs living near me, we continued in peace, not
talking of our difference; For I purposely avoided it in public and private,
unless any asked my opinion. At last his Converts came to me, and told me that
if I would not answer him in writing, they must take it as an encouragement to
them to be Baptized; and confessed that he sent them, or that they came by his
consent: To avoid long writings, one days dispute was thought a shorter way.
That dispute with many additions I was necessitated to publish; with some
returns to some after arguings of Mr. T.'s. He wrote what he thought meet on
the other side. I thought I had done with that work for ever: But in 1655 he
sent to me again, and drew from me the Letters here recited. These without my
consent he published with an answer in the midst of a great Book: I left his
answer these nineteen years, or thereabouts, without any Reply; as also the
rest of his books against me. I thought it not lawful for me to waste my
precious time on things so little necessary: A man may find words at length to
say for almost any cause. I partly know what can be said against this, and
every book that I have written. And I know what I can Reply. And I partly
foreknow what they can say to that Reply, and what I can further say in the
defense of it; and so talk on till we have wrangled away our Charity and our
Time: and must all this be printed, to ensnare poor readers? But at last Mr.
Danvers has laid a necessity upon me: I had silently past over all his vain
Reasonings, and all his accusations of my writings, and all his falsifications
of Authors, had he not called me so loud to repent of slandering some for being
Baptized naked: And when I found it my duty to speak to that, I thought it fit
to say somewhat of the rest, passing by what Mr. Wills. has done more fully in
an answer to his book.

There are two sorts of men called Anabaptists among us: The one sort are sober
Godly Christians, who when they are rebaptized to satisfy their Consciences,
live among us in Christian Love and peace; and I shall be ashamed if I Love not
them as heartily, and own them not as peaceably, as any of them shall do either
me or better men than I that differ from them. The other sort hold it unlawful
to hold Communion with such as are not of their mind and way, and are
schismatically troublesome and unquiet, in laboring to increase their Party.
These are they that offend me, and other lovers of peace. And if God would
persuade them but seriously to think of these obvious questions, it might
somewhat stop them. Qu. 1. How inconsiderable a part of the universal Church
they hold communion with? And unchurch almost all the Churches on Earth? Qu. 2.
Whether they can possibly hope that ever the Church on Earth will Unite upon
their terms, of rejecting all their Infants from the visible Church, and
renouncing all our Infant Rights and Benefits conferred by the Baptismal
Covenant of grace? Qu. 3. And whether if they continue to the worlds end, to
separate from almost all the Churches and unchurch them, their employment will
not be still to serve the great enemy of Love and Concord, against the Lord of
Love and Peace, and against the prosperity of faith, and godliness, and against
the welfare of the Church and souls, and to the scandal and hardening of the
ungodly?

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
THE Preface. page 1 Mr. Tombes's first Letter. p. 5 R. B.'s Answer to it.
Ibid. Mr. T.'s second Letter. p. 8 R. B.'s Answer to it. p. 9 Mr. T.'s third
Letter. p. 10 R. B.'s Answer is divided by Mr. T. into Sections: His Answers
are confuted, Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. The many Questions to be handled. Quest. 1.
Infants were once Church Members. p. 13 Sect. 5. Quest. 2. It was not only the
Infants of the Congregation of Israel that were Church Members. p. 18 How far
the Sichemites were of Israel, and Church Members. p. 21 Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Of other Nations. Ibid. Sect. 11. The Israelites Infants were members of the
Church Universal. p. 26. Sect. 12, to the 18. Infants were members of the Jews
Church as well as Commonwealth. p. 28. Sect. 18. Quest. 4. There was a Law or
Precept of God obliging Parents to enter their Children into Covenant with God,
by accepting his favor, and engaging and devoting them to God; and there was a
promise of God, offering them his mercy, and accepting them when devoted as
aforesaid, etc. p. 31 Sect. 19, etc. Visible Church Membership what it is? And
that it is a benefit. p. 32 Sect. 22. Legal-right to Infants Church State given
by Gods Covenant: Mr. T.'s confuted and the case opened. p. 35 Sect. 23, 24.
This Right is the effect of Gods Law or Covenant. p. 44, -- 46 Sect. 25, 26.
The proof of Parents obligation to enter their Children into Covenant: what we
mean by a Law; Mr. T. makes nothing of Church Membership. p. 46, -- 50 Sect.
27. Precepts oblige to duty, and the promises give right to benefits. p. 54
Sect. 28. No Transeunt fact without Gods statute, or moral donation, or
covenant, made the Israelites Infants Church Members, proved, to Sect. 44. p.
56 Sect. 44, 45. Infants Church Membership instituted by God at man's creation
and the constitution of Gods Kingdom at the first. p. 72 Sect. 46. Infants
Church Membership continued or renewed by the first Law of grace made to Adam,
Genesis 3.15. to Sect. 49. Christ's being the Head in Infancy proves what it is
brought for, and forces Mr. T. to grant the cause. p. 81 Sect. 49. The same
proved by the exposition of this Covenant in that made to Abraham vindicated
against Mr. T. who again forsakes his cause. p. 97 Sect. 50. No proof that
there was ever one Churchmember who in that state had an Infant born to him,
who was not also a Churchmember. p. 104 Sect. 51, 52. How far the Law of
Nature proves what I assert. The Church State of Infants no disadvantage, but
a great benefit: wherein -- proved, to Sect. 59. p. 105 Sect. 60. More
particular proofs, as of Cain, Abel, Seth, Noah's Sons, etc. p. 116 Sect. 70, to
79. Proving the point fully from the Covenant with Abraham. p. 124 Sect. 79, to
86. The point proved by the promises to the Israelites. A virtual cause may be
long in being before it be formally a cause, and may cause at last without any
change in it self, but in the recipient. p. 130 Sect. 86. The proof from the
second Commandment vindicated. p. 135 Sect. 87, to 93. Proofs from diverse other
texts. p. 137 Sect. 93, to 96. The case of Infants in the womb. p. 140 Sect.
96, 97. These statutes not repealed. Mr. T.'s conceit that Gods promise cannot
be repealed, confuted. p. 141 Sect. 98, to 107. Diverse Questions offered to
consideration. p. 145 Sect. 107, etc. Ten humbling Questions to Mr. T.
(published by himself against my will.) p. 157 The fuller proofs from the New
Testament only named as being before handled. p. 159 A Confutation of the many
Arguments by which Mr. T. would prove that Infants were not Church Members
under Christ. p. 161
The Contents of the Second Part.
THE Preface: Sect. 1. Of Controversies; how far good or bad; with whom sharp
rebuke and earnest contending is a duty, and with whom not: And whose duty it
is. p. 185 Sect. 2. Of the weight of the present Controversy, that we make it
not greater or less than it is: And the state of it in part. p. 198 Chap. 1.
The occasion of this Book, from Mr. Danvers. p. 211 Chap. 2. More of my present
judgment of the Anabaptists and their cause, with a motion to them for
Communion and Peace. p. 216 Chap. 3. A general view of Mr. Danvers book. p. 234
Chap. 4. Mr. Danvers Witnesses against Infant Baptism. His sad forgery against
the Donatists detected: His mavelous falsification of Augustines third and
fourth books against them de bapt. The said books vindicated. They prove that
the Donatists consented to Infant Baptism, and that the whole Church held it,
and no Christian thought it vain. His forgery against Vincentius Victor: His
slander of Cresconius. His slander of all the Novatians. His slander of the
Ancient Britains detected. His reasons for the Britains being against
Infant Baptism confuted: where many more untruths are detected, of them and
many others. His forgeries or false stories of the Messalians, called by him,
Dadoes, Sabas, Adulphus, Simonis -- His slander of Faustus Rhegiensis -- His
deceit about Albanus. His gross falsification of Nicephorus and slander of
Peter of Apamea and Zooras. His false story of Adrian Bishop of Corinth; and
his false report of Gregory's dealing with him. His fable of Egyptian Divines.
His fiction about one Berinius, and his falsification of Beda concerning him.
His forgery about Hincmarus Laudunensis, and of Hincmarus Rhemensis charge
against him. His slander of the Waldenses, heretofore detected, and further by
Nauclerus. A reference to our former proofs of the antiquity of Infant Baptism.
Nazianzens judgment. His audacious abuse of Cyprian and the Carthage Council.
My repeated assertion of the novelty of Antipedobaptism. p. 239 Chap. 5. Mr.
D.'s great Calumny of my self refuted, as if I had falsely reported that some
at that time were baptized naked. p. 281 Chap. 6. His abusive Citations of my
Writings as for his cause. p. 285 Chap. 7. His many personal accusations of me
examined. Whence it is that so many boldly speak evil of the things they know
not. His reproach of [every one of my Nonconforming Brethren, that my
Doctrines in the particulars accused by him are heinous to every one of them,]
when I remember not any one of them that has ever to me expressed his dissent,
much less endeavored to change my judgment, but many that have professed
their approbation. His vain talk of my being lost with my friends; by which he
implies that they are Hypocrites in concealing it, and would make me one in
seeking the applause of man. His many falsehoods in his accusations of
self-contradiction and mutability. 1. About Episcopacy; 2. About
Nonconformity: What he means by my sheltring my self in their Tents in a
storm, and with their indulgence coming forth of my hole.] 3. Of my friendship
to Calvin and Arminius. 4. Of the Parliaments cause, etc. 5. Of Tradition. 6.
Of Popery. 7. Whether a Controversy may have difficult objections against
plain proofs. His Catalogue of my heinous errors: A just demand from the
Non-conformists, if there be any such, whom he does not slander: and from
himself. p. 288 Chap. 8. The new Religion of my Back-biters: or a Catalogue of
some Doctrines of Mr. Danvers, and the rest that join in his accusations of my
Writings, if indeed they hold the contraries to that which they accuse, as
their accusations seem to suppose; viz. fifty six New Commandments and
Doctrines. The good that these men do. p. 313 Chap. 9. Mr. William Allens
vindication of himself against Mr. D.'s misreport; and my Testimony concerning
Mr. Allen and Mr. Lamb. p. 333 Conclusion, an Admonition to Mr. Danvers for his
Repentance. p. 337
The Contents of the Third Part.
Chap. 1. THE frightful aspect of his Reply. p. 345 Chap. 2. His impenitent
false allegation of Witnesses against Infant Baptism. Of Tertullian; whether
Cyprians Doctrine was Antichristian. Wickliff vindicated at large, from his
express words. Berengarius vindicated. p. 349 Chap. 3. Mr. D.'s justification
of his slander of the Waldenses confuted. His witnesses examined, and his
unfaithfulness opened; and the case of the Waldenses more largely explicated.
p. 379 Chap. 4. His impenitence in Calumniating the Donatists and Novatians as
against Infant Baptism, reprehended. p. 400 Chap. 5. His renewed Calumny of the
Old Britains reproved. p. 402 Chap. 6. His rash report of Bishops Ushers
censure of me, Considered. p. 404 Postscript. The Testimony of Smaragdus fully
opened: And the reports of Peter Abbas Cluniacensis, and Bernard Abbas
Clarevallensis. Their weak disingenuous course of Printing my words as against
my self (in a sheet called Mr. Baxters Arguments, etc. cried about the streets)
as if the necessity of professed faith for our selves, would prove that our
professed faith and dedicating them to God, were not sufficient for the
baptismal reception of our Infants. p. 407
Readers,
MY pain and greater business deny me time to collect the Printers Errata,
though I see diverse; and therefore must leave the discerning of them to your
selves. And I again admonish and entreat you, that the detection of the
extraordinary falsehoods and blind temerarious audacity of Mr. D. be not imputed
to the whole Rebaptizing party, (to whose Practice Gregor. Magn. paralleleth
Reordaining); and that his crimes abate not your Christian Love and tenderness
to others, there being truly Godly, wise, and peaceable persons, worthy of our
Communion, and willing of it, of that party as well as of others. Hearken not
to them that would render the Party of Anabaptists odious or intolerable; no
more than to those Anabaptists who would persuade those of their opinion to
renounce Communion with all others as unbaptized. It is against this dividing
spirit on all sides that I Write and Preach.

PART I. My private Letters to Mr. Tombs proving the Church Membership of
Infants in all ages, vindicated from his unsatisfactory exceptions.
The PREFACE.
. 1. THE occasion and time of these Letters is long ago published by Mr. Tombs
himself in the third Part of his Anti-Paedobaptism, page 353. and forward;
where he printeth the said Letters without my consent: Had I found his Answers
satisfactory, I had changed my judgment and retracted that and other such
writings long ago. But I thought so much otherwise of them that I judged it not
necessary, nor worth my diverting from better employment to write an answer to
them.

. 2. And whatever the singular judgment of that learned and excellent
Professor of Theology mentioned in his Preface, was or is concerning the
arguments that I, and many before and since have used for Infant Baptism, and
notwithstanding his opinion that it was introduced in the second Century, etc.
yet so many wiser and better men than I, think otherwise both of the cause, and
of Mr. T's writings, that I hope the modest will allow me the honor of having
very good company if I should prove mistaken.

. 3. No sober Christian will deny but that Godly men of both opinions may be
saved: And then I think no such Christian that is acquainted with the History
of the Church, can choose but think that there are now in Heaven many
thousands, if not hundred thousands that were not against Infant Baptism, for
one that was against it: And while we differ de jure, yet without great
ignorance of the state of the world, we must needs agree that de facto, the
number in the Church of Christ in all Nations and Ages that have been against
Infant Baptism has been so small, as that they make up but a very little part
of the Church triumphant: which though I take for no proof of the truth of our
opinion, yet I judge it a great reason to make me and others very fearful of
turning rashly and without cogent proof to the other side. I know the Churches
have still had their blemishes; but that they should all universally so err in
the subject of Baptism and Christianity it self, is not to be believed till it
be proved.

. 4. Though Christ be not the Author of any of our errors, he is the healer of
them, and he is the Effector as well as the Director of his Churches faith and
holiness: And yet to say that though thousands or hundred thousands are in
Heaven that were for Infant Baptism, for one that was against it, yet Christ
was against even such a constitutive part of his Church (as accounted) is not
to be received without good proof.

. 5. For my part I must still say, that after all that I have read for the
Anabaptists, and much more than such Catalogues as Mr. Danvers, I do not at
present remember that I have read of any one Christian that held the baptizing
of Infants unlawful, in many and many hundred years after Christ; at least not
any that denied not Original sin: Though indeed the Pelagians themselves that
did deny it much, yet denied not Infant Baptism.

. 6. But of this enough heretofore: I lay not my faith on the number of
Consenters; but in a doubtful case I think the way that almost all went that
are in Heaven, and took it as the very entrance of the door of life, is safer
caeteris paribus than that which few in Heaven did own: And though on earth I
have more approvers than Mr. T. I think man's approbation so poor a comfort, as
that I am sorry to read in his Preface and elsewhere how much he lays upon
it. Alas, were it not more for the good of others than our selves, how
inconsiderable a matter were it, whether men value and honor, or despise us,
and what we are thought or said of by each other, when we are all on the
borders of eternity, where the honor of this world is of no signification?

. 7. In the answer which I must give to Mr. Tombs, should I transcribe all his
words, and answer every impertinent passage, I should needlessly weary the
Reader and my self: I will therefore suppose the Reader to have his Book at
hand, and to take his words as he has given him them; that I may not be blamed
as concealing any of them. And I shall answer to nothing, but what seems to
me to need an answer: And for all the rest I am content that the impartial
Reader judge of them as he finds them: For I write not for such as need an
answer to every word that is written, how frivolous soever, against plain truth.

Mr. Tombs his first Letter.
SIR,
NOt finding yet that Law or Ordinance of Infants visible Church Membership
which you assert in your book of Baptism to be unrepealed, I do request you to
set down the particular Text or Texts of Holy Scripture where you conceive that
Law or Ordinance is written, and to transmit it to me by this bearer, that your
allegations may be considered by him who is

April 3. 1655. Yours as is meet, John Tombs.


Richard Baxters Answer.
Sir, I mean to see more said against what I have already written, before I
will write any more about Infant Baptism, without a more pressing call than I
yet discern. I have discharged my Conscience, and shall leave you and yours to
take your course. And indeed I do not understand the sense of your Letter,
because you so join two questions in one, that I know not which of the two it
is that you would have me answer to. Whether there were any Ordinances or Law
of God that Infants should be Church Members? is one question: Whether this be
repealed? is another: you join both into one. For the first, that Infants were
Church Members, as you have not yet denied that I know of, so will I not be so
uncharitable as to imagine that you are now about it: And much less that you
should have the least doubt whether it were by Gods Ordination. There are two
things considerable in the matter. First, the benefit of Church Membership,
with all the consequent privileges. It is the work of a grant or promise to
confer these, and not directly of a precept. Secondly, the duty of devoting and
dedicating the child to God, and entering it into the Covenant which confers the
benefit; and this is the work of a Law or Precept to constitute this duty. I am
past doubt that you doubt not of either of these: For you cannot imagine, that
any Infant had the blessing without a grant or promise, (that is impossible;)
nor that any Parents lay under a duty without an obliging law, (for that is as
impossible.) Taking it therefore for granted that you are resolved in both
these, and so yield that such a grant and precept there was, there remains no
question but whether it be repealed: which I have long expected that you should
prove. For citing the particular Texts in which the ordination is contained,
though more may be said than is said, yet I shall think it needless, till I see
the ordination contained in those Texts which I have already mentioned to you,
proved to be reversed. Nor do I know that it is of so great use to stand to
cite the particular Texts, while you confess in general, that such a promise
and precept there is, by virtue of which, Infants were till Christ's time duly
members of Christ's Church (for Christ's Church it was) even his universal
visible Church. Still remember that I take the word [law] not strictly for a
precept only, but largely, as comprehending both promise and precept, and I
have already showed you both, and so have others.

So much of your endeavor as has any tendency to the advancement of holiness,
I, am willing to second you in, viz. that at the age you desire people might
solemnly profess their acceptance of Christ, and their resolution to be his:
But I hope God will find me better work while I must stay here, than to spend
my time to prove that no Infants of believers are within Christ's visible
Church, that is, are no Infant Disciples, Infant Christians, Infant
Church Members. I know no glory it will bring to Christ, nor comfort to man,
nor see I now any appearance of truth in it. I bless the Lord for the benefits
of the Baptismal Covenant that I enjoyed in infancy, and that I was dedicated
so soon to God, and not left wholly in the Kingdom and power of the Devil. They
that despise this mercy, or account it none, or not worth the accepting, may go
without it, and take that which they get by their ingratitude. And I once
hoped, that much less than such an inundation of direful consequents as our
eyes have seen, would have done more for the bringing of you back to stop the
doleful breach that you have made. I am fain to spend my time now to endeavor
the recovery of some of your Opinion who are lately turned Quakers, or at least
the preventing of others Apostasy: which is indeed to prevent the emptying of
your Churches. Which I suppose will be a more acceptable work with you, than
again to write against rebaptizing, or for Infant Baptism. Sir, I remain your
imperfect brother, knowing but in part, yet loving the truth,

Rich. Baxter.


Mr. Tombs his second Letter.
Sir, I confess Infants were by Gods fact of taking the whole people of the
Jews for his people, in that estate of the Jewish Paedagogy (not by any promise
or precept) visible Church Members, that is, of the Congregation of Israel. I
do not confess that there was any Law or Ordinance determining it should be so,
but only a fact of God, which is a transeunt thing, and I think it were a
foolish undertaking for me to prove the repeal of a fact. Wherefore still I
press you that you would show me where that Law, Ordinance, Statute or Decree
of God is that is repealable, that is, which may in congruous sense be either
by a later act said to be repealed, or else to be established as a law for
ever. This I never found in your books, nor do I conceive that law is implied
in any thing I grant; and therefore I yet pray you to set me down the
particular Text or Texts of Holy Scripture where that Law is. Which need not
hinder you from opposing the Quakers (in which I have not and hope shall not be
wanting) of whom I think that you are misinformed that they are Anabaptists, I
think there are very few of them that were ever baptized, and have good
evidence that they have been formerly Seekers, as you call them. And I think
you do unjustly impute the direful consequences you speak of to the denial of
Infant Baptism, and to the practice of adult Baptism, and that as your self are
deceived so you mislead others. I yet expect your Texts, knowing none in any of
your Books that mention that law of Infants visible Church Membership which you
assert either explicitly or implicitly, and am

Bewdly, April 4. 1655. yours as is meet, John Tombs.


Richard Baxters second Letter.
Sir, If you will needs recall me to this ungrateful work, let me request you
to tell me fully, exactly and plainly, what transient fact you mean, which you
conceive without law or promise did make Church Members: that so I may know
where the competition lies. When I know your meaning, I intend, God willing,
to send you a speedy answer to your last.

April 16. 1655. Your fellow servants, Rich. Baxter.


Mr. Tombs his third Letter.
Sir, The transeunt fact of God, whereby Infants were visible Church Members,
was plainly expressed in my last to you, to be the taking of the whole people of
the Jews for his people, which is the expression of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.34. Exodus
6.7. And by it I mean that which is expressed Levit. 20.24.26. when God said, I
have severed you from other people, that you should be mine. The same thing is
expressed 1 Kings 8.53. Isai. 43.1. This I term [fact] as conceiving it most
comprehensive of the many particular acts in many generations, whereby he did
accomplish it. Following herein Stephen, Acts 7.2. and Nehem. 9.7. I conceive
it began when he called Abraham out of Vr, Genesis 12.1. to which succeeded in
their times the enlarging of his family, removing of Lot, Ishmael, the sons of
Keturah, Esau, distinction by Circumcision, the birth of Isaac, Jacob, his
leading to Padan Aram, increase there, removal to Canaan, to Egypt, placing,
preserving there, and chiefly the bringing of them thence, to which principally
the Scripture refers this fact, Exodus 19.4. Levit. 11.45. Nehem. 1.10. Hos.
11.1. the bringing them into the bond of the Covenant at Mount Sinai, giving
them laws, settling their Priesthood, tabernacle, army, government,
inheritance. By which fact the Infants of the Israelites were visible
Church Members as being part of the Congregation of Israel, and in like manner
though not with equal right (for they might be sold away) were the bought
servants or captives, whether Infants or of age, though their Parents were
professed Idolaters. And this I said was without promise or precept, meaning
such promise or precept as you in your Letter say I confess, and you describe,
a promise conferring to Infants the benefit of Church Membership with all the
consequent privileges, a precept constituting the duty of devoting and
dedicating the child to God, and entering into Covenant, which confers the
benefit. For though I grant the promises to the natural posterity of Abraham,
Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and the Covenant made with Israel at Mount Sinai, and
Deuteronomy. 29. wherein Israel avouched God, and a precept of Circumcision, and
precepts of God by Moses of calling the people, and requiring them to enter
into Covenant, Exodus 19. and Deuteronomy. 29. Yet no such particular promise
concerning Infants visible Church Membership, or precept for Parents or others,
concerning the solemn admission of Infants as visible Church Members, besides
Circumcision, as in your Book of Baptism you assert. Nor do I conceive that
Infants of Israel were made visible Church Members by the promises in the
covenants or the precepts forenamed, but by Gods transeunt fact which I have
described. Which I therefore term [transeunt] because done in time, and so not
eternal, and past, and so not in congruous sense repealable as a law,
ordinance, statute, decree, which determines such a thing shall be for the
future, though capable of continuance in the same or the like acts, or of
interruption. Which continuance or interruption is known by narration of what
God has done, not by any legal revocation, or renewing, or continuance of a
promise or precept concerning that thing. Now as the Church Membership of the
Israelites began as I conceive with Abraham's call, and was completed when they
were brought out of Egypt to God, Exodus 19.4. so I conceive it ceased when
upon their rejection of Christ as was foretold Matthew. 21.43. they were broken
off from being Gods people, which was completed at the destruction of
Jerusalem, when the temple was destroyed, as Christ foretold, Luke 19.43, 44.
And instead of the Jewish people by the preaching of the Gospel confirmed by
mighty signs, God gathered to himself a Church of another frame in a spiritual
way, according to the institution of Christ, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16.
in which he included not Infants, the Jews themselves were no part of the
Christian Church without repentance and faith in Christ professed at least.

Having now fully, exactly, and plainly told you my meaning as you request, I
do now expect your speedy answer to my last, and therein to fulfill my request
of setting down the particular Texts of holy Scripture wherein that law largely
taken comprehending promise and precept of Infants visible Church Membership,
which you assert to be unrepealed, is contained. If you shall in your answer
set down wherein the blessing, benefit, and privileges of Infants visible
Church Membership, which you assert unrepealed, did consist; I may better
understand you than I do: But I shall press you no further than you shall be
willing in this thing. I am

Bewdley, April 21. 1655. Yours as is meet, John Tombs.


Richard Baxters third Letter being long, is divided by Mr. Tombs into several
sections, and his Answers accordingly divided; which order I must therefore
observe in my reply. The words of the Letter are.

SECT. I.
R. B. SIR, A probability of doing or receiving good, is to me a call to
action. Seeing no such probability, I told you at first my purposes to forbear
any further debates with you, till you had better answered what is said. In
your next you seemed to deal so plainly, as if some small probability of good
did yet appear: But in your third you fly off again and eat your own words, and
jumble things in much confusion, so that I now return again to my former
thoughts. For you that expressly say and unsay, and contradict your self, are
not likely to be brought to a candid management or fair issue of the Dispute.
You Will sure think it no great matter to be driven to a selfcontradiction (which
with others is to lose the Cause) who so easily and expressly run upon it your
self.

" Mr. T 's Answer, It was a call sufficient, etc.

Reply. I must be the discerner of my own Call or Reasons to write: time is
precious: As for his offense at Mr. M. and Mr. Firmin for charging him with
sophistry, and at Mr. Ford for charging him with railing, and Mr. Gataker for
doubting it is his disposition to braze his forehead; and his own angry words
hereupon, they concern not our present business.

SECT. II.
R. B. IN your second you say [I confess infants were by Gods fact of taking
the whole people of the Jews for his people, in that estate of the Jewish
Paedagogy, not by any promise or precept, then visible Church Members, that is,
of the Congregation of Israel; I do not confess, that there was any Law or
Ordinance determining it should be so, but only a fact of God, which is a
transeunt thing, etc.] In your third you say, [For though I grant the promises
to the natural posterity of Abraham, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and the Covenants
made with Israel at mount Sinai, and Deuteronomy. 29. wherein Israel avouched God, and
a precept of Circumcision, and precepts of God by Moses of calling the people,
and requiring of them to enter into Covenant, Exodus 19. and Deuteronomy. 29. yet no
such particular promise concerning infants visible Church Membership, or
precept for Parents or others concerning the solemn admission of Infants as
visible Church Members besides Circumcision, as in your book of Baptism you
assert.] Before there was no [Law or Ordinance determining it should be so, but
only a fact] now there are Laws or precepts and promises that it should be so,
but [not such as I assert in my book.] And if I should show you never so many,
you may reply, they are not such as I assert in my book, and waste the time in
that trial, when it is better for me to see first what you say to that book:
For this is but to lead us about to trifling.

Mr. T's Answer. There is no shadow of a contradiction, etc.

Reply. Let the impartial Reader judge.

SECT. III.
R. B. TO make any clear work upon the things in question, we must necessarily
speak to the questions distinctly, many of which you too much confound. The
first question in order fit to be resolved is, [whether Infants before Christ's
incarnation were Church Members, or not?] you grant they were: and therefore
this is past dispute with us. The second question and the first resolved, is
[what Church it is that Infants were members of?] This you give me occasion to
take in the way, because you twice explain your meaning, when you confess them
Church Members, by an [ i. e. of the congregation of Israel.] By which you seem
to imply two things: First, that none but the Infants of the Congreation of
Israel were Church Members: Secondly, that the infants of Israel were members
of no Church but what is convertible with the congregation of Israel.] The
third question is, what it is that gives the Israelites that denomination of
[the Congregation of Israel] of which Infants were members? For you jumble both
together, both causes Civil, and Ecclesiastical, and of both those that make to
the being and well-being. So that our enquiry must be, whether the Congregation
and the Commonwealth be the same thing in your sense?] and what constituteth it
formally? For in this you speak in dark ambiguities. The fourth question is,
[Whether there was any Law, Ordinance or Precept of God concerning man's duty
herein, or obliging him to the Covenant acceptance and engagement, and so to
membership; and any promise, grant or Covenant, conferring the right of
Church Membership and the consequent privileges to Infants?] To this you say
both Yea and Nay, if I can understand you, or at least as to much of the
question concerning the being, and part of the effect of the precept and
promise. Yet you conclude, that you [do not conceive that Infants of Israel
were made visible Church Members by the promises in the Covenants, or the
precepts forenamed, but by Gods transeunt fact.] I will not suspect that you
imagine any other promise does it besides that in the Covenant, because your
tying the effect to the transeunt fact does exclude them. Here we are cast upon
these questions next. The fifth question, [Whether there be such precepts and
promises as you grant, (or as I shall prove) which yet make not Infants
Church Members?] The sixth question, [Whether there be any transeunt fact of
God, which without the efficiency of precept or promise did make the Infants of
Israel Church Members?] The seventh question, [Whether those which you have
assigned be such facts?] The eighth question, [Which are the Texts of Scripture
that contain or express the said laws, precepts, or grants which I maintain?]
this you insist upon. The ninth question, [Whether such laws, preceps or grants
as I shall prove, are capable of a repal or revocation?] The tenth question,
[Whether they are actually revoked or repealed?]

Mr. T's Answer. The eighth question is the only question needful to be
resolved, etc.

Reply. If I do too much it is but your passing it by, and it will not trouble
you.

SECT. IV.
R. B. BEfore all these questions are well handled, we should easily be
convinced that it had been better either to have let all alone, or else, if we
must needs have the other bout, at least to have agreed on our terms, and the
stating of the questions better before we had begun. And I think that even that
is not easy to do. For when I desired your plain, exact and full explication
of one word [transeunt fact] and you tell me you have plainly, fully and
exactly told me your meaning: It falls out, either through the unhappy darkness
of my own understanding, or yours, that I know but little more of your mind
than I did before, and that you seem to me to have raised more doubts and
darkness than you have resolved and dissipated. Yet being thus far drawn in, I
shall briefly say somewhat to the several questions, not following your desires
to answer one alone: which cannot be done to any purpose while the foregoing
are unresolved, because it is the clearing up of truth, and not the serving of
your present ends in your writings now in hand that I must intend.

Mr. T's Answer. I affect no more bouts with such a captious wrangler -- so
many doubts seem not to be from the darkness of the understanding, but either
from the lightness of the fancy, or the bent of the will, to find a way to
blunt the Readers attention, etc.

Reply. This is not the Controversy: Is your judgment alike right of persons
as of Doctrines?

SECT. V.
R. B. THE first question being resolved that Infants were once Church Members,
to the resolving of the second question, I shall prove these two Propositions.
1. That it was not only the Infants of the Congregation of Israel that were
Church Members. 2. The Infants of Israel were members of the universal visible
Church, and not only of that particular Congregation. The first I have proved
already in my book. And 1. Isaac was a Churchmember, yet none of the
Congregation of Israel; it was not Israel till Jacobs days. If you say that by
the [Congregation of Israel] you mean [the seed of Abraham which had the
promise of Canaan] Yet 2. I say, that Ishmael and Abraham's seed by Keturah and
Esau had none of the promise, and yet were Church Members in their infancy. [In
Isaac shall thy seed be called] that is, that seed which had the promise of
Canaan. And so it was confined to Jacob, who got the blessing and the
birthright, which Esau lost, and was excluded, yet was of the Church from his
infancy. The Son of the bondwoman was not to be heir with the Son of the
freewoman, yet was Ishmael an Infant member. If you say, that by [the
Congregation of Israel] you mean all the natural seed of Abraham: I add, 3. The
children of his bondmen born in his family, or bought with money, were none of
Abraham's natural seed, and yet were Church Members in their infancy. If you go
yet further, and say, that by [the Congregation of Israel] you mean all that
were at the absolute dispose of Abraham or his successors, and so were his own:
I add, 4. The Infants of free Proselytes were none such, and yet were
Church Members. If you yet go further, and say, that you mean by [the
Congregation of Israel] any that came under the government of Abraham or his
successors: then I add, 5. That the Sichemites, Genesis 34. were not to ^ome under
Jacobs government, but to be his allies and neighbors, being so many more in
number than Jacob, that they concluded rather that his cattle and substance
should be theirs; yet were they circumcised every male, and so were made
members of the visible professing Church. For it was not the bare external sign
that Jacob or his sons would persuade them to, without the thing signified: For
the reproach that they mentioned of giving their daughter to the uncircumcised,
was not in the defect of the external abscission; for so Moses own son, and all
the Israelites in the wilderness should have been under the same reproach, and
all the females continually: But it was in that they were not in Covenant with
the same God, and did not profess to worship the same God in his true way of
worship as they did. And therefore as Baptizing is not indeed and in Scripture
sense Baptizing, if it be not used for engagement to God, even into his name;
so Circumcision is not indeed and in Scripture sense Circumcision, unless it be
used as an engaging sign, and they be circumcised to God.

Mr. T's Answer. By [the Congregation of Israel] I mean the same with the
Hebrew people or house of Abraham -- by an anticipation, etc.

Reply. 1. That not only the Infants of Abraham's house were Church Members
shall be proved.

2. Here he is forced to take in the Children of Keturah, Ishmael, and Esau,
into [the Congregation of Israel]; And so to extend Infants Church Membership
further than the Jews Commonwealth. For let the Reader judge, whether the
posterity of Ishmael, Esau and Keturah were of that Republic, or Proselytes
either, and not usually enemies.

3. He is forced to extend Infants Church Membership to whole Cities that would
be but their Allies, as the Sichemites were: For when he says [They were one
people] by consent, he could not say that they were to be their subjects and so
members of their Republic. And they may be [one people] by mixture and
confederacy, without subjection. And there is no intimation that the Sichemites
were to part with their former Governors and be subject to Jacob. And then if
all the Kingd^ms about would but have been accordingly Jacobs confederates, it
seems Mr. T. must yield that their Infants had been visible Church Members.

SECT. VI.
R. B. IT was then the duty of all the Nations round about (if not of all the
Nations on earth, that could have information of the Jewish Religion) to engage
themselves and their children to God by Circumcision. That all that would have
any alliance and commerce with the Jews must do it, is commonly confessed: that
it must extend to Infants, the case of the Sichemites (though deceitfully drawn
to it by some of Jacobs sons) does show, and so does the Jewish practice which
they were to imitate: that the same engagement to the same God is the duty of
all the world, is commonly acknowledged, though Divines are not agreed whether
the distant nations were obliged to use Circumcision the Jewish sign. The best
of the Jews were zealous to make Proselytes, and no doubt but the very law of
nature did teach them to do their best for the salvation of others. To think
such charitable and holy works unlawful, is to think it evil to do the greatest
good. And if they must persuade the neighbor nations to come in to God by
Covenant engagement, they must persuade them to bring their children with them,
and to devote them to God as well as themselves. For the Jews kn^w no other
covenanting or engaging to God. As the Sichemites must do, so other nations
must do: For what privilege had the children of the Sichemites above the rest
of the world?

Mr. T's Answer. The argument in form would be thus: If it were the duty of all
the nations round about to engage themselves and their children to God by
circumcision, then it was not only the Infants of the Congregation of Israel
that were Church Members, etc.

Reply. 1. You should have said [that would have been Church Members had they
done that duty]. But you can best serve your own turn. 2. One Supreme Power
makes one Republic (with the subjects); And many Sovereigns make many
Republics (as all grant): Therefore if all the Nations about had engraffed
themselves into the Congregation of Israel but as the Sichemites did, they had
not made one Republic, as to humane Sovereignty: I presume to tell you my
thoughts of such a case (and so of the Sichemites): It was the glory of Israel
to be a Theocracy: God was their Soveragin; not only as he was of all the world
( de jure and by overruling their humane Sovereign:) but by special Revelation
doing the work a Sovereign himself: He made them Laws (and not Moses): He
appointed them Captains under him by Revelation: He decided cases by Oracle: He
gave them Judges that were Prophets, and acted by his extraordinary spirit.
Though Moses is called a King, he was but an Official Magistrate, Captain and
Prophet: [A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up to you like unto me, etc.]
says he: which had immediate respect to the form of Government and manner of
succession, (as differing from the way of Kings which the Israelites sinfully
preferred afterward, casting off this special Theocracy) though ultimately it
intended Christ. Now, this being so, the Sichemites or any other nations who
would have taken God for their Sovereign, and come under this special
prophetical Theocracy, (which Circumcision engaged them to as respecting the
Laws to which it bound them) had been so far united to Israel. But how far
might this have extended? To the rest that he says I consent. If you will not
hold to this you must say that the Sichemites were to be of the same Community
with Israel, and not of the same Republic, which signifies either ungoverned
Communities or various Republics confederating.

SECT. VII.
R. B. IN Hesters time many of the people became Jews, Hest. 8.17. who yet were
not under their government. And to be Jews is to be of the Jewish profession.
And it is well known that this was to be circumcised, they and their little
ones (as the Proselytes were) and so to keep the Law of Moses.

Mr. T's Answer. -- They were incorporated into the Jewish people, etc.

Reply. This needs no reply but what is given to the former.

SECT. VIII.
R. B. THE scattered and captivated Jews themselves were from under the
Government of Abraham's successors, and yet were to Circumcise their children as
Church Members.

Mr. T's Answer is the same, and the Reply the same.

SECT. IX.
R. B. WHen Jonas preached to Ninive, it was all the race of man among them,
without exception, from the greatest to the least, that was to fast and join in
the humiliation: Ergo, all, even Infants as well as others, were to partake of
the remission. If you say, the beasts were to fast too: I answer, as they were
capable in their kind of part of the curse, so were they of part of the
benefit, but their capacity was not as man's: They fasted to manifest man's
humiliation. And if by the humiliation of the aged the beasts sped the better
in their kind, no wonder if Infants sped the better in theirs, and according to
their capacities, and that was to have a remission suitable to their sin.

Mr. T's Answer. Neither aged nor infants were visible Church Members, etc.

Reply. This only proves by parity of Reason, their capacity of it, and that
they would have been such, if they had truly turned to God: which yet I cannot
say that many of them did not according to the terms of the Common Covenant of
Grace made with Adam and Noe, though they came not under the Covenant of
peculiarity: And if so (as Repentance is to be interpreted in the best sense
till the contrary be proved) I leave it to the Reader, whether Gods laying on
the Infants their share (as capable) in the humiliation, imply not such a share
as they are capable of in the benefit? And the case of the Israelites Infants
shows what they were capable of. Mr. T's denial is no disproof.

SECT. X.
R. B. WHat I have said of Sem and many others, and their posterity already, I
shall not here again repeat: and more will be said anon to the following
questions.

Mr. T's Answer is none, and needs no Reply.

SECT. XI.
R. B. THE second proposition to be proved is, (...) Israelites children were
(...) of ^he u^^versal visible Church of Christ as well ^s ^^ the Congregation
of Israel] But this you did heretofore acknowledge, and therefore I suppose
will not now deny. I suppose it past controversy between us; 1. That Christ
had then a Church on earth. As Abraham saw Christ's day and rejoiced, and Moses
suffered the reproach of Christ, Heb. 11.26. and the Prophets enquired of the
salvation by Christ, and searched diligently, and prophesied of the grace to
come; and it was the spirit of Christ which was in those Prophets signifying
the time, and testifying beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory
that should follow, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. So were they part of the Church of Christ,
and members of the body of Christ, and given for the edification of that body:
Though it was revealed to them that the higher privileges of the Church after
the coming of Christ, were not for them but for us, 1 Pet. 1.12.2. I suppose it
agreed on also between us, that there was no true Church or Ecclesiastical
worshipping society appointed by God in all the world since the fall, but the
Church of Christ, and therefore either Infants were members of Christ's Church,
or of no Church of Gods institution. Moses Church and Christ's Church according
to Gods institution were not two, but one Church. For Moses was Christ's Usher,
and his ceremonies were an obscurer Gospel to lead men to Christ: And though
the foolish Jews by misunderstanding them made a separation, and made Moses
Disciples to be separate from Christ's Disciples, and so set up the alone
[shadows of things to come, yet the body is all of Christ] Col. 2.17. and by so
doing they violated Gods institution, and unchurcht themselves. 3. I suppose it
agreed also, that Christ's Church is but one, and that even those of all ages
that are not at once visible, yet make up one body. 4. And that therefore
whoever is a member of any particular Church is a member of the universal.
(Though the Church was more eminently called Catholic, when the wall of
separation was taken down.) But I remember I have proved this in my Book, part.
1. chap. 20. and therefore shall say no more now.

Mr. T's Answer. The two first are granted. To the third, Though whoever is a
member of any particular Church is a member of the universal; yet it follows
not, (which Mr. B. drives at, and vainly talks of his proving) that every one
who was a member of the universal Church, in that he was a member of the Jewish
Church. particular, was a visible member of every particular visible Church of
Christ. 2. Nor that every one that was a member of the universal Church, in
that he was a member of a visible particular Church of Christ, was a visible
member of the Jewish particular Church, etc.

Reply. 1. None of this ever came into my thoughts which he untruly says I
drive at, etc. What sober man could imagine either of these assertions? What
pitiful abuse of ignorant Readers is this? 2. And what a poor put off to the
point in hand? That which I said is but that all particular visible Churches
and members, make up one visible universal Church, and therefore every visible
member of any particular Church is a member of the universal? He durst not deny
this, and yet a slander serves his turn.

SECT. XII.
R. B. COncerning the matter of the third question. I assert that [it was not
only of the Jews Commonwealth that Infants were members, but of the Church
distinct from it. This is proved sufficiently in what is said before.

Mr. T's Answer. As yet I find it not prove that the Jewish Church was distinct
from the Commonwealth, or that there was not any member of the Church who was
not of the Commonwealth.

Reply. 1. It is only a formal and not a material distinction that I meddled
with: The formal reason of a Churchmember and a Civil-member differ, at least
after the choice of Kings, when the Republic was constituted by a humane head:
Of which I refer the Reader to Mr. Galuspie's Aarons Rod; If the Jews
Commonwealth be specified as a Theocracy from God the Sovereign, the
Sichemites were of it, and other nations might. 2. But many say that some were
of the Commonwealth that were not of the Church, though not contrarily: And be
they distinct or not, it suffices me that Infants were of the Church.

SECT. XIII, XIV, XV, XVI.
R. B. MOreover, 1. Infants were Church Members in Abraham's family before
Circumcision, and after when it was no Commonwealth. So they were in Isaacs,
Jacobs, etc.

2. The banished, captivated, scattered Jews, that ceased to be members of
their Commonwealth, yet ceased not to be of their Church.

3. The people of the Land, that became Jews in Hesters time, joined not
themselves to their Commonwealth: Nor the Sichemites.

4. Many Proselytes never joined themselves to their Commonwealth.

Mr. T. affirms them all to have been Commonwealths.

Answer. The word being ambiguous may in a large sense be extended to a family,
and to a scattered people that have no Sovereign; but is not so usually taken.

SECT. XVII.
R. B. THE Children of Abraham by Keturah, when they were removed from his
family were not unchurched; and yet were no members of the Jews Commonwealth.
But I shall take up with what is said for this already, undertaking more
largely to manifest it, when I perceive it necessary and useful.

Mr. T's Answer. Abraham's children by Keturah when out of the Commonwealth of
the Hebrews were unchurched; at least in respect of the Church of the Hebrews.

Reply. 1. What a wide gap does that [ at least] make you, yet to say, They
were a Church or no Church, as you please? 2. Reader, use Scripture but
impartially, and in the fear of God, and I will leave it to thy Conscience to
judge whether it be credible, that when God had foretold that Abraham would
command his children and household after him to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis
18.19. and when Ishmael, Keturahs children, and Esau, were circumcised by Gods
command, and God had yet promised the Political peculiarities specially to
Isaac, and Jacob, yet God would have all the grandchildren of Ishmael, Keturah,
Esau to be uncircumcised: and all their posterity to cease that usage, as soon
as they were out of Abraham's house: when yet History assures us that they long
continued it: Or whether God would have them circumcised and yet be no
Church Members? Believe as evidence constrains thee.

SECT. XVIII.
R. B. TO the fourth question I assert that [ 1. There was a Law or Precept of
God obliging the Parents to enter their children into Covenant with God, by
accepting his favor, and re-ingaging and devoting them to God, and so entering
them solemnly Church Members.] And [ 2. there was a Covenant, promise or grant
of God, by which he offered the Church Membership of some Infants and actually
conferred it, where his offer was accepted.] I should have mentioned this
first, and therefore will begin with the proof of this. By these terms
Covenant, promise, grant, or deed of gift, etc. we understand that which is
common to all these, viz. [A sign of Gods will conferring or confirming a right
to or in some benefit] such as we commonly call a Civil act of Collation as
distinct from a mere Physical act of disposal. I call it [a sign of Gods will
de jure] because that is the general nature of all his legal moral acts: they
are all signal determinations de debito, ^f some due. 2. I say conferring or
confirming ^ight to some benefit] to difference it from pre^epts which only
determine what shall be due from us to God, and from threatenings, which
determine what punishment shall be due from God to us.

Mr. T. -- If we prove by another grant or deed of gift Physical or Moral which
is not a promise, or by any Law which is not such a precept, he contradicts not
my speech, etc.

Reply. Your words are [I do not confess that there was any Law or Ordinance
determining that it should be so (that Infants should be members of the Jewish
Church) but only a fact of God which is a transeunt thing, and I think it were
a foolish undertaking to prove the repeal of a fact.] Peruse his words Reader.

SECT. XIX, XX, XXI.
R. B. HAving thus explained the terms, I prove the proposition. If Infants
Church Membership with the privileges thereof were a benefit conferred, which
some had right to or in, then was there some grant, covenant, or promise, by
which this right was conferred: But the antecedent is most certain: Ergo, so is
the consequent. I suppose you will not deny that it was a benefit to be the
covenanted people of God, to have the Lord engaged to be their God, and to take
them for his people, to be brought so near him, and to be separated from the
common and unclean, from the world, and from the strangers to the Covenant of
promises, that live as without God in the world, and without hope.

If it were asked what benefit had the Circumcision? I suppose you would say,
much every way.

If Infant Church Membership were no benefit, then they that had it, were not
(when they came to age or their Parents in the mean time) obliged to any
thankfulness for it. But they were obliged to be thankful for it. Ergo, it was
a benefit.

Mr. T. Denies not the benefit; but denies [that this is to be Visible
members formally or connexively, for they may have all this benefit who are not
visible Church Members: viz. some believing Saints that are dumb.

Reply. Mark Reader, what an issue our Controversies with these men come to?
[Men may be the covenanted people of God, and have the Lord engaged to be their
God and to take them for his people, and be separated from the common and
unclean, from the world, from strangers to the Covenant, etc. and yet be no
visible Church-members] with them! Does a dumb man signify his consent to the
Covenant by any signs or not? If he do, that is visible covenanting. If not,
how is he one of these covenanting and separated people? And do you think that
Mr. T. knew not that I talk to him of visible covenanting and separation, and
not only of a secret unexpressed heart-consent: What will make a Churchmember
then with such men?

He next says that [To be the circumcision is not all one as to be visible
Church Members; Cornelius and his house were visible Church Members, yet not
the circumcision].

Reply. Reader, do thou not marvail to find him so plead for me against
himself, or speak nothing to the case? To be circumcised then, or baptized now,
is not all one as to be visible Church Members: But sure all the Circumcised
were, and all the Baptized are, invested in visible membership? Is it not so?
And if Cornelius and more of the uncircumcised also were members, you see it
was not inseparable from Circumcision. And whom is this against, me or him?

He adds [nor were the benefits, Romans 3.1, 2. (the oracles of God, etc.)
conferred to them as visible Church Members: For then all visible
Church Members had been partakers of them].

Reply. But it was to them as members of the Jewish visible Church: And if you
plead for the extent of the Church to others also, I thank you for it.

When I say [ Infant Church Membership was a benefit] He says [Visible
Church Membership simply notes only a state, by which was a benefit.]

Reply. Only, is an exclusive term: Reader, by this thou may perceive the
mystery of making Church Members by a transeunt fact, without a Law or promise.
It is no benefit with these men, but a state by which was a benefit. Either
they or I then know not at all what Church Membership is: And are not all our
Volumes wisely written to trouble the world, about that Subject that we are not
agreed what it is, and about a term which we agree not of the sense of? I take
a visible Churchmember to be a visible member of Christ as Head of the Church
and of his Church as visible? To be a Member is to be a Part: It is therefore
as the member of a Family, School, Kingdom, a related part! And is it no
benefit in it self besides the consequents to be visibly united and related to
Christ and his body? to be relatively a member of the Household of God? Sure
were it but for the exclusion of the misery of the contrary state, and for the
Honor of it, such a Relation to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and the
Church, is some little benefit: (and great to me.)

And whether he and Major Danvers and such others should make such a vehement
stir about it as they do, if it be no benefit, let it be considered.

SECT. XXII.
R. B. THE next thing in the antecedent to be proved is, that there was a right
conferred to this benefit, and some had a right in it. And 1. If any had the
benefit, then had they right to or in that benefit: But some had the benefit,
Ergo. The consequence of the major is certain. 1. Because the very nature of
the benefit consists in a right to further benefits. 2. If any had the
benefit of Church Membership, Covenant Interest, etc. without right; then they
had it with Gods consent and approbation or without it. Not with it: For he is
just, and consents not that any have that which he has not some right to or
in: Not without it: For no man can have a benefit from God against his will, or
without it. 2. If no Infants had duly and rightfully received this benefit, God
would have somewhere reprehended the usurpation and abuse of his ordinances or
benefits. But that he does not as to this case, Ergo. 3. God has expressed
this right in many Texts of Scripture, of which more afterward.

Mr. T. The Infants of the Jews were visisible Church Members, not by a Legal
right to it, antecedent to their being such visible Church Members which they
or any for them might claim as due: Nor was it capable of being duly and
rightfully received or usurped: For it was nothing but a state of appearing to
be part of that people, who were in appearance from things sensible, Gods
people; and this they had by Gods fact of making them to be a part of that
people visibly, viz. his forming them and bringing them into the world, and
placing them, --

Reply. More mystery still! 1. Was there no antecedent Law or Covenant of God,
giving a jus societatis a Right of membership to Abraham's seed as soon as they
had a being initially, and commanding them to be devoted to God in Covenant,
and Circumcised, that they by investiture might have a plenary Right? Was there
no such thing? O but [ this gave them not a right to it before they had it.] Is
the poor Church to be thus abused, and holy things thus played with? They could
not be members before they had a being; nor could lay claim to it: But could
not Gods Law, Grant or Instrumental Covenant be made before they were born? And
could it not be the Instrument of conveying right to them as soon as they were
born? that is, as soon as they were subjects capable? And is not the cause in
order of nature, though not of time before the effect? Cannot the Law of the
Land be the fundamental cause of the Right of Infants to Honors and Estates,
though till they are in being they are not capable subjects? Is not the Action
ut agentis naturally antecedent to it as in patiente? Is it only Gods transeunt
fact of making them men and these men, and placing them in England, which
makes Infants to be members of the English Nobility, or Gentry or Citizens or
members of this Kingdom? No; but it is the Laws that do morally give the Jus
dignitatis, vel societatis, though their action be not terminated in any
subject till it exist. For every man born in England is not born a Lord, or
Esquire, or Citizen, no nor a free subject, unless the Law say it shall be so.
If Foreigners or Rebels should have children here, and the Law were that they
shall be Aliens, they would be no members of the Kingdom. If Mr. T. or Mr. D's
children have nothing but Generation, and being born in England to show for
their Inheritance, their Title will not hold.

2. And might not right have been falsely pleadded or usurped by a counterfeit
Jew? Or the children of such? Or the children of Apostates? who yet were born
of Abraham's seed, and in that Land? Whatsoever they were that Nehemiah used
severely, I am sure Achans children, and the Infants of the Cities that were to
be consumed for Idolatry, lost their right to life and Church Membership at
once by their Parents sin: And God might if he had pleased, have continued the
Life of Apostates children, without continuing their Church-right; Or Apostates
might (and no doubt multitudes did) escape the justice of the Law through the
fault of Magistrates or people, and yet have no true Legal Right to
Church Membership for themselves or Infants (born after): For he that has lost
his right to life, has lost his right (or may do) to the privileges and
benefits of it.

He adds [yet I grant, they had a right in it, that is, that they had it by
Gods donation.]

Reply. And was it not a Moral Donation then, if it gave Right? You will be
forced thus to confute your self.

Mr. T. It seems to me not true, that the nature of the benefit of Infants
visible membership consists in a right to further benefits.

Reply. Yet he gives not a word to tell us why he thinks so. If we are at
this pass about Relations and Right in general, no marvail if Infant Baptism go
for Antichristian: Does not the Relative state of a Citizen, or of the member
of any privileged society, consist in his state of Right to the Benefits,
Privileges and Communion of the Society, and an obligation to the duties of a
member, to the end he may have the benefits, and the Society the benefit of his
membership and duty? A conjunction of Right ((...)) and obligation constituteth
all such Relations. But what shall we be agreed in that are ignorant and differ
here?

Next Mr. T. denies the consequence, [For a man may have a benefit without
right.]

Reply. 1. And yet just now, Church Membership in Israel was a thing that none
could usurp, or have without right? 2. But I said [ no man can have a benefit
from God against his will or without it:] And therefore if God give such a
thing as Church Membership which consists in a Right to further benefits, he
that has it by Gods gift has it rightfully: Natural effects (as a prey to a
thief) may be said to be given of God improperly, by Physical disposal, to him
that has no right: But right it self cannot be given to him that has no
right; nor any thing else, Relative or Natural, by Gods Moral or Covenant
donation.

He [conceiveth it to be very erroneous that visible Church Membership is given
out of distributive Justice; for as Regeneration, so also visible membership
are of bounty by God as Sovereign Lord, not of distributive Justice by God as
Judge. 2. That all that any man has of God he has of debt, contrary to Romans
4.4. 3. That visible Church Membership is conceived as a thing offered, and to
be duly and rightfully received

Reply. If Mr. T. and I shall tire the Printer, and wast Paper, and trouble the
world, with telling them how many errors each of us hold, it will be an
unsavory task, and I doubt it would be a much shorter work for one of us,
(which ever it is) to enumerate the useful truths we hold. What I hold, be it
right or wrong, I will tell the Reader as to this matter. I hold that Gods
Kingdom is to be considered in its Constitution and Administration: The first
has, 1. The efficient, 2. The Constitutive, 3. The final Causes: And in the
large sense it contains, 1. Subjects only by obligation, (such as Rebels are)
2. Subjects by consent, (or voluntary). The Efficient cause of the former is
only Gods 1. Making them men, and Redeemed men quoad precium, and commanding
their subjection or consent. To the effecting of the second is besides these
required their Actual Consent (Parents consenting for their Infants), without
which they are but Rebels, and have no right to the benefits of the Society.

God being a King de jure before his Government is Consented to, makes a Law
to man to command them to consent and be his voluntary subjects: To those that
consent (as the condition) he promises the interest and blessings of his
Covenant, viz. Christ and Life; and threatens the privation of those benefits,
and sorer punishment to refusing rebels: He is Lawgiver and will be Judge of
Non-consenters; called, Unbelievers and refusers of Christ and Salvation: When
men do consent they are under his further Administering Laws. The said efficient
causes are Gods Actions, 1. As Omnipotent Owner, 2. As Benefactor, 3. As
Sapiential Rector. 1. According to the first, he gives us our Being and
preserves it, and in him we Live, and Move, and Are. 2. As our Benefactor
antecedent to his Administration, he gave the world a Redeemer absolutely, and
reprieved the world and us, and gives us all common Antecedent Mercies. 3. As
the Rector de jure of men not yet consenting, he makes the Law of Grace
absolutely and antecedently to any condition (of making it) on our part. This
Law has the preceptive part, commanding consent (faith and repentance). 2. The
Donative or promissory part, giving us Christ in Relation, and right to his
present benefits, if we consent; which is the condition. 3. And the penalty
aforesaid.

The Administration of the Kingdom de jure, is the efficient of the consenting
Kingdom: The Administration (or Actual Government) of the Consenting Kingdom,
is by Legislation, Judgment and Execution. And the Legislation is, 1. For the
constitution of the particular members that shall from time to time be added:
2. And the Governing of them all.

Now if God have made a Law that men shall be received members of Christ and
his Church if they consent (or Repent and Believe) and formerly to the
Israelites, if they be Consenters (or their seed, who consent by them) then it
is an act of distributive justice of God as Judge, to give these benefits to
Consenters: And to contradistinguish an act of bounty unless he say [ mere
bounty] is intolerable. For God governs us Paternally, as a
Regent-benefactor: He never gave reward to a Creature, Man or Angel, which was
not a Gift as to the value of the thing, and a Reward only as to the ordo
conferendi and ratio recipiendi: It is madness to think that we can merit from
God commutatively. And it is little better to think that bounty and distributive
justice may not consist; yea that there can be any right quoad ordinem
distribuendi from that justice, which is not quoad rem donatam from bounty. It
is sad therefore that the world must see, that looking all how to make good an
espoused cause, should tempt so Ancient and Learned a Divine to subvert the
Gospel and all Christianity: For what does he less? If he talk only of members
by obligation, every living man is a member: This he means not. If he talk
only of Consenting voluntary Members, to say that God commands none to be
such, is to say that he commands none to be Christians, to Repent, Believe or
Consent: To say that he has made no promise or Donative Act in the Law of
Grace, that if you consent (repent and believe) you shall have union with
Christ and his Church (or be members) is to deny the very sum of all the
Gospel, and Baptism it self. To say that God does not as Judge execute his own
Law and promise, giving this union to Consenters, and denying it to Refusers,
is to say that he will not as a Judge absolve Believers or condemn Unbelievers.
O Reader, hate faction and partial disputes that can make men overthrow all
Christianity, not knowing what they do.

2. And his denying that visible Church Membership is a thing offered, and
rightly to be accepted, is the same, even to deny that Christ inviteth any
Infidel to become a Christian, or ever called or commanded Heathens to believe:
or sent his Ministers to compel them to come in, that his house may be filled.

But his slander that I say all that man has from God is of debt, is forged
groundlesly. I say God gives some benefits antec^dently and absolutely, and
some consequently on condition, by a Law: And none of them all are of debt as a
workman deserves his wages with commutative justice.

It is his gross error that visible Church Membership of Infants among the Jews
was not a thing offered on condition of Parents faith, and to be accepted or
refused; but a state resulting from Gods fact. He feigneth a Church to be
formally quid Physicum sure! He that would not consent to the Covenant was by
Asa to be put to death: And was not Circumcision a covenanting act? And did
they not thereby profess to take God for their God? or would God else have
taken them for his people? And would not renouncing God have cut them off? And
would their seed then have had any right for being theirs? Indeed it is
disputable how far some Ancestors, or other Proprietors might be a medium of
right to such Apostates seed: but as theirs, there is no dispute.

SECT. XXIII.
R. B. I Am next to prove the consequence, that [this right was conferred by
some grant, promise, or Covenant of God.] And this is as easy as to prove that
the world was made by Gods power and efficiency or will; or to prove that God
is the owner of all things, and no man can receive them but by his gift. 1. If
there be no other way possible for right to be conveyed from God to us, but
only by his grant, promise, or Covenant, (which we call donation, and is a
moral civil action,) then it is by this means that it is conveyed. But there is
no other possible way of such conveyance: Ergo, we have no right till God give
us right. His will signified creates our right. No man can have right to that
which is wholly and absolutely another, but by his consent or will. This will
is no way known, but by some signs of it. These signs of such a will for
conveyance of right to a benefit, are a civil moral action, called a donation
or gift simply. If the sign be in writing, we commonly call it a deed of gift.
If it be by word of mouth, conferring a present right, we call it a verbal
grant or gift. If it confer only a future right, we call it a promise, and
sometimes a Covenant; and sometimes the word Covenant signifies both, that act
which gives a present right, and promises a continuance of it. Right being a
moral or civil thing, can be no way conveyed but by a moral or civil action. A
gift that was never given, is a contradiction. So that this part of our
controversy is as easy as whether two and two be four.

Mr. T. Visible Church Membership is not a Right, but a state of Being; as to
be strong, healthy, rich, etc. which are not given by a civil moral action, but
by Providence of God acting Physically as the Sovereign disposer of all. -- I
deny therefore that there is such a promise --

Reply. Reader, it is not long of me that this Learned Ancient Divine knows
not what a Churchmember is, or else what is the difference between Ethics, or
Politics, and Physics. But it is our shame that a Preacher in England should
be sound so ignorant. God as the Fountain of nature, and Omnipotent Lord of
all, is indeed the first Cause of Being and Motion as such: As a free
Benefactor he is the first Cause of all our Good as such; And as a Sapiential
Rector, and Benefactor conjunctly (that is, by Paternal government) he is the
first cause of Right.

Being and Motion are the effects of Physical efficiency: Jus vel Debitum is
the very formal effect or object of Moral Efficiency by a Rector, and the
formal object of Ethics. To be a Churchmember, is to have a stated Relation,
consisting in Right to the Benefits and obligation to the duty, as was said
before. He denies this to be any Right, and to have any such Civil-moral cause
as Right has, but to be quid Physicum as Health, strength, Riches, and an
answerable Physical cause. Let the shame of this ignorance reform the common
error of Schools that teach not their children betimes the principles of
Ethics, Politics, or Governing Order: It is a shame that at 16. years old any
should be so ignorant as these words import. I must speak it, or I comply with
the powers of darkness, that so shamefully oppose the truth.

SECT. XXIV.XXV.
R. B. 2. GOD has expressly called that act a Covenant or promise by which he
conveyeth this right: which we shall more fully manifest anon when we come to
it.

The second Proposition to be proved, is, that [there was a Law or Precept of
God obliging the Parents to enter their children into Covenant and
Church Membership, by accepting of his offer, and re-engaging them to God.] And
this is as obvious and easy as the former. But first I shall in a word here
also explain the terms. The word [Law] is sometimes taken more largely, and
unfitly, as comprehending the very immanent acts or the nature of God,
considered without any sign to represent it to the creature. So many call Gods
nature or purposes the Eternal Law: which indeed is no law, nor can be fitly so
called. 2. It is taken properly for [an authoritative determination de debito
constituendo vel confirmando.] And so it comprehends all that may fitly be
called a law. Some define it, [Jussum majestatis obligans aut ad obedientiam
aut ad poenam.] But this leaves out the premiant part, and some others: So that
of Grotius does, Est regula actionum moralium obligans ad id quod rectum est. I
acquiesce in the first, or rather in this, which is more full and exact; [A law
is a sign of the Rectors will constituting or confirming right or dueness.]
That it be a sign of the Rectors will de debito constituendo vel confirmando,
is the general nature of all laws. Some quarrel at the word [sign] because it
is logical and not political: As if Politicians should not speak logically as
well as other men! There is a twofold due: 1. What is due from us to God (or
any Rector;) and this is signified in the precept and prohibition, (or in the
precept de agendo and non agendo.) 2. What shall be due to us; and this is
signified by promises, or the premiant part of the law, and by laws for
distribution and determination of proprieties. All benefits are given us by God
in a double relation, both as Rector and Benefactor: or as Benefactor Regens;
or as Rector benefaciens: though among men that stand not in such a
subordination to one another as we do to God, they may be received from a mere
benefactor without any regent interest therein. The first laws do ever
constitute the debitum or right: afterward there may be renewed laws and
precepts to urge men to obey the former, or to do the same thing: and the end
of these is either fullier to acquaint the subject with the former, or to
revive the memory of them, or to excite to the obedience of them: And these do
not properly constitute duty, because it was constituted before; but the nature
and power of the act is the same with that which does constitute it, and
therefore does confirm the constitution, and again oblige us to what we were
obliged to before. For obligations to one and the same duty may be multiplied.
3. Some take the word [law] in so restrained a sense as to exclude verbal or
particular precepts, especially directed but to one; or a few men; and will
only call that a law which is written, or at least a well known custom obliging
a whole society in a stated way. These be the most eminent sort of laws: but to
say that the rest are no laws, is vain and groundless, against the true general
definition of a Law, and justly rejected by the wisest Politicians. That which
we are now to enquire after, is a precept, or the commanding part of a law,
which is [a sign of Gods will obliging us to duty,] of which signs there are
materially several sorts, as 1. by a voice, that is evidently of God: 2. by
writing: 3. by visible works or effects: 4. by secret impresses, as by
inspiration, which is a law only to him that has them.

Mr. T. I assert, 1. There is no such offer, promise or Covenant: 2. That
though there are precepts for Parents to pray for their Children, to breed them
up yet they are not bound to believe this, that upon their own faith God will
take their Infant Children to be his, and will be a God to them, nor to accept
of this pretended offer. 3. That though Parents may enter into Covenant for
their Children -- as Deuteronomy. 29.12. they do not by this make them partakers of
the Covenant or promise that God will be their God.

Reply. What a deal of the Gospel and the Churches mercys do these men deny? 1.
The very nature of our own Holy Covenant is, that in it we give up to God our
selves and all that is ours according to the capacity of that all. And as our
Riches are devoted hereby as capable utensils; so our Infants as capable of
Infant Relation, Obligation and Right. What is it that a sanctified man must
not devote to God that is His? If you except Liberty, Health, Life, you are
hypocrites: And can you except Children? It Is true; this is but so far as they
are our own, and we say no more: when they have a will to choose for
themselves, they must do it. 2. I have fully proved Scripture commands for
Parents to offer their Children to God, and that signifies his will to accept
what he commands them to offer. And his promises to show mercy to them as
theirs are plain and many, which I must not tire the Reader with repeating.

Mr. T. adds, That if there were such a promise and duty of accepting the
pretended offer and re-engaging, yet this neither did then nor does now make
Infants visible Church Members.

Reply. Reader, are not the Anabaptists ductile men where they like, as well as
intractable where they dislike, that they will follow such a Leader as this?
Promise and Duty of accepting and re-engaging aggravateth the sin of Rebels
that reject it; but if these performed, even visible mutual covenanting, make
not Church Members visible, what does? You see what he has brought the ancient
and later Church Membership, Circumcision and Baptism to? I think to nothing:
As formal Pontifician Church-tyrants when they have mortified some ordinance,
and turned it into an Image, make an engine of it to trouble the Church, and
silence the Preachers and serious practisers of the Gospel with. These men make
nothing of Church Membership, and then restlesly trouble the Church-about it.

SECT. XXVI.
R. B. HAving thus opened the terms [Law and Precept,] I prove the Proposition
thus. 1. If it was the duty of the Israelites to accept Gods offered mercy for
their Children, to engage and devote them to him in Covenant, then there was a
Law or Precept which made this their duty, and obliged them to it. But it was a
duty: Ergo, there was such a Law or Precept. For the antecedent, 1. If it were
not a duty, then it was either a sin, or a neutral indifferent action: But it
was not a sin, (for, 1. It was against no Law, 2. It is not reprehended;) nor
was it indifferent, for it was of a moral nature, and ergo, either good or
evil, yea sin or duty: For properly permittere is no act of Law, (though many
say it is,) but a suspension of an act: and so licitum is not moraliter bonum,
but only non malum; and ergo is not properly within the verge of morality. 2.
If there be a penalty (and a most terrible penalty) annexed for the
nonperformance, then it was a duty: But such a penalty was annexed (as shall
anon be particularly showed) even to be cut off from his people, to be put to
death, etc. If it oblige ad poenam, it did first oblige ad obedientiam: For no
Law obliges ad poenam, but for disobedience, which presupposes an obligation
to obedience. 3. If it were not the Israelites duty to enter their Children
into Gods Covenant and Church, then it would have been none of their sin to
have omitted or refused so to do: But it would have been their great and
heinous sin to have omitted or refused it; Ergo. Now to the consequence of the
major. There is no duty but what is made by some Law or Precept as its proper
efficient cause or foundation: Ergo, if it be a duty, there was certainly some
Law or Precept that made it such. Among men we say, that a benefit obliges to
gratitude, though there were no Law: But the meaning is, if there were no
humane law, and that is because the Law of God in nature requires man to be
just and thankful. If there were no law of God natural or positive that did
constitute it or oblige us to it, there could be no duty. 1. There is no duty
but what is made such by Gods signified will, ergo, no duty but what is made
such by a Law or Precept. For a Precept is the sign of Gods will obliging to
duty. 2. Where there is no Law there is no transgression, Romans 4.15. ergo,
where there is no law there is no duty; for these are contraries: it is a duty
not to transgress the Law, and a transgression not to perform the duty which it
requires of us. There is no apparent ground of exception, but in case of
Covenants. Whether a man may not oblige himself to a duty merely by his
consent? I answer, 1. He may oblige himself to an act, which he must perform,
or else prove unfaithful and dishonest: but his own obligation makes it not
strictly a duty: ergo, when God makes a Covenant with man, he is as it were
obliged in point of fidelity, but not of duty. 2. He that obliges himself to
an act by promise, does occasion an obligation to duty from God, because God
has obliged men to keep their promises. 3. So far as a man may be said to be
his own Ruler, so far may he be said to oblige himself to duty, (that is duty
to himself, though the act be for the benefit of another;) but then he may as
fitly be said to make a Law to himself, or command himself: so that still the
duty (such as it is) has an answerable command. So that I may well conclude,
that there is a law, because there is a duty. For nothing but a Law could cause
that duty, nor make that omission of it a sin. Where there is no law, sin is
not imputed, Romans 5.13. But the omission of entering Infants into Covenant with
God before Christ's incarnation would have been a sin imputed; ergo, there was a
law commanding it. 2. If it was a duty to dedicate Infants to God, or enter
them into Covenant with him, then either by Gods will, or without it: certainly
not without it. If by Gods will, then either by his will revealed, or
unrevealed. His unrevealed will cannot oblige; for there wants promulgation,
which is necessary to obligation: And no man can be bound to know Gods
unrevealed will, unless remotely, as it may be long of himself that it is not
to him revealed. If it be Gods revealed will that must thus oblige, then there
was some sign by which it was revealed. And if there were a sign revealing Gods
will obliging us to duty, then there was a law, for this is the very nature of
the preceptive part of a law, (which is the principal part,) so that you may as
well say, that you are a reasonable creature, but not a man, as say that men
were obliged to duty by Gods revealed will, but yet not by a Law or Precept. 3.
We shall anon produce the Law or Precept, and put it out of doubt that there
was such a thing. In the mean time I must confess, I do not remember that ever
I was put to dispute a point that carries more of its own evidence to shame
the gain-sayer. And if you can gather Disciples even among the godly, by
persuading them that there were duties without Precepts or Laws, and benefits
without donations, covenants or promise confirming them, then despair of
nothing for the time to come: You may persuade them that there is a Son without
a Father, or any relation without its foundation, or effect without its cause,
and never doubt but the same men will believe you, while you have the same
interest in them, and use the same artifice in putting off your conceits.

Mr. T. would first persuade the Reader that I mean nothing but Circumcision,
--

Reply. Long ago I told you that, 1. The Females were not circumcised, 2. Nor
the Males for forty years in the wilderness: And yet were all Church Members by
being Gods Covenanted people. And so was Israel before Circumcision.

His terms of [the hissing of a Goose, and the snarling of a Cur] and other
such, I account lighter than the least of his injuries to the truth.

SECT. XXVII.
R. B. THE fifth Question requires me to lay down this assertion, that [there
is no Law or Precept of God which does not oblige to duty; and no actual
promise or donation, which does not confer the benefit.] This I aver on
occasion of your last Letter, where in contradiction to the former, you confess
[the promises to the natural posterity of Abraham, Genesis 17. and the Covenants
made with Israel at Mount Sinai, and Deuteronomy. 29. and a precept of Circumcision,
and precepts of God by Moses, of calling the people, and requiring them to
enter into Covenant, Exodus 19. Deuteronomy. 29.] Yet you [do not conceive that the
Infants of Israel were made visible Church Members by the promises in the
Covenants, or the precepts forenamed.] If so, then either you imagine that
among all those precepts and promises there was yet no promise or Covenant that
gave them the benefit of Church Membership, or precept concerning their
entrance into that state; or else you imagine that such promises were made, but
did not actually confer the benefit, and such precepts were made, but did not
actually oblige. Your words are so ambiguous in this, that they signify
nothing of your mind to any that knows it not some other way. For when you say
[there is no such particular promise concerning Infants visible
Church Membership, or precept, etc. besides Circumcision, as in my Book of
Baptism I assert,] who knows whether that exception of [Circumcision] be a
concession of such a precept or promise in the case of Circumcision? or if not,
what sense it has? and what you imagine that precept or promise to be which I
assert? and before the sense of your one syllable [such] is discerned by trying
it by a whole volume, I doubt you will make what you list of it. However if you
should mean, that such precepts there are as have for their subject [the
avouching God to be their God, the entering into Covenant Circumcision] of
Infants, but not their Church Membership; then, 1. I have proved the contrary
to the negative before; 2. And more shall do anon; 3. And it is a palpable
contradiction to the precedent affirmative. But if you mean that
Church Membership of Infants as well as others is the subject or part of the
subject of those promises or precepts, and yet that Infants were not made or
confirmed thereby; it is the contrary that I am asserting, and I have no
further need to prove, than by showing the contradiction of your opinion to it
self. For an actual Covenant or promise that does not give right to the benefit
promised (according to its tenor and terms,) is like a cause that has no
effect, a Father that did never generate, and it is all one as to say, a gift
or Covenant which is no gift or Covenant, seeing the name is denied, when the
thing named and defined is granted. So a Precept or Law to enter Infants
solemnly into Church Membership, which yet obliges none so to enter them, is
as gross a contradiction as to say, the Sun has not heat or light, and yet is
truly a Sun.

Mr. T. here confesses, 2. That the Jews were Gods visible Church not barely
by Gods promise to them to be their God, but by their promise to God: Gods call
of them made them his Church, and their promise to God with other acts made
them visibly so --

Reply. Reader, is not all here unsaid again by this concession? Unless he will
say that this Call, and Covenant, and Promise made them all a visible Church,
and yet none of these, but their birth and place made them members? As if any
thing made the Whole Church which made none of the Parts as such.

SECT. XXVIII.
R. B. I Come next to the sixth Question, Whether indeed there be any transeunt
fact, which without the causation of any promise or precept, did make the
Israelites Infants Church Members* This you affirm (if you would be
understood;) whether this your ground of Infants Church Membership or mine be
righter, I hope will be no hard matter for another man (of common capacity) to
discern. By a [transeunt fact] thus set as contradistinct to a law, precept or
promise, either you mean the act of legislation and promise making, or some
other merely physical act. If the former, it is too ridiculous to be used in a
serious business: For you should not put things in competition excluding the
one, where they both must necessarily concur, the one standing in a
subordination to the other. Was there ever a Law or Covenant made in the world
any other way than by a transeunt fact? Sure all legislation is by some
signification of the Sovereigns will. And the making of that sign is a
transeunt fact. If it be by voice, is not that transeunt? If by writing, is not
the act transeunt? If by creation it self, the act is transeunt though the
effect be permanent. And certainly if legislation or promising be your
transeunt fact, you do very absurdly put it in opposition to a law (or promise)
it being the making of such a law. And the legislation does no way oblige the
subject, but by the law so made: nor does the making of a promise, grant or
covenant, confer right to the benefit which is the subject of it, any otherwise
than as it is the making of that grant which shall so confer it. As the making
of a knife does not cut, but the knife made: and so of other instruments. So
that if the law oblige not, or the grant confer not, certainly the legislation
or promise-making cannot do it. I cannot therefore imagine that this is your
sense, without charging you with too great absurdity. As if you should say, It
is not the will of the testator, i. e. his testament, that entitleth the
legatary to the legacy, but it is the transeunt fact of the testator in making
that will: or it is not the Sovereigns commission that authorizeth a Judge,
soldier, etc. but it is the transeunt fact of writing or making that
commission. It is not the sign that signifies, but the transeunt fact of
making that sign. Were not this a contemptible arguing? To charge you with
this, were to make you tantum non unreasonable. And yet I know not what to say
to you, that is, how to understand you. For if you mean a mere physical
transeunt fact, which is no such legislation or promise-making, then it is far
more absurd than the former. For if it be not a sign of Gods will obliging to
duty, or conferring benefit, then can it not so oblige to duty, nor confer
benefits. It is no other transeunt fact but legislation that can oblige a
subject to duty, nor any other transeunt fact but promise, or other donation,
that can convey right to a benefit, or oblige the promiser. A moral or civil
effect must be produced by a moral or civil action, and not by a mere physical
action; which is unfit to produce such an alien effect, and can go no higher
than its own kind. What sense therefore I should put on your words, without
making them appear unreasonable, even much below the rates of ordinary rational
peoples discourse, I cannot tell. For to say, it is not a law but legislation,
is all one as to say, it is not the fundamentum, but the laying of that
foundation that causes the relation, or from which it does result. And to say
it is an alien physical act, which has no such thing as right for its subject
or terminus, is to confound physics and morals, and to speak the grossest
absurdities; as to say that the transeunt fact of eating, drinking, going,
building, etc. do adopt such an one to be your heir. I must needs think
therefore, till you have better cleared your self, that you have here quit your
self as ill, and forsaken and delivered up your Cause, as palpably as ever I
knew man do, without an express confession that it is naught. When men must be
taught by this obtuse subtilty to prove that Infants Church Membership needed
no revocation, forsooth [because their Church Membership was not caused by a
law, precept, promise or covenant, but by a transeunt fact] than which as you
leave it, the world has scarce heard a more incoherent dream. But I pray you
remember in your reply that you being the affirmer of this, must prove it.
Which I shall expect, when you can prove that you can generate a man by spiting
or blowing your nose, or by plowing and sowing can produce Kings and Emperors.

Mr. T. Here Mr. T. is at the old transeunt fact again: Let the Reader make his
best of it: I account it not worth the reciting; nor his title of Canine
Scoptical Rhetoric regardable.

SECT. XXIX, to XXXIX.
R. B. IN consideration of the seventh Question, I shall consider the nature
and effect of the transeunt fact which you here describe. And first of the
reason of that name. You say that you call it [transeunt] [because done in time
and so not eternal, and past and so not in congruous sense repealeable as a
law, ordinance, statute, decree which determines such a thing shall be for the
future.] And do you think this the common sense of the word? or a fit reason of
your application of it to the thing in hand?

I think your intellection and volition are immanent acts, and yet not eternal.

We use to contradistinguish transeunt acts from immanent, and that because
they do transire in subjectum extraneum.

But it seems you take them here as distinct from permanent.

But use your sense as long as we understand it.

If it be only [past] actions which you call [transeunt] it seems your long
fact which was so many hundred years in doing, was no transeunt fact till the
end of all those years; and so did not (by your own doctrine) make any
Church Members till the end of those years.

But, Sir, the Question is not, whether it were a transeunt fact that laid the
foundation by legislation or promise-making; but whether the effect were
transeunt, or the act as it is in patiente: Whether the law were transeunt
which was made by a transeunt fact? and whether the moral action of that law
were permanent or transeunt? it being most certainly such a moral act that must
produce a title, or constitute a duty. Gods writing the ten Commandments in
stone was a fact soon past, but the law was not soon past, nor the moral act of
that law, viz. obligation. There are verbal laws, that have no real permanent
sign: and yet the law may be permanent, and the obligation permanent, because
the sign may have a permanency in esse cognito, and so the signifying virtue
may remain by the help of memory, though the word did vanish in the speaking.

When you come to point out this transeunt fact individually, you say [it is
Gods taking the whole people of the Jews for his people,] which you term [fact]
as conceiving it most comprehensive of the many particular acts in many
generations whereby he did accomplish it.] 1. I did not well understand before
that [a fact] did so vastly differ from an [Act,] as to contain the acts
(rather than the facts) of many generations.

This is a long fact according to your measure, even from Abraham's call out of
Ur: but how long it seems you are not well agreed with your self. For in the
first part of your Letter you enumerate to the other acts that compose this
fact [the bringing them into the bond of the Covenant at Mount Sinai, giving
them laws, settling their Priesthood, Tabernacle, Army, Government,
Inheritance:] But before you end, you change your mind, and say [the
Church Membership of the Israelites began as I conceive with Abraham's call, and
was completed when they were brought out of Egypt to God, Exodus 19.4.] But
sure that was long before the settling their inheritance. Your fact according to
your last account was about 437. years in doing; but according to your first
opinion, it was about 470. years long.

If it were one individual fact of about 470. years long that made Infants
Church Members, then they could not be Church Members till that fact was past,
For the effect is not before the cause, or causality of the efficient; the
relation cannot be before the fundamentum be laid: and it seems this long fact
was the laying of the fundamentum: But the consequent is certainly false; for
Infants were Church Members before the end or completing of your long fact:
For they were Church Members (you will grant) when Ishmael and Isaac were
circumcised. Ergo, it was not this long fact that made them Church Members.

If you mean that it was not the whole, but some part of this long fact that
actually made Infants Church Members, then you would have assigned that part,
when that was the thing desired, and which you pretended exactly to perform; or
at least you would not have told us it comprehended all these acts.

And if each particular act did make Infants Church Members, or lay a
sufficient ground of it, then it seems that it was done before the institution
of Circumcision. For Gods calling Abraham out of Ur was before it. So that the
Children born in his house must be Church Members upon that; and a sufficient
ground laid for his own to have been such, if he had then had a natural issue:
And it seems then that Ishmael was born a Churchmember many years before
Circumcision.

If this be your meaning, I pray you be so just and impartial as to accept of
the proof which I shall give you of Infants Church Membership before Abraham's
days, if I make it appear to be as strong as this call of Abraham from Ur.

If you should mean that some one of these comprehended acts should of it self
make any Infants Church Members, then it must be any one; for you no more
assign it to one of them than to another, (only say [chiefly the bringing them
from Egypt:] But surely some of these acts particularly cannot do it, as the
leading to Padan Aram, the removal to Canaan, to Egypt, placing, preserving
there, settling their Army, etc. Did any one of these make Infants to become
Church Members?

Nay, suppose you mean that all these acts must concur to make them members,
(and so that they were no members till many hundred years after the institution
of Circumcision,) yet could not your Doctrine hold good: For some of these acts
are of an alien nature, and no more apt to cause infant Church Membership, than
a Bull to generate a Bird. What aptitude has the settling of an Army to be any
part of the causation of Infants Church Membership? None, I think; at least if
it be such an Army as ours: For surely the settling of ours caused no such
thing, as you well know. What aptitude has the leading to Padan Aram, or
removal to Egypt, to make Infants Church Members? Nay, how strange is it, that
the removing of Church Members, and such as had been Infant Church Members, as
Ishmael, Keturahs children, Esau, must cause Infant Church Membership? Sure it
was no cause of their own. Keturahs children were Church Members in infancy: I
enquire of you by what act they were made such? You say [by Gods fact of taking
the whole people of the Jews for his people] whereof the act of removing
Keturahs children was a part. Very good. It seems then that removing from the
Congregation of Israel a people of the Jews, is a taking of the removed to be
of that people: or else it is not only the taking that people, but also the
removal from that people that makes Church Members, even the removed as well
as the taken, both which are alike absurd.

And I pray you tell me yet a little better, how an act can make a man a
Churchmember that was one long before that was done? You cannot here say, that
it was before in esse morali, and had a moral causation. How then could your
chiefest act, the bringing out of Egypt, make those Infants Church Members
that were born in Egypt, and were Church Members before? Or how could it be
any part of the cause? Did the bringing out of Egypt concur to make Moses a
Churchmember when he was in the basket on the waters? And when you answer
this, you may do well to go a little further, and tell me, how such an act
concurreth to make him an Infant Churchmember that was dead an hundred or two
hundred years before that act was done. For example, how did the settling of the
Israelites Army, or Inheritance, or the Covenant on Mount Sinai, make Ishmael,
or Esau, or Isaac, or Jacob Church Members?

I desire you also to tell me by the next, what be the nerves and ligaments
that tie all these acts of 430. years at least together, so as to make them one
fact? And whether I may not as groundedly make a fact sufficient for this
purpose of the acts of an hundred or two hundred years only? And whether you
may not as well make all the acts from Abraham's call till Christ to be one
fact, and assign it to this office?

You say that you call this fact [transeunt] because it is [past,] (and so till
it is [past] it seems Isaac and Jacob that were dead before, are no
Chruch-members;] I would then fain know whether it be this same transeunt fact,
or some other, that makes Infants Church Members five hundred years after it is
past? If it be this same, then how comes a mere transeunt fact to work
effectually so many hundred years after it is past? unless it made a Law or
Covenant which does the deed? If it be a new transeunt fact that must make
Infants Church Members after the completing of this (the settling their
inheritances;) then I pray you let me know, whether it ^e one fact exercised on
the whole nation in gross, or must it be a fact upon every Infant member
individually? If on the nation, remember to tell us what it was; and do not
only tell us the cause of the membership of former Infants. And seeing it must
be such as the membership of every Infant till Christ's time at least must be
caused by, I pray you remember to make your work square and full, and be sure
to assign us no other kind of fact, than what you will prove to have been so
frequently repeated in every age, and so fully extensive to every Infant among
the Jews, as that it have no gaps, but may make all members that were so in
each age. And remember, that it is no law, precept, promise or covenant that
you must assign for the cause; for that is it you are engaged against: but a
constant succession of transeunt facts extending to each individual member. O
what work have you made your self? and what a sort of new political Doctrine
shall we have from you, when these things are accomplished according to the
frame you have begun? Such as I believe the Sun never saw, nor the wisest
Lawyer in England ever read before? Which makes me the less marvel that so many
of your opinion are so much against the Lawyers; for I dare say they will be
but few of them for you, if these be your grounds, or at least not for these
your grounds.

Reply. To all this I find nothing said by Mr. T. that I think worthy the
Readers trouble to reply to: Let him read it and see. His charge of [foolish
exclamations, vanity, etc.] I pass by.

SECT. XXXIX, to XLIV.
R. B. But all this yet is but a light velitation: The principal thing that I
would enquire into, is, what your great comprehensive fact is in the true
nature of it, which you call [Gods taking the whole people of the Jews to be
his people.] Does the word [taking] signify a mere physical taking or fact; or
a moral, such as among men we call, a civil action? If it be a mere physical
taking, then, 1. It cannot produce a moral effect, such as that in question is.
2. And then it must have an answerable object, which must be individual
existent persons. 3. And then you cannot call it one fact, but many thousand:
even as many as there were persons taken in to the Jews in above four hundred
years. 4. And then what was the physical act which is called Gods taking? was
it such a taking as the Angel used to Lot, that carried him out of Sodom; or as
the Apocryphal Author mentions of Habakkuk, that was taken by the hair of the
head, and carried by the Angel into another Country, to bring Daniel a mess of
Pottage? If God must by a physical apprehension take hold of them that he makes
Church Members, we shall be at a loss for our proof of their Church Membership.
But I cannot imagine that this is your sense. But what is it then? Is it a
physical action though a moral causation of some physical effect? That it
cannot be: For it is a political or moral effect that we enquire after. It
necessarily remains therefore that this be a political moral taking that you
here speak of. And if so, then the transeunt fact you speak of must needs be a
civil or political action. And what that can be, which is no Law, Promise or
Covenant in this case, I pray you bestow some more diligence to inform us, and
not put us off with the raw name of a transeunt fact opposed to these.
Certainly, if it be a civil or legal action, the product or effect of it is jus
or debitum, some due or right: And that is either, 1. A dueness of somewhat
from us, (which is either somewhat to be done, or somewhat to be given;) 2. Or
a dueness of something to us, which is either of good or evil: If good, it is
either by contract or donation (whether by a Testament praemiant Law, or the
like:) if evil, it is either by some poenal Law, or voluntary agreement: Now
which of these is it that your transeunt fact produces? To be a member of the
Church, is to be a member of a society taking God in Christ to be their God,
and taken by him for his special people. The act which makes each member, is of
the same nature with that which makes the society. The relation then
essentially contains, 1. A right to the great benefits of Gods sovereignty
over men, Christ's headship, and that favor, protection, provision and other
blessings, which are due from such a powerful and graciou Sovereign to such
Subjects, and from such a Head to his Members: As also a right to my station in
the Body, and to the inseparable benefits thereof. 2. It contains my debt of
obedience to God in Christ, acknowledged and promised actually or virtually,
really or reputatively. Now for the first, how can God be related unto me as my
God, or Christ as my Saviviour, and I to him as one that have such right to him
and his blessings, by any other way than his own free gift? This gift must be
some signification of his will: For his secret will is not a gift, but a
purpose of giving. This way of giving therefore is by a civil or moral action,
which is a signifying of the Donors will; and can be by no way, but either pure
donation, contract, testament, or law. In our case it must needs partake of the
nature of all these. It is not from one in any equality, nor capable of any
obliging compensation or retribution from us. Being therefore from an absolute
dis-engaged Benefactor, it must needs be by pure donation, or it cannot be
ours. Yet as he is pleased as it were to oblige himself by promise, or by his
word, and also to call us to a voluntary acceptance, and engagement to certain
fidelity, gratitude and duty, and so is the stipulator, and we the promisers in
the latter part of the action: it is therefore justly called a contract or
Covenant, though indeed the word [Covenant] frequently signifies Gods own
promise alone. As it proceeds from the death of the testator (in natural
moral-reputative being,) so it is called a testament. And as it is an act of a
ruling Benefactor, giving this benefit to the governed, to promote the ends of
government, and obliging to duty thereby, so it partaketh of the nature of a
law. The commonest Scripture name for this act, is Gods Covenant or Promise,
and sometimes his gift; which all signify the same thing here. It follows
therefore, that either by Gods [taking Israel to be his people] you mean some
civil political action, as a Covenant, Promise, or the like collation of the
benefit, (and then you assert the thing which you deny,) or else you know not
what you mean, nor can make another know it, without the discovery of the
grossest absurdity. And as for the other thing which is contained in
Church Membership, the professed duty of man to God, it is most certain, 1.
That Gods Law obliges us to that duty: 2. And obliges all according to their
capacities to consent to the obligation, and so to re-engage themselves: 3.
That this actual consent professed does therefore double the obligation. And
thus by a mutual contract, Covenant or consent (whereof our part is first
required by a law,) is the relation of Church Membership contracted. Now to lay
by and deny all this, and give us the general naked name of [taking for Gods
people,] is merely delusory, seeing that [taking] means this which you exclude,
or it means nothing that is true and reasonable. And therefore tell us better
what it means.

As for the Texts you cite, Deuteronomy. 4.34. and Levit. 20.24, 26. 1 King. 8.53.
Isai. 43.1. In Deuteronomy. 4. is mentioned not the moral act of God by which he made
them his people, or took them for his own, and founded the relation: but the
natural actions whereby he rescued them from the Egyptian bondage and took
them to himself or for his use, service, and honor out of that land. But I
think sure they were his people, and all their Infants were Church Members
before that taking by virtue of a former Covenant-taking.

As to Levit. 20. God did perform a twofold work of separation for Israel. 1.
By his Covenant and their entering Covenant with him. 2. By local separation of
their bodies from others. It was the first that made them his people, and
Church Members, and not the last: the last was only a favorable dealing with
them as his beloved. The same I say to the other two Texts. Sure you cannot
think that corporal separation makes a Churchmember. What if an Egyptian that
had no part in the Covenant had past out with the Israelies, and got with them
through the Red Sea, do you think he had been therefore a Churchmember?
Suppose God had made no promise or covenant with Abraham or his seed, but only
taken them out of Chaldea into Canaan, and thence into Egypt, and thence into
the Wilderness, and thence into Canaan again: Do you think this much had made
them Church Members? Then if the Turks conquer Greece, or the Tartarians
conquer China, they are become Church Members, because this seems as great a
temporal prosperity at least. And I think it is past doubt, that Lot was a
Churchmember in the midst of Sodom, and the Israelites in Egypt before they
were brought out, as truly as after.

As to Genesis 12.1. Acts 7.2. Nehem. 9.7. which you also cite, as there is not
one of them that gives the least intimation that Infant-Church-membership then
began, so I shall further enquire anon, whether they contain any Covenant or
promise.

So Exodus 19.4, 5. has no word that gives the least intimation that God by
that act of taking them out of Egypt, did make Israel a Church, or the Infants
or any others, members of it: But only that by fulfilling a former promise in
the deliverance of a people formerly his own, he lays further obligations to
duty on them by redoubling his mercies. The same I say of Levit. 11.45. Neh.
1.10. I will not believe yet, but that you believe your self, that the
Israelites and their Infants were as truly Church Members before, as after
their deliverance out of Egypt. And methinks the Texts you cite might put it
out of doubt. What if God say, Hos. 11.1. [When Israel was a child I loved him,
and called my Son out of Egypt.] Is it easy hence to prove that calling him
out of Egypt did make him his Son that was none before: or to prove that
Israel was Gods Son before he called him out of Egypt? If you should maintain
the former, I might expect that you should say the like of Christ himself, to
whom the Evangelist applies this text; and so you may prove as fairly, that
Christ was none of Gods Son till he was called out of Egypt, but was made his
Son by that call. Certainly the Text terms him Gods Son that was called, as
being so before that call. By this time I am well content that any waking man
do compare your doctrine and mine, and try whether it be a transeunt fact, or a
Law and Covenant, that made Infants and all others Church Members: and if they
do not admire that ever a learned man should harbor such a conceit as yours,
and that ever a godly man should build such a weight on it, and go so far on
such a ground, yea and that ever ordinary godly people should be so blinded
with such palpable nonsense or absurdities, then let them still follow you in
the dark; for I expect not that reason should recover them.

Reply. To all this I find nothing said that needs any further reply.

SECT. XLIV, XLV.
R. B. I Come now to the eighth Question, that is to speak to the point which
you propounded. You urge me to cite to you the particular Texts that contain
this Law, Ordinance, Precept or Covenant. To which I answer thus. 1. There are
two sorts of Laws; one which first make a duty; the other which suppose it so
made, and do only call for obedience, and excite thereto, or prescribe somewhat
as a means in order thereunto. If I could show you no written law or promise as
first constituting the duty, or granting the privilege of Church Membership,
it were not the least disparagement to my cause, as long as I can show you
those following Laws which presuppose this. You know the Church of God did live
about 2000. years without any written law that we know of: Where then was Gods
will manifested about such things as this, but in tradition and nature? If
Moses then at the end of this 2000. years did find this tradition, and find all
the Infants of Church Members in possession of this benefit, then what need he
make a new Law about it? Or why should God promise it as a new thing? I confess
if I should find by any new law or promise that it did begin but in Moses days,
I should think it some abatement of the strength of my cause (though yet I
think there would enough remain.) 2. There are (yet higher) two sorts of laws:
the one for the constitution of the Commonwealth it self, the other for the
administration or government of it when it is so constituted. The former are
called by some, Fundamental Laws, as laying the frame and form of the
Commonwealth, and the quality of the materials, etc. I think indeed, that as
constitutive of the form of the Commonwealth, these are scarce properly called
Laws; though as they look forward, obliging to duty, and prohibiting
alteration, they may. But if they be not laws, they are somewhat higher, and
lay the ground of all laws and obedience, and so are laws eminenter and
virtualiter, though not actually and formally: And in our case, as this
constitution did subject us to God, making it our duty ever after to obey him;
so does it oblige us to acknowledge that subjection. And the very constitution
of the Church is an act of high beneficence, and performed by the fundamental
grant or Covenant. Now if this Covenant and constitution could not expressly be
showed in writing, it were no diminution of the authority of it, seeing among
men Fundamentals are seldom written; and when they are, it is only as Laws
obliging the subject to maintain and adhere to the first constitution. As long
therefore as we can prove that it is Gods will that successively Infants should
be Church Members, it no whit invalidates the cause if we could not show the
original constitution in writing. Yet somewhat we shall attempt. 3. We have
full proof of Infants Church Membership by Laws and Covenants concerning it,
ever since the time that there was a written word of God: and that is
sufficient, if we could fetch it no higher. Having premised this, I come nearer
to the Question.

The first institution of Infants Church Membership de jure upon supposition of
their existence, was in Gods first constitution of the Republic of the world,
when he became man's Governor, and determined of his subjects, and members of
the Commonwealth: Which Republic being sacred, and devoted to Gods worship
and service, was truly a Church of which God was head. This was performed by
the first Law and Covenant made either in or upon man's creation. That such a
Covenant or promise of felicity was made by God to innocent man, almost all
Divines agree: But because it is rather implied than expressed in Moses brief
History, some few cavillers do therefore contradict us. But, 1. The threatening
of death for sin, seems to imply a promise of life if he sinned not. 2. And the
New Testament affords us diverse passages that yet plainlier prove it, which
to you I need not recite. But whether this promise of life were natural (as the
threatening of death was,) or only positive and more arbitrary, Divines are not
agreed among themselves. Those that say it was free and positive, give this
reason, That God could not naturally be obliged to bless or felicitate the most
innocent or perfect creature, nor any creature merit of God. Those that think
it natural as the threatening was, say, it is true that God could not be properly
obliged, because he is under no Law, no more is he obliged to punish, but only
man obliged to suffer if he inflict it: And it is true that man cannot strictly
merit of God. But yet, say they, as man may have a natural aptitude for such
felicity, so God has a natural propensity to do good according to the capacity
of the subject, and his works do oblige him (improperly) in point of fidelity
and immutability as well as his word. So that their reasons are these
following. 1. Because God is as naturally prone to do good to the good, as to
do evil to the evil, that is, to reward as to punishment, as his name
proclaimed to Moses, Exodus 34. shows. 2. Because God making man capable of a
higher felicity, and principling him with inclinations thereto, and giving him
desires, love, and other affections for that blessed end, even the everlasting
fruition of God, therefore they say, God did in this frame of his nature give
him ground to expect such a felicity; if he sinned not. For else all these
inclinations and affection should have been in vain: But God made not so noble
a creature with vain inclinations and affections to act fallaciously and
falsely. Also Gods works would not be harmonical: So that as Gods promise is but
a sign of his will obliging him improperly in point of fidelity and
immutability, so, say they, the nature of man was a sign of Gods will so far
engaging him: So that as he could not let-sin go unpunished without some breach
in the harmony of his sapiential frame of administration, no more could he deny
to perfect man the object of those desires which he formed in him. So that
although he might have made man such a creature as should not necessarily be
punished for evil, or rewarded for good, that is, he might have made him not a
man; yet having so made him, it is necessary that he be governed as a man in
regard of felicity as well as penalty. 3. Our Philosophers and Divines do
commonly prove the immortality of the soul from its natural inclinations to God
and eternal felicity. And if the immortality may be so proved from its nature,
then also its felicity in case of righteousness. I interpose not my self as a
Judge in this controversy of Divines, but I have mentioned it to the end which
I shall now express. 1. It is most certain, whether the reward or promise be
natural or positive, that such a state of felicity man was either in or in the
way to, or in part and the way to more. And it is most certain, that man was
made holy, devoted to God, and fit for his service, and that in this estate
according to the Law of his creation, he was to increase and multiply: It is
most certain therefore, that according to the first law of nature, Infants
should have been Church Members. 2. But if their opinion hold, that make the
reward grounded on the law of nature, and not on a mere positive law, (and you
see the reasons are not contemptible,) then the argument would be yet more
advantageous. 3. But however it be of the title to glory or eternity, it is
most certain, that according to the very law of nature Infants were to have
been Church Members if man had stood. The first Text therefore that I cite for
Infants Church Membership, as expressing its original de jure, is Genesis 1.26,
27, 28. [So God created man in his own Image -- And God blessed them, and God
said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.] Here you
see by the law of nature Infants were to have been born in Gods Image and in
innocence, and so Church Members. And note, that the first blessing that God
pronounces on mankind, is, that they propagate Children in their own estate,
to be as the Parents were, even in Gods Image.

Mr. T. 1. If this prove their Church Membership, it proves not their visible
Church Membership.

Reply. Mark Reader, that Gods Law and blessing for the propagation of Adams
seed in his Image, would not have made them when born to be visible
Church Members, though members? What not so notorious a Law, and Covenant, and
Benediction? No wonder if all Christians Infants must be shut out, if Innocent
Adams must have been shut out?

He adds, [2. If it prove a Law or Ordinance, yet not such a Law or Ordinance
as is in question; which is not a Law or Ordinance de jure, but de eventu, that
so it shall be -- they being to be actually visible Church Members before
admission according to Mr. B's dictates.]

Reply. Alas, poor Readers, that must be thus wearied! I know nothing that this
Law or Covenant gives but a Right to real benefits that must have answerable
causes: I know no Right given but it is eventually given, nor received but it is
eventually received. Admission is an ambiguous word: My dictates as he calls
them, are 1. That Gods Law obliges persons to devote themselves and their
Infants to God, by consenting to his Covenant for themselves and them: 2. And
to do this if they have opportunity in the solemn Baptismal Covenanting
Ordinance: 3. And in his Covenant or Law of Grace he promises to accept them,
and signifies his consent to the mutual Covenant: which is antecedently to
their consent, but a conditional consent or Covenant, but consequently a^tual.
4. That accordingly natural interest only is not the Reason why a Believers
Child is a Churchmember, merely because he is his: BE God having given him
power and obligation also to dispose of his own Child for the ends of his
Creation and Redemption, he is a Churchmember initially upon heart-consent;
and by Investiture upon Sacramental consent: which I think you mean by
Admission.

3. Says Mr. T. If it did prove such a Law or Ordinance, yet it proves it not
such a promise and precept as Mr. B. asserteth.

Reply. Must such dealing as this go for an answer? What Is the difference?

Mr. T. adds, 4. If it did, yet it only proves it of the Church by nature,
--

Reply. You are hard put to it. I do by this first instance show you where and
when the Ordinance, Law or Grant of Infant Church Membership was first made.
And I leave it to any impartial Christian whether I prove it not certain, that
God in Nature making man in his own Image with an [Increase and Multiply]
signify not that Infants should have been Holy to him, if Adam had not sinned:
and so have been members of the Innocent Church or Kingdom of God. Alas, many
go so much further, as to assert as truth, that had Adam stood (nay but in that
one temptation; yea say some, had he but once loved God) all his posterity had
not been only born Holy, but confirmed as the Angels: I cannot prove that: but
I can prove that they had been born holy had not Adam sinned, and so had been
visible members. And if so that God did found Infant membership in Nature, let
awakened reason think, whether Parents yet have not as much interest in
children, and children in Parents, and then whether God have ever reverst this
natural order? Yea whether he has not all along confirmed it? It seems out
of doubt to me.

I know that Parents and Children now are corrupt: but withal upon the promise
of a Redeemer, [an universal conditional pardon and gift of life in a Covenant
of Grace took place] Let them deny it that can, and dare. And it intimates no
change of Gods will as to Infants conjunct interest with their Parents.

He says that [the Church by Grace is only by Election and Calling, not
birth.] I would desire him if he can, to tell me, whether both Cain and Abel
were not visible Church Members in Adams family? And whether none but the Elect
are visible members? And whether God call not them that are visible members to
that state?

He says [If this Law be in force all are born without sin.]

Reply. The Covenant of Innocence is not in force; but yet I may tell you what
it was while it was in force; and that Infants visible Church Membership was
founded in Nature and that Law at first: And therefore though our Innocence be
lost, Parents are Parents still; And if God change not his order therein, are
as capable of consenting to Grace for their Children, as they were of being
innocent for them.

SECT. XLVI.
R. B. THe next Institution of Infants Church Membership, was at the first
proclamation of grace to fallen man, or in the first promise of redemption to
sinners, in Genesis 3.15. [And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise
his heel.] I will prove that this fundamental Covenant of grace or promise does
declare it to be the will of God that Infants should be Church Members: And to
this end, let us first consider what the words expressly contain, and then what
light may be fetched from other Texts to illustrate them. It being a known rule,
that an Expositor must not turn universals into singulars or particulars, nor
restrain and limit the Scripture generals, where the word it self or the nature
of the subject does not limit them, I may well conclude that these things
following are comprehended in this fundamental promise. 1. That the Devil
having played the enemy to mankind, and brought them into this sin and misery,
God would not leave them remediless, nor to that total voluntary subjection to
him as he might have done: But in grace or undeserved mercy would engage them
in a war against him, in which they that conquered should bruise his head. 2.
That in this war the Lord Jesus Christ, the principal seed, is promised to be
our General, whose perfect nature should contain, and his perfect life express
a perfect enmity against Satan, and who should make a perfect conquest over
him. 3. The Lord Jesus is promised to do this work as the woman's seed, and so
as conceived of her, and born by her, and so as an Infant first, before he
comes to ripeness of age. So that here an Infant of the woman is promised to be
the General of this Army, and Head of the Church. This is most evident: By
which God does sanctify the humane birth, and the Infant state, and assure us
that he does not exclude now that age from the redeemed Church, which he
admitted into the Church by the laws of creation. For the first promise is of
an Infant born of the woman to be the Head of the Church, and growing up to
maturity, to do the works of a Head. Had God excluded the Infant state from the
visible Church he would not have made the Head first an Infant. Where note, 1.
That Christ is the great exemplar of his Church; and in things which he was
capable of, he did that first in his own body, which he would after do in
theirs. 2. That the Head is a Member, even the principal Member, one of the two
parts which constitute the whole. As the pars imperans and pars subdita do
constitute each Commonwealth. So that if an Infant must be a member eminently
so called, then Infants are not excluded from membership, but are hereby
clearly warranted to be members of a lower nature. If an Infant may be
Sovereign, no doubt he may be a Subject. If an Infant may be the chief Prophet
of the Church, then no doubt but Infants may be Disciples. If you still harp on
the old string, and say, They are no Disciples that learn not; you may as well
say, He is no Prophet that teaches not. And if you will openly deny Christ in
Infancy to have been the Prophet of the Church, I will undertake to prove the
falsehood and vileness of that opinion, as soon as I know you own it. The
promise then of an Infant Head, does declare Gods mind that he will have
Infants members, because the head is the principal member.

Mr. T. The thing to be proved is a Law or Ordinance of God unrepealed,

Reply. The thing I am to do, is to show you when and how God instituted
Infants Church state; And that he never had a Church on earth that excluded
them: And particularly to show you that they are included in the first edition
of the Covenant of Grace made to Adam, which is perfected in a second edition,
but not repealed. This I think I have done.

Mr. T. adds that It will not hold from Christ's Headship in Infancy, etc. 1.
It is not declared in Scripture, and so a mere phan^y: 2. Then an Infant in the
womb should be a visible member, because then Christ was Head of the Church: 3.
Then an old man should not be a member; for Christ was not an old man.

Reply. 1. Irenaeus thought it would hold who gives this reason of it: And I
leave the Reader to consider whether the words cited prove it not. Sure I am,
it greatly satisfies my judgment, that God hereby declared his will to
include Infants in his Church visibly. For the Head is a Member, even the
noblest: Therefore one Infant is confessed by you to be a visible member of the
Church: And if one, it will be incumbent on you to prove the rest incapable or
excluded. When I read that Christ came not into the world at the statute that
Adam did, but chose to be an Infant, and to be persecuted in Infancy, and to
have Infants murdered for his sake first, and to invite and use them as he did,
it is not the rolling over of your wearisom dry denials and confident
absurdities, that will persuade me that Christ shuts out all Infants. And I
am sure that the Instance confuteth your common exceptions against Infants; As
that they are not Disciples because they learn not, which yet they may be in
the same sense as Christ was their Master in infancy when he Taught not: And
that their Infancy did not incapacitate them to be in Covenant with God, to be
Christians, to be Church Members, etc. Christ showed, in that in Infancy he
bore all the Counter-relations, and was in the Covenant of God as Mediator: and
that (as far as we can judge) only by a virtual and not actual consent (in his
Infancy and humane nature) to the Covenant of mediation.

Mr. T. says, [Then an Infant in the womb may be a Church-member] --

Reply. Yes, in the same sense as Christ in the womb was the Churches head: not
by the solemn Investiture of Baptism, but by Consent: For believing Parents do
dedicate their children to God intentionally when they are in the womb: But a
man would think that you your self should acknowledge that this dedication and
so the visibility of membership, has its gradations to perfection: Are not
your proselytes visible members in one degree, when they openly profess
Christianity (as Constantine did) and in a further degree when baptized? The
interest of your opinion puts frivolous reasons into your mind which a child
might see through.

Mr. T. adds, [ Then an old man should not be a member.] --

Reply. Could you think now that you did not cheat your poor Reader, if
partiality had not shut one of your eyes? It will follow, from the affirmative,
that such a state of life which Christ undertook is lawful, such words which he
spoke, such deeds which he did are lawful, because he did them (being not
proper to the Mediator:) But will it thence follow from the negative, that no
calling, no thoughts, no words, no deeds are lawful which Christ used not? A
single man that has no Wife or Children may be proved capable of
Church Membership, because Christ that was such was the chief Churchmember,
that is, the head: But will it follow that a married man therefore may be none?
Christ's example will prove that a child of God may seem forsaken, may be
crucified as a Malefactor: but not that no other are Gods children.

Mr. T. I deny not that Christ in infancy was head of the Church, nor that he
was the Prophet of the Church in Infancy, understanding it of his being the
Prophet habitually and by designation, nor that he in some respect, to wit, of
Rule and protection, was the head of the visible Church, even of that part
which is not elect: yet I deny that in respect of that union which makes any
members of his body, in the Scripture acceptions which is by his spirit, he is
the head of that part of the visible Church which is not elect.

Reply. 1. And will not the Reader be satisfied with these concessions? Mark
Reader, that he grants that Christ an Infant was the Churches head, and thus
far as he mentions of the Church visible, and that he was the Prophet of the
Church, because he was so habitually and by designation: Why, even so it is
that we say an Infant may be a Member, a Disciple, a Christian habitually and
by designation, (though I would use a fitter word here than habitually:) If
this much be a reason for the denomination in one, why not in the other? Yield
Sir, or be not angry with Mr. Gataker.

2. And then what brought in your denial of spiritual membership to the
non-elect? Would you have made your Reader believe that it was any thing to the
question? And when will you prove that neither 1 Cor. 12. nor any other
Scripture calls those members that have but such common gifts of the spirit,
as tongues, miracles, prophecy, etc. rejected Matthew. 7.23. And that Christ
never talked in John 15. of branches in him not bearing fruit, and some cut off
from him and withered. I am sure it was a whole Church visible that had carnal
contentious wranglers against the Apostles in it, and men that were drunk at
the Lords supper, etc. of whom Paul says 1 Cor. 12.15, 18, 20, 22, 23, 26, 27.
that they were the Body of Christ and members in particular, and common gifts
are mentioned as their Character. --

Mr. T. That the humane birth and infant state is sanctified (by Christ's) is
not true: for then it would be holy to all, --

Reply. I deny your consequence. There are several causes concur to the same
sanctification: Christ's Birth and Infancy are but a remote preparatory cause,
of powerful sanctification, which is ever to individual persons; as all things
are pure to the pure, and when they are capable subjects, by natural existence
and Parents consent, then from all the causes together results the holiness of
that state: As Christ's death and merits sanctify us, but not immediately nor
alone. But Divines use to take this word [ sanctifying] in an initial
preparatory sense, as it signifies the making of such a thing or state fit for
holy use: As Temples and Utensils are said to be sanctified, when designed to
be used holily (before the use.) But must they therefore be so used by all? No,
but by the Priests and Worshippers? So they use to say, that Death and the
Grave are sanctified by Christ: How? Not to all, or any of the ungodly: But the
curse is taken off, and they are hallowed for the holy advantage of the
faithful. So is it as to his Birth and Infancy.

Mr. T. Nor do I conceive any truth but gross falsehood in that speech [Had God
excluded the Infant state from the visible Church, he would not have made the
Head first an Infant] For this does suppose this the only end or chief end --
and more in Gods eye than the saving of sinners --

Reply. I prove that gross falsehood to be true, thus:

That state or age which God visibly included and actually made the chief
visible Churchmember in, he did not exclude from the visible Church: But the
Infant state God visibly included, and actually made the chief visible
Churchmember in* Therefore the Infant state God did not exclude from the
visible Church.

The reason of the Major is because to include and exclude are contraries. The
Minor he confesses. If he say that it may be included and excluded in several
persons, I answer, I here spoke but of the State or Age of Infancy as such, to
prove that qua talis an Infant is not excluded: For if qua talis, then it will
hold ad omnes universally, and then Christ had been excluded: And therefore the
Age is not excluded as such, if included in one: For it must be a total
exclusion: And therefore if he will prove our Infants excluded, it must not be
qua tales as Infants, but for some other reason, (when he c^n find it) and so
the Age or state is not excluded.

2. But what man else could have gathered, that then this must be the only or
chief end, and more in Gods eye than the saving of a sinner? Is there any more
included in the assertion than barely that [ God would not have made an Infant
the chief member if he would have excluded Infants as Infants?] Who c^uld hence
have found out that God has various degrees of intention? And we must dispute
which is chiefly in his eye: and that this was only or chiefly in his eye more
than saving sinners. Let them dispute what is chiefly in Gods eye, that can
better distinguish of those volitions which are all but his simple essence; but
let them do it on better reasons than these.

Mr. T. I deny that Christ as man in infancy was the Prophet of his Church
visibly, and in actu exercito: Let Mr. ^. when he will assault, there will
appear in his contradiction vileness and manifold falsehoods.

Reply. That one little [ and] was cunningly put in to bring you off; by taking
visibility and exercise conjunctly: But are your followers so critical as to
discern the knack? 1. Neither do we say that Infants are learners in actu
exercito; and so what is this to the matter? 2. But Reader I can prove to thee
if thou be impartial, though not to Mr. T. that it is neither vile nor false
that Christ in Infancy was the Prophet of his Church visibly, (though not in
actu exercito:)

That which was declared by Angels from Heaven, and by revelation to Mary,
Zacchary, Anna, Symeon, and by Prophecy by them to others, is to be called
visible: But that Christ was the Head and Prophet of the Church, (habitually
and by designation as Mr. T. calls it) was thus declared -- Ergo --

Mr. T. And for his inference, If an Infant may be the chief Prophet of the
Church, then no doubt but Infants may be Disciples, I grant both: and yet deny
that Christ was visibly, audibly, in actu exercito, in his infancy in his
humane nature the Prophet of his Church, or that any Infants are actually
Disciples visibly, till they hear the Gospel and profess the faith: Nor am I
a^hamed to aver that he is no Prophet that prophesies not, that they are no
Disciples that learn not.

Reply. Reader thou art not the person that I write for, if thou perceive not
here his cause notoriously given up, and yet a noise of words used shamefully
to hide what he is forced to confess.

1. He grants both that an Infant may be (and was) the chief Prophet of the
Church, and Infants may be Disciples. 2. This is it that we dispute for which
he expressly grants. 3. He denies the said Relation titles as in actu
exercito, and so do we; that is, that Christ then prophesied, and Infants learn
or believe. 4. He talks confidently in this denial, as if he would have fools
believe that this were the difference, and we held the contrary. 5. But he is
fain to juggle in the word [ audibly] joined to [ visibly] for a paltry
subterfuge, that if we prove Christ visibly the Prophet, we may not prove him
audibly so. 6. Yet it is such a [ visibility] as [ makes one known] that he
had in hand; and before denied the [ visibility:] as here; but if you prove
that Christ was visibly the Prophet, he can say [ but not audibly] If you prove
that he was audibly so, in that Angels and Prophets audibly declared it, he can
say [ but not in actu exercito] and by his own Prophesying; which none denies.
7. And yet in the end he expressly without distinction denies him to be any
Prophet that Prophesies not, or them any Disciples that learn not, when he had
in terminis granted the contrary before, and must needs therefore grant and
deny by distinction. In sum, our cause is expressly granted us (and expressly
denied) we plead for no other kind of membership to Infants, but such as Christ
had, nor for any other sort of visibility, than the visibility of their being
the seed of persons consenting to Gods Covenant, and Gods expressed will in his
word, that they should be offered to him by consenting Parents, and that he
will accept them, and did conditionally first consent.

SECT. XLVII, XLVIII.
R. B. AS the war is here proclaimed, and the General or chief Commander
constituted, so next here is a natural enmity put into the whole seed of the
woman, or humane race, against the whole seed of the Serpent that then was, or
the Diabolical nature. This is plain both in the Text, and in the experience of
the fulfilling of it. As in the instrumental serpent, it is the whole
serpentine nature, that has an enmity to the humane nature, and the whole
humane nature to the serpentine nature; they being venomous to us, and we
abhorring them as venomous, and as such as our lives are in danger of: so is it
the whole humane nature that is at enmity to the Diabolical nature. Vide
Muscul. Calvin. Luther. in locum. All men have naturally as great an abhorrence
of the Devil, as of a serpent, they apprehend him to be their enemy, they abhor
the very name and remembrance of him: If they do but dream of him, it
terrifieth them, they are afraid of seeing him in any apparition. If they know
any temptation to be from him, so far they dislike it and abhor it, though for
the thing presented they may cherish it. This is not special saving grace, but
this is a great advantage to the work of special grace, and to our more
effectual resisting of temptations, and entertaining the help that is offered
us against them, when our very natures have an enmity to the diabolical nature:
we now look on him as having the power of death, as Gods executioner and our
destroyer and malicious adversary. And if there be any Witch or other wicked
person that has contracted such familiarity and amity with him, as that this
natural enmity is thereby overcome, that proves not that it was not naturally
there, but that they by greater wickedness are grown so far unnatural. 5. As
this enmity is established in the nature of mankind against the diabolical
nature, so is there a further enmity legally proclaimed against the diabolical
pravity, malignity and works. Vide Paraeum in locum. God will put an enmity by
his laws (both natural and positive) making it the duty of mankind to take
Satan for their enemy; to resist, and use him as an enemy, and fight against
him and abhor his works, and so to list themselves under the General that
fights against him, to take his colors, and to be of his Army: And this
being spoken of the common world of mankind, and not only of the elect (for it
is not they only that are obliged to this hostility and warfare) belongs to
each one according to their capacities: and therefore Infants being at the
Parents dispose, it is they that are to list them in this Army against the
enemy of mankind, of which more anon. 6. A third and higher enmity is yet here
comprehended, and that is an habitual or dispositive enmity against the
diabolical malignity, pravity and works, which may be called [natural] as it is
the bent or byas of our new nature. This God gives only to his chosen, and not
to all. And it contains not only their consent to list themselves in his army
against Satan, but specially and properly a hatred to him as the Prince of
unrighteousness, and a cordial resolution to fight against him and his works
universally, to the death, with a complacency in God and his service and
soldiers. Here take a short prospect of the mysterious blessed Trinity. As God
is one in three, and in his entity has unity, verity and goodness, and in his
blessed nature has posse, scire, velle, power, wisdom and love, so as from
these is he related both to his created and redeemed rational creatures, as
absolute proprietary, as sovereign ruler, and as most gracious benefactor: As
Lord of our nature he has put the foresaid enmity between the humane nature
and the Diabolical: As sovereign Ruler, he has by legislation imposed on us a
further enmity as our duty, that we should be listed in his army, profess open
hostility against Satan, and (...) against him to the death. As Benefactor, he
gives special grace to do this, to his chosen. As he is Lord of all so the
first is done on the natures of all: As he is Rector of all, but not by the
same Laws (as to positives) so he obliges all to this hostility, but not all
as he does those that hear the Gospel: As he is Benefactor he does with his own
as he list, and makes a difference. If any say that it is the same enmity that
is here said to be put in all, and therefore the same persons in which it is
put. I answer, 1. There is no proof of either. A general command or promise to
a community, may signify a difference of duties or gifts to that community,
though that difference be not expressed: For the nature of the subject may
prove it. And, 2. Experience of the fulfilling of this promise or covenant,
proves the difference before mentioned. And it is well known, 1. That Moses is
so concise in the History of these matters. 2. And that the mystery of grace
was to be opened by degrees, and so but darkly at the first, that it is no
wonder if we find the whole sum of the Gospel here coucht up in so narrow a
room, and if each particular be not largely laid open before our eyes. 7. That
we may certainly know that this promise speaks not only of the enmity that
Christ himself should have to Satan, and does not engage a General without an
army, God does here expressly mention the woman her self, saying [I will put
enmity between thee and the woman] so that as she stood in a threefold respect;
she is here her self possessed with this threefold enmity. 1. As she is the
root of humane nature, from whence all mankind (...), she is possessed with the
natural enmity (...) diabolical nature, and this to be naturally conveyed or
propagated. 2. As she was the root of the great Republic of the world, or that
rational society which God as Rector would sapientially govern, and her self
with her husband (who no doubt was also included in the promise) were the whole
then existent race of mankind, so did she receive a legal enmity of obligation,
which she was traditionally to deliver down to all her posterity, being her
self hereby obliged to list her self and all her Infant progeny in the
Redeemers army, against the proclaimed enemy, and to teach her posterity to do
the like: For thus obligatory precepts must be brought down. 3. As she was one
of the chosen favorites of God, she received the habitual enmity of
sanctification: And this is not in her power to propagate, though she may use
some means that are appointed thereto, and whether a promise of any such thing
be made to her seed on the use of such means, I will not now stand to discuss.
8. It is not all that are possessed with the natural enmity against the Devil
himself that are the Church of Christ: For this is but a common preparative
which is in all: Nor is it all that are obliged to the further enmity against
the works of Satan: But all that on that obligation are duly listed in Christ's
army against Satan (by the obliged person) are visible members: and all that
are by sanctification at an hearty enmity (habitual or actual) with the Kingdom
of Satan, are members of the Church called mystical or invisible. This I put as
granted. 9. Those that violate this fundamental obligation, and to their
natural pravity shall add a fighting against Christ and his Kingdom for Satan
and his Kingdom, are become themselves the seed of the Serpent. And though they
had the natural enmity with the rest of mankind in general against Satan, yet
have they therewithal the habitual enmity against Christ. This much I suppose
as out of controversy. But whether also the first original corrupted nature it
self (before any sin against recovering grace) did contain an habitual enmity
against the Kingdom of the Redeemer? Or whether the sins of later Parents may
propagate this as an additional corruption in our nature, I will not now stand
to discuss. Only as to our present business, it is certain that the general
natural enmity to Satan, may consist with an habitual friendship to his ways
and cause. And though as men they may have the first common advantage of
nature, and as subjects de jure may be under the common obligation, yea, and as
listed in Christ's army may have many of its privileges; yet for the enmity of
disposition to Christ, they may be under a greater curse. 10. As it is certain,
that it is not only Christ himself that is here made the object of this
promise, and is here called [the seed of the woman,] (as is before proved, and
may be more, and is commonly granted;) so it is to be noted, that those others
in whom this enmity is put, are called here [the seed of the woman,] and not
the seed of Christ (though the chief of them are his seed.) And so though the
promise is made to none but the woman's seed, and no exception put in against
Infants, or any age of all her seed: Till you can prove that Infants are none
of her seed, we must take this fundamental promise to extend to Infants, and
that very plainly, without using any violence with the Text.

11. Some learned men do use no contemptible arguments to prove further, That
the sanctifying enmity is here promised to the seed of the woman as her seed (I
mean those that go the way of Dr. Ward, Mr. Bedford, etc.) that is, that as the
two former sorts of enmity are put into all the seed of the woman (as is
explained) so the spiritual holy enmity promised to her seed as she is a
believer. 12. And some learned men do accordingly conclude, that the impiety of
Parents may do much to hinder their children from that blessing more than by
original sin they were hindered, and therefore their faith may further them. Of
which though much may be said, I shall say no more, because I will not stand on
things so much questioned.

M. T. This tedious discourse of Mr. B. is indeed serpentive --

Reply. They that need a Reply to any thing here said, shall have none from me.

SECT. XLIX.
R.B. I Come next to prove from other parts of Scripture, That the fundamental
promise of Grace is thus to be interpreted as including Infants. 1. If the same
Covenant of grace when it is more fully and clearly opened, do expressly
comprehend Infants as to be Church Members, then is this fundamental promise so
to be understood (or then does this also comprehend them.) But the antecedent
is certain, therefore so is the consequent. The antecedent I prove from the
Covenant of grace made to Abraham the Father of the faithful, which
comprehended Infants for Church Members: The Covenant made with Abraham
comprehending Infants, was the same with this in Genesis 3. but in some things
clearlier opened. Which is proved thus: Both these were the Covenant of grace
and free justification by faith in the Redeemer, therefore they were the same.
For there is but one such. If Abraham had some special promises additional to
the main Covenant, that makes not the Covenant of free justification by faith
to be diverse. That this in Genesis 3. is the promise or Covenant of grace and free
justification is not denied, that I know of. That the promise to Abraham was
the same, is evident from Romans 4.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 1. It is there expressly
manifest, that the Covenant whereof Circumcision was to Abraham the seal, was
the Covenant of free justification by faith; Circumcision it self being a seal
of the righteousness of faith which Abraham had, yet being uncircumcised, that
he might be the Father of believers, etc. 2. Yea the promise that he should be
heir of the world was not made to Abraham or to his seed through the Law, but
through the righteousness of faith. Now it is certain that this Covenant sealed
by Circumcision and made to Abraham and his seed, did comprehend Infants. The
consequence of the major then is evident, that the same promise expressed more
concisely, is to be expounded by the same expressed more fully: And it is
acknowledged that the Gospel light and grace was to be manifest by certain
degrees.

Mr. T. That the fundamental Promise of Grace, Genesis 3.15. does include Infants,
was never denied by me, and therefore Mr. B. does but waste paper and abuse me
and his Readers by going about to prove it.

Reply. If we be really of one mind, it is pity we should make men think we
differ: Mark this concession Reader, [ The fundamental promise of Grace does
include Infants.] The Grace of that promise is our Union Relative to Christ and
his Church, and the benefits internal and external belonging to Christ's
members. Do you believe that our union with the visible Church as such, and
participation in its privileges, is none of that Grace?

Mr. T. This I deny, that it includes all Infants, or all Infants of Believers,
and that any Infant is made a visible Churchmember by that promise as the next
cause or sole efficient.]

Reply. It will come to something anon: 1. That all Infants are made
Church Members by it, did any of us ever affirm? Though if the Parents dissent
had not hindered, and their consent had made them and their Infants capable
Recipients, it would have been all.

2. The Covenant or Law of Grace gives visible Church Membership conditionally
to all that hear it. Deny this, and you know not what you do. I first ask you,
Does not the Law of Grace (or Promise) give both mystical and visible
Church Membership to all that hear it that are at age and have the use of
Reason? (I speak not of membership in a particular Church which some may want
opportunity to enjoy, but in the universal.) Deny this, and you deny Christ's
Gospel. Does he not say, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved:
whoever believes shall not perish -- whoever will, let him take the water of
life freely: He that comes to me I will in no wise cast out: Go into the
highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, etc. If Gods Law, Covenant,
Promise or Donation (call it which you had rather) do contain a conditional
Gift of Christ, pardon and life to all the adult, (which it beseems none but
an Infidel to deny,) ask thy Conscience, Reader, whether this blessed Covenant
give no such conditional right to any Infant in the world? Are they all
excluded? And why? Are they worse than their Parents? If it give any Right to
Infants conditionally as it does to Parents, it must be on a condition to be
performed by the Parents, or such as are so far entrusted.

Mr. T.'s talking of [ the next cause, and the sole efficient] seem to me the
words of a man that knew not what to say, but was resolved that he would not
yield: Sir, do you grant that the promise makes Infants visible
Church Members, as any cause, next or remote, sole or cooperating?] If not, why
cheat you your simple followers by this talk? If you do, we are agreed, and why
contend you? If Logical notions are our difference, say so; I think as it is a
Beneficial Relation, the Parents consent and dedication, and the child's being
Theirs, are the dispositio materiae, called by some causae Receptivae vel
dispositivae: and that Gods donation is the sole efficient in which his
donative word (call it what you will) is the Instrument: This is plain Logic.
But you that profess that your Church Membership is it self no benefit (and so
owe God no thanks for it, and yet make such a stir about it) cannot indeed
hold, that Gods love or mercy, or Christ's merits, or the Covenant or Promise
are givers of it to young or old: For they give nothing but benefits. Be not
angry to have your absurdities opened, but before you die be sober and reform
them.

He adds [ I grant that the Covenant to Abraham was the Covenant of
Evangelical Grace, though mixed, and that it did include Infants, and that they
were Church Members, to wit, of the invisible Church of the Elect -- And that
Abraham's Infants in his house were visible Church Members, but not by virtue of
the Covenant barely as Evangelical, but by the transeunt fact: and if in any
respect by virtue of the Covenant, it was by it as containing household or civil
promises, rather than Evangelical.

Reply. About 23 and 24 years of age I was my self in doubt of Infant Baptism:
But had I read such a Writer as this against it, I think he would have easily
resolved me for it. 1. The Covenant to Abraham's family was a Covenant of
Evangelical Grace, he says, (And surely so was that to Adam, and Noe before.)
And it included Infants, but only as Elect in the Church invisible. But the
conditional Promise or Covenant is confessed to include the Non-elect at age: And
what! None of them in Infancy? Reader, How can this be called a Covenant, for
God only to say [ I will save all such Infants as I elect] and yet offer
Salvation to none of them in the world on any condition, nor give a title to
any person that can be known by themselves or others? They confound the Decree
of God with his Covenant. If God had made no other Law, Promise or Covenant,
with the adult, but [ I will save whom I will save] who would have taken this
for a Law or Covenant? And what right or hope does this give to Christians for
their Children more than Pagans?

And, Reader, if God have given no condition or character antecedent, as a
differencing reason or qualification of those that he will save from those that
he will not, but only told us that he will save whom he list, this makes
Infants no subjects of his Kingdom, under no Law, and so liable to no
judgment, nor to stand in judgment with the rest of the world, but only to be
used as beasts or stones, by Divine natural motion as he will. And then, how
can you say that any Infants shall be damned, or not saved? Or that it shall be
one of a million at least that shall not? For if there be no Law that gives
Right to Pardon and Salvation to any one Infant in the world, and yet many are
saved, it will follow, 1. That God is (as the profane say) better than his
word, and will save many to whom he never gave right to it by promise. 2. And
will not the ungodly put in for the like hopes? If besides those that Gods Laws
condemn or justify, God will save many in a neutral state, why may he not,
says the ungodly, save me also? for Infants once deserved punishment by
original sin: And if God pardon them without any reason in themselves, he may
do so by me. 3. Or at least he may save all the Infants in the world for ought
you know, that die in Infancy.

And do all the promises to the seed of the faithful, in the second
Commandment, and Exodus 34.7. and many another Text, mean no such thing as they
speak, as if to be the seed of the faithful were no condition, but only [ I
will save my elect?]

And why might not this Covenant [ I will save my Elect] be made with Cain, or
Cham, or Judas, as well as with Abraham?

2. He says, Abraham's Infants were visible Church Members, but not by the
Covenant barely as Evangelical.]

Reply. What a bare put off is that, of a man that must say something? Is it at
all by the Covenant as Evangelical? If yea, we have our desire. If not, what
means [ barely] but the nakedness of your ill cause?

3. Then comes next [ And if in any respect by virtue of the Covenant (which
it seems he yet knows not after all this talk, or will not know) it was by
it as containing household or civil promises, rather than Evangelical.]

Reply. See, Reader, some more of the mystery: Infants were Church Members in
Abraham's house, but Church Membership signified but household and civil
promises: Do you now perceive what the Jews Infant Church Membership was? The
Socinians perhaps will say the like of the Jews Covenant to the adult.

But we may yet mistake him, For [ rather] is not a negative: It is [ Rather
than Evangelical] which is but a preference, not a denial. O for plain honesty
in things divine!

SECT. L.
R. B. 2. THat the first fundamental promise is thus to be interpreted, I
further prove by Gods constant administration in the performance of it.
Concerning which I do make this challenge to you (with modesty and submission,)
to prove if you can, that there was ever one Churchmember that had Infants
born to him while he was in that estate, from the beginning of the world to
this day, whose Infants also were not Church Members? Except only the
Anabaptists, who refuse or deny the mercy, and so refuse to dedicate their
Infants in Baptism unto Christ. And whether their Infants be Church Members, I
will not determine affirmatively or negatively at this time. I do again urge
you to it, that you may not forget it; to prove to me, that ever there was one
Infant of a Churchmember in the world, since the creation to this day, that
was not a Churchmember, (except the Anabaptists that refuse the mercy or deny
it.)

Reply. Mr. T. 's Answer is a refusing to answer, save a cross challenge (often
answered) and the instance of Timothy: To which I say, that if Timothy 's
Father being a Greek countermanded his communion with the Jews, he could not be
a member of their policy or particular Church. (Though if he only delayed as
Moses did to circumcise his Son, that Son might be a member as the children in
the wilderness were.) But his Mothers right alone might make him a person in
Covenant with God as a visible member of the Church-universal.

SECT. LI.
R. B. BEfore I proceed to any more Texts of Scripture, I will a little enquire
into the light or Law of Nature it self, and see what that says to the point
in hand. And first we shall consider of the duty of dedicating Infants to God
in Christ, and next of Gods acceptance of them, and entertaining them into that
estate. And the first is most evidently contained in the Law of nature it self
(at least upon supposition that there be any hopes of Gods entertaining them;)
which I prove thus. 1. The law of Nature binds us to give to every one his
own due: But Infants are Gods own due; Ergo, the law of Nature binds Parents
to give them up to God. By [giving] here I mean not an alienation of propriety,
to make that to be Gods that was not so before; but an acknowledgement of his
right, with a free resignation and dedication of the Infant to God, as his own;
for his use and service, when he is capable thereof. If you say, Infants being
not capable of doing service, should not be devoted to it till they can do it;
I answer, they are capable at present of a legal obligation to future duty, and
also of the relation which follows that obligation, together with the honor
of a Churchmember (as the child of a Noble man is of his Honors and title to
his Inheritance) and many other mercies of the Covenant. And though Christ
according to his humanity was not capable of doing the works of a Mediator or
head of the Church in his Infancy, yet for all that he must be head of the
Church then, and not (according to this arguing) stay till he were capable of
doing those works. And so is it with his members.

Reply. Here is so little said that needs but this remarke, that Mr. T. knows
not how to deny the duty of dedication handsomely, which being Accepted of God
is to Church Membership as private Marriage to public, where publication is
wanting: But he denies that Parents may dedicate them by Baptism: But if they
may and must do it privately by heart consent, it will follow that they must do
it publicly in the instituted way. As for my bold attempt in proving so much
by the Law of Nature, if he cannot confute it, let him not strive and sin
against nature.

SECT. LII.
R. B. 2. THe law of nature binds all Parents to do their best to secure Gods
right, and their Childrens good, and to prevent their sin and misery: But to
engage them betimes to God by such a dedication, does tend to secure Gods
right, and their Childrens good, and to prevent their sin and misery: For they
are under a double obligation, which they may be minded of betimes, and which
may hold them the more strongly to their duty, and disadvantage the tempter
that would draw them off from God.

Mr. T. Really Infant Baptism is a disadvantage, 1. In that it is the occasion
whereby they take themselves to be Christians before they know what Christianity
is, and so are kept in presumption, etc. 2. They are kept from the true
baptism, etc.

Reply. This nearly concerns our cause: I once inclined to these thoughts my
self: But I am satisfied, 1. That Infant Covenanting and Baptism is no
hindrance in Nature or Reason from personal serious Covenanting with God at
age. We tell our Children and all the adult, that their Infant Covenanting by
Parents, will serve them but till they have Reason and Will of their own to
choose for themselves: And that without as serious a faith and consent of their
own then as if they had never been baptized, they cannot be saved: What hurt
then as to this does their Infant interest do them?

2. Yea doubtless it is a great help: For, 1. To be in the way of Gods
Ordinance and Benediction is much. 2. And (knowing you deny that) I add, to be
conscious of an early engagement, may do much to awe the minds of Children; yea
and to cause them to love that Christ which has received them, and that
Society to which they belong.

3. If Children till Baptized have any thoughts of dying, according to you,
they must have little hopes of mercy: And God accounts not the spirit of
bondage best, no not for Children. They cannot well be educated in the Love of
God, who must believe that they are damned if they die, and that God has not
given them any promise of life.

4. Experience of many Moors (servants) among us and in our Plantations,
(besides ancient history) assures us, that delaying Baptism till age tends
to make people delay repentance, and think I am but as I was, and if I sin
longer all will be pardoned at baptism, and I must after live strictlier, and
therefore (as Constantine and many more) they will be baptized Christians when
there is no remedy.

5. And experience assures us that it were the way to work out Christianity
and restore Infidelity in any Nation: For had not Christ early possession, and
were not Nations discipled and baptized, Christians were like to be almost as
thin as Puritans now: and the multitude being Infidels from a cross interest
(such as divisions cause) would be ready on all occasions (as they did in Japan
and Monicongo) to root them out.

I take this to be a very concerning consideration, whether in reason Infant
Baptism be like to do more good or harm. The not calling men to serious
Covenanting at age does unspeakable harm: To have a few good words about
Confirmation in the Liturgy, and such as Doct. Hammonds writings of it, will
not save ignorant ungodly souls, nor the souls of the Pastors that betray them:
I have said my thoughts of this long ago in a Treatise of Confirmation.

But I must profess that it seems to me, that if Christ had left it to our
wills, it is much liker to tend to the good of souls, and the propagating
Christianity, and the strength of the Church, for to have both the obligation
and comfort of our Infant Covenant and Church state, and as serious a
Covenanting also at age, when we pass into the Church state of the Adult, than
to be without the former, and left to the expectation of adult baptism alone.

SECT. LIII, to LVIII.
R. B. THe law of nature binds Parents in love to their children to enter
them into the most honorable and profitable society, if they have but leave so
to do: But here Parents have leave to enter them into the Church, which is the
most honorable and profitable society. Ergo. That they have leave, is proved,
1. God never forbad any man in the world to do this sincerely, (the wicked and
unbelievers cannot do it sincerely;) and a not forbidding is to be interpreted
as leave in case of such participation of benefits: As all laws of men in
doubtful cases are to be interpreted (...), in the most favorable sense. So
has Christ taught us to interpret his own: When they speak of duty to God,
they must be interpreted in the strictest sense: When they speak of benefits to
man, they must be interpreted in the most favorable sense that they will bear.

2. It is the more evident, that a not forbidding in such cases is to be taken
for leave, because God has put the principle of self-preservation, and
desiring our own welfare, and the welfare of our Children so deeply in humane
nature, that he can no more lay it by than he can cease to be a reasonable
creature. And therefore he may lawfully actuate or exercise this natural
necessary principle of seeking his own or childrens real happiness, wherever
God does not restrain or prohibit him. We need no positive command to seek our
own or childrens happiness, but what is in the law of nature it self, and to
use this where God forbids not, if good be then to be found, cannot be
unlawful.

3. It is evident from what is said before (and elsewhere) that it is more than
a silent leave of Infants Church Membership that God has vouchsafed us. For in
the forementioned fundamental promise, explained more fully in after times, God
signified his will that so it should be. It cannot be denied, but there is some
hope at least given to them in the first promise, and that in the general
promise to the seed of the woman they are not excluded, there be no excluding
term. Upon so much encouragement and hope then it is the duty of Parents by the
law of nature to enter their Infants into the Covenant, and into that society
that partake of these hopes, and to list them into the Army of Christ.

4. It is the duty of Parents by the Law of Nature, to accept of any allowed or
offered benefit for their children. But the relation of a member of Christ's
Church or Army, is an allowed or offered benefit to them, Ergo, etc. For the
Major, these principles in the law of nature do contain it. 1. That the Infant
is not sui juris, but is at his Parents dispose in all things that are for his
good. That the Parents have power to oblige their children to any future duty
or suffering, that is certainly to their own good: and so may enter them into
Covenants accordingly: And so far the will of the Father is as it were the will
of the child. 2. That it is unnaturally sinful for a Parent to refuse to do
such a thing, when it is to the great benefit of his own child. As if a Prince
would offer Honors, and Lordships, and Immunities to him and his heirs: if he
will not accept this for his heirs, but only for himself, it is unnatural. Yea,
if he will not oblige his heirs to some small and reasonable conditions for the
enjoying such benefits. For the Minor, that this relation is an allowed or
offered benefit to Infants is manifested already, and more shall be.

And this leads me up to the second point, which I propounded to consider of;
whether by the light or law of nature we can prove that Infants should have the
benefit of being Church Members, supposing it first known by supernatural
revelation, that Parents are of that society, and how general the promise is,
and how gracious God is. And 1. It is certain to us by nature that Infants are
capable of this benefit, if God deny it not, but will give it them as well as
the aged. 2. It is certain that they are actually members of all the
Commonwealths in the world (perfect sed imperfecta membra) being secured from
violence by the laws, and capable of honors and right to inheritances, and of
being real subjects under obligations to future duties, if they survive. And
this shows that they are also capable of being Church Members, and that nature
reveals to us, that the Infants case much follows the case of the Parents,
especially in benefits. 3. Nature has actually taught most people on earth, so
far as I can learn, to repute their Infants in the same Religious society with
themselves, as well as in the same civil society. 4. Under the Covenant of
works (commonly so called) or the perfect rigorous law that God made with man
in his pure nature; the Infants should have been in the Church, and a people
holy to God, if the Parents had so continued themselves. And consider, 1. That
holiness and righteousness were then the same things as now, and that in the
establishing of the way of propagation, God was no more obliged to order it so,
that the children of righteous Parents should have been born with all the
perfections of their Parents and enjoyed the same privileges, than he was
obliged in making the Covenant of Grace to grant that Infants should be of the
same society with their Parents, and have the immunities of that society. 2. We
have no reason when the design of redemption is the magnifying of love and
grace, to think that love and grace are so much less under the Gospel to the
members of Christ, than under the Law to the members or seed of Adam, as that
then all the seed should have partaked with the same blessings with the
righteous Parents, and now they shall all be turned out of the society, whereof
the Parents were members. 5. God gives us himself the reasons of his gracious
dealing with the children of the just from his gracious nature, proclaiming
even pardoning mercy to slow thence, Exodus 34. and in the second Commandment.
6. God does yet show us that in many great and weighty respects he deals well
or ill with children for their Parents sakes: as many Texts of Scripture show
(and I have lately proved at large in one of our private disputes, that the
sins of nearer parents are imputed as part of our original or natural guilt.)
So much of that.

Reply. Mr. T. says nothing to all, that I think the Reader needs a reply to.

SECT. LVIII.
R. B. YEt before I cite any more particular Texts, I will add this one
argument from the tenor of the Covenant of grace, as expressed in many Texts
of Scripture. According to the tenor of the Covenant of grace, God will not
refuse to be their God and take them for his people, that are (in a natural or
law sense) willing to be his people, and to take him for their God. But the
Infants of believing Parents are thus willing, Ergo. The Major is
unquestionable. The Minor is proved from the very law of nature before
expressed. Infants cannot be actually willing themselves in natural sense,
Ergo, the reason and will of another must be theirs in law sense, and that is
of the Parents, who have the full dispose of them, and are warranted by the law
of nature to choose for them (for their good) till they come to use of reason
themselves. The Parents therefore by the light and law of nature choosing the
better part for their children, and offering and devoting them to God, by the
obligation of his own natural law, he cannot in consistency with the free grace
revealed in the Gospel, refuse those that are so offered. And those that thus
come to him in the way that nature it self prescribes, he will in no wise cast
out, Joh... And he will be offended with those that would keep them from him,
that are offered by those that have the power to do it, though they cannot
offer themselves. For legally this act is taken for their own. Thus I have
showed you some of the fundamental title that Infants of Believers have to
Church Membership, and our obligation to dedicate them to God.

Reply. Mr. T. says [that some acts of the Parents are legally taken for the
child's is not denied.] But here he denies it, and I leave his denial with my
copious proof in my Treatise of Infant Baptism to the Readers.

SECT. LIX.
R. B. YOu must now in reason expect, that infants Church Membership being thus
established, partly in the law of nature, and partly in the fundamental
promise, what is after this spoken of it should not be any new establishment,
but confirmations and intimations of what was before done, rather giving us the
proof that such a law and promise there is that did so establish it, than being
such first establishing laws or promises themselves. And from hence I may well
add this further argument. If there be certain proof in Scripture of Infants
Church Membership, but none except this before alleged that makes any mention
of the beginning of it, but all speaking of it as no new thing, then we have
great reason upon the forementioned evidence, to assign this beginning which
from Genesis 3. we have expressed. But the former is true, ergo, the later. You
confess that Infants were Church Members once. You only conceive it began when
Abraham was called out of Ur. Your conceit has not a word to support it in the
Text. The right to such a blessing was then new to Abraham's seed, when Abraham
first believed: But when it began to belong to Infants of Believers in general,
no Text except this before cited does mention. Nor does that promise to Abraham
intimate any inception then as to the Church Membership of Infants, but only an
application of a privilege to him that in the general was no new thing.

Reply. To this Mr. T. still affirms that Infants Church Membership was
proper to the Hebrews only. Reader, though they had their peculiarities, is it
credible that the Infants of that one small country only should be so
differently dealt with by God, from all the world else, even Henoch 's, Noe 's,
Sem 's and all from Adam to the end of the world, that these Infants only
should be Church Members and no others? what unlikely things (yea against
evidence) can some believe?

SECT. LX, LXI, LXII.
R. B. NOW for the Texts that further intimate such a foregoing establishment.
1. There seems to be some believing intimation of this in Adams naming his wife
the mother of the living: For it is to be noted what Bishop Usher says, Annal.
vol. 1. p. 2. Unde tum primum (post semen promissum) mulieri Evae nomen a
marito est impositum, Genesis 3.20. quod matter esset omnium viventium non
naturalem tantum vitam, sed illud quoque quod est per fidem in semen ipsius,
Messiam promissum: quomodo and post eam Sara fidelium matter est habita. 1 Pet.
3.6. Gal. 4.31.] He put this name on her after the promise, because she was to
be the mother of all the living, not only that live the life of nature, but
that which is by faith in the Messiah her seed. So that as she was the root of
our nature, we are her natural seed; and as she was a believer, and we the seed
of her a believer, so is she the mother of a holy seed, and we that are her
seed are holy, as a people visibly dedicated to God.

2. When Cain was born, his mother called him [possession] because she had
obtained a man of the Lord, that is, says Ainsworth, [with his favor, and of
his good will,] and so a Son of promise, and of the Church. And therefore it is
to be noted, that when Cain had sinned by killing his brother, God did curse
him, and cast him out of his presence, Genesis 4.14, 16. So that he was
excommunicate and separated from the Church of God, says Ainsworth, [that is,
from the place of Gods word and worship which in likelihood was held by Adam
the father, who being a Prophet, had taught his children how to sacrifice and
serve the Lord. So on the contrary, to come into Gods presence or before him, 1 Chronicles. 16.29. is explained in Psalm. 96.8. to be the coming into his Courts.]
Very many learned men give the same exposition of it. Now if Cain were now
excommunicate, then was he before of the Church: nay it is certain by his
sacrificing, and other proof, however this Text be interpreted: But no man can
give the least reason from Scripture to make it so probable that he entered into
the Church at any other time, as we give of his entrance at his nativity.

When Eve bare Seth, she so named him as a Son of mercy in faith, as appointed
her by the Lord to be in Abels room, faithful as Abel, and the father of our
Lord after the flesh, as Ainsworth on Genesis 4.25. And is there no intimation in
this that Seth was an Infant member of the visible Church? I confess he that
shall excommunicate this appointed seed, or says, that Seth was without the
Church in his infancy, does speak in my ears so improbably, and so unlike the
Scripture, that I am very confident I shall never believe him.

Mr. T. 's Answer to all, is a denial: says he, [There is no intimation that
Seth was an Infant member of the visible Church; from which Ishmael was not
excluded: In which though I place not Seth, I do not thereby excommunicate him,
or say that he was without the Church in his Infancy.

Reply. But you say He was without the visible Church: (or else within and
without are consistent with you.) And whether Ishmael was within, and Seth, and
Henoch, and Sem without, I will no more dispute with you.

SECT. LXIII, to LXX.
R. B. NOte also, that as God had thus cast out Cain, and supplied Abels room
by Seth, and had given each of them posterity; so we find him in a special
manner registring the successors of the righteous, and putting two titles on
these two distinct generations, calling some the sons of God, and others the
daughters of men, Genesis 6.2. Supposing that you reject the old conceits that
these sons of God were Angels that fell in love with women, the current
ordinary exposition I think will stand, that these were the progeny of Seth,
and other members of the Church, who are called the Sons of God; and that it
was the progeny of Cain, and other wicked ones, that are called the daughters
of men. Where note that they are not themselves denominated wicked, but the
children of men, as being a generation separated from the Church from the
birth. And the other are not themselves affirmed to be truly godly ones, but
sons of God, as being the seed of the Saints not cast out, but members of the
Church, or the sons of those who were devoted to God, and so devoted to him
themselves: a separated generation belonging to God as his visible Church.
Where note, that these that are called the sons of God, even the line of Seth
and other godly Parents, were yet so wicked that God repented that he made
them, and destroyed them in the flood, sparing only Noah and his family. So
that it was not their own godliness, that made them called the sons of God, but
their relation, Church state and visible separation from open unchurched
Idolaters. Compare this phrase with the like, Deuteronomy. 14.1. 2 Cor. 6.18. In the
former it is said [ye are the children of the Lord your God, ye shall not cut
your selves, etc.] where the whole people, Infants and all, are called Gods
children, as being a people separated to him from the Idolatrous world; and so
in the next verse. called a holy people unto God, peculiar to him, etc. And 2
Cor. 6.8. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, etc. and I will be a
father to you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty.] So that Gods sons and daughters are that society that are separated
from Idolaters unto the worship of God as the visible Church is. And then it
appears that the generation of the righteous, even from the womb, were
enumerated to the rest, in that they are not mentioned as a people called out
here and there, and initiated at age (there is no mention of any such thing:)
but as a stock or generation opposed to the daughters of men, or of the
unchurched, who were such from their infancy as all will grant. For it was not
the same men that were the Parents of those here called the daughters of men
and the sons of God (though some of the later might be excommunicate when they
fell:) But it plainly intimates, that it was another sort of men that these
were the daughters of, than those that were Parents to the sons of God. So
Ainsworth in loc. [The sons of God, i. e. the men of the Church of God, for to
such Moses says, Deuteronomy. 14.1, etc. 1 John 3.1. Daughters of men, meaning of
Cains posterity that were out of Gods Church, Genesis 4.14.] So our Annotations,
and many more.

An intimation of this privilege, and that they were sons of mercy and of the
promise, appears in the very names of many of the children of the righteous,
both before and after the flood, which I will not stand on particularly.

And when all the world had so defiled themselves, that God was resolved to cut
them off; he spared Noah and his family or sons. Though Cham was to be cursed,
yet was he of the Church which worshipped the true God, and spared as a son of
Noah, and one of that society. And if God so far spared him then for his
Fathers sake as to house him in the Ark (the type of the Church) he sure took
him to be of the same society in his infancy, and then bare him the same favor
on the same account.

As soon as Noah came out of the Ark God blessed himself in his issue, as he
did Adam, with an [increase and multiply] and made a Covenant with him and his
seed after him. Which Covenant though the expressed part of it be that the
earth should be drowned no more, and so it was made with the wickedst of Noah's
seed, and even with the beasts of the field, yet does it import a special
favor to Noah and his seed, as one whom God would show a more special respect
to, as he had done in his deliverance, and upon this special favor to him the
creatures fare the better. For though the word [Covenant] be the same to man
and beast, yet the diversity of the promissary and his capacity may put a
different sense on the same word, as applied to each. And indeed it should seem
but a sad blessing to Noah to hear an [increase and multiply] if all his Infant
posterity must be cast or left out of the visible Church, and so left as common
or unclean. This were to increase and multiply the Kingdom of the Devil. If he
that was so mercifully housed in the Ark with all his children, must now be so
blessed as to have all their issue to be out of the Church, it were a strange
change in God, and a strange blessing on Noah! And an uncomfortable stablishing
of a Covenant with his seed, if all that seed must be so thrust from God and
dealt with as the seed of cursed Cain.

Moreover it is certain that Noah did prophetically, or at least truly
pronounce the blessing on Shem and Japhet. And in Shems blessing he blesses
the Lord his God, showing that God was his God and so in Covenant with him. And
it is plain that it is not only the persons, but the posterities of his three
sons that Noah here intended. It was not Cham himself so much as Canaan and his
succeeding posterity that were to be servants to Shem and Japhet, that is, to
their posterity. And the blessing must be to the issue of Shem, as well as the
curse to the issue of Cham. And indeed a Hebrew Doctor would take it ill at
that Expositor or Divine whatsoever that should presume to exclude the Infant
seed of them out of Gods Church. And well they may, if in the blessing God be
pronounced to be their God, Says Ainsworth in loc. [under this Shem also
himself receives a blessing: for blessed is the people, whose God Jehovah is,
Psalm. 144.15. and eternal life is implied herein, for God has preprepared for
them a City of whom he is not ashamed to be called their God, Heb. 11.16. and
Shem is the first man in Scripture that has expressly this honor.]

Moreover in Genesis 9.27. in Japhets blessing there is much, though in few words,
to this purpose intimated. First, note that the Jewish Church is called [the
tents of Shem.] From whence it appears, that the Church privileges of that
people begun not with or from Abraham, but were before: And that it is the same
Church that was of Shem and of Abraham, and after all the additional promises
to Abraham, the Jewish Church is still denominated [the tents of Shem:] now
they were the tents of Shem before Abraham's days. And therefore it is clear,
that it being the same Church, must be supposed to have the same sort of
members or materials: and therefore Infants must be members before Abraham's
days as well as after. That Church which was Shems tents had Infant
Church Members (for the Jews Church is so called, into which Japhet was to
pass:) But the Church both before and after Abraham was Shems tents, Ergo.

Yet further let it here be noted, that it is into Shems tents that Japhet must
pass. I suppose that the evidence is better here for that exposition that
applies the word [dwell] to Japhet than to God, and so that this is spoken of
the conversion of the Gentiles, as many Expositors have cleared at large. And
so, as Ainsworth says, the sense is that Japhet shall be [united with the
Churches of the Jews, the posterity of Shem, which was fulfilled when the
Gentiles became joynt-heirs, and of the same body, and joynt-partakers of Gods
promise in Christ, the stop of the partition wall being broken down, etc.
Ephesians. 3.6. and 2.14, 19. Although it may further imply the graffing of Japhets
children into the stock of the Church, when Shems posterity should be cut off,
etc.] vid. ult. Now if it be Shems tents even the same Church that Japhets
children must dwell in, then as Shems Infants were Church Members, so must
Japhets, and not all his Infant seed be cast or left out. So that here is a
promise of Infant Church Membership unto the Gentiles in these words.

Reply. To all this the sum of Mr. T. 's answers are, 1. A denial of the
senses given of some Texts, which I leave to the Readers examination, being
resolved not to tire him with a tedious Reply. 2. He grants that their persons
were blessed, God their God, and their seed in the Church: As if Gods open
Covenant and promise made them not visible members but invisible.

SECT. LXX, to LXXIX.
R. B. WE come next to the Promise made to Abraham, which I shall say the less
to, because you confess it. But again note, that whereas your self make the
beginning of Gods taking the Jews to be his people, and so of Infants to be
members of the Church, to be at Abraham's call from Ur; 1. There is no one word
of that in the Text. 2. Lot came out of Ur with Abraham, yea, and from Haran,
and lived with him: were not Lot and his Infants Church Members then?

3. The chief note I intend is this, that there is no more said then to prove
Infants Church Members, than what we have showed was said long before, and is
said after of the Gentiles Infants, no nor so much. If therefore the passage of
Abraham out of Ur, yea, or the promise made to him in Haran, Genesis 12.2, 3. will
prove Infants Church Membership, then have we as good proof of it to the
Gentile Church as to the Jews.

And here I note further, that in the beginning before the command for
Circumcision, you plainly yield that Infants Church Membership is a thing
separable from Circumcision, and begun not with it, but before. And indeed I
have evinced that to you in my Book of Baptism. Abraham himself was not made a
member by Circumcision, but circumcised because a member of Christ's Church by
faith. Ishmael was a member before, and so was Isaac, and the Infants born in
Abraham's house.

Whether there were any promise or precept of this (but a mere transeunt fact)
let the Text last mentioned, and the following bear witness. Genesis 12.2, 3. In
thee shall all families of the earth be blessed, and, Genesis 17.7, 9, 10. And I
will establish my Covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee -- and I
will be their God. And God said to Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou and thy seed after thee in their generations. This is my
Covenant which you shall keep between me and you, etc. to verse. 15. In all this
let these things be noted, 1. That here is an express promise or Covenant to
Abraham and his seed after him. 2. That it is not only de praesenti, but for
the future, called an everlasting Covenant. 3. That this promise or Covenant
does manifestly imply and include Infants Church Membership (as you confess.)
4. That yet here is not the least word that intimates an institution of it de
novo, but rather the contrary plainly intimated. The promises before Genesis 17.
are mainly about the multiplication of Abraham's seed. What is that to Church --
membership? (except what intimates the promised seed, of which anon.) Hagar
has a promise also of the multiplication of Ishmaels seed. And the very
precept of Circumcision is only one part of the Infant members, viz. the males,
and therefore it cannot be foundation of their Church Membership, which leaves
out half the members. 5. Note that the promise that God will be their God, does
expressly contain the Church Membership of the seed. 6. Note that this is more
than a transeunt fact, Ergo, being an everlasting Covenant. Had it been a
natural transeunt fact, that had left no permanent title behind it in the
obligation of the Covenant, then it had been null and void as soon as spoken:
then the word of God is but a bare sound and of no further force. 7. Note that
the Apostle (as is said) Romans 4.10, 11, 12, 13. does fully manifest to us, that
this promise was made to Abraham as a believer, and that Circumcision was a
seal of the righteousness of faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised: and
therefore that the chief part of the Covenant of having God for our God, and
his taking us as his peculiar people, belongs to the Gentiles as well as to the
Jews. 8. And he often shows that the faithful are Abraham's seed, and therefore
the chief blessings of the promise belong to all the faithful. But one of the
blessings was, that their Infants should be comprehended in the same Church and
Covenant, Ergo, the Infants of the faithful who are the heirs of the same
promise, must be comprehended in it too.

9. I think it is not to be made light of as to this matter, that in the great
promise, Genesis 12.3. the blessing from Abraham in Christ is promised to all the
families or tribes on earth, all the families of the earth shall be blessed, as
the Heb. Samar. Arabic. or all the kindreds as the vulgar Lat. and Chald.
paraph. or all the tribes as the Sept. (...). And doubtless it is by Christ
that this blessing is promised, and so a Gospel blessing ( Ergo, the Syriac.
adds and in thy seed, and the Arab. has by thee.) And the Apostle fully
testifies that. So that as tribes, kindreds, families, do most certainly
comprehend the Infants, and as it was to such families that the promise was
made before Christ as to the Jewish Church, so is it expressly to such families
or tribes that the promise is made as to the Gentiles since Christ.

10. Note that as Infant Church Membership is here clearly implied in Infant
Circumcision, so they are two distinct things; and as the sign is here
commanded de novo, so the thing signified (I mean the duty of engaging and
devoting to God as their God in Covenant) is commanded with it, though not de
novo, as a thing now beginning as the sign did. So that here is in Circumcision
not only a command to do the circumcising outward act, but also to do it as a
sign of the Covenant, and so withal for the Parents to engage their children to
God in Covenant as their God, and devote them to him as his separated peculiar
people. So that here are two distinct duties concurrent. The one external newly
instituted, the other internal not newly instituted. And therefore the former
may cease, and yet the later stand: and it is no proof that the later (Covenant
engagement of Infants to God) is ceased, because the sign of Circumcision is
ceased; no more than it proves that such Covenant engagement did then begin
when Circumcision did begin; or that women were not Church Members separated,
engaged, dedicated to God in Infancy, because they were not circumcised. And no
more than you can prove that all Israel was unchurched in the wilderness when
they were uncircumcised for 40 years. So that here you have a command for
entering Infants as Church Members. And so you see both promise and precept in
Genesis 12.3. and Genesis 17.

And when I consider the Parents, breeding and manners of Rebekah, I think it
far more probable that she was a Churchmember from her Infancy, than that she
was entered afterward at age, or that she was a heathen or infidel when Isaac
married her.

And as here are before mentioned standing Covenants, so it is to be noted how
God intimates the extent of the main blessing of them to be further than to
Abraham's natural seed, not only in the express promise of the blessing to all
the nations or families on earth (of which before) but in the assigned reason
of the blessing which is common to Abraham with other true believers. For Genesis
22.16, 17, 18. it is thus alleged [because thou have done this thing, etc. And
in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou have
obeyed my voice.] And Genesis 26.3, 4, 5. the Covenant is renewed with Isaac, and
the same reason assigned, [because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my
charge, my commandments, my statutes and my laws.] How man's obedience is said
to be a cause of Gods blessing, I am not determining; but taking the words as I
find them in general, I may conclude, that they are here given as a cause or
reason of it some way or other? And though a special mercy may be given on a
common ground or reason, yet where there is no apparent proof of the
restriction, we are to judge the blessing common where the reason is common: At
least, if a special blessing be superadded to Abraham's seed (upon the freeness
of Gods grace, or the eminency of Abraham's obedience,) yet there goes with it a
mercy common to all where the reason of the mercy is found. It being therefore
the case of every true believer to be faithful and obedient, yea, to prefer
that before his own life, and not a son only, it may be hence gathered, that
God who blessed Abraham's seed on that account, will bless theirs on the same,
with the same blessings in the main (as to his favor and acceptance of them)
though not with the same in the variable superadditionals or overplus of
external things.

In Exodus 12.48. there is a law for the circumcising of all the males of
strangers that sojourn in the land, that will keep the passover: which
comprehends their Church Membership, as is showed.

Reply. To all this neither do I find any new thing calling for any answer, but
what the considering Reader can easily make: His repeated sayings, that if
[Admission be by Baptism I must make Parents Ministers to baptize] a child may
well answer. There are more Parties that act in baptism than one: God by his
Ministers expresses his Covenant-Gift and Consent, and delivers it sealed to
the Receiver by the instituted investing symbol: The party receiving expresses
his consent, and this the Parent has power and trust to do for the child, as
you may take a Lease for your Child: Cannot the Parent do this, and so be a
Cause of Reception without being a Minister?

SECT. LXXIX, to LXXXVI.
R. B. THe promise to the whole people of Israel, Infants and all, that they
should be [a peculiar people, a Kingdom of Priests, and a holy Nation,] Exodus
19.5, 6. you cannot deny. This is a promise, and not a transeunt fact which
made no promise. And the people are called to keep Gods Covenant, that they
might have this promise fulfilled to them. Yea, if you had said, that it was a
mere transeunt Covenant or promise, reaching but to the persons then existent,
and dying with them, though you had spoken more sense, yet no more truth than
when you denied the law and promise, and substituted a transeunt fact. For, 1.
It is expressly a promise de futuro to a Nation. 2. Yea, and the Apostle Peter
gives the same titles to believers under the Gospel, intimating the fulfilling
of the promise even to them, as the promise to Abraham was to the faithful who
were his uncircumcised seed. However, here is a Covenant granting by way of
confirmaon the blessing of Church Membership to Infants with the rest of
Israel: For certainly, this peculiarity, and holiness, and priesthood here
mentioned, contains their Church Membership: It is undeniable therefore, that
such Church Membership is here granted by Promise or Covenant, not as a thing
then beginning, but by way of confirmation of the like former grants. And it is
to be noted, that though this promise is made to all Israel, yet not to be
fulfilled to any of them, but on condition that they [obey Gods voice, and keep
his Covenant,] verse. 5. on which conditions also any other might have then
enjoyed the same blessing, and therefore so may do now.

In Deuteronomy. 17.1, 2. The Infants with the rest are called the children of God,
and a holy and peculiar people to the Lord their God.

And Deuteronomy. 26.14, 18. the Covenant is expressed [Thou have avouched the Lord
this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken to his voice. And the Lord
has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he has promised
thee, etc. And that thou may be an holy people, etc. Is here no promise, when
the promise is expressed? and is here no Covenant, where the mutual Covenant is
described? And I think you grant that Infants are included.

So Deuteronomy. 28.4, 9. Where the promise to the nation is, that if they hearken to
Gods voice and observe his Commandments, they shall be blessed in the fruit of
their bodies; and the Lord will establish them a holy people to himself, as he
had sworn unto them.] Here is not only a Covenant and Promise for the future,
but also an oath confirming it, as annexed to the same before. Is this
establishing Covenant on Promise but a transeunt fact? or does not this confirm
their right to the benefit promised, which was received before by the same
means?

And Ezra 9.2. They are called the holy seed.

Of that in Deuteronomy. 29. I have formerly spoke enough. It is called a Covenant.
All Israel with their little ones did enter the Covenant and the oath with God,
and which he made to them. It was a Covenant, to establish them for a people to
himself, and that he may be to them a God, as he had before said and sworn. It
is a Covenant made even with them that stood not there, whether it be meant
only of the successive Israelites (and then it is not a transeunt Covenant) or
of all people whoever that will accept of the same terms (and then it is not
proper to Israel.) It is a Covenant not made to them as mere Israelites: but as
obedient to the Covenant terms, and Covenant breaking would cut them off, verse.
19, 20, 21, 23, 25, 26. Is not Church Membership contained in, Gods being their
God, and taking them for his people thus in Covenant? Does not the promise give
them an established right in this blessing? Is all this then no promise, but a
transeunt fact?

Deuteronomy. 30.19. There is a law and promise, choose life, that thou and thy seed
may live. This is the same Covenant which Asa caused the people to enter, 2 Chronicles. 15. and if there had been no law for it, there would have been no
penalty, and then he would not have made it death to withdraw. It is the same
Covenant which Josi^h caused the people to enter, 2 Kings 23.2, 3. 2 Chronicles.
34.31, 32. Of Levit. 25.41, 54, 55. I have spoken elsewhere, and of some other
Texts.

Mr. T. -- For the sole efficient cause being actually put (as the Covenant and
the Parents believing are, Deuteronomy. 29.) the effect must be in act: but it is not
so in the unborn: therefore the Covenant and Parents faith are not the sole
efficient -- so that though the Covenant give a Right to a blessing, yet it
does not make actually visible Church Members, without some other transeunt
fact --

Reply. (The rest let the Reader make his best of.) We are it seems by this
time in a fair way of agreement, and have almost done our work. It seems by
this time he could find in his heart to grant that the Covenant is an efficient
cause, though not the sole efficient: well, we will not stick on that: Gods
love and revelation, and Christ's merits shall be antecedent chief efficients:
And he seems now instead of saying still that [It is only by the Physical
transeunt fact] to be content if we will say, it is not till or without that
fact, that is, that men are not members of the Church till they are men. We
will not be so sour as to deny him that much. And indeed is this all at the
upshot? But I will not grant him the logical notion too easily, though we will
not quarrel about it. I think a cause materially may long exist before the
effect, though it be not formaliter causa till it effect: And I think that Gods
conditional Covenant or Promise, is but causa virtualis and aptitudinalis till
it effect, and yet may be the sole proximate efficient of our Right afterward:
I think the child's being born did not effect his Right to Church Relation, nor
does our Faith now, nor the Parents faith or consent, but only as a condition
make men capable Recipients. And I think the effect may begin de novo without
any change in the efficient, upon a change in the Recipient: And that the Sun
unchanged is the proximate efficient of motion, light and heat, to the next
existent wight that received not his influx before it did exist: And the
Covenant or Donative Instrument of God which says [He that believes shall be
justified] may effect my Justification when I believe and not before, though my
faith effect it not at all, but dispose the recipient. But I deny that the
Parents faith being put, all the capacity of the recipient is put, even when he
is born: For if it be possible for the Parent to consent for himself and not
for his child, and to devote himself and not his child to God, part of the
condition of reception is wanting.

As far as I perceive, could I but hope to be so happy a disputant, as to
convince Mr. T. that Church Membership (visible) is any benefit at all it self,
or was to the Israelites, he would grant me all that I plead for of the
conveyance of it by Covenant. And if I cannot it is a hard case.

SECT. LXXXVI.
R. B. THe second Commandment, Exodus 20.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 5.9, 10. I think is a law,
and contains a promise or premiant part, wherein he promises to show mercy
to the generations or children of them that love him and keep his Commandments:
of which I have also spoken elsewhere, to which I refer you. I see no reason to
doubt but here is a standing promise, and discovery of Gods resolution,
concerning the children of all that love him, whether Jews or Gentiles, to whom
this Commandment belongs: nor to doubt whether this mercy imply
Church Membership: And that this is fetched from the very gracious nature of
God, I find in his proclaiming his Name to Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7.

Mr. T. If this mercy here imply Church Membership to the Infants of them that
love him to a thousand Generations, then it implies it to all the Infants in
the world -- But there is nothing to prove that this mercy must be
Church Membership, or that it must be to all the children of them that love
God, or that it must be to them in Infancy -- I incline to conceive this a
promise of temporal mercies, chiefly to the Israelites --

Reply. 1. That it is not only of temporal mercies, the words [Love and Hate]
as the qualification of the Parents, seem to prove; and the joining the
children to the Parents in the retribution: And all the terms seem above such a
sense: It is the revenge of a jealous God on Idolaters, and mercy to his Lovers
that is spoken of: And the joining this Command to the first which setleth our
relation to God, with the Laws annexed in Deuteronomy. for the cutting off whole
Cities (Parents and Children) that turn from God to Idols, shows that it
reached to Church Communion and Life.

2. And that it was not only to the Israelites (whatever you chiefly mean) is
proved both in that it is in the Decalogue, and the proclaimed name of God,
Exodus 34.5, 6. and exemplified throughout the Scripture and in the Gospel.

2. As to the extent, we can hardly expect that the world should endure a
thousand Generations: Therefore it can mean but that God who boundeth the
punishment to the third and fourth generation, will set no bounds to the
succession of his mercies while our capacity continues. And whatever the
mercies be, the exposition of this continuance concerns you as much as me.

3. As to the conditions, I doubt not but it supposes that the child at age
imitate the Parents in their Love or Hatred, duty or sin: And that if on
Repentance the Parent be forgiven, his sin may not be visited to the third and
fourth. And if a child of Godly Parents turn wicked, the right is intercepted.

4. But the Commandment with the foresaid exposition shows, that God means
that his Retribu^ion to Parents that Love or Hate him, shall extend to their
children as such; unless they interrupt it at age by their own acts: And if to
their children qua tales, then to Infants.

And it speaks such a state of mercy as cannot in reason be conceived to
belong to them without, and can mean no less than Gods visible favor, by which
the Church is differenced from the world, when Lovers and Haters are
distinguished sides.

And when God has Recorded this decreed granted distinguished mercy to the
children of the faithful as such in the Tables of stone, sure it is a visible
notification, which will make them visible favorites and Church Members as soon
as they visibly exist.

And the quatenus seems to me to prove that it extends to all the children
of the faithful, because it is to them as such. But it follows not that it
must extend to them all alike, as to equal mercies, nor yet that the sin of
Parents after may make no kind of forfeiture. But of this I have said more in
my Christian Directory.

SECT. LXXXVII, to XCIV.
R. B. IN Psalm. 102.28. It is a general promise, the children of thy servants
shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee. It is usual in
the Old Testament to express Gods favor by temporal blessings, more than in
the Gospel; but yet still they secure us of his favor. As, I will not fail
thee, nor forsake thee, might secure Joshua more than us of temporal successes,
and yet not more of Gods never failing favor.

There is a stable promise to all Gods people in general that have children,
Psalm. 103.17. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon
them that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens children. And to be
secured by promise of Gods mercy and righteousness is the state of none without
the Church.

And if they were all to be kept out of the Church, I scarce think that
Children would be called an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb his
reward, Psalm. 127.3. nor the man happy that has his quiver full of them. Nor
would the sucking children be called as part of the solemn assembly to the
humiliation, Joel 2.16. 2 Chronicles. 20.13.

There is a standing promise to all the just, Prove. 20.7. The just man walks
in his integrity, his children are blessed after him. There is no sort of men
without the Church that is pronounced blessed in Scripture. A blessed people
are Gods people, and those are the Church separated from the cursed world. One
lower blessing will not denominate a man or society, a blessed man or society.

If it were a good argument then, Deuteronomy. 4.37. because he loved thy fathers,
therefore he chose their seed after them, then it is good still as to favor in
general. So Deuteronomy. 10.15. Psalm. 69.36. Prove. 11.21. The seed of the righteous
shall be delivered. In Psalm. 37.26. there is a general promise to, or
declaration of the righteous, that his seed is blessed, and then they are
Church Members.

In Isa. 61.8, 9. it is promised I think of Gospel times, I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, and their seed shall be known among the
Gentiles, and their offspring among the people: all that see them shall
acknowledge them, that they are the seed which the Lord has blessed. And cap.
62.12. They shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord: and thou
shall be called, sought out, a city not forsaken. Gospel promises then extend
to [people and cities,] whereof Infants are a part. Isa. 65.23. they are the
seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them. This is plain,
and full, and durable.

What is necessary to be said in answer to the common objections, as [that
experience tells us all the seed of the righteous are not blessed] with the
like, I suppose already done in my book of Baptism. All the seed of the
righteous are blessed, though not all with that blessing which cannot be lost
and cast away by themselves when they come to age.

Mr. T.'s Answers all contain the difficulty of discerning the fulfilling of
these promises, and so denying that they infer visible Church Membership: and
he says [ That without the Church a person may be pronounced blessed, is
apparent from Ishmaels blessing, Genesis 17.20. when he was excluded the Covenant
and cast out.]

Reply. He was excluded the Covenant of peculiarity, but not the common
Covenant of Grace made with mankind in Adam and Noe: And the Church was larger
than the Israelites Nation. The rest I leave to the Reader.

SECT. XCIV, XCV.
R. B. IF you say that the word [seed] does not necessarily include Infants. I
answer, Infants are part of the seed of the righteous, yea all their seed are
first Infants. If therefore God have made general promises as to age and
person, who is he that dare limit it, without just proof that indeed God has
limited it? Does God say, that the seed of the righteous are not blessed till
they come to age? If he pronounce the seed blessed, they must be blessed, when
they are first such a seed: And if any one age might be more included than
another, one would think it must be that wherein they are so merely the seed of
such as that they stand not on any distinct account of their own actual faith
or unbelief. For the seed of the righteous, as such, have a promised blessing:
But the seed of the righteous turning themselves to unrighteousness, do turn
from that blessing, and become accursed.

I suppose I have already been more tedious than you expected: I will therefore
add no more of these passages of Scripture, having said that which satisfies
me formerly to the same purpose, and having yet seen nothing that leaves me
unsatisfied. And also because one text either containing such a Law or Covenant
as you call for, or declaring to us that God did make such a Law or Covenant,
is as good as a thousand in point of authority.

Mr. T. Mr. B. not holding children in the womb unborn to be visible
Church Members, all this may be retorted: They are part of the seed of the
righteous.

Reply. The whole seed (in the womb and born) are taken into this relation to
God which implies his blessing on them as separated from the wicked, according
to their capacity: An Infant in the womb is visibly separated to God, if you
denominate visibility from the notoriety or visibility of Gods promise that
does it: But the person is not visible to you, though sensible to the mother.
As Christ was the Head in the womb, so far Infants are members; the Parents
then privately devoting them to God: I told you before, the visibility of our
state has several gradations. To quibble thus on all Gods promises to the
children of the faithful by questions and exceptions about embryo's, abortives,
etc. is vanity.

SECT. XCVI, XCVII.
R. B. THE next Question that I spould speak to is, whether these Laws, or
Covenants, or Promises, are capable of a revocation, or repeal? and I shall
take this for a question that needs no further debate, among men that know what
a Law or Promise is. Gods immutability and perfection may make some Laws
unrepealable, while the subject remains: but otherwise the thing it self is
capable of it. Only where a Promise or Law is but for a limited time, when the
time is expired it cease, and the cessation is as to the nulling of it, equal
to a revocation or abrogation. I put in this question, lest you should
hereafter change your mind and say, that indeed it is a law, or promise, or
covenant, by which the right of Church Membership is conferred, and Infants
dedicated to God: but it is but a transeunt Law or Covenant.] Answ. If so, then
it is either immediately or presently transeunt, or at a certain limited time
only, when it will cease. The former is certainly false and intolerable. For,
1. They are promises and laws for the future, and therefore cease not
immediately. 2. That were to make God the most unfaithful promises and mutable
Lawmakers in the world, if his promise and his laws cease as soon as they are
made. Nay it makes them to be no laws or promises. 3. It was one standing law
and promise that belonged to the Nation of the Jews successively. And God did
not make his promise anew to every Infant that was made a Churchmember, nor
renew his law to every Parent to enter their Children into his Covenant by the
sign of Circumcision. Were not the uncircumcised Israelites in the Wilderness
made members by the efficacy of the former Covenant of God remaining in force.
And did former Laws oblige to Circumcision till Christ? Else there were but few
members, nor but few that circumcised warrantably, if the promise and precept
did extend but to the person that it was first delivered to, and every one else
must likewise have a personal promise and precept. The Mother of Christ cannot
then be proved to have been a Churchmember in Infancy. If it be said that
these promises were limited in the making of them, to a certain time when they
were to cease, I say when that is proved we shall believe it, which I have not
yet seen done.

And it falls in with the last question, which is, whether these promises be
indeed revoked and ceased, and these laws repealed or ceased. And here it is
that I have long expected your solid proof, together with the satisfactory
answer to my arguments to the contrary. And so I shall leave this task in your
hands. Sure I am that Christ never came to cast out of the Church, but to
gather more in: much less to cast out all the Infants, even all of that age in
which himself was head of that Church: But to gather together in one the
children of God that were scattered, John 11.52. And therefore he would often
have gathered all Jerusalem and Judaea, even the National Church that then was,
unto himself, as the true head, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, and they would not. It was not because he would not (as intending a new
frame, where Infants could have no place) but because they would not, and so
cast out themselves and their Infants. Certainly it is the joy of the formerly
desolate Gentiles, that they shall have many more children than she that had an
Husband, and not fewer, Gal. 4.25, 26, 27. And we as Isaac are children of the
promise, even that promise which extended to the Infants with the Parents. Gal.
4.28.

Mr. T. -- I conceived a Promise not in congruous sense repealable: For
although a promise be a Law to the Promiser, yet I know not how congruously it
should be repealed: It Is true, the act of promising being transeunt cease;
but that cannot be repealed: that which is done cannot be infectum, not done.

Reply. I perceive we must dispute our first principles, as well as our
Baptism. Reader, Gods promise in question is not a particular promise to some
one person only, but his Recorded Instrument of Donation, or stablished written
or continued word, which is the sign of his will: It is the same thing which is
called, the Premiant or Donative part of his Law, in one respect, and his
Testament in another, and his Donation or Gift in another, and his Covenant as
Conditional in another, and his Promise in another. As [He that believes shall
be saved] is the Rewarding or Giving part of a Law, and it is a Testament, a
Covenant, a Promise, a Gift, all these. Mr. T. cannot see how this promise can
be repealed: what, not an universal promising Law, or Covenant or Instrument?
The question is not whether it ever was repealed, but whether it be
repealeable, in congruous sense. Why may not the King make a Law that every one
that kills such and such hurtful creatures (a Fox, etc.) or that kills an
enemy in war, shall have such a reward* and repeal this Law or Promise when he
sees cause? I think the first Covenant ceased by man's sin, without repeal. But
I cannot say that no promise to the Israelites was repealed, upon their sin!
The nonperformance of the condition depriveth the party of the benefit while
it is unrepealed: but may not God thereupon repeal the Law or Covenant, and
null the very offer to posterity? Is it not so as to the Jews policy and
peculiarity? What pains is taken in the Epistle to the Hebrews to prove the
change of the Covenant as faulty in comparison of that which had better
promises? But if you will call it a mere cessation, all is one as to our
question in hand.

SECT. XCVIII.
R. B. BEfore I end I shall be bold to put two or three Questions to you out of
your last Letter. Quest. 1. Whether the circumcised servants of Israel sold
away to another nation, and so separated from the Civil state of Israel, did eo
nomine cease to be Church Members, though they forsook not God? And so of the
Infants if they were sold in Infancy? If you affirm it, then prove it. If you
deny it, then Infants might be Church Members that were not of the
Commonwealth.

Mr. T. -- None was of right of the Jewish Church who was not of the
Commonwealth.

Reply. But my Question was, when without forsaking God, they are forcibly
separated from the Jewish policy and subjected to others, are they not members
of the Church-universal still, though not of the Jews?

SECT. XCIX.
R.B. Quest. 2. IF (as you say) it was on the Jews rejection of Christ that
they were broken off from being Gods people, were those thousands of Jews that
believed in Christ so broken off, or not, who continued successively a famous
Church at Jerusalem, which came to be a Patriarchal seat. Whether then were
not the children of the Disciples and all believing Jews Church Members in
Infancy? If no, then it was somewhat else than unbelief that broke them off.

Mr. T. They were broken off from the Jewish Church, not by unbelief, but by
faith in Christ.

Reply. This is too short an answer to so great an evidence against you. The
Infants of the Christian Jews were the day before their Conversion members of
the Jewish Church and of Gods universal Church, of which the Jews were but a
part: For as he that is a member of the City is a member of the Kingdom, and a
part of a part is a part of the whole, so every member of the Jews Church was a
member of Gods universal Church. Now, 1. The very Jews policy totally ceased
not till the destruction of Jerusalem at least. 2. But if it had, I ask, was it
no mercy to be a member both of the Jews Church and the universal? If not, the
Jews lost nothing by being broken off? If yea, how did the Christians Children
forfeit it? Was it better to be of no visible Church, than of the universal?
The Jews were broken off by unbelief: you say Christians Infants were put out
of that and the whole visible Church by faith, or without unbelief.

SECT. C.
R. B. Quest. 3. WHether it be credible that he who came not to cast out Jews,
but to bring in Gentiles, breaking down the partition wall, and making of two
one Church, would have such a Linsey Woolsey Church of party colors, or
several forms: so as that the Church at Jerusalem should have Infant members,
and the Church at Rome should have nonel? Jews Infants should be members and
not Genties?

Mr. T. so answers as before, and needs no other Reply.

SECT. CI.
R. B. Quest. 4. IF unbelief brake them off, will not repentance graff them in?
And so should every repenting believing Jews Infants be Church Members?

Mr. T. Not their Infants --

Reply. Then it would be but a part of the people that would be graffed in.

SECT. CII.
R. B. Quest. 5. WAs not Christ's Church before his incarnation spiritual, and
gathered in a spiritual way?

Mr. T. The invisible was; the visible Jewish Nation was not.

Reply. Not in comparison of the times of maturity: but the visible Jewish
frame had the Father of spirits for Sovereign, and commanded spiritual duties,
upon promises of spiritual blessings, even life Eternal.

SECT. CIII.
R. B. Quest. 6. HOw prove you that it was a blemish to the old frame, that
Infants were members? Or that Christ's Church then and now are of two frames in
regard of the subjects age?

Mr. T. It was a more imperfect state in that and other regards.

Reply. I called for some proof that the Infant-membership was any part of the
Church-imperfection: If it be not a blemish, why must it be done away: what,
was the Church the worse for Infants Rights?

SECT. CIV.
R. B. Quest. 7. IN what regard is the new frame bettered by casting out
Infants which were in the old?

Mr. T. The Church is more spiri^ual --

Reply. What, does Infants Relation detract from its spirituality? The adult
have souls and bodies, and so have Infants? The adult come in by the same kind
of consent for themselves, as they make for their Infants? The adult blemish
the Church with more carnal sins than Infants do? The Kingdom would be never
the more spiritual nor excellent, if all Infants were disfranchised: Nature
teaches all Kingdoms on earth to take them for members, though but
Infant-members.

SECT. CV.
R. B. Quest. 8. WHether any Jew at age was a member of the old Church without
professing faith (in the Articles necessary to salvation) repentance and
obedience? And wherein the supposed new call and frame does in this differ from
the old; save only that a more full and express revelation of Christ, requires
a more full express faith?

Mr. T. I know not what profession each Jew did make, or was to make.

Reply. I would you had been as cautelous and modest throughout. It is evident,
that they were to profess consent to Gods Covenant, which those that denied,
Asa would put to death.

SECT. CVI.
R. B. YOu may see the words near the end of your Letter that occasion the
seven last Questions, and toward the middle that occasioneth the first. As for
your motion of my fully describing the privileges of Church Members, I shall
add no more at this time to what is already elsewhere said of it.

Reply. Here Mr. T. chides me for wronging him by length; and being afraid the
Reader will do so too I make haste.

SECT. CVII, CVIII.
R. B. ANd now I have gone thus far with you, in an enquiry into the truth, I
entreat you be not too much offended with me, if I conclude with a few
applicatory questions to your self. Quest. 1. Is it not an undertaking as
palpably absurd as most ever any learned sober Divine in the world was guilty
of, to maintain that [Infants were visible Church Members not by any promise or
precept, but by a transeunt fact, and that there was no law or ordinance
determining it should be so, but only a fact of God, which is a transeunt thing
not repealable?]

But either by this fact you mean Legislation and Covenant-making, or not: if
you do, what a saying is it that Infants were made Church Members not by
Covenant, but by a Covenant-making, not by a Law, but by a Law-making? If not,
either you must say, that God makes duty without any law, and gives right to
the benefit without any promise, or Covenant-grant as the cause; or else, that
it is no benefit to have right to Church Membership, and no duty to enter into
that relation, and to accept of that benefit, and to be devoted to God. Which
ever of these ways you choose (and one you must choose, or change your opinion)
has the world heard of any more unreasonable and ridiculous, or else more
unbeseeming a Divine, from a learned sober man of that profession? Pardon the
high charge: Let the indifferent judge.

Reply. To this I find no answer worth the reciting.

SECT. CIX.
R. B. Quest. 2. IS it not a great disgrace to all your followers, that they
will be led so far into such ways of Schism, and be so confident that they are
righter and wiser than others, and that by such unreasonable arguings and
shifts as these, which one would think any man should laugh at that knows what
a Law, Promise, or Covenant is? And do you not prove, that it is not because of
the evidence of truth, but by your mere interest or confident words, these
people are changed and held to your opinion? Do they know what [a transeunt
fact is, that without Law or Covenant makes Church Members?] I say, do they
know this? which no man that ever breathed till now, nor ever man will know
again? And do you not proclaim them men of distempered consciences, that dare
go on in such a Schism, on the encouragement of such fancies as were hatched so
long after their perversion, and never waking man I think did before so
solemnly maintain?]

Reply. I have nothing to say here, but Mr. T. seems very angry at this.

SECT. CX.
R. B. Quest. 3. IS it not a desperate undertaking, and dare you adventure on
it, to justify all the world before Christ's incarnation except the Jews, from
the guilt of not dedicating their children to God, to take him to be their God,
and themselves to be his people? Yea, to justify all Jews against this charge,
that should neglect or refuse to engage their children to God in Covenant as
members of his Church? And does not he that says there is no law, say there is
no transgression?

Mr. T. He does -- Let him tremble at his desperate undertaking to uphold his
Lie of Infant Church Membership and Baptism by such Lies as these, and fear the
ate of Liers.

Reply. Charge not your self, and I will not: I propose it to your
consideration, whether the persons that solemnly take God for their God
according to Gods Covenant, and are by his visible word of Covenant, taken by
God for his people, be not visible members of the Church universal? And whether
he that says, There is no Law of God binding to do thus for his children, do
not infer that they sin not by not doing it?

SECT. CXI.
R. B. Quest. 4. DAre you yet justify also at the Bar of God, all the world
since Christ's incarnation from the guilt of sin, in not dedicating their
children to Christ, and entering them into his Covenant as members of his
Church? Dare you maintain that all the world is sinless in this respect?

Mr. T. I dare justify the Non-baptizing them --

Reply. Here you make a modest stop. It seems you dare not justify men for
not solemnly dedicating them in Covenant to God, and visibly engaging them to
Christ as members visible of his Church.

SECT. CXII.
R. B. Quest. 5. HAve you well considered of the fruit of your ways apparent in
England and Ireland at this day? Or have you not seen enough to make you
suspect and fear whether indeed God own your way or not? And is it any wonder
if posterity be left in controversy about the History of former times, when
you can venture, even in these times when the persons are living in our
company, to tell me that [you think I am misinformed that they are
Anabaptists, and you think that there are very few of them that were ever
baptized,] when of many that we know, and multitudes that we hear of, there are
so few that were not before against Infant Baptism, and the Seekers first such,
and when the Quakers themselves commonly cry down Infant Baptism; and it is one
of the questions that they send to me, and others to answer, [how we can prove
it by express Scripture without consequences, or else confess our selves false
Prophets.

Reply. The answer to this I leave to the Readers judgment.

SECT. CXIII.
R. B. Quest. 6. HAve you felt the guilt which we too strongly fear you have
incurred, of the perverting of so many souls, opening them such a gap to
schism, contempt of the Ministry, and Apostasy, destroying a hopeful
reformation that cost so dear: or weakening our hands in the work, and filling
the adversaries mouths with scorn, enticing the Jesuits and Friars to seem
your proselytes, and list themselves among you, as the hopeful party to
befriend their cause, hardening thousands both of the Papists and profane, and
settling them again on their dregs, when many once began to shake! O what a
Church might we have had, and were likely to have had? Had it not been for the
Separatists and you? And what a lamentable confusion are we now brought into by
these? Have these things touched your heart?

Reply. Mr. T. here is angry, and I wonder not; one stone he snatcheth up from
Doct. Owens Appendix, and one from the Scotch Church, and Elders, and the
Church at Kederminster, and the Worcestershire Association, which few before
him I think have said much against.

SECT. CXIV.
R. B. Quest. 7. IS [a transeunt fact, making Infants Church Members without
Law, Promise, or Covenant] a sufficient medium to encourage you to venture on
all these horrid things, and run such hazards us you have done? Or is it
possible that an humble sober man, and a tender conscience, durst make all this
havoc, and stand out in it so many years considerately as you have done, and
this upon such a palpably unreasonable pretense? When you should prove to us
the revocation of Infants Church Membership, to tell us that they had it only
by a transeunt fact? Is this a safe ground to build so great a weight on? Sir,
my conscience witnesses, that it is not your reproach that is the end of
speaking these unpleasing words to you, but some compassion on you (do not
scorn it) and more on your poor followers; and most on the Church of God which
you have so much injured and troubled.

Reply. Here Mr. T. is angry again, which is the sum.

SECT. CXV.
R. B. Quest. 8. CAn you prove that ever there was one age, or Church
(particular) on earth since Ad^m till about 200 years ago, that the Anabaptists
rose, wherein Infants were not de facto taken for members of the Church? If you
can do it: Let us hear your proof.

Mr. T. I can; and for proof look back to Sect. 50, 51. and besides
Constantine, Augustine, Naz. Hierom --

Reply. I can find no such thing there: what if the four men you name were
baptized at age (the special reasons are told you elsewhere.) Does that prove
that others were not baptized in Infancy? Your 52 Sect. I think to examine in
the end.

SECT. CXVI.
R. B. Quest. 9. CAn you bring us proof of any one Infant of true
Church Members, that was not rightfully a Churchmember himself from the
creation till Christ's days? or from the creation till this day? except the
Anabaptists, who reject the benefit; whose case (as I said before) I will not
presume to determine?

Mr. T. I can, look back to Sect. 50, 51, 52, 57. --

Reply. I have done, and I find no such proof.

SECT. CXVII.
R. B. Quest. 10. SEeing that Infants have been de facto Church Members from
the creation to this day (as far as any records can lead us) is it likely that
the Lord, and head and all-sufficient Governor of his Church, would have
permitted his Church till now to be actually made up of such subjects, as in
regard of age be disallowed? And suffer his Church to be wrong framed till now?
Or is it a reasonable, modest and lawful undertaking, to go about now in the
end of the world to make God a new framed Church, as to the age of the
subjects? And is it not more modest and safe, to live quietly in a Church of
that frame as all the Saints in Heaven lived in, till the other day, as a few
Anabaptists with vile and sinful means, and miserable success, did attempt an
alteration?

Mr. T. here denies the suppositions: I leave the Reader to judge how truly.

SECT. CXVIII, CXIX.
R. B. SIR, pardon the weakness, and bear with the plainness and freeness of
Your faithful Brother (though not as is meet) Rich. Baxter. May 14. 1655.

Sir, if you have any thing of moment to say, in reply to these, which you have
not yet in your writings brought forth, I shall be willing to consider of it:
But if you have not, I pray you tell me so in two words, and spare the rest of
your pains (as for me) and trouble me no more with matters of this nature. For
truly I have no sufficient vacancy from greater works. Yea, I am constrained to
forbear much greater than these. R. B. After this he tells me, that whereas I
preached a Sermon at Bewdley, in which I refuted by many arguments Infants
visible Church Membership, I must be either mutable or hypocritical, if I deny
such a Law and Ordinance which I took on me then to refute, and desires a Copy
of that Sermon, that he may show the sad mistakes and vanity of those my
arguments.

Reply. Reader, to Mr. T.'s anger at these ten Questions I must say, 1. That
the dolefulness of the Churches case constrained me in grief of heart to deal
plainly with him.

2. But it was in a private letter, extorted by his importunity, and published
to the world by himself and not by me; who confess that this plainness was too
great for me to have used to him publicly: But secret admonition disparageth
him not to others. It has now been by himself about nineteen years divulged to
the world, and I did not so much as trouble his patience by a word of answer,
and little thought ever to do it: But Major Danvers his loud invitation has
drawn me to give them this Farewell.

THE Reader must here take notice that I am not here called to prove Infants
Church Membership out of the New Testament, but to show out of the Old that
they were visible Church Members before by a Grant or Covenant, which Christ
has not repealed. The rest (out of the New Testament) I have done long ago in
my Treatise of Infant Church Membership and Baptism, which Mr. T. is so much
displeased at. And indeed I think that the proofs are plain, though many
objections may be difficult to be answered, especially by those who have not
thoroughly considered the case. When I set together Christ's own Infant
membership, and his kind reception of Infants, and his chiding those that would
have kept them off, and his offers of taking in all the Jewish Nation into his
Church, and that they were broken off by unbelief, and consequently the seed of
Believers not broken off from the Church universal, and that whole households
are often said to be baptized, and that Paul pronounces Believers children holy,
and that Christ expressly, Matthew. 28. commands his Ministers as much as in
them lies to Disciple all Nations baptizing, and it is prophesied that the
Kingdoms of the world shall be made the Kingdoms of Christ, and there is no
Nation or Kingdom on earth that Infants are not members of; All this and much
more seems to me a plain revelation of Gods will, that as he never had a
Church which excluded Infants, so he does not now exclude them. And it is
expressly said of the Jews that they were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud
and in the sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. where doubtless the Apostle in the name had
respect to our being baptized into Christ, of which theirs was a typical
Baptism; And it is not said in vain that they were [ all baptized] including
their Infants, but as part of the Analogy, as if he had said [ As we now are
all baptized into Christ.]

These things seem to me a certain notification of Gods will herein; which in
the foresaid former Treatise I have fullier opened and improved. And should I
stand to answer all the words that Mr. Tombs has said against it, I should
needlessly tire the Reader and my Self, and lose that time which I cannot spare.

A Confutation of Mr. Tombes's Reasons Sect. 52. by which he pretends to
prove that Infants were not reckoned to the visible Church-Christian in the
Primitive times, nor are now.
Mr. T. 1. I Argue thus: If no Infants were part of the visible
Church-Christian in the Primitive times, then whatever Ordinance there were of
their visible membership before, must needs be repealed: But the antecedent is
true, ergo, the consequent -- The Antecedent I prove thus. If in all the days
of Christ on earth, and the Apostles, no Infant was a part or member of the
visible Church Christian, then not in the primitive times: But, etc. Ergo, etc.
The Minor proved -- 1. All visible members of the Church-Christian were to be
baptized: But no Infants were to be baptized: Therefore no Infants were visible
members of the Christian Church.

Answ. 1. To the Major; they were to be baptized after Christ's baptism was
instituted, Mat. 28.19. but not before, when yet the Christian Church was
existent in Christ and his Disciples: Therefore Christ was not baptized in his
Infancy.

2. To the Minor, If his bare affirmation would prove that Infants were not to
be baptized, what need he write his books?

Mr. T. 2. They were not visible members of the Church-Christian who were not
of the body of Christ: But no Infant was of the visible body of Christ, proved
from 1 Cor. 12.13. All that were of the body of Christ were made to drink into
one spirit in the Cup of the Lords Supper: But no Infant was made to drink into
one spirit; for none of them did drink that Cup, etc.

Answ. Denying the Minor, I answer to the proof: 1. To the Major: 1. Mr. T.
elsewhere pleads that 1 Cor. 12. speaks of the Church-invisible only, and
yet now he makes it to be the visible. 2 [All] is often put for the Generality
and not a proper universality: And it seems hard to prove that every visible
member has the spirit, which is expressly there said of all the members, though
whether Baptism and the Lords Supper be included, Mr. T. elsewhere makes
disputable. But I grant that it is spoken of the Church as visible, and that
all the members ordinarily having Spiritus Sacramentum, are in judgment of
charity said to have the Spirit. 3. But if Sacraments be indeed here included
as he asserteth, then Baptism is first included: and so if we prove Infants
Church Members, this Text will prove them to be baptizable, according to Mr. T.
Remember that. 4. But that Mr. T.'s exposition is not true, that every member
drinks of the Cup in the Lords Supper, he may be turned about to confess
himself: For, 1. Doubtless he thinks that this Chapter speaks of the Church
not only as visible (if at all) but as invisible also; and he often says that
many real members of Christ's body have not the Sacrament. 2. By this his
exposition, his adult Baptizing should not make or prove any to be visible
Church Members till they drink of the Cup; though it were a year or many years.
3. And no one that lives without the Lords Supper through scruples (about
Church-orders, or their own fitness, which are the cases of multitudes) should
be visible members: Nor those that live where they cannot have the Sacrament:
Nor any Layman in all the Popish Church, where the Cup is denied the Laity.

2. To the Minor, Infants might be baptized into one spirit by the initiating
Sacrament, in order to the rest to be partaked of in due time: And as not every
Church-suspension, so Natural-suspension of further privileges, nullifieth not
membership.

Mr. T. 2. From 1 Cor. 10.17. All that were one body and one bread did partake
of that one bread which was broken: But no Infant did partake --

Answ. 1. Christ and his Disciples did not partake of it before the
institution: 2. No baptized persons partake of it in the interspace between the
two Sacraments: which with some is a long time: 3. A baptized person may die
before he drinks that Cup; or may live where it is not lawfully to be had. 4.
Church Members may be suspended from the Lords Table. Therefore the text
speaks not of every member, but of the ordinary communion of capable persons.

Mr. T. Ephesians. 4.5. The whole Church is one body, and has one Lord, and one
faith: But no Infant has one faith]

Answ. 1. It is spoken of the generality of the noblest and capable members,
denominating the Church: The Apostle says not that every member has all
these, but [ There is one Lord, one faith, etc.] Christ had not one Lord (being
Lord himself as here understood) and yet was a member: Christ in the womb
cannot be proved to have actually h^d that one faith; and he was long the chief
member before he was baptized: And whether ever the twelve Apostles were, is
uncertain.

2. The Text seems chiefly to speak of the Doctrine of faith, called
objective faith; one Creed: And this the Church might have, and yet not each
member actually believe. For, 3. The Parent in faith devoting himself and his
Infant to God, his Faith and Consent is reputatively the Child's, who is used as
a member of the Parent.

Mr. T. 3. They were no members of the visible Church, who were left out of the
number of the whole Church, all the Believers, the multitude of the Disciples,
etc. But Infants are left out of the number in all places in the New Testament,
Ergo: --

Answ. 1. Many texts speak of all that were present only; and many speak only
of such as the present matter did concern: And it is most usual to denominate
All or the Body from the Noblest and Greatest part. If you were to describe a
Kingdom, would you not say that it is a Civil Society of rational creatures (or
men) consenting to the mutual Relations of King and Subjects and the duties of
each for the common welfare? You would so define it as that Reason, Consent and
Intention should be in the definition. Infants have none of these in act, and
yet who doubts but Infants are members of the Kingdom (of every Kingdom under
Heaven that I have read of?) So you know that we take Infants to be members of
our Churches now: And yet is it not usual with us to say that all the Church
met to hear, or to do this or that? When yet the Infants and many others might
be absent.

The Texts Mr. T. alleges are, Acts 1.15. The number of the names together
were about 120.

Answ. Though I take not the Church then to be so numerous as some do, yet
reason is reason: Can we think that when Christ was seen after his resurrection
of more than 500 Brethren at once, that only 120 of them were Christians? And
can we think that Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea and many more, were not
timorous fainthearted Christians? It Is like that the text means that this 120
was the number of those bold confirmed Christians who so quickly after Christ's
death appeared in open profession and conjunction with the Apostles, and had
opportunity to assemble at that time and place.

The next is Act. 2.1. They were all with one accord in one place.

Answ. This needs no other answer than as before. The other texts, Act. 2.41,
44. and 4.4, 23, 24. and 5.11, 13, 14. and 6.1, 2, 7. and 8.1. and 15.22. 1
Cor. 14.23. need no other answer: His exposition would sometimes exclude women,
and sometimes many of the men: Does he believe no man or woman was a member of
the Church, Act. 15.22. who did not send men of their own company? Nor any man
or woman a member of the Church at Jerusalem, that did not being scattered go
about Preaching, Act. 8.1, etc. 1 Cor. 14. it is said, You may all prophecy,
and yet women are forbidden.

Mr. T. 4. They were no part of the Christian Church visible to whom the things
ascribed to the whole Church did not agree: But the things ascribed to the
whole Christian Church visible did not agree to Infants: Ergo --

Answ. This is fully answered already. It is most usual to ascribe that to a
Church or other Society which is done only by the most considerable part. As I
said before, when rational Consent, Contract, Intention, are ascribed to a
Kingdom; which is constituted by the consent of King and Subjects: and yet
Infants are members who consent not, save by their Parents. The Church meets
to choose a Pastor, when yet the women meet not: The Church admonishes a
faulty member, when every woman does not admonish him: Our Churches meet all to
hear, when Children meet not, whom we take for members: These are not
satisfactory allegations, being contrary to common use of words, and to many
texts of Scripture.

Mr. T. The Minor is proved, Matthew. 16.18. On this Rock will I build my Church,
viz. by Preaching.

Answ. When Preaching converted the Parents, they devoted themselves to God,
and all that were in their trust and power; and that Preaching brought in by
consequence the Infants that did not hear. I prove it, 1. Christ commands the
discipling of Nations and baptizing them (that is, as much as in the Preacher
lies:) But Infants are part of those Nations: Therefore he commands the
discipling and baptizing of Infants, (as much as in the Preacher lay,) which
could be done but by the success of preaching on the Parents. 2. The Kingdoms
of the world are made the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ: But Infants
are members of all those Kingdoms: But this is done at large elsewhere.

Mr. T. 1 Cor. 1.2. called to be Saints; Act. 2.41, 47. and 5.14. They that
were added to the Church did hear and believe, etc.

Answ. I will not weary the Reader with repeating the same answers to the like
things.

Mr. T. 5. They who are not reckoned Christ's Disciples were not visible
Church Members: But Infants are no where reckoned as Christ's Disciples: ergo.
--

Answ. 1. What is said before to the other Texts answers all these. The
Actions of adult Disciples only were in mention. 2. Infants are called
Disciples, Acts 15. as I have elsewhere proved, on whose neck the yoke of
Circumcision was laid; And in Matthew. 28.19. when Nations are to be discipled.
3. Mr. T. himself confesses that Christ was habitually and by designation a
Prophet in Infancy, and that so may Infants be Disciples.

Mr. T. 6. If in the distribution of the members of the Church then, Infants
are not comprehended, then Infants were not visible Church Members -- But, etc.

Answ. 1. Here he instanceth in 1. The sex, Men and Women, 2. Jews and
Gentiles, 3. Circumcision and uncircumcision, mentioned, but not Infants. But
if Infants be of neither sex, male nor female, nor of Jews or Gentiles, nor
circumcision nor uncircumcision, I plead not for them.

2. If those Texts cited by you mention not Infants, others do, as I have
elsewhere proved: Our children are called Holy, and a blessed seed, and
received by Christ, and of such is the Kingdom of God, etc. And you confess it
of Christ himself in his Infancy, and yet now forget it, or contradict your
self.

Mr. T. 2. I argue from the common received definitions of the visible Church,
Acts 19. of the Church of England: A congregation of faithful men -- etc.

Answ. And so Kingdoms and all Societies that Infants are members of, are
accordingly defined, as is aforesaid. You cannot deny it. And was not the
Church before Christ's incarnation a society of faithful men, when yet you
confess that Infants were visible parts of is?

Mr. T. 3. I argue, They are no visible members of the Christian Church, to
whom no note whereby a visible Christian Church or Church Membership is
discernable, does agree: But, etc. ergo --

Answ. When a man thinks only what to say for his cause, and never thinks what
can be said against it, his judgment is of little value. 1. All that agrees
to Infants which was requisite to a visible Infant member before Christ's
coming; And do you not confess that they were members then among the Jews? 2.
Did nothing in Christ himself in Infancy agree with visible membership? Yes;
the open Revelations of God as to a visible person: You confess before as much
as I need. 3. The essentiating qualification of a Churchmember, is
Covenant-consent, such as God according to the sense of his offered Covenant
will accept as such: But Infants have this Covenant-consent, seeing they
consent by their Parents who are entrusted to do it for them, as if they were
parts of themselves: As the Jews Infants did. Mutual consent of God and
themselves by their Parents is it that makes them members. I have often wondered
to read in orthodox Divines, that the Word purely preached, Sacraments and
Discipline, are the marks of the true Church. No doubt but Heart-consent to the
Baptismal Covenant of Grace makes a sincere member of the true Church (which
the Infant does by the Parent,) and professed consent to the same Covenant
makes a visible member (which regularly must be by Baptism for investiture.)
But a true Church may long by persecution be hindered from public assemblies,
Preaching, Sacraments and Discipline; And may have much corruption in all these.

Mr. T. makes this mutual consent as two distinct pretended Notes, denying
either of them to be true marks.

Answ. Neither the Princes consent alone, nor the Subjects alone makes a
Commonwealth: Neither the Husbands consent alone, or the Wives makes a
marriage; but both conjunct: So here: Mutual consent makes a Churchmember:
But so, that Gods Consent is the Donative efficient cause, and man's consent is
the receptive cause, which is conditio sine qua non. They that will not
impartially think of plain cases cannot understand them. Your unthankful
denying that God has made any such Promise, Covenant or Consent, is elsewhere
confuted: And if I shall say with Davenant and the Synod of Dort that this
Covenant being the same that is made with Parents themselves, gives the
Children the same Right to Pardon and Life eternal according to their capacity,
so that faithful Parents should not doubt of the Salvation of their Children
dying in Infancy (ut Synod. Dort. Art. 1. c. 17.) I could better with them bear
the consequence (of the loss of Gratia Infantilis in some at age) than the
consequents of (...) turning them all out of the visible Church. The former I
know no Christian that ever opposed for many and many hundred years after
Christ; and the latter the universal Church as long opposed: And yet I will not
subscribe that [ It is certain by the word of God that baptized Infants dying
before actual sin, are certainly saved,] without excepting the Infants of
Heathens or Infidels, wrongfully baptized.

Mr. T. 4. I argue: They who have not the form constituting and denominating a
visible Churchmember, are not visible Church Members. But. Ergo. Profession of
faith is the form constituting, etc.

Answ. 1. Covenant Consent is the form constituting ex part Recipientis, and
this they have reputatively in their Parents, whose will is as theirs.

2. The Jews Infants had the form constituting a visible member as you confess.
And that was not circumcision; For the uncircumcised females, and males too in
the wilderness were visible members: Nor was it to be born of Jews; For
apostate Jews forfeited it, and Proselytes of other Nations obtained it: But it
was by consent to Gods Covenant.

3. And Christ was a visible member by Divine Revelation. His arguings would
make against Christ's Righteousness Imputed to believers, and Adams or the
Parents sins imputed to them.

Mr. T. 5. If Infants be visible Christian Church Members, then there may be a
visible Church-Christian which consists only of Infants of believers -- But
this is ^bsurd: Ergo.

Answ. Such quibbles seem something when the Will gives them their force. 1.
Infants are members of all Kingdoms under Heaven: And yet there neither is nor
can be a Kingdom of Infants only. 2. Members are Essential or Integral. Because
the exercise of the faculties of the Pars Imperans and Pars subdita is the
intended means to the Common Good, which is the End of Government, therefore
there can be no Governed Society, Kingdom or other proper Policy of which men
that have the use of Reason are not members: that there be some such to be the
Active part is Essential to the Society: But yet Infants that are yet but
virtually such, are Integral members.

Mr. T. 6. I argue: If Infants be visible Church Members, there is some Cause
of it: But there is no Cause: Ergo --

Answ. The Cause efficient is Gods Revealed Donation and Covenant Consent: The
Cause Receptive or the Condition of Reception, is That this be the Child of a
Consenting believer.

Mr. T. To this 1. Mr. T. denies any such Covenant of grace to the faithful
and their seed (which is soon said.)

2. He says the Conditional Covenant promises Justification, Salvation, on
Condition of faith, and not visible Church Membership, and so belongs to all as
Mr. B. etc.

Answ. 1. It gives both Justification and visible membership; that is, Right
to both and many other Covenant benefits. 2. It belongs Conditionally to all,
and Conditionally gives union with Christ and his Church, and Pardon and life
to all: But actually to none, till the condition be performed; which is a
believing Parents consent, and regularly his Baptismal dedication.

Mr. T. If there were a Covenant to the faithful and their seed, to be their
God, yet this would not prove their Infants Christian visible
Church Membership: As he is the God of Abraham, of Infants dying in the wombs
of believers at the hour of death --

Answ. It Is true, if they be not the Children of visible believers; because
they are not visibly capable subjects. But it being such that we speak of, your
three instances are abusive. 1. Abraham is a visible Churchmember of the
Church Triumphant where he is. I will not believe you if you deny it. 2.
Infants of visible Christians dying in the womb, are in that degree visible
Church Members as they are visible persons: that is, It is a known thing that
they are the children of God according to their capacity. 3. One visibly
believing at the hour of death is a visible Churchmember: One not visibly
believing belongs not to our case.

Mr. T. If all these which Mr. B. makes the cause or condition, may be in act,
and the effect not be, then the cause which Mr. B. assigns is not sufficient.
But etc. For they may all be before the child is born.

Answ. A mere quibble. 1. Before he is born I tell you as far as he is visibly
the child of a visible Christian, so fa^ he is a visible unborn member: But as
to that degree of visible membership which is proper to born baptizable
Infants, two causes are wanting to the unborn: 1. Gods consent or donation: For
though the Promise as a donative Instrument was existent a thousand years
before, it effects not the gift till the subject be Receptive or capable: God
may promise a thousand years before in diem or sub condition, which signifies
his consent that so and then it shall be due, and not otherwise or before.
These easy things should not be thus winked at. 2. The Parents consent is
wanting: For though the Parent dedicate the child in the womb to God by
promise, yet he does not deliver him up in the baptismal Covenant as a visible
person till he is born.

Mr. T. reciting my answer elsewhere says [ It deserves a smile: For I make
Christ by his Law or Covenant-grant the only cause efficient] The rest of his
words are 1. To tell us that Justification etc. has a further efficient after
the Covenant; which causes Justificability, but not actual Justification
without man's faith. 2. That I err in taking visible membership to be a Right,
and moral effect.

Answ. I take not that for the picture of the wisest man, whom the Painter
draws laughing or smiling. And I am now confirmed in that fancy. 1. A
Testament or Deed of Gift in diem which says At seven years end that land
shall be yours] may be the only efficient Instrument, long before existent, and
yet give you no right till the time; and then give it* Because it effects but
by signification of the Donors will. Must the Christendom of Kingdoms be
impetuously questioned by men that know not such rudiments as these? 2. That
Justification which is given us at our believing, which is [our Right to
Impunity and Life] is the Immediate effect of the Covenant Donation; and man's
faith is no efficient but a Recipient cause of it (As even they confess that
call it a Receiving Instrument:) And yet we have it not till we believe or
consent. Who would have thought that such a m^n as you had taken your own faith
to be an efficient cause of your own Justification, and so that you justify
your self? And what if one give land to you and your heirs? It is none of
theirs till they are in being: And yet their birth is no efficient cause, but
only the cause of the subjects receptive capacity. I am ashamed that you put me
thus to catechize you.

Mr. T. 5. If visible Church Membership be antecedent to the interest a person
has in the Covenant, then the Covenant is not the cause of it. But etc. Ergo
--

Answ. The word [Interest] may signify the Interest that fallen mankind has
in the Covenant as conditional antecedent to man's consent: And thus I suppose
neither you nor I here speak of it. But if by my Interest you mean, that I am
the person to whom the Covenant gives a present Right to its benefits, I
answer, Some benefits follow long after: but when I consent, then I am the
person to whom the Covenant gives a present Right to union with Christ, in the
first instant and consequently with his Church or body in the second: so that
here is no such thing as your feigned membership before Covenant interest, that
is, before a Right to that Relation by Gods donation. And as (...) former dream
that this is not a Right an^ moral effect but a physical, it was your self and
not I that subjected you to the shame of such an assertion, which I will no
more confute.

Mr. T. 6. If the Covenant etc. be the only (...) bought Orphans of Turks,
wholly at our dispose, are no visible members, etc.

Answ. No friend of truth will run into the dark with a controversy, and argue
a minus notis. Many judicious Divines think that Gods Covenant with Abraham's
Infants born in his house, proves that two things go to make up the capacity
of an Infant for baptism: 1. That he be his own and at his dispose who offers
him to God. 2. That he be offered or dedicated by a Consenting Owner. Now their
reason is because if they be our own, we have the dispose of them for their
good, and our wills are theirs. But the case is most clear about those that by
Generation are our own, and darker about those that are by Adoption or purchase
our own. Now here you do nothing but deny the darker (which you cannot
disprove) and thence the plainer which we have fully proved.

Mr. T. 7. If the Covenant o^ Law with the Parents actual faith without
profession, make not the Parent a visible Churchmember, neither does it the
child. But -- Ergo.

Answ. I grant both major and minor: He that is not known to have faith, is not
a visible adult member: And he that is not known to be the (justly reputed)
child of a professed believer, is (...) an Infant Churchmember. And what is
this (...) our controversy? Heart consent makes a mystical or invisible
Christian and member, and Professed belief (that is, Believing Consent) makes
a visible member of the parent, and is necessary to the visible membership of
the child: If I may call that Making them, which is but the Disposition of the
material Receptive constitutive cause. It Is pity we should have need to talk
at this rate.

Mr. T. 8. If persons are visible Church Members and not by the Covenant of
Grace, then it is not true that Christ by his Law or Covenant is the sole
efficient of visible Church Membership. The minor is proved in Judas and
hypocrites.

Answ. 1. They are not the sole efficient; Gods Love and mercy also is
efficient.

2. You profess your self that the name [Christian and Church-member] are
equivocal as to the sincere and the hypocrites: If they be not the same things,
no wonder if they have not the same causes. That Donation or Covenant may be
the sole nearest Instrumental efficient of True membership, and yet not of
Equivocal.

3. God who is our Paternal Beneficient Ruler does give some of his benefits by
his Law or Covenant absolutely and antecedently to man's conditions, and some
consequently as Rewards: And Gods Laws having first a Preceptive part, as well
as a Donative or Premiant, a Right may accrue in foro ecclesiae to an hypocrite
from that precept: As e. g. God antecedently does by his Covenant give the
world an Impunity as to the punishment of Drowning it: And so by his common Law
of Grace he gives the world many common mercies by a Redeemer, and perhaps
many by that you call a physical act, immediately. And by his Law he (having
given a conditional pardon and life to all) commands his Ministers to offer
it, and All men to Accept it, and his Ministers to judge by men's profession,
and to use professed Accepters as real; because we cannot see the heart. This
being so, when the hypocrite professes his consent, the Law obliges the
Minister and Church to receive it, by which in foro ecclesiae he has a right
to his Church station. And Christ himself called Judas, and sent him out to
Preach, and his mandates were as Laws. So that the Right that an hypocrite
has, he has by the Law which obliges the Church to use him as a true
believer, upon his professing to be such. None of this can be denied. But Judas
was called immediately by Christ himself; and his [ follow me] was a precept
which gave him a Right to his Relation.

Mr. T. 9. If Infants are visible members by the Covenant on Condition that the
Parents etc. then either the next Parents or in any generation precedent etc.

Answ. The next Parents that are Owners of the child, and have the trust and
power of disposing of him or covenanting for him: And the Reason is, because
they have 1. That Propriety, and 2. That trust and power.

Mr. T. 10. If an Infants visible Church Membership be by the Covenant on the
Parents actual believing, and not a bare profession, then it is a thing that
cannot be known, etc.

Answ. I pity Readers that must be troubled with such kind of talk. 1. The
Right of the child is upon [the Believing Parents dedication of that child to
God by consenting that he be in the mutual Covenant.]

2. Heart consent known only to God gives no Right coram ecclesia, known to
men, but only to such mercy as God who only knows it, gives without the
Churches judgment.

3. Believing and profession qualify for Right in the Judgment both of God
and of the Church.

4. Profession without consenting faith, qualifieth for Right, in the Churches
judgment according to Gods Command, who bids them so judge and do: Wrangle
not against plain truth.

Mr. T. 11. If other Christian privileges be not conveyed by a Covenant upon
the Parents faith, without the persons own act and consent, then neither this.
But etc. Not to be a Believer, a disciple, a Minister, a Son of God -- There is
the like reason for them as for this.

Answ. Privileges are 1. Proper to the adult, (those concern not our case, as
to be Ministers) or common to them with Infants: 2. Privileges consist either
in Physical qualities or other Physical accidents (and these are given by
physical Action, and such is Knowledge, Belief, Love, Gifts of utterance,
health, etc.) Or in Right and Moral Relation, (Jus Debitum, obligatio) These
are given by Moral means, that is by signification of the Donors will, by
precept (obliging,) promise or signal Donation, which is the Instrument of
conveyance by that signification (As a Testament, Deed of Gift, Act of pardon
and oblivion, etc. are among men.) Now do you think that the reason of Physical
Qualities and Moral Rights, Relations and duties is the same?

2. As a Disciple, or believer, signifies one that is Reputatively such jure
Relationis, and as a Son of God signifies an Adopted heir of heaven, loved of
God as a reconciled Father in Christ] so Infants are such: You say (after) that
Christ was habitually and by designation the Head and Prophet of the Church in
Infancy, and so mihgt Infants be disciples: And will you now deny it? Again I
will say though it offend you, that there is no trusting to that man's judgment
that looks all (or partially) on one side, and studieth so eagarly what will
serve his cause, as that he cannot mind what may be said against it. See here
what two abominations you thrust on your pitiful followers (which yet I know
you hold not your self, but the heat of your spirit in desire of victory
draws you to say you mind not what) You conclude that none is [A Son of God]
without his own consent: And so 1. All Infants are certainly shut out of
Heaven: for they are no Sons of God without their consent (neither by Election,
Christ's intercession, Covenant or Gift:) And I think you will not say that they
consent: And if no sons, no heirs; For the Inheritance is only of children: And
if no sons, then are they not Regenerate; which is but to be made sons of God
by a new Generation, and renewed to his Image. And do you damn all Infants?

2. And consider whether you deny not Christ in Infancy to have been the Son of
God according to his humane nature? For you can never prove that in that nature
he actually consented in the womb or in his Infancy. But partiality is rash and
blind.

Mr. T. 12. If there be no Law or ordinance of God unrepealed by which either
this Infant visible Church Membership is granted, or the listing of Infants or
entering into the visible Church Christian is made a duty, then it is not a
cause of Infants visible Church Membership which Mr. B. assigns, etc.

Answ. I have here proved to you such a Law and Covenant before Christ's
Incarnation, and formerly at large proved it to be continued and renewed by
special signification of Christ's will since his Incarnation in the Gospel.
Review now your pitiful Reasons against it.

The Second Part: A CONFUTATION OF THE Strange FORGERIES OF Mr. H. DANVERS,
Against the ANTIQUITY OF INFANT BAPTISM; And of his many Calumnies against my
Self and my Writings, with a Catalogue of 56 New Commandments and Doctrines,
which he and the Sectaries who join with him in those Calumnies seem to own.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons and Jonathan Robinson. 1675.

The PREFACE.
SECT. I. 1. Of Controversies: 2. Of the Weight of this Controversy.
. 1. IT is a thing that all are not duly informed of, How far Controversial
Writings and Disputes are to be practiced by pious and peaceable men? And here
(as in almost all things else) men are hardly cured of one extreme but by
another.

I. No doubt but the extreme which has far most injured the Church of Christ,
has been the excess of Disputing; and given just occasion to Sr. H.W.'s motto,
[ The Itch of Disputing makes the Scab of the Church,] which is easily
discernable, both in the Cause and the Effects.

. 2. 1. In the cause it is too notorious, that ordinarily it proceeds from
the depravation of the three faculties of the soul, Potestative, Intellective,
Volitive, in the three great Principles of iniquity, Pride, Ignorance and wrath.

. 3. 1. Did not Pride cause men much to overvalue their own parts and worth,
Controversy would have shrunk into a narrower compass before this day: Men
would have come to one another as friends to be informed of what they know not,
by enquiry and gentle conferences, if not as children to School, to learn: And
if grace by hard studies had given one man more insight into any matters than
another, humility would readily have acknowledged Gods gifts, and desired to
have the benefit of a friendly communication; and wherever God had set up a
light, the Children of his family would have been ready to work by it: It would
not have been so hard as now it is for an Ignorant man to know his Ignorance,
nor to discern when another knows more than he.

. 4. But now, alas, a multitude that understand not half their Catechism hear
their Teachers as Masters hear their Scholars, to know whether they say their
lesson well or not: And the Preacher that says as they would have him, may
pass for orthodox at least, if not for a very wise man, because he is, so far,
as wise as they: But if he will presume to teach them more than they know, they
suspect him of heresy, and the repetition of his Sermon which they make, is to
mangle some sentences which they had not wit enough to understand, and thence
to proclaim (or whisper abroad at least) that the Preacher has some dangerous
errors, (and does not know so much as they;) unless it be some luscious
unwholesom notions that he offers them, or be a militant wrangler and would
list them under him as his troop, to serve him in some new raised war, and then
corrupt nature can magnify novelties as if they were new revelations from
Heaven.

. 5. And O that the Teachers wanted not the sense of their intellectual
imperfections, as well as the people! But too many think that when they are all
ordained into the same office, the honor of the same office is equally due to
them all, and consequently all that honor of Knowledge, Parts and Piety,
without which the honor of the office cannot be well kept up. And so when they
all walk in the same robes and are called by the same titles, matters which
they never understood, must pass according to the major vote, or at least, they
must not be contradicted, nor their ignorance made known: And therefore when
they have owned or uttered a Doctrine or Sentence, their honor is engaged to
make it good; And they find a far easier way to make ostentation of the
Knowledge which they have not, by robes, titles and big words, than to macerate
their bodies by employing their minds in serious long unwearied studies, till
they have received into their minds the well digested frame of sacred truths.

. 6. And if this tribe can keep the major vote (as it must be a strangely happy
country where they do not) whoever will be wiser than they, shall be a
heretic. But if it fall out better, and they be the weaker part, they will
make up their honor by the way of singularity among so many as they can get to
believe, that they are masters of some excellent truths which almost all the
Christian world is unacquainted with.

. 7. And even in men otherwise truly pious, there is so much remaining pride as
is greatly gratified by singularity: Selfishness and the Old man are but One.
And an opinion that is peculiarly their own, is as lovely to them, as their own
Children in comparison of others: If they can say, ego primus inveni, it is
sweetest: If not, yet to be one of a singular Society, that is supposed wiser,
and better and more excellent in their way of worship than all others, is very
comfortable to them, that by taking the elect to be fewer than they are, do
judge it a good mark to hold what few hold, and do as few do.

. 8. And there may be a conjunction of good and evil in the cause of these
effects.

And from hence we now live among many that fall into various kinds of Sects,
and every one hops for the comforts of singularity in their way. Many turn
Quakers, because they are singular in their austerities: And many Congregations
will not endure the singing of Gods Praise in Psalms, at least in David's
Psalms; and some will not have the Scriptures read, and some are against humane
learning and studies, and some against Preaching upon a Text, and Praying
before and after Sermon, and some against ordinary Family Worship, and many
startle if they hear the Creed, the Lords-Prayer and Commandments; and hence
also the Doctrine of denying all Christians Infants Church Membership has
prospered.

. 9. And too many honest persons in opposition to ungodliness, are disaffected
to lawful and laudable things in the worship of God merely because the Ungodly
use them: When as experience tells all the world, that they that have no
Religion in sincerity, will usually join with the Religion that is uppermost;
And so if good Rulers and Teachers set up that which is best, the best will be
outwardly the way of the ungodly; and if we must needs be singular from them we
must take the worst, and leave them the best: to their self deceit and our
shame.

10. I have thought by this weakness of some singular people, that, if God
should but let us have a King and other Rulers that were Antinomians, and
against Infant Baptism, and against singing Psalms, and against the use of the
Creed and Lords Prayer, and such other things, and withal were themselves of
wicked lives, and would make Laws for their own way, and impose it on the
people, so that the ungodly multitude did fall into this way, it would
presently cure most that are now for such opinions: And though the Godly and
the wicked must be greatly differenced in the Church, yet before we are aware,
our secret Pride sets in with this desire of discipline, and makes us much
desire to seem eminently Good, by a more notable and conspicuous difference
from the common sort of Christians than God in Scripture or reason does allow.

2. And how much Ignorance has to do in all our controversies, would soon be
acknowledged if the question concerned not our selves: For every disputer
accuses his adversary of Ignorance: If they be of ten minds (inconsistent)
nine of them must needs be erroneous, and therefore Ignorant, and yet every one
charge it on the rest, and thinks that he alone is free. Alas, that man's
soul, which here must act in such a puddle of brains, and in so frail a
receptive engine as it here uses, should have such high and confident thoughts
of its own untryed and undigested conceptions that will not let Ignorance be
acknowledged or cured! Most certainly we are all so dark and weak, that it is
but a few Great necessary things, or such as are very plain, which we have
cause to be confident of, without all suspicion of mistake. Most certainly
natural dullness, or short and superficial studies, through sloth or diversions,
or want of right teachers, or an early reception of wrong methods or opinions,
leading unto more, and many such causes, does and will keep not only most
Christians, but most Teachers of the Church in so low a measure of Knowledge,
as unfitteth them to master and manage very difficult controversies: And yet
sad experience tells us, that he that is least able to speak, is often least
able to hold his tongue; And it is too rare to find a man that is not Ignorant
of his Ignorance, and that charge not him with Pride that will presume to
contradict him. What wonder then if disputes be endless?

. 12. 3. And that wrath is in the cause needs no proof but experience, while we
see men come forth with militant dispositions, and animosity is their valor,
and how to make their adversaries seem contemptible or odious is their work.

. 13. 2. And if I should but open to you the Disputing evil, in the effects as
I have done in the Causes, what a woeful tragedy, of 1500 years duration, should
I present you with? But I shall put off that part of the work, supposing that
sight and experience do inform you more effectually than words can do.

. 14. On all these accounts I still say as Paul, The servant of the Lord must
not (needlessly) strive, nor meddle with those wranglings which minister
Questions rather than godly edifying which is in faith: For the end of the
Commandment is Love out of a pure heart, and a good Conscience and faith
unfeigned: And the high pretenders are too often [ proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about questions and strifes of words; whereof comes envy, strife,
railing, evil surmising, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds and
destitute of the truth.

. 15. II. But yet for all this, as Politicians use to tell Tyrants, that if God
and man did but secure them from all resistance, men would fly from them as
from Tigers or Crocodiles, and suppose their boundless uncontrouled pride and
cruelty would be insatiable; so I say of Heretitical and truly Schismatical
Contenders, that If they were once secured that whatever folly, heresy, or
ungodly mischievous conceits they vend, and that with the greatest industry and
turbulency to deceive the people, no man yet must contradict them, nor open
their folly that it may be known to all, and go no further, for fear of being
taken for a man of disputation, controversy and strife, this would so embolden
them to attempt the seduction of all sorts of people, that no place would be
safe or quiet.

. 16. It is a foolish pretense of peaceableness and quietness, to stand by in
silence for fear of our own or others trouble, and see well-meaning people
seduced, Christ and his truth and name abused, and God dishonored, and his
Churches shaken, and made a scorn and scandal to the world, and all for fear of
being accounted contentious. If it be lukewarm (as they say themselves) to hear
daily swearers, cursers, scorners, and such other profane sinners, and not
give them a close reproof or admonition, so much more is it to see or hear
hurtful falsehoods published as the precious truths of God, and not to
contradict it, nor endeavor to save men's souls from the infection. If Satan's
work must be done without resistance as often as a mistaken well-meaning man will
do it, there will be little safety for the flocks.

. 17. When Paul foretold the Ephesians of two sorts that would assault them,
viz. Grievous devouring wolves, and men arising among themselves that would
speak perverse things to draw away disciples after them, his conclusion is [
Therefore watch]: And what that watching is he tells Timothy, The mouths of
such deceivers must be stopped: not by force, for that Timothy had no power to
do; but by evident truth. And Truth has a power in its evidence, if it be but
rightly opened and managed. And were it not that God in all ages had enabled
some of his servants, faithfully and clearly to vindicate truth, and defend
sound doctrine, and hold fast the form of wholesome words, and stop the mouth
of ignorant pride that wrangleth against them, what had become of us long ago?
And though ill disputes have done much mischief, and too often disputing
succedeth more according to the Parts, interests or advantages of the
Disputers, than according to the evidence of truth: Yet for all such abuses,
Truth must be defended, and it finds something even in nature (as bad as man
is) to befriend it; few love a plain falsehood, unless where interest greatly
bribeth them: And upon trial Truth will at last prevail, where sin does not
provoke God in judgment to leave men to the delusions which they choose.

. 18. If then the way be to Teach and Learn, and quietly open the evidence of
truth, and in meekness to instruct those that oppose themselves, and to avoid
contentions as we avoid wars, till other men's ass^ults do make them unavoidably
necessary; and yet not to be cowardly betrayers of the Truth and Church of God,
nor suffer Satan to deceive men unresisted, but earnestly to contend for the
faith once delivered to the Saints, It must be considered, I. To whom this
earnest contending may be used, II. And by whom.

. 19. I. We must not be over sharp or earnest, 1. With those that are yet
strangers to Religion, of whose conversion there is hope, and who are liker to
be won by a gentler way, which more demonstrateth love and tenderness, 2 Timothy
2.25, 26.

. 20. 2. Nor with Godly Christians who fall into such sins of infirmity as we
are liable to, and whose tenderness makes compassionate tender dealing fittest
to their recovery, Gal. 6.1, 2, 3.

. 21. 3. Nor with humbled dejected Christians who are apter than we to
aggravate their own faults, and have need of comfort, to restrain their sorrows
and keep them from despair, 2 Cor. 2.7.

. 22. 4. Nor with sinners that under conversion and repentance are humbling
themselves by confession to God and man, Luke 15. Philem. 10, 16, 17.

. 23. 5. Nor with Christians that differ from us in tolerable matters, and
manage their differences but with tolerable infirmities, not hazarding the
safety of the Church or men's souls.

. 24. But in these cases we must use plainness, sharpness and earnestness. 1.
When in secret (where men's honor with others is not concerned) it is necessary
to men's convict^on and repentance; 1. Because of the Greatness of the sin or
error, which will not be known if it be not truly opened and aggravated. 2. Or
by reason of the hard-heartedness or obstinacy of the sinner, that will not be
convinced or humbled by easier means.

. 25. 2. And when we are called so to admonish a public sinner for his crimes
or heresies, which must be opened as they are, before he will be convinced and
humbled openly before the Church.

. 26. 3. And when the people or Church is in danger of being infected by the
sin or error, if the evil of it be not fully and plainly opened, and the sinner
rebuked before all, that others may beware.

. 27. 4. When the offender or heretic shows us by his obstinacy, that we
have no cause to expect his cure and conviction, but are only to defend Gods
truth and men's souls against him, then he must be used as Christ did the
Pharisees: and as Rulers execute malefactors not for their own good, but for
the warning of others and preservation of the innocent.

. 28. 5. And when our gentle speeches tend to scandalize those without, and
make them think that we prevaricate and favor Christians in their sins.

. 29. All these cases you may see proved 1. In Nathans dealing with David, and
Christ's with Peter, Matthew. 16. and Paul's, Gal. 2. etc. 2. In Paul's dealing with
the incestuous man, 1 Cor. 5. and Peter's with Ananias and his wife. 1 Timothy
5.20. Them that sin rebuke before all, etc. 2 Timothy 4.2. Tit. 1.13. Rebuke them
sharply that they may be sound in the faith (cuttingly) Tit. 2.15. Rebuke with
all authority; especially when we deal with Inferiors who must be humbled, Tit.
3.10, 11. Mat. 23. throughout: And Eli's gentleness or remisness is our warning.

. 30. II. And as to the persons who must use this sharpness and earnestness
against errors and sinners in contending for the faith, 1. It is not those who
overvalue their own conceptions, and grow fond of all that is peculiarly their
own, and insolently take all men to be enemies to truth and faith and
godliness, who are adversaries to their odd opinions. 2. Nor must inferiors
rise up with insolency against superiors, or the young against their elders,
and the ignorant against the wife, on pretense of a zealous standing for the
truth; Though they may humbly and modestly defend that which is truth indeed.
3. Nor should unstudyed Christians presently think hardly of any party and
backbite them, and inveigh against them, because their Leaders call them
heretics or reproach them as erroneous dangerous men: (as almost all parties
do against each other.) 4. Nor should those Ministers who have not a through
insight into a Controversy, meddle much with it, nor be too forward to reprove
and reproach where they do not understand, nor to undertake disputes which they
cannot manage. 5. But as God does indow men with various gifts, if each man
were employed according to his talent, all would have their honor and comfort,
and the Church the benefit of them all.

. 31. We have notoriously all these sorts of Ministers in the world. 1. Carnal,
proud and worldly hypocrites, who are enemies to that which is against their
pride and worldly interest: These contend malignantly against Godliness. 2.
Ignorant, idle, fleshly droans, that eat and drink and mind the world, but
meddle not much with controversies. 3. Professors of Religious zeal, who
espouse some singular dividing way, and turn all their studies to make good
their mistakes; who have laudable abilities perverted by prejudice, error and
interest. 4. Honest Preachers that serve God in practical preaching; but being
but half studied in some controversies, are yet as forward and busy in
disputing, censuring and reproving dissenters, as if they knew as much as the
cause requires. I would all these would meddle with no controversies, but what
great necessity in plain and certain cases calls them to. 5. We have many
humble truly Godly men, who as they are conscious that they are not well
studied for controversy, so they meddle not with it but lay out themselves in
preaching the truths that we all agree in, and do God and his Church much
service in quietness and peace: These are the men that the Church is most
beholden to. 6. Some are judicious and very fit for controversy, but too cold
in the practical part of Religion. 7. Some excellent holy men (like Augustine)
have so digested the matter, as to be able to defend the truth against all
adversaries and live accordingly. Only these two last sorts should be employed
in such disputes.

SECT. II. Of the weight and nature of the present controversy.
. 1. I think it a matter in this distracted age, which you may be much
concerned in, to know what weight is to be laid on the controversy about
Infant Baptism that you may neither come too short nor go too far. For my part,
when the Christian Parent (or owner) to whom God in Nature and Scripture has
entrusted the Infant, does heartily dedicate him to God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, and consent that he stand related according to the Baptismal
Covenant, I am none of those that believe that God who is a Spirit, lays so
much upon the application of the water, as to damn any such Infant merely for
the want of it. And though I cannot subscribe to as much more, as some would
have me (who think so much better of their own understandings than ever any
evidence persuaded me to do, as to judge themselves worthy to be Creed-makers
for all others, yea and to be called The Church it self,) yet I approve of the
seventeenth Canon of the Synod of Dort Art. 1. that [ faithful Parents have no
cause to doubt of the salvation of their children dying in Infancy.]

. 2. And I hope all the pious Anabaptists themselves do virtually though not
actually devote their children to God, and consent to their Covenant relation,
while they vehemently plead against it. For surely they have so much natural
affection, that if they did think that God would be a God in special Covenant
with their children, and pardon their Original sin, and give them right to
future life, upon the Parents dedication and consent, they would undoubtedly
accept the gift, and be thankful? And I believe most of them would say, [ I
would do all that God intrusteth and enableth me to do, that my child may be a
child of God, and I would give him up to God and accept any mercy for him as
far as God does authorize me so to do.]

. 3. And if Parents and Owners will not consent that their children be in
Covenant with God and be baptized, I am not yet satisfied what remedy we have,
nor who can do it for them to as good effect. For if any one may do it, as some
plead, then all Heathens children may be so used and saved: And he that
persuades me that there is extant such a Covenant or promise of God that he
will save every Heathens child that is but by any one brought to baptism, 1. He
must show me that text where this promise is. 2. And when he has done, he will
leave me persuaded that God will save all Heathens Infants whether baptized or
not. 1. Because I and ten thousand more Christians would sit in our closets and
offer to God all the Infants in the world; that is, consent that he be their
reconciled God, and they his children and in Covenant with him: what good man
would not desire their salvation? 2. And I should not easily believe that God
will damn them all merely for want of a strangers consent to save them, were
that wanting. 3. Much less that when we do consent a thousand or ten thousand
miles off, that all the children e. g. in China or Siana shall be baptized and
saved, that this shall not hinder their damnation merely because the Infants
and we are so distant that we cannot in sight and presence offer them to God:
surely if my consent that a Turks child be baptized and saved will do it if he
were with me, it may do it a mile off: and if so, then ten thousand miles off.
4. And if I be empowered to consent, I shall never believe that the bare want of
the water will damn him, who has all things else that God has made necessary
to his salvation (as I said before.) I think they give too much to Baptism, who
say that God will either save any one by it, who wants other things necessary
to salvation, or that he will damn any for want of it (that is, of the washing
of the body) who want nothing else which is necessary to salvation. And I doubt
they that say otherwise will prove dishonourers of the Christian Religion, by
feigning it to be too like to the Heathenish superstition, laying men's
salvation on a ceremony as of absolute necessity: And I am confident it is
contrary to Christ's redoubled lesson, Go learn what that means, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice: And no men shall unteach me this great and comfortable
lesson, which Christ has so industriously taught me, and which has been long
written so deeply on my heart, as has made all unmerciful persecutions and
separations, and alienations very displeasing to me.

. 4. I have proved afterward that even Augustine himself does as on great
deliberation assert that where the Ministry of baptism is not despised, Heart
conversion without it suffices to salvation in the adult: And no scripture or
reason does make it absolutely necessary to Infants, if not to the adult.

. 5. And if Heathens Infants are not damned merely for want of outward baptism,
nor yet for want of the consent of others (either because that other men's
consent who are strangers to them is not necessary to their salvation, or if it
be necessary they have it at a distance) then it will follow that all the
Infants of Heathens are in a state of salvation, unless somewhat else be yet
proved necessary to it: And if they are all saved, then so are all Christians
Infants also, or else they are more miserable than Heathens. And if you can
first believe that the Infants of all Infidels, Atheists, and ungodly
Christians (hypocrites) have a promise of salvation, you will next be inclined
to think better of their Parents state than God allows you: And where is this
promise?

. 6. Some say that the new Covenant gives grace and life to all that do not
ponere obicem. But I must have Gods Covenant in his own terms, that I may have
it in his own sense, if I will be assured of the benefits. Non ponere obicem
signifies plainly no Action or positive qualification as necessary, but only a
negation of some contrary action: And it is certain that the terms of Gods
Covenant to the adult are clean contrary; It is not he that neither Believes
nor opposes faith shall be saved, or he that does neither good nor harm, as a
man in an apoplexy, or asleep: But [ he that believes shall be saved, and he
that believes not shall be damned; And except ye repent ye shall all perish;
And without holiness none shall see God:] But a mere negation is no holiness.

. 7. And if any will feign another Covenant for Infants, let him show what and
where it is; for I know but one Covenant of grace, which takes in the Infants
with the Authorized Parents, whose members or Own God takes them to be, and
requires a positive believing consent and dedication to God, as the positive
condition: which is more than a Negative (non ponere obicem,) though performed
by the Parent for the child: And so the promises throughout the Scripture run
to the faithful and their seed.

. 8. I know that God promises to bless children through many generations, for
their faithful Ancestors sake: But that is on supposition that fidelity
continue in the line, and that apostasy make no intercision. Else all should
be blessed for the sake of Noe, even Cham's posterity as well as Shem's.

. 9. What then is the thing made necessary (and sufficient) by the Covenant to
their salvation, but that they be the seed of the faithful devoted by them to
God, that is, that their Parents natural, or at least civil, whose Own they
are, and have the power of disposing of them for their good, do enter them by
consent into the Covenant with Christ? which it is supposed that Faithful
Parents virtually did before, and will actually do when God does call them to
it.

. 10. As to them that say, [the thing further necessary as the condition of the
Infants acceptance and salvation is [ A promise to educate the Child as a
Christian if he live] I answer, 1. That promise indeed is included in his
dedication and consent; 2. But who but the Owners of the child are capable of
making such a promise? (unless as seconds promising that the Owners shall do
their duty): For only he that owneth him can educate him (by himself or others)
or dispose of him for his education: who has power to dispose of another man's
child, and educate him? They that undertake as sureties to do it, in case the
Parents apostatize or die, do plainly imply, 1. That till then it is the Parent
that is entrusted to do it; and therefore that the Parent must consent to do
it; and therefore that the Parent must enter his child in the Covenant of
Christ: 2. And that if the Parents apostatize or die, they will take the child
themselves as their Own; or else by what power can they educate him or dispose
of him?

. 11. They that say, God did not save one for the faith or consent of another;
must remember, 1. That we are all saved for the meritorious Righteousness of
Christ, by the way of a free gift, whose condition is but suitable acceptance:
And why may not a Parent accept a donation for his Child, who has no will to
accept it for himself? Shall he be certainly shut out unto damnation? Or shall
he have that gift absolutely which is conditional to all others? Or is he not
concerned in the donation at all? 2. And remember that we have guilt and misery
from our Parents; and therefore though life and pardon be by Christ only, yet
it is congruous that the mere condition of acceptance may be performed by the
Parents.

. 12. Perhaps some will lay all the right of Infants to the pardon of sin, and
salvation, upon secret election only; as if all that we knew of Infants
Salvation were that God will save some whom he has elected: but that there is
no Promise of grace and salvation to any particular Infant in the world, as
under any condition or qualification: And if this be so, then, 1. No Infant
has any Right to pardon, grace and salvation, given him by the Covenant of
Grace; No more than any elect person at age has before faith and regeneration:
Election gave Paul (nor any wicked man) no right to pardon or salvation: Else
elect Pagans and Infidels are justified; if they have jus ad impunitatem and
Regnum Coelorum. 2. And if this be so, we have no assurance that God will save
ten or three Infants in all the world: For he has not told us whether he has
elected so many. 3. And yet we cannot be sure but that they may all or almost
all be saved, while the number of the elect is unrevealed. 4. Nor can we know
that any more of the Children of the Faithful are saved, than of the Heathens
or Infidels; of those that love God and keep his Commandments, than of those
that hate him. 5. And, in a word, we have then no proper hope, upon Covenant
right, that God will save any one individual Infant in the world: For we can
hope (in this proper sense) of nothing but what we do believe, and we can
believe nothing but what is promised or revealed. And so Parents must be thus
far hopeless.

. 13. God who made man after his Image, teaches him to govern according to
those principles which are his Image: And all the Kingdoms in this world take
Infants for Infant-members; and the Laws give them Right to Honors and
Inheritances, the possession and use whereof they may have in the time and
degrees that nature does capacitate them. And can we then think that God who
made a Conditional Gift of Pardon and Salvation to all the adult persons in the
world, did wholly leave out Infants, and that his Covenant gives them no
rights at all; no not to be members of his visible Church?

. 14. It seems to me a matter of doubtful consequence to assert, that God
will save more (yea so great numbers as we will hope are saved in Infancy)
than ever he promised to save, and gave any antecedent Right to Salvation to? I
doubt we shall open such a gap to the hopes of presumptuous Heathens and
Infidels this way, as will cross our common doctrine: If God may save whole
Kingdoms and millions of Heathens Infants to whom he never gave Right to
Salvation by any gift or promise, merely because he elected them; some will
say, why may he not do so also by the Parents; at least renewing them all in
transitu?

. 15. If you say that He gives them freely his sanctifying grace, and gives
them right to Salvation as sanctified, though he tell us not who are
sanctified, I answer, 1. Take heed lest you teach the presumptuous to say the
same of Infidels, Heathens and almost all, that God may in the passages when
they are dying sanctify and save them all. 2. Still this gives no positive
hope of any particulars, nor more to Christians for their Children than they
may have of the Children of Infidels; nor any promise of the spirit and
sanctification, as Believers have.

. 16. I take it therefore for the soundest Doctrine that Gods taking the
Children of the Faithful into Covenant with him, and becoming their God and
taking them for his own, does signify no less than a state of Grace, and
pardon and right to life eternal; and that they are in this state upon their
Parents Consent and Heart-devoting them to God in Christ, before baptism, but
baptism is the solemnizing and investiture, which openly coram Ecclesia
delivers them possession of their visible Church State with a sealed pardon
and gift of life: For it is not another, but the same promise and Covenant
which is made to the faithful and their feed: And all Gods promises to the many
Generations of them, in the second Commandment and many other Texts, cannot
mean any such little blessings as consist with a state of damnation and the
possession of the Devil. And all the ancient Churches in baptizing of Infants
were of this mind (whom I will not despise.) And Abraham's case persuades me
that the Children of Natural and Civil Parents (truly their Owners) have this
right (before they are baptized.) But the former (natural Parents) have plainer
evidence than the later (which is a darker case.) But as for them that think
either that all Infants are saved, or all baptized Infants ( ^ure vel injuria)
though no Parent or Owner consent or dedicate them (heartily, or openly) to
God, or though they are hypocrites and truly consent not for themselves or
theirs, let them prove it if they can; but I must say it is past my power.

. 17. I know the grand difficulty is, that then this Infant-Grace is lost in
many that live to riper age. I have said so much of this in my Christian
Directory that I will refer the considering Reader thither, only adding, 1.
That far greater absurdities will follow the contrary opinion, and the greater
are not to be chosen. I am loath again to name them. 2. That the universal
Church (as far as by any notice we can know) did for many hundred years grant
the conclusion and take it for no absurdity, but a certain truth; yea much
more, Austin and his followers themselves, thought more at age were truly
justified and sanctified than were elected and did persevere: And some hold
that not all that have the sanctifying spirit, but only certain confirmed
Christians, have a certainty to persevere: And others hold, that as the spirit
of Christ is promised to Believers, though men believe not without the spirit,
so that measure of Grace which causes men only to believe, as antecedent to
that promised spirit (of Power, Love and a sound mind) is but such as may be
lost, as Adams was; and that it is the spirit following it (as the rooted
habit) which cannot be lost: And others come yet lower, and say that the Grace
which gives faith it self cannot be lost (because such have the promise of the
spirit;) but yet the grace which only enableth men to Repent and Believe
(called sufficient) may be lost before it produce the Act: Accordingly some
think of Infant-Grace: The last sort think that they have real pardon of
original sin and right to life, and have real Grace; but being Infants, that
grace is but such as will enable them to believe if they come to age, and not
infallibly cause it, and that this may be lost: And so I might run over the
opinions of the rest. And among all these the judgment of Davenant, Ward, etc.
of the loss of an Infant-state of Grace, as by them opened is not so hard, as I
think the contrary way will infer: And it seems by Art. 1. c. 17. that the
Synod of Dort was of their mind.

. 18. Our darkness about the future state of Infants Souls, has occasioned
some diversity of thoughts about their present state. Indeed they will neither
in Heaven or Hell have any work for Conscience in the review of any former
actions, good or evil: And it seems by Nazianzene before cited ( Orat. 40.)
that some Ancients thought as most Papists do, that unbaptized Infants have
neither the joys of Heaven, nor any punishment but the loss of these: But what
state then to place them in they know not: To think that they shall remain in a
mere potentiality of understanding, and shall know no more than they did here,
is to equal them with bruits, and to encourage the Socinians who say the like
of the separated souls of the adult: And if they can allow understanding to
those that died baptized, why not to the rest? And if they understand, they
must have grief or pleasure: But who can know more than God reveals?

. 19. In sum; 1. That God would have Parents devote their Children to him, and
enter them according to their capacity in his Covenant (as I have elsewhere
proved) is a great truth, not to be forsaken. 2. And also that he accepts
into his Covenant all that are faithfully thus devoted to him, and is
peculiarly their God, and such Children are holy. 3. That they are certainly
members according to an Infant capacity of the visible Church as they are of
all Kingdoms under Heaven: These are all clear and great truths. 4. And that
there is far more hope of their salvation than of those without. 5. And I think
the Covenant makes their Salvation certain if they so die. 6. And it seems
to me that the investiture and solemnization of their Covenant with Christ,
should be made in Infancy, from Matthew. 28.19, 20. and the exposition of the
universal Church. 7. But if any should think with Tertullian and Nazianzene
that the time of investiture and solemnization is partly left to prudence, and
may be delayed in case of health, yea or should think that Infants are not to
be solemnly invested by baptism, but only the adult, so they confess Infants
relation to God, his Covenant and Church; I would differ from such men with
love and peace, and mutual toleration and communion.

CHAP. I. The Occasion of this Writing.
. 1. AS I was by great and long importunity unwillingly engaged at first to
meddle publicly in the Controversy of Infant Baptism with Mr. Tombs, so I
then resolved to meddle no more with it, unless I found that necessity made it
an apparent duty.

. 2. Accordingly when Mr. Tombs had printed the last private papers which past
between him and me, without my consent, I never answered his reply to this day;
not striving to have the last word, and supposing that the studious impartial
Reader, would find no need of a rejoinder: For to me his Reply seemed so empty
and next nothing, that I thought it unnecessary to say any more.

. 3. But it is now grown the custom among Papists and Sectaries and almost all
the wranglers that trouble the world, to scribble somewhat sense or nonsense
against that truth which they have not wit, or will, or humility enough to
learn, and then say to those that would make them wiser, you are answered; and
it goes for a victory to any foolery, if they can but say, such a one that
has written against you is unanswered: As if we dealt on such terms with the
world in writing, as that he that speaks last, (that is, that lives longest)
must be supposed to be in the right. Or as if we knew not when we write against
the grossest heresy or error, that as many words may be said or written for it
as against it!

. 4. And O what pity is it that with the vulgar sort of well-meaning people,
number goes for weight, and he seems to be in the right to them, who is
nearest them and has best opportunity to talk to them a few smooth deceitful
words for his opinion, and to belie and vilify those that are against him! Not
but that there are great fundamental Truths which manifest themselves, which I
hope these honest souls would not be drawn from by an Angel from Heaven: But
verily no true Charity can be so blind as to deny it, that in lower
controverted points, the knowledge of the vulgar Religious people is so low,
that he that is lower than an Angel, or than a well-studied Divine, or than a
man of sober solid reason, may deceive them (having first been himself
deceived) if he can but speak zealously, and reproach others impudently, by the
spirit described and exorcised in Jam. 3. at large.

. 5. And I crave thy pity, Reader, to my self and such as I, that our Time and
Employment is so much at the will and mercy of such a sort of wrangling men.
That if I have it in my desire to do Gods Church service upon some greater and
more needful subject, yet it is in the power of the Devil to stir up the
corruption of honest well-meaning Christians, to put a necessity on me to do
some poor inconsiderable works, and leave undone the greater and more excellent.

. 6. For circumstances may make it a man's duty to do that as presently
necessary, which within a few years will be of no signification, but die with
the interests and quarrels of the age.

. 7. It has pleased the Lord, who did let loose the Serpent upon Adam in
Paradise, to exercise his Church in almost all ages with temptations from two
sorts that seem much contrary, but are nearer in disposition and principles
than they well understand themselves, I mean Church-Tyrants and
Church-Dividers; And though I (and most others of my quality) have suffered
incomparably more by the former, yet it is not a little that I have suffered by
the later: And especially that by their slanderous and clamorous unquiet
importunity, they will not give me leave to live by them in peace, nor to go on
in better work while I meddle not with them. I could not obtain that leave from
Mr. Tombs; And now Mr. D. has been pleased to open the mouths of so many of
his partakers against me, as makes wise men tell me that to be silent will be
to be scandalously guilty of their sin. And do we live upon these terms, that
any Railer can call us off from our better services when ever He and Satan
please?

. 8. But my purpose is to meddle with them but this once: And if after this
these crying Children will bawl and wrangle and foul the house, and think that
I am made for no better work than either to rock the Cradle or to make them
clean, I will let them cry and take their course, and will no more believe that
their humors are the masters of my time.

. 9. By three or four arguments (of his making) it has pleased one Major
Danvers a Soldier to call me to this task. 1. By heaping up a Catalogue of
Accusations against my Doctrine in my Christian Directory. 2. By reproaching me
for not answering Mr. Tombs. 3. By proclaiming me to the world a slanderer who
owe the Anabaptists satisfaction, for saying that many of them were Baptized
naked. 4. By perverse citations of my later Writings as if they had been
serviceable to his cause. 5. By his injury to poor souls and the Churches
peace, by his ignorant though confident opposition to the truth, and writing a
Volume of he knows not what.

. 10. And to add to my invitation, it is become of late a common saying among
the Anabaptists, that I am turned to their opinion or very near it, but have
not humility to retract my former error, and openly acknowledge what I hold.

. 11. The occasion of this is, 1. Because I have so many years forborne to
answer Mr. Tombs his last. 2. Because I seek peace with them, and speak for it
upon all occasions, and seek to abate other men's overgreat opposition to them.
3. Because upon all occasions I press the consideration and improvement of our
Baptism, taking it for the sum and Character of our Christianity, and the true
description of Conversion, and the essential mark of Grace, and the
qualification of Catholic Church Members, and the bond of all our Christian
duty: As if none but Anabaptists could think thus?

. 12. When I first read Major Danvers Book, I thought such a Fardle could not
be so regarded as to need an Answer; But when his Bookseller came to know of me
what I had against it, as from him; and when I heard how many thousands of them
were Printed, I rather chose to imitate him that had compassion on a headless
multitude, than him that said, si populus vult decipi, decipiatur. And they
that will not let me rest, must bear some of the fruits of my disquietment.

CHAP. II. More of my Judgment of the Anabaptists and their Cause, with a
motion to them for peace.
. 1. I Confess that in my Book against Mr. Tombs I wrote several pages
enigmatically of the offensive scandals of the Anabaptists: And they that now
read them when the occasion is forgotten or unknown, will either not understand
them, or think them too sharp. But in all military Controversies, no man is so
meet a Judge as he that is on the ground.

. 2. I am almost ready to condemn my self for that and many other things past
when I forget the occasion of them and the state that we were in: But I will
not deny that at that time my heart felt more than I expressed, 1. When I heard
Anabaptistry obtruded on the religious people, as a great and needful part of
their integrity: 2. And when they that abhorred to hear of old scandals were
busily making more and greater: 3. When I saw what was done against the
Parliament, by them that professed to be their servants, and that the
Anabaptists and their Associates were the forwardest in the work: 4. And what
was done against the King, when they had thrust out the Parliament; 5. And what
was done in the wars against Scotland; 6. And what orders past for sequestring
all such as my self that were not for their Engagement or Keeping their days of
fasting and thanksgiving in causes of blood: 7. And when I saw these executed
on many excellent men that were Masters of Colleges in the Universities, and
useful Ministers in the Country: 8. And when I saw what that called the Little
Parliament was and did, and how it was put to the Vote whether all the Parish
Ministers of England should be put out at once? and carried against them but by
a few: And that the Anabaptists were of the forwardest in all this work: 9. And
after when I saw how many of them turned Ranters, and read my self some of
their Letters, full of horrid Oaths and Blasphemies; All these things made me
think that they were not friends to the Churches welfare, and this was not the
way of holiness or peace.

. 3. All this while I desired to have lived by them in peace and quietness, but
I could not obtain it: Mr. Tombs thought that I stood in the way of his
successes, even when I meddled not with them. And therefore I must be either
converted to them or conquered, that the triumph might promote their ends. And
when that quarrel was over I was glad, and purposed to meddle with them no more.

. 4. One of the greatest things that offended me, was that (even in the
Parishes where there were the ablest faithful laborious Ministers,) they
labored to gather separated Churches, upon the account of their opinion; And
when they had gathered them, they were militant Churches: Presently that Town
was in a war; and the meetings employed for the extolling of their opinions,
and vilifying the Ministers and Churches that were against them, and making
them odious or contemptible to their followers: which could not be the work of
God.

. 5. I dare challenge any man to make it good, that ever I fought to persecute
any Anabaptists, or stirred up others to persecute them for their judgments: I
know not that ever I did any of them any harm, except by not being of their
minds, or contradicting them.

But though my sufferings by them were nothing, (that honor being assumed by
another party) yet they have not carried it so to me: But have convinced me
that were they uppermost they would then have had too little tenderness for
those that hindered their successes: Even some of Mr. Tombs his flock, my
neighbors and familiar friends, I think, sought my life or ruin when I
meddled not with them. When Sir George Booth had done what was done in
Cheshire, I wrote a Letter to Major Beak at Coventry, and the Messenger telling
them at Bewdley that he had a Letter from me, some of them made themselves
Soldiers, and in arms waylaid the messenger, assaulted him, and took his
Letters, and though they found not what I suppose they expected, yet finding in
it but a great man's name, who then much ruled public affairs, they sent it up
to the Council to him, who summoned Major Beak to London to answer it, who had
never seen it and knew nothing of it: And though he so escaped, I was loudly
threatened; but General Monks approach out of Scotland stayed the execution of
their displeasure. Thus did my familiar Friends unprovoked (some of them yet
alive).

. 6. Indeed my judgment was and is, that the point of Infant Baptism has its
considerable difficulties, which may occasion wise and good men to doubt, or to
be mistaken in it. And many of the Roman party have taken it to be proveable
only by the tradition and judgment of the Church: And Mr. Tombs has
publicly intimated as if one of our most Learned and Entire public Professors
of Theology in one of our Universities, had declared himself of the same mind,
viz. that it is not to be proved by Scripture, (Mr. Danvers has also made
advantage of this testimony), (Though of late Scripture certain proof is found
(in the new Rubric of the Liturgy) for a great deal more.) I am not of that
mind, that it is not proveable by Scripture. I think I have proved it: but not
by evidence so clear, as every good man can perceive.

. 7. Therefore I never took the point of it to have such weight, as that all
that differed from me in it, must be denied either Love, Liberty or Communion:
If I know my own heart I do as heartily love a sober godly man that is against
Infant baptism, as I do such men that differ from me in other such
Controversies; and much better than one of my own judgment, who has less
piety and sobriety. And I make no doubt but there are among us very many such,
even sober and religious men, as there be among other parties.

. 8. Nor do I think that there is so much malignity in the bare opinion which
denies Infant Baptism, as that all the Anabaptists miscarriages should arise
from the nature of that opinion. But I am past doubt that they arise from the
diseased minds of many that hold it. When injudicious persons lay hold upon an
opinion which is not common, their singularity kindles a proud selfish zeal,
and they take that opinion as more peculiarly their own, than the common
Articles which all Christians hold: And therefore they grow fond of it, and are
puffed up thereby with a conceit of their extraordinary knowledge: And then they
seem to themselves more religious than others, and greater friends to the
truth: And so Pride and Ignorance engage them in singularity and separation:
And thus they would do, were it any other opinion, which they thought as highly
of as this: So that it is not an Anabaptist as such, but the proud
Church-divider, or Separatist that I am most offended at.

. 9. I know that in the Ancient Churches men were left at liberty, both when
they would be baptized themselves, and when their Children should be baptized:
And though Infant Baptism was without any known original, since the Apostles,
yet it was not a forced thing.

. 10. And were it in my power it should be so still: I would not deny Christian
Love, nor Church Communion, nor public encouragements, to any pious peaceable
man for being an Anabaptist: If he would not separate for it from the Churches,
if he would live peaceably with me, I would live peaceably with him, and should
be loath to be behind with him in love and peace.

. 11. It is not (I say) Anabaptistry, Independency, nor any such opinion which
I impute our calamities to directly: But it is (next to Church Tyranny) the
spirit of separation; I mean, when men cannot so far differ in judgment from
others, but a perverse zeal for their opinion as some excellent truth of God,
does instigate them to run away from those that are against it, as if they were
the enemies of the truth and God, and unworthy of the Communion of such as
they: which is nothing but a conjunction of Pride, Ignorance and
Incharitableness (or Malice.)

. 12. I have told these men that when they have spoken never so sharply against
Persecutors, it is apparent that there is much of the same spirit in
themselves: One says, of Dissenters, Away with such unworthy persons out of
the Ministry or out of the Country: and the other says, Away with such
unworthy persons from your Communion: And both contrary to Christ's sheep-mark
which is Love, and both tend to make their Brethren seem unlovely: And whom
they serve by this means, whether the Prince of Love, or the Prince of
Malignity, it is pity but they knew; or at least would consider of it, instead
of being angry with us when we tell them of it.

. 13. I am not therefore half so zealous to turn men from the opinion of
Anabaptistry, as I am to persuade both them and others, that it is their duty
to live together with mutual forbearance, in Love and Church Communion
notwithstanding such differences: For which they may see more reasons given by
one that once was of their mind and way (Mr. William Allen in his Retractation
of Separation, Satan will not consent that you should soberly read the Books.
and His Persuasive to Unity) than any of them can soundly refel, though they
may too easily reject them.

. 14. I am persuaded that the formal Ministers, and people, who make little
more use of Baptism, than to give it to Infants, and to receive it in Infancy,
have been the greatest occasion of Anabaptistry among us: when the people see
that all being Baptized in Infancy, many afterward live all their days, and
never understand what Baptism is, and few ever solemnly and distinctly own and
renew that Covenant when they come to age, (unless coming to Church and
receiving the Lords Supper with as little understanding, be a renewing it,)
this tempts serious people that understand not the matter well themselves, to
think that Infant Baptism does but pollute the Churches, by letting in those
who know not what they do, and after prove profane or Infidels: And they think
that it is the only way to reformation to stay till they are ready to devote
themselves understandingly to God. But this is their mistake: For, 1. If it
were deferred till ripeness of age, one part would neglect it and continue
Infidels; and another part would do all formally, as we see they do now at the
other Sacrament, where the same Covenant is to be renewed. 2. There is a better
remedy.

. 15. For we hold that all that are Baptized in Infancy should as
understandingly, and as seriously and (if it may be conveniently) as solemnly,
own and make that Covenant with God when they come to age, as if they had never
been baptized; (if not more, as being more obliged.) The reasons of this I have
given long ago at large, in a Treatise of Confirmation, written when we had
hope of setting up this Course, under the name of Confirmation, which some of
us practiced in our Assemblies not without success. To be seriously devoted to
God by our Parents first, and to be brought at age as seriously to devote our
selves to him, as any Anabaptist can do, is a much liklier way to fill the
Church with serious Christians, than to leave all men without the sense of an
early Infant obligation.

. 16. I am as fully persuaded that Infants Church Membership and Baptism is
according to Gods will, as ever I was, when I was most engaged in the
Controversy: And I am persuaded that these Papers of mine to Mr. Tombs, are
so unsatisfactorily answered as is worse than no Answer, and shows how little
is to be said.

. 17. Though the Act of Baptizing be a duty, and so necessary necessitate
praecepti, yet Protestants hold that it is not so necessary necessitate medii,
but that in some cases those that are unbaptized may be saved: As in case the
Child die before it can be done, or in case the absence or delay of the
Baptizer be the cause: It is true-consenting to his Covenant (for our selves
and those that we have power to consent and accept it for) which Christ has
made necessary to salvation; and if he should damn a true Consenter, he should
damn one that has the Love of God, and one to whom he promises salvation,
John 3.16, 18.

. 18. It is utterly incongruous to the rest of the Law of Grace, which is
spiritual, and to Christ's alterations, who took down the Law of burdensome
Ceremonies; to think that he should lay so great a stress upon the very outward
washing, as that he would damn true Believers that Love God, for want of it:
when he has done so much to convince the world, that God seeks such to
worship him as will do it in spirit and truth, and that Circumcision or
Uncircumcision is nothing, but Faith that works by Love: And if Penitent
Loving Believers shall not be saved, Gods promises give us no assurance or
security.

. 19. When the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. puts [ one Baptism] among the
necessaries of Church-Concord, by Baptism is meant, our solemn devoting our
selves (and ours under that trust) to Christ in the Baptismal Covenant; which
can mean no more but that as there are three things (on our part) in Baptism,
1. Heart-consent, ^. Profession of that consent, 3. The Reception of washing as
the professing symbol: So, 1. The heart-consent is necessary to our membership
of the Church as invisible, that is, to our union with Christ and our
salvation; 2. The Profession of Consent as there is opportunity is necessary,
both to prove the sincerity of Consent it self, and to other men's notice of it,
and so to our membership of the Church as visible: 3. And our Professing it by
being Baptized is necessary to the regular and orderly manner of our
Profession: And so far to our concord.

. 20. And he that knows Baptism to be hic et nunc his duty and yet will not
receive it, shows his unsoundness by his disobedience.

. 21. As Baptism is made our great duty under that name, so Profession or
Confession of Christ, as such, is often mentioned as necessary, even to
salvation, Romans 10.9, 10. 1 John 4.2.3.15. Mat. 10.32. Phil. 2.11. 2 John 7.

And Baptism being our Open confessing and Owning Christ by a solemn Vow and
Covenant, it is principally as such that it is necessary to salvation, yea and
to a perfect membership of the visible Church.

. 22. Therefore if any man that in a desert or dry Country could have no
water, or that lived where there is no Minister, should openly before all the
people devote himself to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, according to the
Baptismal Covenant, and solemnly profess himself a Christian, that man were a
true member of the visible Church, though defective as to the mode of entrance,
and were to be numbered with Christians: And Constantine and many another were
called Christians long before they were baptized. And it were injurious to the
Rationality and spirituality of Christ's Covenant, to feign him to be so
ceremonious, as to reject a sound professing believer for want of water.

. 23. Though Augustine be called durus pater Infantum, and be supposed for some
passages by many Papists and others to damn all unbaptized persons save
Martyrs, yet these following words among others, in his later times in his
deliberate disputes against the Donatists, fully show his contrary judgment
(which yet I believe the Interest of his cause against the Donatists was a help
to in this point) And remember that he confirms it in his Retractations, by
retracting only the instance of the thief on the cross, as uncertain whether he
was baptized or not.

. 24. Aug de baptis. cont. Donat. li. 4. c. 29. [ Quod etiam atque etiam
considerans invenio, non tantum Passionem pro nomine Christi, id quod ex
Baptismo deerat posse supplere; sed etiam Fidem conversionemque Cordis, si
forte ad celebrandum mysterium baptismi in angustiis temporum succurri non
potest -- Et Cap. 24. Cum Ministerium baptismi non contemptus religionis sed
articulus necessitatis excludit: and baptismus quidem potest inesse ubi
conversio cordis defuerit: Conversio autem cordis potest quidem inesse non
percepto baptismo; sed contempto non potest: neque enim ullo modo dicenda est
conversio cordis ad Deum, cum Dei sacramentum contemnitur. Conversion then will
save without baptism, when baptism is not contemned: It is the contempt that
destroys, and that as it proves men unconverted. And this he professes to
be his judgment after long and great consideration.

. 25. Baptism is to Christianity much like what Ordination is to the sacred
Ministry, and what solemn Matrimony is to Marriage. It is necessary as a Duty,
and as a Means to our ordinary and regular admittance to the Communion of the
Church. But as in case there were no Ordainer to be had, in a far Country in
America, no doubt but a qualified person might become a Pastor, rather than God
should have no Church, nor be solemnly worshipped; And as in case there could
be no regular solemnization of Marriage (as in such a wilderness) a published
consent may tie the knot; so in case there could be no Baptizing, a solemn
Profession and Covenanting would serve to Gods acceptance, and to a right to
the Christian name.

. 26. I only leave it to Christian Charity and wisdom to consider how far some
men's Education, natural weakness of judgment, and other impediments of
information, may make their error against Infant Baptism, to participate of
such a Necessity: The case has its difficulties: Papists and Protestants
confess it, as to Scripture evidence: Weak men cannot know all things: And even
considerable heads, that have heard and thought of much against it, which they
cannot answer, may grow very confident that they are in the right, and after by
that prejudice may become incapable of what should satisfy them: Abundance of
the sons of the Church that talk most against them, give such weak reasons for
Infant Baptism, and are so unable to confute an Anabaptist, as shows, that it
is not More knowledge, but somewhat else more inclining them to the truth
therein, that keeps them right.

. 27. If the case were, whether the Lords Supper might be Administered with
Beer, or Milk, where there is no Wine? Or whether Baptism might be Administered
by Milk or Wine, where there is no water? suppose the affirming party were
certainly in the right; yet if the contrary minded should say, I own Christ's
Sacrament, and solemnly profess my consent to his Covenant; and I would
participate as you do, but that I take it to be a sin, and with all the means
that I can use, in conference, reading, meditation, prayer, my judgment is not
changed,] I should not break such communion with such a man, as he were capable
and willing to hold with the Church. And how near some Anabaptists case is to
this, I leave to consideration.

. 28. But making no question but many of them are far better men than I, and
knowing my self liable to error, and knowing how much Christ in his promises
lays upon sincerity of Faith and Love more than upon ceremony; and having
endeavored to learn what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice; As
I am far more offended at their Schism, or separation from Communion with our
Churches, than at their opinion, so I will here lay down those terms on which I
am persuaded good and sober men will be willing on both sides to agree and hold
communion: Or on which I am sure I would gladly live in brotherly love and
communion with them my self.

. 29. Let the Anabaptists consent to and profess as follows or to this sense.

[Though we judge Infant Baptism dissonant from Christ's instituted order, yet
finding that God has made many promises to the seed of the faithful above
others, and that Christ expressed his readiness to receive little children when
they were brought to him for his blessing, and knowing that all Christian
Parents should earnestly desire that their children may be the children of God
through Christ, and should devote them to him, as far as is in their power, and
knowing that there are difficulties about the extent of this power, and Christ's
promises; we do here solemnly profess, that we thankfully desire all those
mercies for this child which God has promised to such in his word; and that we
heartily offer, devote and dedicate this child to God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, as far as he has given us power to do it, beseeching him accordingly to
accept him: And we promise faithfully to endeavor to educate him in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, and as we are able to persuade him when he
is capable, to believe in Christ, and solemnly devote himself to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost in Baptism.]

Let this much be done in the Church or so openly as may satisfy the Church,
that they are not despisers of Gods mercies, nor their childrens souls.

Much more would it tend to our quietness and concord, if those that profess
that they cannot satisfy their consciences in their Infant Baptism, would but
do as the Liturgy does by those whose Baptism is uncertain, [ If thou be not
Baptized, I Baptize thee,] and so would say, [ Being uncertain whether my
Infant Baptism be valid, If it be not I now receive that which is] And when
they have satisfied their consciences, would live quietly in the Love and
communion of the Church! Who would not receive them, though we approve not of
their way?

. 30. And were it in my power as a Pastor of the Church, I would give
satisfaction by such an answerable profession as this.

[Though it be our judgment that Infants have ever been members of Gods
visible Church, since he had a Church and there were Infants in the world, and
do believe that Christ has signified in the Gospel that it is his gracious
will that they should still be so; And that he that commanded, Mat. 28.19. [ Go
ye and Disciple all Nations Baptizing them] would have his Ministers endeavor
accordingly to do it, and has hereby made Baptism the regular orderly way of
solemn entrance into a visible Church state; and therefore we devote this child
to God in the Baptismal Covenant: Yet we do also hold, that when he comes to
age, it will be his duty as seriously and devoutly to make this Covenant with
God understandingly himself, and to dedicate himself to God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, as those must do that never were Baptized in Infancy: And we
promise to endeavor faithfully as we have opportunity, to instruct and
persuade him so to do, hoping that this his early Baptismal dedication, and
obligation to God will rather much prepare him for it, than hinder it.

. 31. Me thinks these Professions should put off the chief matter of offense
and exception against each other, as to the ill consequents of our opinions?
And if sober good men would by such a mutual approach, be the more disposed to
live together in love and holy peace, how easily should I bear the scorns of
those Formalists that will reproach me for so much as motioning [ a Peace with
the Anabaptists, even in the same Communion!] Who by making it a reproach will
but persuade me, that such as they are less worthy of Christian Communion than
sober, pious, and peaceable Anabaptists.

. 32. And if with the partial sort of themselves such motions of Peace be
turned into matter of contempt, and they proceed in their clamours and reviling
of me, as an enemy of the truth, for being against their way, I shall account
it no wonder nor matter of much provocation, finding in all Sects as well as
theirs, that the injudicious sort are apt to be abusively censorious, and the
more men's Pride, Ignorance and uncharitableness remain, the more they will
swell into self-conceit, and trouble the Church with a mistaking wrangling
hurtful sort of zeal.

. 33. And as I must needs believe as ill of some sort of Zeal as St. James has
spoken of it, Jam. 3. and experience has too long told the world of it; yet I
take it for truly amiable in men, that they have a love and Zeal for Truth in
general, and a hatred to that which they think to be against it; and that their
bitterness against the truth and me, is upon a supposition that both are
against the truth and God; for this bears them witness that they have a zeal
of God, though it be not according to Knowledge; and if they knew truth indeed,
they would be zealous for it.

. 34. I conclude with this notice to the contrary minded, that the evidence for
Infants Church Membership seems to me so clear, both in nature and in
Scripture, that I bid them despair of ever persuading me against it: But if
they will have any hope of changing my judgment, it must be by confessing the
visible Church Membership of Infants, and proving that yet they are not to be
baptized, and that Baptism was appointed for initiating none but adult
converts, and not to be the common entrance into the Church: which yet I think
they can never do, while the plain Law of Christ Mat. 29.19. and the exposition
of the universal Church, does stand on record to confute such an opinion! But
here they have more room for a dispute.

. 35. But (though I expect to be censured for it) I will say once (because
truth is truth) that though Rebaptizing and Reordaining are justly both
condemned by the ancient Churches, and pronounced alike ridiculous by Gregory
Mag. Lib. 2. Ep. Indict. 11. c. 46. and many others; yet were men Rebaptized
but for Certainty to themselves or to the Church, and to quiet their
consciences, and on such terms as in my Christian Directory I have showed that
a seeming Reordination might in some cases be tolerated, and would not wrong
Infants, nor make it an occasion of division or alienation; I know not by any
Scripture or reason that such Rebaptizing is so heinous a sin, as should
warrant us to contemn our brethren: No though it were as faulty as the often
commemorative baptizing used by the Abassines.

CHAP. III. A General View of Mr. Danvers book.
. 1. MR. Danvers book is entitled a Treatise of Baptism, in which he gives us
the History of Infant and Adult Baptism out of Antiquity, as making it appear
that Infant Baptism was not practiced for 300 years (in his second edit. it is
[ near 300.) And in his Append. ed. 2. [ I cannot find that it was practiced
upon any till the fourth Century:] And he gives us a Catalogue of witnesses
against it. By which those that hold their Religion on the belief of such men's
words, will conclude that all this is true, and that Infant Baptism is a
Novelty, and those that are against it do go the old and Catholic way.

. 2. Having perused his testimonies on both sides, I am humbled and ashamed for
the dullness of my heart, that does not with floods of compassionate tears
lament the pitiful condition of the seduced, that must be thus deceived in the
dark; and of the Churches of Christ that must be thus assaulted, and shaken,
and distracted, by such inhumane horrid means: The book being composed, in that
part of history which the stress of the cause lies on, of such UNTRUTHS in
fact and history, as I profess it one of my greatest difficulties to know how
to call them. Should I say, that they are so notorious and shameless, as that
(I say not only a Papist,) but any sober Turk or Pagan should blush to have
been guilty but of some page or line^ of them, and much more a man of any
tenderness of conscience, the Readers would think that the language were harsh,
were it never so true, and some would say, Let us have soft words and hard
arguments]. And should I not tell the Reader the truth of the case, I might
help to betray him into too much fearlesness of his bait and snare, and I doubt
I may be guilty of untruth by concealing the quality of his untruths: And it is
not matter of Argument, but fact that I am speaking of.

. 3. But it pleases that God whose counsels are unsearchable, as to permit
five parts of the Earth to remain yet strangers unto Christ, so to permit his
Church to be so tried and distracted between Church Tyranny, and dividing
separations, Sects and parties, as that in many ages it has not been easy to
know which of them was the more pernicious.

. 4. And it must grieve every conscionable and discerning lover of Truth and
Peace, to observe how these two Church-disturbing parties, do by their
extremities of opposition, increase as well as exasperate each other: As the
Ithacian Prelates did by the Priscillianists, and the Priscillianists by them.
The Pride, covetousness, dead formality, and cruel violence of Clergy Tyrants
makes the poor Sectaries think that they must go so far from them, till they
have lost themselves and know not where they are; and as Mr. Danvers musters up
a catalogue of my sayings in his mode and dress, which seem ugly to the poor
man that thinks he sees Antichristianity in such Gospel and natural truths
which he understands not, (Like that melancholy person, who thinks she sees
Spiders upon every one that comes near her, and they must brush them off before
she can converse with them, though she be caetera sana); so those on the other
extreme think them so fanatic, and almost mad, that they are apt to suspect
every word almost that they say, of madness, and sometimes thereby injure the
truths of the Gospel, and soberer people, that partake not of their guilt, and
so say of such as agree with them but in aliquo tertio, They are all alike.

. 5. This was the main cause which made St Martin separate from his neighbor
Bishops, and deny communion with them to the death: Because their persecution
of the Priscillianists had so animated the looser sort against strict Religious
people, that they had brought men under the suspicion of Priscillianism,, if
they did but fast, and pray, and read and talk of the Scripture. It Is easy to
see of late who they are that have done the like.

. 6. When this sort of men see the weakness of the Sectaries, and the
bold-faced falsehood which such as Mr. Danvers obtrude on the world, and hear
them furiously revile what they understand not, it makes them think that they
are fitter for Bedlam than for humane society: And their consciences justify
them for all the cruelties that they use against either them, or more innocent
persons, whom in their ignorance and uncharitableness they number with them.

. 7. And on the like account when they read and hear their erroneous Doctrines,
and hear their incongruous words in prayer, they think they can never be too
strict in shackling them and all others in prescribed forms: And nothing
quieteth their Consciences in all this so much, as the undeniable errors, and
follies and miscarriages of those that thus provoke them.

. 8. But in this the Church in Augustines days did not think that way the
wisest cure: when he says [ Afferat, ut fieri solet, aliquam precem in qua
loquatur contra regulam fidei (multi quippe irruunt in preces non solum ab
imperitis loquacibus, sed etiam ab haereticis compositas, and per ignorantiae
simplicitatem non eas valentes discernere, utuntur iis, arbitrantes quod bonae
sint:) Nec tamen quod in eis perversum est evacuat illa quae ibi recta sunt;
sed ab eis potius evacuatur] Aug. de bapt. cont. Donat. (as I remember about
lib. 5. c. 11.) O truly charitable and peaceable Doctrine! And he that will
separate from other for every difference (or real error) in Doctrine or
Prayers, shall have enough to separate from him.

. 9. I know nothing that so much multiplieth Sectaries as the notorious
miscarriages of Church-Tyrants that oppose them: And I know nothing, next
carnal interest it self, that so much multiplieth and confirms Papists and
Church-Tyrants, as the madness of the Sectaries^ The wildeness, but especially
the diversity of their opinions, has done more to increase the number of
Papists among us than any thing that ever the Papists themselves could
otherwise say for their cause: For people see so many giddy with turning round,
and see so many Sects among us, that they are confounded, and know not which to
be of; but they must lay hold of somewhat that is more stable, or be wheel-sick.

. 10. O what a confirmation is it to a Papist to find such a one as Mr. Danvers
calling Gods Truths and Ordinances Antichristian! Yea, our very Baptismal
Covenant and dedication to Christ is Antichristian, and the chief Fathers and
Martyrs of the Church are Antichristian! (no wonder if I be so.) And I doubt
almost all the Church of Christ for 900 years, at least in this man's reckoning.
And what will the Papists desire more? With what scorn will they deride such
men? Woe be to him by whom offense comes. The chief Quakers are charged by Mr.
Faldo and others (even some of their own name) of denying the person and office
of Christ himself: It is worth the enquiring whether they reject him not as
Antichrist, and call not Christianity by the name of Antichristianity?

CHAP. IV. Of Mr. Danvers's his Witnesses against Infant Baptism.
. 1. WHen he has told you, that In his small search (shamefully small) he
cannot find there is any authentic testimony that it was practiced on any till
the fourth Century; he in the next words says that it is granted that
Tertullian spoke against it in Africa, which is clear evidence that some had
been speaking for it in that corner of the world:] This is no contradiction
with him: And did they only speak for it and not practice it? Speak once like a
man: And was not that till the fourth Century?

. 2. His Catalogue contains three Columns: The first of the Baptism of the
Adult: And what Christian ever denied this? And what means the man in
laboring to prove it? The second is of the Instituting and asserting of
Infant Baptism; of which more anon. The third is of his Witnesses against
Infant Baptism. And the first of these mentioned in the Catalogue is Tertullian
in the third Century. By which he seems to confess that till the third
Century he has no witness against it. But I have said so much elsewhere and
others more, to prove, 1. That Tertullians words prove that Infant Baptism de
facto was then in use; 2. That he only tells his opinion of the point of
convenience, but concludes not against Infant Baptism as unlawful; 3. That it
is most probable he speaks of the Infants of Heathens; 4. That he speaks
from that strict singularity which made him plead also for the Montanists
Fanaticism, and against second marriages, and for his inordinate fastings, etc.
as a man differing from the Churches and numbered with the Heretics (though I
think him a learned Godly man.) And I refer it to the Readers judgment whether
in my book of Infant Baptism I have not proved by many other words in
Tertullian that he was not against all Infant Baptism, but for it among
Christians.

. 3. His next and great Witness is the Donatists together. This is something,
were it true: but it is such a kind of falsehood as I must not name in its due
epithets, lest you think me over-sharp.

. 4. His words are [ Donatus a learned man in Africa taught that they should
baptize no Children but only that believed and desired it.]

Answ. Utterly false: And how does he prove it? By Sebast. Frank. whom I will
not search to see whether he say so or not. Reader, if the question be, what
was done, said or held by thousands of men twelve hundred years ago, and the
Writings of them and their Adversaries were extant, and the Histories written
of them in that and the next Ages, would you have a man pass by all proof from
these, and tell you what a fellow of his own opinion says eleven hundred years
after? He brings us with great ostentation the Dutch Anabaptists Martyrologie
and such like Histories of a few years old, of fellows that knew little more
than as he does, what their Party or Companions told them, or what they
ignorantly gathered from such Books as are yet to be seen by us as well as by
them. If I should dispute what Augustine held, would Mr. D. fetch his proofs
from the writings of James Nailor, or George Fox, or Isaac Pennington, yea or
Mr. Tombs to prove his assertions, while Augustines works are at hand to be
seen?

. 5. So next he says [that the followers of Donatus were all one with the
Anabaptists, denying Baptism to Children, admitting the Believers only thereto
who desired the same] And he (...) one called Twisk.

Ans^* ^tterly false; They held no such thing.

. 6. His next proof is indeed from an unquestionable witness; he says [
Augustines third and fourth Books against the Donatists do demonstrate that
they denied Infant Baptism, wherein he manageth the argument for Infant Baptism
against them, with great zeal, enforcing it by several arguments, but
especially from Apostolical Tradition, and cursing with great bitterness they
that should not embrace it.

. 7. Answ. Mr. Bagshaw is now quite overdone in the quality of untruths:
Reader, either this man had seen and read the Books of Augustine mentioned by
him, or he had not. If not, does he use Gods Church and the souls of poor
ignorant people with any tenderness of Conscience, sobriety or humanity, to
talk at this rate of Books, that he never saw or read, which are so common
among us to be seen? If he understand not Latin, how unfit is he to give us
the History of these antiquities? And how audacious to talk thus of what he
knows not? If he understand it, what cruelty is it to the Church to venture
on such untruths to save him the labor of opening and reading the books he
talks of? But if he have read them, then I can scarce match him again among
all the falsifiers that I know in the world; I dare not be so uncharitable to
him as to think that ever he read them.

. 8. The Books are seven that Augustine wrote of Baptism against the Donatists:
And in them all I cannot find one syllable of intimation that ever the
Donatists denied Infant-^^^^ism, but enough to the contrary that they (...):
Nor do the third and fourth books mentioned by him meddle with it any more than
the rest: There is not in the seven books nor in all the rest of Austins books
against the Donatists, one word that I can find, of any such controversy with
them at all: And for a man to say that in two books he manageth the arguments
for Infant Baptism against them with great zeal, etc. when there is not one
word that supposes them to deny it, blush Reader in compassion for such a man.

. 9. Render, the Donatists were a great party of men in Africa: They were
Prelatical and for Ceremonies as the other Churches were: They differed from
the rest on the account of the Personal succession of their Bishops. In a time
of persecution they said (truly or falsely was a great controversy) that one of
the Bishops delivered up the Church-books to the Persecutors, to be burnt,
rather than die himself, when they demanded them; And that the Catholic
Bishops received successively their ordination from that man, and called them
Traditores; whereas the Bishop that all their Bishops had successively been
ordained by, was one that had refused to deliver up the Church-books; And
consequently he was the right Bishop, and they that had their succession from
him were true Bishops and Churches, and all the rest were no true Bishops or
Churches; and therefore that all their Baptism and Sacraments were nullities,
and their Communion unlawful, and that all people were bound in Conscience as
ever they would be saved to separate from the rest (called Catholics) and to
come to them and to be rebaptized. So that their Schism was much like the
Papists, who confine the Church to their party, and condemn all others, save
that the Papists (ordinarily) rebaptize not (though they say some Monks have
done it, as elsewhere I have cited.) The Donatists were Episcopal ceremonious
Separatists, that did it on the account of a purer Episcopal succession. Till
their days the holy Doctors of the Church had almost all been against drawing
the sword against Heretics, even Augustine himself. But the greatness of their
party and the proud conceit of their greater zeal and strictness than the
Catholics had, made them so furious that the Catholic Pastors could not live
quietly by them. Insomuch that some of them wounded the Ministers in the
streets, and some of them made a salt sharp water and spouted into Ministers
eyes as they past the street, to put out their eyes; till many such insolences
provoked Augustine to change his judgment of toleration, (and especially the
multitudes seduced by them,) and the Bishops to crave the Emperors aid: The
Emperor made Edicts for mulcts and banishment to those that persevered: This
(being a new way) so exasperated the Donatists, that in very passion many of
them (yea Bishops) murdered themselves to bring odium on the Catholics, to
make the people believe that the cruelty of the Catholics compelled them to
it: And this was the state of these two parties; but not a word of difference
about Infant Baptism between them that ever I read in either part.

. 10. The Controversy between Austin and them he thus stateth: Lib. 1. c. 1,
2. Si haberi foris potest, etiam dari cur non potest? Baptism received out of
the Catholic or true Church among Schismatics is true baptism: and therefore
baptism given without by Schismatics is true baptism.

Impie facere qui rebaptizare conantur orbis unitatem, and nos recte facere qui
Dei Sacramenta improbare, nec in ipso schismate audemus: They do impiously that
endeavor to rebaptize all the united Christian world, and we do rightly who
dare not deny Gods Sacraments, no not in a Schism.] For Augustine peaceably held
the Donatists baptism to be true and valid though irregular and unlawfully
given and taken, but the Donatists held all the Catholics Ministry and baptism
null.

. 11. Therefore he thus summeth up their differences, cap. 3. Duo sunt quae
dicimus, and esse in Catholica Baptismum, and illic tantum recte accipi: Item
alia duo dicimus, esse apud Donatistas baptismum; non autem recte accipi: Harum
sententiarum tres nostrae tantum sunt, unam vero utrique dicimus.] That is,
[Two things we say, that there is Baptism in the Catholic Church, and that
there only it is rightly received: Also two things more we say, that there is
Baptism with the Donatists; but that with them it is not rightly received: of
these sentences, three are only ours, and one is common to us both:] Austin
held it a sin, to be baptized among Schismatics, (to join with their Sect) but
not a nullity.

. 12. Hereupon he addresseth himself to evince the sinfulness of their Schism
and unchristianing all the Churches: And indeed he seems to think that though
Baptism was among them, yet hardly Salvation: And his argument (though I think
we must abate for men's passions and temptations) is worth the Separatists
consideration: that baptism that destroys (remitteth he calls it) not sin, is
not saving: that which is without love remitteth not sin: But Schismatics,
says he, have not love: For, Nulli Schismata facerent si fraterno odio non
excaecarentur: Annon est in Schismate odium fraternum? Quis hoc dixerit? Cum
and origo and pertinacia Schismatis nulla sit alia nisi odium fraternum.] That
is, None would make schisms if they were not blinded by the hatred of their
brethren: Is there not the hatred of brethren in Schism? What man will say so?
Whenas both the Rise and the Pertinacie of Schism is no other than the hatred
of brethren.] But blind zeal will not let men know their own hatred, when yet
they defame their brethren as no brethren, and endeavor to have all others
think them so bad as not to be communicated with, and separate from them on
that account.

. 13. The main subject of all the rest of these seven Books of Austin is to
answer the Donatists claim of Cyprian and his Carthage Council as on their
side: and to answer all the sayings of him and the several Bishops of that
Council. The plain truth is this: In the first age the Churches were so sober
and charitable as not to account every erring brother and party Heretics, but
such as subverted the Essentials of Religion: And some of these corrupted the
very form of Baptism: The baptism of these the Church took for null, and
baptized such as they pretended to have baptized. Cyprian and the other African
Bishops knowing this, and being much troubled with heretical Churches about
them, stretched this too far and rebaptized them that such Heretics baptized
as did not change the form of Baptism, but incorporated men into their corrupt
societies: The Donatists took advantage by this example and all the Reasons of
the Council, to go so much further as to take the Catholics for Heretics or
unlawful Churches, and rebaptize those that they baptized: Austin answers all
the Councils reasons, but praises Cyprian as a holy Martyr, and no Heretic
though mistaken.

. 14. And it is not enough for me to say that all these Books of Austin have
not a word of what he speaks, as controverting Infant Baptism with the
Donatists, but moreover, he brings the Donatists agreement with the
Catholics in the point of Infant Baptism, as a medium in his arguing against
them, Lib. 4. c. 23. showing how much baptism avails, in that Christ himself
would be baptized by a servant, and Infants that cannot themselves believe are
baptized [Quod traditum tenet universitas Ecclesiae cum parvuli Infantes
baptizantur qui nondum possunt cord credere ad justitiam and ore confiteri ad
salutem, quod latro potuit: Quinetiam flendo and vagiendo cum in eis mysterium
celebratur, ipsis mysticis vocibus obstrepunt; and tamen Nullus Christianus
dixerit eos inaniter baptizari.] That is, [ Which all the Including the
Donatists.
Church holds when little Infants are baptized, who certainly cannot yet with
the heart believe to righteousness and with the mouth confess to Salvation: And
yet no Christian will say that they are baptized in vain.]

Thus he argues against the Donatists, If the whole Church hold
Infant Baptism, and no Christian will say that it is in vain, though they
themselves believe not and confess not, then you should not say all baptism is
vain because we Catholics administer it, or because it is received in our
Churches. The whole tenor of Austins charitable language to the Donatists, and
the scope of this place shows, that he here pleaded universal consent, and by
[ all the Church] and [ no Christian] includes the Donatists. And so he often
argues against the Pelagians, who though they denied original sin, durst not
differ from the whole Christian world by denying Infant Baptism, but pretended
that it was for the conveyance of Grace, though not for remitting sin.

. 15. And Austin next adds [ Et si quisquam in hac re authoritatem divinam
quaerat (Quanquam quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed
semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime
creditur) tamen veraciter conjicere possumus, etc.] That is, [And if any one in
this case (of Infant Baptism) ask for Divine authority (Though that which the
universal (or whole) Church does hold, and was not instituted by Councils but
was ever held, is most rightly believed to be delivered by the Apostles
authority) yet we may truly conjecture, etc. (and so he passes to the
Scripture argument from Circumcision.)

. 16. Here note, 1. That this was no controversy with the Donatists, 2. Nor
with any other Sect, but hold by all the Church, 3. That he only says as in a
Parenthesis that [ that which all the whole Church holds, and did ever hold,
not instituted by any Council, is justly taken for an Apostolical tradition,]
which I think few Protestants or sober Christians will deny. Who can imagine
that Timothy, Titus, Silas and all the whole Church in the Apostles days and
ever since, should hold and agree in any thing as a part of Christian Doctrine
or Worship, which they had not from the Apostles? Had the Apostles so little
charity as not to endeavor to rectify any of their errors? 4. Note here that
the Donatists never denied this (that Infant Baptism was ever held by the whole
Church to that day, and not instituted by any Council:) And were not Austin,
the Donatists and the whole Church liker to know the universality and Antiquity
of the thing, than the Holland or English Anabaptists about fourteen hundred
years after them? 5. Note that he brings Scripture for it also.

. 17. Indeed I find some that before those times had been above Ordinances and
against all baptism, but none against Infant Baptism as unlawful. Therefore
Augustine says elsewhere, that it is easier to find Heretics that deny all
baptism, than any that change the form of baptizing; so sure has the Tradition
of universal practice delivered down the form and words of baptism to us.

. 18. Afterward page 230. Ed. 2. Mr. Danvers comes to Austin again, and says
that Vincentius Victor did oppose Austin in the point of Infant Baptism, citing
August. li. 3. c. 14. de Anima.

Answ. Not a word of truth: no such matter in that Chapter or the whole book.

. 19. Next he says [ Cresconius did also oppose Austin in the point of Infants
baptism, and did maintain -- that there was no true baptism but that which
administered after faith.

Answ. Utterly false still. There was no such controversy between them. No
wonder if he had miscited sentences that will thus go to falsify whole Books,
as speaking of that which they never meddle with! Augustine having written
against Petilian (their best speaker, having of a Lawyer been made a Bishop)
Cresconius a Donatist Grammarian interposed for Petilian, and persuaded Austin
to gentler thoughts of them; but speaks not a word against Infant Baptism.

. 20. Nay, lib. 3. cap. 31. Austin tells us that they held it as well as the
Catholics: says he, [ Circumcisionem certe praeputii in figura futuri
baptismi Christi ab antiquis observatum esse, negare, ut arbitror, non audetis:
That is, I suppose you dare not deny that Circumcision was observed by the
ancients in figure of the Christian baptism.] It was a granted thing.

. 21. And it was Cresconius words to Austin [Vna Religio, eadem Sacramenta,
nihil in Christiana observatione diversum: and adhuc adversus invicem
laboramus? Says Austin, Quare ergo rebaptizas Christianum? Ego non rebaptizo;
that is, [We have all one Religion, the same Sacraments, there is nothing in
our Christian observation diverse ( says Cresconius) And yet do we strive
against each other? Why then do thou rebaptize a Christian (that differs
not from them?) I rebaptize no Christian, ( says Austin.) So that here was no
disagreement in Sacraments or any Christian observance. Only as Austin says
lib. 7. de bapt. c. 2. the quarrel was that the Catholics were charged to be
Traditores quia ex traditoribus, the successors of sinners: Thus being wise and
righteous overmuch did tear and almost ruin the Churches.

. 22. He adds, page 223. Ed. 2. the saying of Osiander, Fuller, Bullinger,
that the Donatists and the Anabaptists held the same opinions?

Answ. 1. In what? In all things or some? that is, in the point of Rebaptizing
persons before baptized (do you own that indeed?) But not as being against
Infant Baptism. 2. So, many Prelatists have called the Puritans Donatists; and
abundance of Protestants say that the Papists succeed the Donatists in
appropriating the Church to their party. Do not write next that they say the
Papists are against Infant Baptism, lest you make your selves Antichristian
also.

. 23. Reader, the Donatists were so great a party of men and had so great a
number of Bishops, and so many wrote against them whose works are yet extant,
and their cause had so many public examinations, that I leave it to thee if
thou have the brains of a man, to judge whether if they had been against
Infant Baptism in a time when Austin said no Christian denied it, neither
Optatus, nor Austin, nor any other of their most copious opposers would ever
have charged them with such an opinion, nor any examiners, Councils or
Historians of their ages; even when the Catalogues of heretics unhappily took
in so many little matters as they did, and made heretics some more and worse
than they were? And now if John Becold will say they were of his side, we must
believe him.

. 24. His dealing with the Novatians is the same or worse: He feared not in the
face of the Sun, to write that the Novatians opposed Infant Baptism, and
numbreth them also with his party. When it is a falsehood as much aggravated as
these particulars import. 1. They were an honest and numerous people, and
scattered almost all over the Empire; tolerated till Innocents time in Rome,
and long tolerated and much favored by many Emperors and Patriarchs in
Constantinople, because (as Socrates says) they agreed in Doctrine with the
Catholics: And could they have denied Infant Baptism, and not be accused of
it? 2. They had many bitter enemies that would soon have cast this in their
teeth. 3. Many Councils had to do with them, where multitudes had opportunity
to accuse them. 4. They were an ancient Sect, arising even in Cyprians time,
and long continued: And in so many generations it would have been known. 5.
They are put in the Catalogues of many Heresiographers that are keen enough,
and none of them (that ever I found) accuse them of any such thing: No not
Epiphanius himself, who is most copious, and not very backward to accuse. And
shall either John of Leyden or any of his party now in the end of the world
persuade us, by slandering so many thousands of innocent men, that they were
guilty? And can Mr. Danvers now tell us that they held that which for a
thousand years has lain unknown?

. 25. He cites Socrates, l. 7. c. 9. that Innocent banished them out of Rome.

Answ. Elsewhere indeed Socrates and many more say so: But does that prove they
were against Infant Baptism?

. 26. Somewhat he would fain say at the second hand out of Albaspinaeus,
Observe. 20. I hope he never read the book: Albaspinaeus there purposely
decideth the Controversy, what the Novatian Heresy was, in several Chapters,
and never mentions any such opinion or suspicion of them. The same does that
great Antiquary Jesuit Petavius; (and what these two men knew not of the
Fathers and Church History, few in the world knew, unless I may except Blondel
and Usher:) In his notes on Epiphanius of the Novatians, he enters on the same
Controversy as Albaspinaeus did, and never mentions any such thing.

. 27. Next he tells us that Ecbertus and Emericus do assert that the Waldenses,
the new Cathari, conform to the Doctrine and manners of the old, the Novatians.

Answ. But did they say that the Novatians were against Infant Baptism? Why did
you cite neither words, page nor Book? And if they had, should two railing
slanderous Papists near a thousand years after Novatian be taken for witnesses
that he was against Infant Baptism, against all the History of the Church that
concerns them to the contrary? Socrates himself (an honest Historian) and
Sozomen also are ordinarily by the Papists accused as Novatians, because they
speak fairly and impartially of them as honest men: (and whether they were or
not I know not, but by their own words conj^cture the contrary) And they lived
when and where the Novatians were best known: And yet tell us not a syllable of
any such suspicion of them.

. 28. Next he says, Perin says that the Waldenses were the offspring of the
Novatians, driven out of Rome about Anno 400.

Answ. It is very probable: Therefore the Waldenses were not against
Infant Baptism. For it is certain the Novatians were not: And the same Perin
says the Waldenses were not. But if they had, would that prove that the
Novatians were, seven hundred or eight hundred years before?

. 29. Next he cites as Cassanders reason against him that the Donatists were
for Infant Baptism, the sixth Council of Carthage, saying that [ All that
returned from the Donatists should be received into the Catholic Church
without rebaptization though baptized in Infancy,] and says, [It is but a
supposition at best that they might be baptized in Infancy or they might not,
and can signify nothing against all the former evidence.] And is it not shame
and pity that so public matters of fact must be handled at this rate? What is
his former evidence but such as humane nature may blush at, to find that one
called a man and a Christian, and too good for the communion of such as we,
should be guilty of? And why talks he of this one reason against him in so
public a matter of History? as if he knew not what abundance more may easily
be produced, if it were of any need? And how shamefully are these plain words
of a Council put off, as if all the Bishops that lived in the same time and
Country with them knew not what the Donatists hold, so well as he and such as
he?

. 30. His next witnesses are [ the ancient Britains that having received the
Christian doctrine and worship from the Apostles times did entirely keep
thereto -- whom Austin the Monk would have engaged [ especially in Christening
children and keeping Easter, but in as much as they utterly refused to be
seduced by him therein etc.

Answ. This is a witness (being such a body of witnesses) of great importance
(as that of the Donatists and Novatians was) if it were true: But it is all
false still: And must our own Country, yea all our Christian Ancestors be thus
slandered? Whether Britain received the Christian doctrine and worship from the
Apostles time (if he mean in that time) is very doubtful and nothing to our
business: we have no sufficient proof of any such thing: The Reason of the case
makes me conjecture that Christianity was first brought hither by Soldiers, of
the Roman Legions; especially since I read in Beda that the first Temple I find
any mention of was built at or near Canterbury by such Soldiers. But who ever
brought it, it is like they were of the Asian and not the Roman opinion,
(whether Soldiers that had been in the Asian Legions, or who else, is not
known) and it is certain that they were not against the observation of Easter:
For both they and the Scots that concurred with them against the Romans, did
strictly keep it: But all the question was of the due time.

. 31. Nor is there the least proof or probability that they were against Infant
Baptism. 1. Because Augustine the Monk that quarrelled with them, never
charge them with it, in his Ep. to Gregory or to themselves. 2. Beda that was
downright against them, and a Roman zealot, and the ancientest writer after
Austins time, and lived in the same Country with them, and knew them, and
describes all the contests with them, yet never lays any such thing to their
charge; when yet he mentions the Rebaptizing of One by Bishop John, because
it was an ignorant insufficient man for the Priesthood, that Baptized him; and
this a rare instance. 3. The Scots that about Easter and other contrarieties to
the Romans, were of the Britains mind, and refused so much as to eat with the
Romans, yet are charged with no such thing. 4. And the controversy continued
for above an hundred years after Austins time, and great stir and meetings and
disputes were about it, as Beda tells us at large, before the Scots were
changed: And in all that time, there would have been opportunity for their
forward adversaries (especially Wilfrid, afterward St. Boniface of Mentz, who
was the Chief) to have found out this matter of accusation. 5. None of the
historians near following those times do charge any such thing on them. And yet
were the old Britains against Infant Baptism?

. 32. But to put all out of doubt take the words of Austin to them in his three
demands thus by Beda recorded, Eccl. Hist. li. 2. c. 2. [ Vt Pascha suo tempore
celebretis; ut Ministerium baptizandi quo Deo renascimur juxta morem Romae
sanctae Ecclesiae, et Apostolicae Ecclesiae compleatis; ut genti Anglorum una
nobiscum praedicetis verbum domini]. That is, [ 1. That you celebrate Easter at
the due time; 2. That ye complete the Ministry of Baptism by which we are born
again to God, according to the fashion (or manner) of the holy Church of Rome,
and the Apostolical Church. 3. That you Preach with us the word of God to the
English Nation].

And what is here of Infant Baptism? How proves he that that was meant by the
Roman manner or fashion of Baptizing? Is the subject of Baptism, the Manner?
when about the Manner indeed there were then so many and different ceremonies?
Nay when above an hundred years before this Austins days, a wiser Austin had
told the Donatists, that the whole Church was agreed for Infant Baptism, and no
one Christian held it to be in vain? sure this was not so long after, a Manner
peculiar to Rome? But thus the honor of our Ancestors, and the history of the
Church, and the souls of poor ignorant Christians among us, must all be
heinously wronged by the falsehoods of rash presuming ignorant men.

. 33. And if this had been as true as it is false (that the old Britains were
against Infant Baptism) it would inform these men that it is not delaying
Baptism till riper age, that will keep it from formality, nor the Church from
falling into all impiety: For if our eldest historian Gildas may be believed
(and who may if not he?) his Countrymen the Britains, were Princes, Priests and
People fallen to such abominable wickedness, murder, drunkenness, filthy
lusts, deceit, theft, cruelty etc. that he takes the Princes for wolves and
monsters, and the Priests for no Priests but traitors, (excepting some good men
among them) etc. It is neither Infant nor Adult Baptism that will secure
against the corrupting of Churches, but Grace with either has saved souls.

. 34. He cites himself here Fox, quoting Beda, Polychron. and others. And what
say they? [ Baptizing after the manner of Rome] And what is that to his
question? But he tells you that Fa^^an says [ that you give Christendom to
children.] I have not Fabian to examine: but if he do, when he knows that he
is an empty f^llow, of the other day as it were and that he has nothing but
what comes from Gregory, and Beda; and that in them there is no such thing:
will a k^^wn ^a^sification of a (...) about nine hundred years after, disprove
the yet v^^ible words of the (...), which undertake to give you not only the
sense but the very ter^^?

. 35. He proceeds to prove by argument that the Britains were against-Infant
Baptism.

1. Because they received the Scriptures, the Christian Faith, Doctrine and
Discipline from the Apostles and Asiatick Churches, who had no such thing as
the Baptizing of Infants among them?

Answ. No such thing in the Asiaticks Churches? He might as well say, There is
now no such thing in England. But perhaps he will say that he means in the
Apostles time or soon after: Of which you have tried* part of his strength. But
when he has studied well Bishop Vshers Primordia who says all that is to be
said for our Antiquity, he will find no proof that we had our Religion from the
Apostles or any in their time.

. 36. But ask the man whether Asia it self long before the days of Gregory had
not Infant Baptism? And whether they received not the Scriptures and Religion
as certainly from the Asiatick Churches, and so from the Apostles, as the
Britains did? And whether this will prove that at that time they were against
Infant Baptism? If not, why will it prove the same of the Britains?

. 37. His second Argument is [ Because they so fully prized and faithfully
adhered to the Scripture, etc.]

Answ. What will not partiality say? 1. You must believe him that Scripture is
against Infant Baptism: And then the controversy is at an end. 2. You must
believe him how closely they adhered to Scripture, if you can, when you have
read Gildas (who is translated into English) their neighbor, one of them, the
only certain historian that knew them, who describes them as I have said, as
most flagitious heinous wicked men. Though I hope they amended after Gildas
days, yet that showed you how they held to Apostolic discipline or Scripture.
The book is so very small; it is but equal to entreat him to read it before he
use this argument again It seems by some citations out of it after that he has
read it, and yet speaks thus!
. 3. You must believe him that all that prize and adhere to Scripture are
against Infant Baptism. Read and try whether there be not greater evidence that
Cyprian, Athanasius, Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Augustine, the Egyptian Monks,
and other such strict persons in those ages, at least the Novatians, and
Donatists (in his own judgment) prized the Scripture than the Britains? And
does it follow (in despite of their own professions and practices) that all
these and the rest such, were against Infant Baptism?

. 38. Were not this as good an argument? Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Bradford,
Hooper; all the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, etc. prized the Scriptures: Ergo
they were all against Infant Baptism. Yea even Independents and Presbyterians
and all that prize and cleave to them now in England?

. 39. 3. He adds [Because they did so vehemently reject humane Traditions in
the worship of God; especially all Romish Rites and Ceremonies; this as before
undeniably appearing to come from Romes ordination and Imposition.]

Answ. 1. [ Vndeniably] is a word that shameth you to every intelligent Reader
that understands Church history. Will you not confess your self that Cyprian
and that Carthage Council, Nazianzene, Basil, Augustine etc. were for
Infant Baptism? were all these Papists, or Romans? Can you prove any Roman
Ordination of it before all these?

2. How know you that they so vehemently rejected humane Traditions in the
worship of God? Did they not use the Asiatick Ceremonies? Did they not
precisely observe Easter, and place Religion in keeping it on their own days?
Had they not Bishops, and were they not Monks? And do you gather by Gildas that
they were such as you dream? And did they not Plead Tradition for their
difference from Rome?

3. And were not the Scots then of their mind, and as much against Traditions
as they? and more against vice and formality in and after Colmans and
Columbanus days? And are not the Independents more against Traditions now than
the Britains were? And are they therefore Anabaptists?

. 40. He adds [4. Because Constantine the Great (the son of Constance and the
famous Helena, both eminent Christians) in the ye^r 305. was not Baptized till
he was aged as before. A clear proof that the Christians in Britain in those
days did not Baptize their children].

Answ. Some will laugh at these things, but I had rather mourn for the poor
peoples snares. 1. It Is false that Constance was a Christian, at least when
Constantine was young. No regardable history makes him any better than a
moderate favourer of the Christians. 2. It is not proveable that Helena was one
in Constantines Infancy. 3. There is no probability that he was born in
England, as many Learned men have proved. 4. It is certain he was educated and
lived in other Lands. 5. He was no Christian in his youth himself, nor
professed it till after he was Emperor: The sign of a Cross appearing in the
skies and his victory thereupon is said to be the means. 6. He lived long at
Rome, and Constantinople, and elsewhere before he was Baptized. And was that a
certain proof that none of those Countries were for Infant Baptism, no nor for
Baptism at Conversion neither, because Constantine was not Baptized! 7. He kept
in with the Philosophers (having one at his Table familiar with him) to hold
all parties to him. 8. And many in those times thought that all sin being
pardoned at Baptism, they must live much strictlier after they were Baptized,
and were in much more danger by their sin, and therefore would not be Baptized
till old, as Constantine when he was like to die. And now where is this man's
clear proof that the Britains were Anabaptists?

. 41. 5. Says he [Because of the Correspondency and unity that were between
the French Christians after called the Waldenses, and them -- viz. Germanus and
Lupus.]

Answ. What abundance of untruths will one man's head hold! 1. He would make the
ignorant believe that the French Churches that sent over Germanus and Lupus
were such as after were called Waldenses: When yet before he cites Perin
saying that the Waldenses were the offspring of the Novatians banished from
Rome. Beda Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. tells us briefly that the
Britains being infected with Pelagianism by Agricola the son of Severianus a
Pelagian Bishop, sent to France for help, as being unable themselves to dispute
the case. The Bishops of France in a great Synod agreed to send Germanus Bishop
of Altissiodore, and Lupus Bishop of Trecasse (brother to Vincentius
Lerinensis.) Prosper in his Chronicle tells us that Germanus was sent by Pope
Celestine by the instigation of Palladius a Deacon: Usher recites and
rejects not Baronius his conciliation, that it was done by the Pope and
French Bishops. Germanus and Lupus come over, and work miracles by the way, and
here Germanus carried a box with him of the Relics of all the Apostles and
many Martyrs ( Beda c. 18.) This he lays to the eyes of a blind maid and
cured her suddedly, which confounded the Pelagians: These Relics he buried in
St. Albanes Sepulcher; And instead of them took with him some of the dust where
St. Albanes blood had been shed, which remained red till then. And after other
miracles and a victory he returned with a prosperous navigation, says Beda c.
20. by his own Merits and St. Albanes intercession. Afterward he returned
again in a second necessity with Severus, and delivered the Britains from
Pelagianism, who yet lived in such wickedness as Beda after Gildas describes.

Here let the Reader note against Mr. Danvers dream, 1. That this was done in
429. And if Mr. D. could prove indeed that all the Bishops of France then were
Waldenses, or of the judgment so called so long after, he would do us Knights
service against the Papists in the question of the perpetual visibility of the
Church. But if I cite Mr. Danvers for it, I doubt they will laugh at me, and
make no more of his authority than I do of the Dutch Anabaptists Martyrology.

2. Note that Prosper says it was the Pope that sent Germanus.

3. Note that he was sent by the Bishops of France, who then did little differ
from Rome, but submitted to his Primacy, (and Patriarchate) in the Empire,
though reserving their liberties; Read the Epistles of Leo 1. against Hillary
Arelat. and all that story, and you will see how much the Pope usurped there
betimes.

4. Pope Celestine was the great maintainer of Augustine against Pelagius, and
so the apter to do this.

5. The Pope had before this sent Palladius to the Britains who received him:
And therefore they were then on some fair terms with him.

6. Germanus and Lupus were Bishops, and they that sent him; and so
Antichristian to some Anabaptists

7. Germanus sure was not of Mr. D's. Church, that used Relics so strangely
for working miracles? Was this an Anabaptist?

8. This was all done after Augustine had written, that no Christian thought
Infant Baptism vain: (or about that time.) And yet were all the Britains then
of another mind?

9. The Bishops of France (with Pope Celestine) took part with Augustine
against Pelagius, and sent Lupus with Germanus to do that work: And yet were
all these Bishops against Augustine, about Infant Baptism, which he says all
the Church Universal agreed in?

10. Lastly, the Britains were infected with Pelagianism; Pelagius (called
Morgan, being a Britain (and Usher says, some say born the same day with
Augustine) and Celestius a Scot or Irish man; And the Pelagians themselves were
for Infant Baptism, (And if any Christians in the world had been against it,
they would have been the likeliest, who denied Original sin: Yet even they
durst not deny this.) And is it a credible thing that all these Britains who
were some of Pelagius's mind, and some of Augustines, were yet against both in
point of Infant Baptism? Yea and not a word said of this by any writer, when
their Pelagianism made so great a stir! Yet this man gathers that the
Churches of France were Anabaptists (contrary to all history) because the
Waldenses 600 years after were Anabaptists (which is also false:) And the
Britains were Anabaptists, because the Churches of France sent two Learned men
to dispute against Pelagianism in England, (when the unlearned Britains could
not do it). Reader, will not this kind o^ arguing make thee an Anabaptist? or
else make thee pity the seduced party? O what a temptation to Popery do such
men lay before the people! When men see that every such a one that has
ignorance and pride enough to make him wise in his own eyes, shall thus pour
out falsehoods to cheat mankind, and the ignorant know not but it may all be
true, it tempts men to think that there must be some Authorized men whom the
Ignorant must believe before such seducers, or else confusion and falsehood will
take place of truth, and the people will be as children tossed up and down, and
carried to and fro with every wind of doctrine. And indeed a concordant
Ministry is so to be preferred, though it infer not a Roman infallibility.

. 42. 6. His last proof that the Britains were against Infant Baptism, is
because Augustine the Monk was himself so raw and ignorant in the rite, as to
ask, How long the Baptizing of a child might be deferred, there being no danger
of death?]

Answ. I grow ashamed that I have meddled with such a Collector: A baculo ad
angulum. Does it not rather imply that there was no controversy between him
and the Britains about Infant Baptism, seeing he never mentioned any such thing?

. 43. His next witnesses against Infant Baptism are in the fourth Century,
called by him Dadoes, Sabas, Adulphus, and Simonis who (says he in his
catalogue) oppose it. And p. 229. he says to prove it, but that they were
charged to have an ill opinion of the Sacrament of the Altar and of Infants
Baptism. And he cites Histor. Tripartita li. 7. c. 11. (and some fellow an
hundred years ago.)

Answ. And have we here any honester dealing than before? Read and judge. That
which the Tripartite History cited by him says is this, that [There was then a
Sect called Messalians or Euchetes (known in the Catalogues of Heretics) and
called The Praying Heretics) who expected the operation of some Devil thinking
him to be the Spirit of God, refusing to work and giving themselves to lie and
sleep to expect Revelations; Indeed their opinion was that Prayer was all, and
Baptism and the Lords Supper were nothing, dicentes Divinum cibum nihil nec
prodesse nec laedere; that the Sacred or Sacramental food, did neither profit
nor hurt: These men were led by one Dadoes, Sabbos, Adelphius, Hermas and
Simeon: And Adelphus when old (for they hid their opinion) bewrayed his error
in a speech to Flavian of Antioch; that Baptism does the Baptized person no
good, but prayer only expels the Devil. And 1. These men were no more
against Infant Baptism than against the adults Baptism. For they were above all
Ordinances save Prayer. 2. They were against neither as unlawful, but against
both and other ordinances as unprofitable. 3. They carried this much in secret;
which they could not have concealed had they not Baptized Infants. 4. Some
heretics, and all Infidels and Pagans were against all Baptism as well as
they: And does any of this prove that any one Christian was against Infant
Baptism more than adult?

. 44. Next he tells you that Faustus Regiensis says that Personal and actual
desire was requisite in every one that was to be Baptized (Vincent and
Cresconius I spoke to before) And he cites not a word of his writings for it,
nor any other but one Jacob Merning, I suppose a Dutch Anabaptist.

Answ. Reader, thou see still how thou art used. Faustus Rhegiensis is a
known Author; his works are common; He is commonly taken for a Semipelagian,
and he has a book to prove that souls are bodies, which Claudianus Mammertus
has answered. But I never read one syllable in him, nor in any other that ever
wrote of him or against him, that should make one doubt whether he was for
Infant Baptism. Could he be in such a station as he was, and have so many
writings, and so many adversaries, and yet hold such an opinion and never be
suspected? Do the Anabaptists no better own their cause? But the words he
alleges are but such as he cites of my own; If truly cited, no doubt spoken
only of the adult, and of what the Infants do by them. But who can answer words
not cited? Must we read all his works again to see if there be such a word, as
often as such a man will talk to us at this rate?

. 45. The next is [ Albanus a zealous godly Minister in the sixth Century was
put to death for baptizing Believers, though baptized in Infancy or by
Heretics.]

Answ. Still all alike. 1. Baronius is cited an. 413. n. 6. when in my Book
there is not a syllable of any such matter: 2. But thereabout he has the
History of the Donatists, who rebaptized all both old and young, as if our
Separatists now should tell all England, [You are all out of the true Church
which is only with us, and if you come not to us and be not baptized in our
Churches, you have no true baptism nor can be saved.] And for such rebaptizing
many were troubled. And is this a witness against Infant Baptism? Shall we not
have one true word?

. 46. His tale of Swermers he refers us for to Merning and Rulicius, or
Lulicius and Glanaus, men that I know not so well as himself, and I had rather
he had referred me to himself or Mr. Tombs.

. 47. He adds p. 231. [Nicephorus l. 17. c. 9. says that [In the year 550.
one Peter Bishop of Apamen and Zoroarus a Monk in Syria did maintain and defend
the point of dipping, rebaptization or weder-dipping.

Answ. Did Nicephorus write in Dutch? 1. Is dipping any thing to the case of
Infants? 2. Are you really for Rebaptizing; and are you justifying it? If not,
why cite you instances of Rebaptizers? Too many besides the Donatists
rebaptized others to engage them to their Sect as the only Church. 3. Do you
know the History of the Council of Calcedon and Dioscorus, and the Nestorians?
Reader, believe not this man any further than sense or great evidence
constrains thee: That which Nicephorus there says is this, [Severus of
Antioch, and Peter of Apamea, and Zooras a Monk, were found to curse the
Council of Calcedon, and to hold but one nature in Christ; praeterea
anabaptismos aliaque nefandae obscoenitatis plena facinora peragere, that is, [
and also to have practiced Rebaptizings, and other villainies full of such
obscenity that is not to be named.] If he rejoice in these Witnesses, is here a
word of Infant Baptism? When shall I come to a sentence that is true?

. 48. The next is [ Adrian Bishop of Corinth in the seventh Century did
publicly oppose Infant Baptism, insomuch as he would neither Baptize them
himself, nor suffer them to be Baptized by others, but wholly denied Baptism to
them: Wherefore he was accused by Gregory Mag. Bishop of Rome, to John Bishop
of Larissa, as appears by Gregory's Letter to the said John, in which among
others he complains against the said Adrian that he turned away children from
Baptism and let them die without it, for which they proceeded against him as a
great transgressor and blasphemer.]

Answ. Not one true Sentence in all this: 1. It Is false that Adrian publicly
opposed Infant Baptism. 2. It Is false that he was accused for it by Gregory, or
that Gregory laid any such thing to his charge: 3. Or that they so proceeded,
if my books be true. Reader, the case in Gregory's Epistles here cited is this.
Adrian was accused malevolently of many things (not by Gregory) but to Gregory:
Among others, that through him some Infants had dyed without Baptism. Gregory
writes to John Bishop of Larissa on his behalf, and says that [ no one of the
witnesses could say that he knew any such thing by him, but that they were told
so by the mothers of some children, whose Husbands had for their faults been
removed (from the Church) sed nec in baptizatos eos mortis tempus professi sunt
occupasse, sicut accusatorum continebat invidiosa suggestio, cum in Demetriade
Civitate baptizatos eos esse constiterit] that is, [ Nor did (the witnesses)
say, that they died unbaptized, as the envious suggestion of the accusers
contained; for it is manifest that they were baptized in the City Demetrias.]

1. Is here a word that he was against Infant Baptism? 2. Could a Bishop of so
great a City and Diocese have been against Infant Baptism and none to be able
to prove it, even in envious accusations? Would not every week detect it? 3.
Would Great Gregory have thus justified him, if he h^d but suspected such a
thing, above a hundred years after Austin said no one Christian thought
Infant Baptism vain? Was this great Pope an Anabaptist? 4. Is it not plain by
all this, th^^ it was but the particul^^ children of some excommunicate men's
wives, who maliciously accuse him (not for being against Infant Baptism; no nor
against their Infants baptism; but) for delaying it? It is like, to difference
them from the children of Church Members: And yet that they were afterward
baptized. See here what a witness he has brought?

. 49. The next in his Catalogue is, [Aegyptian Divines] but after in his book
before it he tells you of one Berinius an eminent learned man that professed
instruction to be necessary before baptism, and that without it baptism ought
not to be administered to high or low] and citeh Beda l. 4. c. 16.

Reader, the passage in Beda is but this, That Ceadwall having conquered the
Isle of Wight gave it to Bishop Wilfrid (no friend to Anabaptists) who gave it
his Sisters Son Bernwin appointing him a Priest called Hildila, who by his
labor among the Heathens converted and baptized two of the Kings Sons, who
were baptized and had a strange deliverance. And is there a syllable in this
story that Infant Baptism is concerned in? No nor a word of one Berinus an
eminent learned man that professed as he says, though it be nothing to the
purpose: Nor was the business done as he says in Lower Saxony but in the Isle
of Wight; so little is there that has the least kin to truth in this
lamentable Reporter.

. 50. His Testimony of Egyptian Divines he cites two late Papists for
(instead of just proof) who neither of them ever dreamed that those Egyptians
were against Infant Baptism. That the adult should be Catechized and instructed
before Baptism, all the Christian world agreed: That there were some
Monasteries of the Egyptian Monks that would not hold communion with the
Church of Rome, is known; and what a turn was made among many of the Clergy
after the Council of Chalcedon on Dioscor^s his account, whereupon a great body
of the Southern Churches cut off from Rome, and disowning them are called
Nestorians (many injuriously) to this day. And Fulgentius was dissuaded from
going to the strict Heremites and Monasticks near Egypt, because they were
separated from the Roman Communion, as you may see in Fulgentius's life. But
what is all this to Infant Baptism?

. 51. Next he tells us that in the ninth Century Hincmarus Laudunens. was
against Infant Baptism, and recites many words of Hincmarus Rhenensis to him.

Answ. The book is Bib. Pat. Suppl. To. 2. containing 55. Chapters: And if I
must read every word of such long books to try his Citations, I must spend many
months to be able to tell you that a man told you so many untruths: All that I
can find by a cursory perusal is but this, about a Village in the other Pari^h,
whom it should pay Tithes to, [ habebas imbreviatos quot Infantes sine
baptismate, and quot homines sine Communione inde obierunt, quae mihi in
publicum objicere nolles, ne postea tibi improperarem; at si alia mala de me
scires, illa etiam de me diceres.] Reader, is here a syllable against
Infant Baptism? Who was the accuser here? What is in the accusation but as in
Adrians to Greg. which plainly proves the contrary, that he was for
Infant Baptism and ordinarily used it, when the intimation was but that he had
let some Infants die without baptism and some men without Communion? Has not
many a Minister among us been so accused? And are we therefore against
Infant Baptism? Or was Hinomarus against adult Communion because envy said he
let some die without it?

. 52. Reader, the truth is I am so weary of this work, that I cannot persuade
my self to follow it any further, it is so sad and loathsome a business that is
set before us; fitter to be wept over than answered at large. I shall yet take
notice of what he says of the Waldenses, and to that further say, 1. That I
have elsewhere vindicated them already from this slander. 2. That so do many of
their bitter adversaries, in laying no such thing to their charge. Among whom
to what is said elsewhere, I add but the Testimony of Nauclerus a Popish bitter
enemy to them, who Vol. 2. part 2. page 265. recites their Doctrine as being
agreeable with the body of Doctrine held in the Reformed Churches, never
mentioning any denial of Infant Baptism, but only that they affirmed Water to
be sufficient without Oil.

AND now as to our Testimonies for the Common practice of Infant Baptism from
the days of the Apostles, I will not abuse the Reader by reciting again the
testimonies long ago recited. Let him but consider what I have there said out
of Justin, Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Nazianzene, Augustine and
others, and I leave the matter to his Judgment.

. 53. And further where they feign Nazianzen to be indifferent I will add but
these words out of his Orat. 40. vol. 1. p. 648. Ed. Morel. [(...) -- [Hast
thou an Infant? Let not naughtiness surprise him first, [Let him be sanctified
from his Infancy: Let him be consecrated to the spirit from his Infancy: But
do thou fear the seal because of the weakness of his nature? How weak a
minded mother art thou, and of how little faith? But Hannah, etc. Thou have no
need of Amulets and Enchantments Which the Heathens used to Children.
with which the wicked one creeps into the minds of vain men, stealing to
himself the veneration due to God: Give him the Trinity, that great and
excellent [Amulet.]

That all this is spoken of Baptism is past all doubt: Yet Nazianzen in some
cases admits of delay till three years old: But took baptism to be so
necessary for Infants, that he thought that if any though by surprise and not
the Parents contempt should die unbaptized, they should not go to Heaven (or
be Rewarded) though he thought they should not go to Hell or be punished: Ib.
Orat. 40. His opinion therefore for delay three years in case of safety
consisted with too much apprehension of its necessity even to Infants.

. 54. When I read his language of holy Cyprian, I confess the apparition of so
frightful a spirit, does affright me from his doctrine. First, The man (with
greater audaciousness than the Papists use the Fathers,) does first attempt
against all consent of antiquity, and without any proof, to question the truth
of the sentence of Cyprian and the Carthage Council to Fidus.

Secondly, And what could he say more to betray the Prot^stant Cause to the
Papists, than as after [ Either Cyprian had been vilely Ruffined, or that he
himself was a notable Factor for Antichrist, and that in him the mystery of
iniquity did very strongly work.]

The man it seems had never read Jeremy Stephens his Edition of Cyprian de
unit. Eccl. and how those few words of Peter and the Church of Rome were added
by Corrupters (though he is willing to believe in the general that his writings
were corrupted) But we have certain Copies at least of so much of them, as
confute his Cause. I remember our great Antiquary Bishop Usher told me that it
was Tertullian and Cyprian that he took for the Chief Records of Church
Antiquities, next a few small things which give little information of matters
of fact. And some of the things that this man so starteth at, Cyprian held, and
as Epiphanius says, All the Christian Churches: And must he then be a Factor
for Antichrist? Who then is this Man a Factor for? Mark, Reader, whether it be
any wonder if I be abominable and Antichristian to him, when Cyprian and the
sixty six Bishops with him must come under (hypothetically) that suspicion. 1.
That Cyprian who was so holy and wise a man; 2. That lived before Antichrist
was born; 3. That died a Martyr for Christ; 4. Who is so great a part of the
pure antiquity; that if you cast him away, what will the rest be for a great
time? 5. That Cyprian who is called by some the first Anabaptist, because he
was for rebaptizing those baptized by Heretics; 6. That Cyprian who so stiffly
opposed the Bishop of Rome (though himself was in the error;) 7. That Cyprian
whom the Donatists boasted of as their predecessor in rebaptizing, and Austin
was put to answer (though with his honor;) 8. That Cyprian who lived before
any Christian Emperor, when strict discipline upheld religion without and
against the Magistrates sword; and who wrote so many of his Epistles only for
the rigor of Church Discipline? O wh^t pleasure is this to Papists? If we be
but such Antichristians say they, as holy Cyprian and the primitive Churches
were, we will prefer it before the Anabaptists Christianity?

. 55. And if Cyprian was Antichristian, where then was the Church of Christ? It
will be hard to answer Papist or Seeker about its visibility, or Infidel about
its reality: And what a King do they make Christ that make him to have no
Kingdom, that they can prove to have been existent --

. 56. We will easily grant him that Cyprian de unit. Eccl. is abused by the
Papists, and the very words thrust in are proved so to be by many Copies that
have them not: Yea, Jeremy Stephens says that there are eight Copies in
England which omit twenty three of the Epistles which are commonly received
(and it is most credible by other Copies are Genuine:) And yet none of these
leave out the Epistle to Fidus about Infant Baptism.

. 57. And whereas he says that Cyprian urged not Tradition, I answer, there
was no cause: For the question was not whether Infants should be baptized; much
less whether they were to be dedicated in Covenant to God, and to be
Church Members; but only whether they should be baptized before the eighth day:
For Fidus thought that at one two or three days old they were so unclean as
made them unmeet for baptism, and that the eighth day was the time of their
purification; which Cyprian and the sixty six Bishops confuted, and showed that
Gods mercy accepts them from the beginning without respect to legal days. And
what use was here for a plea from Tradition for Infant Baptism, which was not
denied?

. 58. And it seems to me to be a great evidence that the Tradition of the
Church was then for it, in that this Council of Bishops (before true Popery was
born) so unanimously determine of the day or time, and not one of them, no nor
Fidus himself that raised the doubt, did so much as raise any scruple or
question about Infant Baptism it self at all: which sure they would have done
on such an occasion if any or many Christians, or any Churches had denied it.
No wonder therefore if Augustine so long after say that no Christian takes it
to be in vain?

. 59. Yet again I will confess, that the words of Tertullian and Nazianzen,
show that it was long before all were agreed of the very time, or of the
necessity of baptizing Infants before any use of Reason, in case they were like
to live to maturity: For I am persuaded that the Apostles and first Ministers
were so taken up with the Converting of Infidels (Jews and Gentiles) that the
case of Infant Baptism was so postponed and taken but as an Appendix to the
baptism of the adult, as that it was thought less needful to give it a
particular express mention in the Records and History of the Church. The
Churches made no question of Infants Church Membership, as being undoubtedly in
the promise, and devoted to God by all faithful parents: And they took not
baptism at first, for their first Covenanting or Consent, but for the
solemnization of it; and so not for Infants first real state of relation to
Christ and right to life (which was before it, as it was to believers before
baptism;) but for the solemn investiture in those rights: And so Greg. Nazian.
Or. 40. gives this brief definition of baptism, that it is nothing else but a
Covenant made with God for a new and purer kind of life: And hereupon many who
thought Infants Church Members (visible) and safe upon their Parents Covenant
consent, thought that the time of solemnization was so far left to prudence as
that (as the Israelites did Circumcision in the wilderness) it might be delayed
a few years by such Parents as desired it, till children could somewhat answer
for themselves.

. 60. Yet after my review of this controversy upon their urgencie, I find no
proof brought by any of these men, that ever one Church in the world was
without Infant-members, (that had Infants,) nor one person in the Church
against Infant Church Membership and baptism, from Christ's days till the
Waldenses (about eleven hundred or a thousand years) except that Tertullian,
who took them for Innocent and therefore Church Members, did in some case
advise the delay: I say, I find not one Christian or Heretic against it:
(unless you will impute it to them that were against all baptism, which
Infidels also are.) And though I verily believe that the Waldenses were not
against Infant Baptism, nor is there full proof that any in their time were,
yet because I am loath to judge the Papists utterly impudent liars, I think it
most probable that in the Waldenses days and Country, there was a sort of
odious Heretics, that denied Infant Baptism, and the Resurrection, and held
community of Wives and other abominations reported all together by their
opposers in those times.

CHAP. V. Mr. Danvers's great Calumny of my self refuted.
. 1. MR. D. page 134. Ed. 1. says thus [ Yet is not Mr. Baxter ashamed to fix
such an abominable slander upon the Baptists of this our age of baptizing
naked: (which it seems was so long the real practice of the paedobaptists) and
about which he spends three whole pages to aggravate the heynousness of their
custom (which he is pleased to father on them.) And though I am persuaded he
cannot but be convinced that the thing is most notoriously false, and brought
forth by him rather out of prejudice (not to say malice) rather than any proof
or good testimony he ever received thereof; yet have I never heard that he has
done himself, his injured neighbors and the abused world that right as to own
his great weakness and sinful shortness therein, in any of the many Editions of
that piece, which I humbly conceive as well deserved a recantation as some
other things he has judged worthy thereof.]

. 2. Answ. To live and die impenitently in so unprofitable a sin (and
unpleasing to any but diabolical natures) as is the belying of others, is a
very dreadful kind of folly. I would heartily wish that Mr. Danvers and I might
meet and help to bring each other to repentance, by a willing impartial
examination of each of our guiltinesses herein.

. 3. I never look to speak to them thus more, nor long to any man on earth, and
in this station and with these thoughts I must profess (not thinking it lawful
to belie my self) that in the year 1647. or 1648. or both when Anabaptistry
began suddenly to be obtruded with more successful fervency than before, I
lived near Mr. Tombs in a Country where some were, and within the hearing of
their practice in other parts of the land: And that in that beginning the
common frame of Ministers and people was, that in diverse places some baptized
naked and some did not: And that I never to my best remembrance heard man or
woman contradict that report till this man did it in this writing: And that no
Anabaptist contradicted it to me that I then or since conversed with: And that
thereupon in 1659. I wrote against both sorts, those that baptized naked, and
those that did not: And after all this when Mr. Tombs answered my book and
those very passages, he never denied the truth of the thing (though he did not
so baptize himself (unless he have any where else since said any thing of it
which I never saw or heard of.) And I appeal to impartial reason, whether he
would not then at the time have denied it, had it been deniable: And whether
this man now twenty five or six years after be fitter to be believed in a
matter of fact, than common consent at the present time? And whether it be
lawful for me to take all sorts then living for liars, rather than this one man
that has written us such a book? and who in a negative 25 years after cannot
possibly be a competent witness, no nor if he had written at that time: For who
can say that there was or is no such thing done beyond his knowledge?

. 4. But if Mr. D. would persuade the world either that I wrote that of all the
Anabaptists, or of most, or of any in any other age, or that I have since said
that any continue the same practice, he would but deceive men: for it is
nothing so.

. 5. I must confess I did not see the persons baptized naked, nor do I take it
to be lawful to defame any upon doubtful reports: But when it is a fame common
and not denied by themselves either Ministers or people at the time, I think it
is to be taken so much notice of, as the confuting of the evil does require.

. 6. I know not by sight that there is ever a Fornicator, Adulterer, Murderer
or Thief (as I remember) in England: And yet if I neither Write nor Preach to
call such to repentance, lest I be a Slanderer in saying that there are any
such, I think it would be foolish uncharitable Charity, and unrighteous justice.

. 7. Most Sects do in their height and heat at first do that which afterward
they surcease with shame: The Donatist Circumcellians continued not
self-murder; the Anabaptists held not on to do as they did at Munster, or in
the time of David George: Our Ranters continued not open swearing and whoredom
long: The fame of England which I never heard gainsayed is that the Quakers at
first did shake and vomit and infect others strangely: And is he a liar that
says it, because they do not so now? I was at Worcester my self when at the
Assizes one of them went naked (as a Prophet) before our eyes through the high
street, and they said they did so in many other places: I know not the man's
name now, nor any of the multitude of Spectators, if after twenty years and
more I were called to prove it. I know by uncontrolled fame that Mistress Susan
Pierson solemnly undertook to raise the dead (taking up a dead Quaker at
Claines and commanding him (in vain) to live.) But if now after more than
twenty years my witnesses were called for, I must travel to the place before I
could produce them.

. 8. Yea, I never saw any Anabaptist rebaptize (or baptize the aged:) But fame
says they do so and none deny it. If it prove false, I shall be glad, and will
join in vindicating them; And so I say of the present case; And will heartily
join with any in reforming backbiting, and rash ungrounded defamations of
others.

CHAP. VI. Of Mr. Danvers's frequent Citations of my Words.
. 1. WHen I read Mr. Tombs his twenty Citations of me as against my self,
which Mr. D. provokes me to answer, and when I find Mr. D. so often imitating
them, and alleging my words, as justifying his cause, I have no conviction on
my mind that it is lawful for me to wast my time and the Readers, about a
particular vindication of my words, so triflingly and vainly used by them.

. 2. Either it is the authority of the Writer which they suppose will serve
them, or the force of the arguments; or else it is only to make the Reader
believe that the Writer is so foolish as not to know when he contradicts
himself. The first I may well presume it is not: If it were, the same persons
authority would be as much more against them as his judgment is. If it be the
second, why do they use any arguments of mine, when they are able to form such
of their own as seem much more useful to them than any that I can give them?
And why then do they not insist only on the Argument and neglect the Author?
But seeing I must believe that the last is their business, I can have leisure
to say little more than this to them, that it is not my business to prove my
self no fool but to prove Infants Church Members; nor will it make me smart if
all of their mind in England so judge of me; But yet I am not so foolish but
that I know my own mind better than they do, and can reconcile my words when
they cannot. If this satisfy not them, it satisfies me.

. 3. In sum, the words of mine which they allege against my self need but
these two things to be said for them against such silly cavils: 1. That most of
them speak to the Question [ What is the kind of Covenant consent required in
baptism? Whether a mere dogmatical faith professed? Or the profession of a
saving faith? as to the matter believed and the sincerity of the belief and
consent?] And I prove that it is no other sort of faith, but a true saving
faith as to object and act which is required and accepted of God the searcher
of hearts, as the Condition of his Covenant: And that it is not the Profession
of any lower sort of faith (as to object or act) but of this saving faith,
which the Church must accept to the admission of members: A lower profession
will serve for none. 2. But I still maintain (and I think fully proved) that
God so far takes the child as if he were a part of the Parent (nature and
grace having committed him to his will and disposal for his good till he have a
will to choose for himself) as that by this sort of faith and consent the
Parent is to enter his Child into Covenant with God as well as himself, and
that in Gods acceptance the Child does thus truly consent by the believing
Parent, and does Covenant with God, as a child Covenanteth and consents
reputatively among men, who by his Parents is made a Party in a Contract, as in
a lease for his life, or the like. Not that in sensu physico the person of the
Child being the same with the Parents does consent in his consent; but that the
Parent having the treble interest in the Child, of an Owner, a Governor and a
Lover, God by Nature and Grace conjunctly allows and requires the Parent to
dedicate the Child to God, and to consent that he shall be a member of Christ
and his Church according to his capacity, and by that Covenanting consent to
oblige the Child to live as a Christian when he comes to age: And this shall
be as acceptable to the Child's Covenant Relation and rights, as if he had done
it himself; and in this sense may be said reputatively to have consented or
Covenanted by his Parents, which in proper speech, is, They did it for him at
Gods Command.

. 4. He that is not satisfied with this General Answer, let him either peruse
the words themselves in my Writings, with those before and after that explain
them, or else if he will do as this man does, abuse his own understanding and
his ignorant Readers, by such silly wranglings animated by partiality, let him
bear the Consequents, and know that I have somewhat else to do with my few
remaining hours, than to write books on such insufficient invitations and
expectations.

CHAP. VII. Of Mr. Danvers's many other accusations of me.
. 1. IT was one of the old Characters of the Heretics in the Apostles days,
To speak evil of the things that they understood not.

And that may well be their Character in which they contradict the three great
constitutive parts of Christianity, and all Religion, and true honesty, viz.
TRUTH, HUMILITY and LOVE, by Falsehood, Pride and Malignity, (called commonly
Vncharitablness.)

. 2. The Root of this is, when Reigning, an unsanctified heart in which these
vices remain unmortified, covered from the owners knowledge, by a form of
Godliness, and especially a zeal for the ways of some Party, more honored in
the persons eyes for wisdom, or piety than others: In others there is a great
measure of the same vices mixed with true Grace, where an evil and a good cause
are conjoined as to some effects: They love God and his Truth, and they hate
all that they think against him, they would promote piety in the world, and
repress what they think against it; And being persons whose wits and studies
were not such, as exactness and largeness of knowledge do require, but yet
lovers of knowledge, truth, and Scripture, they have more knowledge than
profane sots, but little, alas, little, in comparison of that which is
necessary to a methodical, accurate understanding of the matters which
frequently fall under controversy; And so knowing but little they know not
what they are ignorant of, nor what others know beyond them; And it being the
common vice of man's understanding, to be hasty in judgeing before they hear or
know one half that is necessary to a true and faithful judgment, and so to be
confident before they understand, these men hereby are led to confidence in
many an error: And an erring judgment first tells them that Truth is
falsehood, and falsehood truth, that Good is evil, and evil good, that Duty is
sin, and sin is duty; and then a good cause and a bad, the Love of Truth and a
perverse and partial zeal concur, to put them on in the way of error. Ignorance
and error set them on a wrong cause, and a mixed affection or zeal, partly good
and partly evil spurreth them on. And in these the Error and Heresy and
consequent sins, are no more predominant than the cause; and God will have
mercy on those that in ignorance, with good meanings, oppose many truths, and
do much evil.

. 3. And the great means of nourishing this sin in Churches is departing from
Christ's Church order, who has appointed Teaching and Learning to be the settled
way of getting knowledge; And therefore required all his disciples to come to
his Church, as little children to School, with teachable humble minds, to
Learn, and not with proud wrangling minds to dispute: If all our children
should spend their time at School in disputing with the Teacher and setting
their wits against his as in a conflict, what would they thus Learn?

. 4. Therefore Paul says, that the servant of the Lord must not strive, and
often calls men from perverse disputings, and striving about words which
subvert the hearers, and from such contendings as edify not but tend to more
ungodliness, (though the faith may be contended for, and truth defended, when
opposition makes it truly necessary).

. 5. When a man seeks after knowledge as a Learner, he meets it with a
willing mind; he comes toward it with an appetite, and so is a capable
receiver: But when a man comes as a disputant, he is engaged already to one
side, and if that be false he comes out to fight against the truth, with a
spirit of opposition, hating truth as error, and good as evil, and thinks it
his duty and interest to destroy and shame it if he can, and therefore is unapt
to think what may be said for it, but studyeth all that he can against it. And
is this loathing, and opposition and fighting against truth the way to know it?

. 6. Therefore that which has undone the Churches peace is, that too many
Teachers, being themselves too forward to controversies, have too hastily drawn
in their people into their quarrels, and cast such bones before them in books
and pulpits instead of food, which break their teeth and set them together by
the ears instead of nourishing them. And so one man's hearers are taught to
dispute for this sort of Government, and another for that sort; one man's for
free will and another against it; when perhaps neither they nor the master of
the quarrel can tell you what it is? and so of an hundred more such like. The
honest hearers when they should be digesting the ancient Christian doctrine,
and learning to increase in Love to God and man, and to practice a holy and a
heavenly life, and prepare for a comfortable death, and happy eternity by a
Living faith and hope, are taught that if they be not zealots for this opinion
or that, for Anabaptistry, for separation, etc. if they pray by a book, or if
they join with those that hold such things as they hear called by odious
frightful names, they are not then right zealous Christians, but corrupt or
complyers or lukewarm; And thus each Church is made a miserable
Church-militant, and trained up to war against each other.

. 7. And this Ministers have done, partly to strengthen themselves by the
consent and number of their adherents, as the Captain must conquer by his
Soldiers: When they can set a great number on hating their adversaries, and
backbiting them, and telling the hearers wherever they come, to make them seem
odious, how erroneous and bad such and such men are, they think they have done
much of their work? And while they think it is for Christ, they know not how
notably they please and serve the Devil. But I must remember that I have spoken
of this elsewhere, and so dismiss it.

. 8. That Mr. Danvers and his imitaters speak evil (confidently and vehemently)
of the things they know not (yea very many such) I am sure. But from what
principle or root, or how far that vice which produces these fruits is
mortified or unmortified as to all others, I am neither called nor willing to
judge. I remember how Mr. Tho. Pierce once dealt with me: When my Religious
neighbor could hardly be persuaded to communicate with those among them that
were of his judgment, saying, they were men that would swear and lie, and
lived scandalously, I thought it my duty (to keep up discipline and yet) to
moderate their censures by telling them what sins I thought might stand with
some measure of sincere piety, and Church Communion. And what does he but hence
take advantage to tell the world how loose my doctrine was, and what sinful
persons I thought had grace? So now if I should say, that notwithstanding these
hard-faced falsehoods heaped together, and confidently obtruded on the ignorant,
even about public and visible matter of fact, yet I hope the Au^hor fears
God truly in other respects, and erreth through Ignorance, passion, and
temerity; I should be told publicly ere long by one or other, that I think the
most brazen-faced Liars may be Saints: And if I deny such men's Goodness, I look
to be told that I am censorious and a reviler of godly men that differ from me.
Therefore I am thankful to Christ that he not only excuses us from so hard a
work as the Judging of the sincerity of others, but calls us off, and says,
who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own master he stands or
falls: But whoever censure me for it, I will say that my judgment still
inclines to the hopeful and charitable part! For siding and error may draw
good men into heinous sins.

. 9. That He and I do differ in Judgment and Practice, is not to be denied: I
thought our difference had been but in so small and tolerable things (till I
saw worse in his writings) as should neither abate Love or forbid Communion:
And thinking so, I was the likelier to practice as I thought, and not to hate
him and such as he: But I perceive he takes the differences to be far greater,
and my errors and sins to be more heinous and intolerable, and therefore if he
hate me (though I know not that ever he saw me or I him) it is no wonder, it
being more agreeable to his judgment; And also if he would not tolerate me
were it in his power.

. 10. If he so greatly differ from me, and be in the right, certainly it is
because he is either a great deal wiser and more knowing in these matters, or
because he is more conscionable to avoid perverting temptations, and more Godly
and fit for divine light. I deny not either: but from the bottom of my heart
tell him, that I am so deeply conscious of the darkness and smalness of my
understanding, and my little goodness and very ill deserts from God, that did
he bring me any considerable evidence for his cause, my great suspicion of my
self would prepare me to hear him: But it must not be such stuff as he here
obtrudeth on us. And I must tell him, though I acknowledge God to be a free
Benefactor, and may give the Greatest Knowledge to them that have least
labored for it; yet while diligent searching is his commanded means, I shall
doubt whether his easier and shorter search has attained to so much more than
my harder and longer, till the fruit shall prove it.

. 11. He tells us Ed. 2. p. 170. that I [cannot do my self more right and my
offended brethren, than to clear my self in these particulars which are indeed
so heinous, not only to every one of his Nonconforming brethren, but to most
Protestants that hear them.]

Answ. 1. Still such untruths? Do you know what most Protestants think that
hear them? and every one of my Nonconforming brethren? Why some of the wisest
of them that I know did read them over, and approved them before they were
printed? Others (many and many) of the most judicious also of my acquaintance
have since professed their consent: Nay more; I remember not one Minister that
has made me know by word or writing to me that he dissenteth from any one of
all these heinous things. I remember that once some objected what they heard
others say (not as consenting to the opposers) and acquiesced in my answers, or
rather in the words of the book perused. So that if every one of my
Nonconforming brethren be offended, and I known not of one, nor any one of them
would ever vouchsafe a word or line to convince me, you censure them for woeful
dissemblers or uncharitable. But I believe them of themselves rather than you.

. 12. He adds, And I dare be bold to say, has given more general offense,
and lost Mr. Baxter more amongst his Friends Not so much as Mr. Tombs is among
the Anabaptists for writing for Parish Communion.
, than any thing he did in all his life.]

Answ. 1. The offense which Christ dreadfully condemns, which is scandalizing
the weak or laying snares or stumbling blocks before them, to tempt them to
think ill of Christ, or Godliness, or to commit any sin, I would avoid as
carefully as I can, And to avoid it I have written that which offends you.
But the offense which is but Displeasing dissenters, yea mistaking men, I
little regard on my own account. And your talk of my loss (or being lost) does
savor so rankly of a humane hypocritical temptation, as makes me remember
what Christ said to Peter Math. 16.23. that would have had him save himself
from suffering, though I will not speak out such unpleasing words to you: But
your words savor too much of the flesh. O Sir, it is but a few moments more,
and you and I shall be in a world, where the thoughts and words of mortals, of
us, will be of small importance to us! And themselves are hasting to the day
when all their thoughts perish. O cease from man whose breath is in his
nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of? Would you tempt me to look to
the hypocrites reward? the approbation of man? O miserable reward* Were not
that book odious to you, I would refer you for my Reasons to the two Chapters
of Man-pleasing and Pride: If Gods approbation seem not enough for us, why call
we him our God?

But if I have lost so much as you intimate, you would persuade me that my
service is more than I take it to be? I have felt little comfort in any service
of God which cost me nothing. But you shall not tempt me to overvalue it so
much; I find no loss at all by it. What have I lost Sir? Not one farthing or
farthings-worth, that I am aware of! As I lived not on any man before, so I am
never the poorer for that duty now. Is it men's praise or good thoughts of me?
Not one friend to my remembrance in the City or Land has once told me his
dissent, much less that I have lost his good esteem: (Only one young man that
heard me Preach came for satisfaction about one of the particulars, who was
satisfied as far as I could perceive, and I wished him but to read over all in
my book (about that you object concerning the Crucifix) and I heard of him no
more.) And if I am so much lost with my friends, and no one of them in England
tell me that he dissenteth, and wherein, such friends are not so valuable as to
be any of my felicity! And do you call a man [ lost] that loses the thoughts
or the breath of man? As it is their own duty or sin, I regard all men's
thoughts or words, and so would please all men for their good to edification:
But as to my own comfort I can spare yours and theirs; and if you and a
thousand such should write a Cart-load of Calumnies as you have done, I think
they would break but little of my sleep. Set these arguments next before
hypocrites that live on man: I live not on them.

But your words do mind me, how men that are embodyed in little parties, (far
less than the Donatists or Novatians) are inclined to take their Cabin for all
the Kingdom, and their Sect for the Church, and are affected with their praise
or dispraise almost as if they were all the world. You hear your folks it seems
talk against me (with whom backbiting is a duty) and you seem to dream that it
is all my friends. If God in Christ will be my friend, I can spare others.

And tell me Sir, for what prize or gain do you think I am lost with all my
friends? No man in his wits will voluntarily be lost for nothing. Do you think
it is to get other friends that I more value? Who be they? Is it the Papists?
Enquire what I get by them. Is it the Diocesan. party? What have I got by them
but silencing and the loss of all Ministerial maintenance, these twelve years?
And ask them whose writings have more offended them yours or mine.

If I am lost, it has ^ost me more years hard study to be lost, and to be
erroneous or a fool, than it has done you to be some body and to be wise; And
I tell you I never yet repented of Cost or loss for that Truth and duty, which
you lament as heinous error and sin. But naked truth, and the faithful
endeavors of pleasing God, in promoting that Love among Christ's disciples, and
peace in his Churches which Church Tyrants and Sects have so many ages labored
(too succesfully) to destroy, are sweeter than to be forsaken either through
the persecution of one sort or the Revilings of the other, or the loss of all
men's friendship upon earth.

And yet I will add, that though being long ago glutted with men's applause, as
finding it a luscious but unwholesome thing, and having voluntarily cast up
much of it my self, I yet perceive no want of friends, but take your words of
them for mere slanders.

. 13. Says Mr. D. (Pref. ed. 1.) [He has so much abounded (in contradictions)
(none more that I know of;) being as you will find, sometime a great opposer, then
a great defender of Episcopacy.]

Answ. 1. Yet I know not that ever this man saw me (as I said) or I him. 2.
This falsehood did unhappily overslip him, my writing being so full a
confutation of it, that he can have nothing of sense to say to cloak it. My
judgment was for Episcopacy 1639. by Reading Bishop Downame and some others:
But in 1640. the oath called Et caetera calling us to swear never to consent to
the alteration of the present Government by A. Bishops, Bishops, Deans,
Archdeacons, etc. forced me to study the whole cause to the bottom, since which
time my judgment of Episcopacy never altered (which is 34 years ago) having
settled in the Receptibility of one sort of Episcopacy, and the desirableness of
another, and the dislike of another sort: All which I have fully published in
my Dispute of Church Government 1658. when the Bishops here were at the lowest.
Either this man knew me and my writings herein, or not. If not, what a man is
this that dare talk thus confidently and falsely of what he knew not? If he did,
then how much more flagitious is his practice, thus to tell the world an
untruth so notorious to himself? He says (as you may find) but never tells you
where. Let him tell you where and when I ever defended that Episcopacy which I
had opposed?

. 14. [Mr. D. [Sometime for Nonconformity (in whose tents he has seemed to
shelter himself in the storm, and with their Indulgence to come forth of his
hole) and yet at length so highly to disgrace the same.

Answ. 1. Let him show you if he can, where or when I have changed my judgment
about Conformity, or expressed a change since 1640? Not that I take it for a
disgrace to be mutable by growing wiser: But necessity forced me so long ago to
study those controversies so hard, as fixed me, and I never heard any thing
since which considerably altered me therein: Which also being visible in the
foresaid Dispute of Liturgy, Ceremonies, etc. written 1658. leave no cloak for
this man's calumnies. See there whether I said not more for so much of
Episcopacy, Liturgy and Ceremonies which I took to be lawful, than ever I have
done since Bishops returned?

2. But what does he mean by [ sheltering my self in a storm in their tents]? I
cannot imagine what, unless sense and truth at once forsook him! When a storm
fell on the Nonconformists, were their tents a likely place for shelter? Had
not the Conformists tents been likelier? Did the Nonconformists shelter me?
From what, and how?

3. And what hole was it that I came out of, with their Indulgence? Are such
men as this the Vindicators of Gods Truth against the Christian world, that
pour out untruths at such a rate, in despite of the most public notoriety of
fact? Do I need to tell the Reader (only for the sake of youths and
foreigners) that when the Nonconformists cause was at the bar, when speaking
had any room and hope, they set me in their forlorn, and engaged me (with my
Conscience and desire to have prevented that which I foresaw) in the tasks of
writing and speaking which would most exasperate and offend the Bishops; till I
was I think the first among them that was forbidden to Preach. I continued
after that in London a year, where I never had place or flock, but was a
stranger: sickness then forced me to remove into the Country. The Tents I was
sheltered in, were Gods protection in my own habitation; which if a hole I
thought good enough for me. I Preached to such as would hear me, till, being
near the Church door, and the people numerous, Clergie-envy caused me to be
sent to the common Gaol, among malefactors; As soon as I was out, another
warrant was put into the Officers hands to apprehend me again, and send me to
Newgate for six months; Upon which I removed my dwelling to the next Village
out of the County: I refused none there that desired to hear me, of my
Neighbors. The writings which he revileth, show that I lived not idle; And I
think he could wish I had done less and spoken to fewer. I came not out of that
hole of many months after the Indulgence was granted: I stayed on reasons of
Self-denial, because I would fore-stall no London Ministers, nor hinder their
Auditories, and therefore resolved to stay till they were settled: I came on
terms of far greater Self-denial, to the great abatement of my health, (to say
nothing of my greater cost,) which now has again forced me at present to
retire. You see now at what rate these men inform the world, and how far they
are to be believed.

As for his talk of [ Disgracing the Nonconformists] it is true in two senses.
1. As he and I disgrace Christianity by being so ignorant and bad: 2. Or if he
mean not My own Nonconformity but his, (even his Nonconformity to a great deal
of truth and Christian duty and common honesty (by concatenated falsehoods), I
have done my part (when constrained) to disgrace it.

. 15. [ Sometime a friend to Calvin, and then a greater to Arminius] says he.

Answ. 1. Did he tell the Reader where by one (in any words) I contradict the
other? 2. But see the misery of a Sectarian spirit, that takes it for a
contradiction to be a friend to Calvin and Arminius both? He would as this
infers, take it ill to be thought a friend to Anabaptists and Paedobaptists
both, to Independents and Presbyterians and Episcopal too. But that is to such
as I, the greatest duty, which to him is a shameful contradiction: When I think
none Christians but Anabaptists, I will be a friend to no other as such: Men of
so little a Church, must have answerably little Love: Censoriousness is a
friend but unto few. 3. But by this your friendship seems narrower than I
thought it: I thought it had extended to all the Anabaptists But they are
divided into [ Free-willers] and [ Free-gracers] as they call them, that is,
into Calvinists and Arminians: and are you a friend but unto one part of them?
4. But indeed Sir, the Controversies intended by you under these names, are not
such as a man of my poor measure can fix his judgment in every young, and
promise that it shall never change, nor that I can take it for a shame to grow
any wiser in them, than heretofore, though perhaps your judgment changed not
from your Childhood. And I hope (if what I have written may be published) to
make it appear that such as you that speak evil of what you understand not, are
the grievous enemies of the Churches of Christ, as to Truth, Holiness, and
Peace, by your militant noise about Calvinism, and Arminianism,, stirring up
contentions, and destroying Love, by making differences seem greater than they
are; and laying the Churches Concord and Communion and men's salvation upon such
questions, as Whether the house should be built of Wood or Timber? And is not
this worthy of your zeal?

. 16. He adds [Sometimes a great Defender of the Parliament and their Cause,
and then none more to renounce them and betraytor them for their pains.]

Answ. 1. Was there never but One Parliament and One Cause? Perhaps you mean
that the Parliament called 1640 and the Rump (as called) and the Armies Little
Parliament, and Oliver, and the Army Council and all the rest of the Sovereigns
were all One Parliament? Or that to swear to the first Parliament, or fight for
them, and to shut out and imprison them, and to dissolve them, as Usurpers, and
to set up one chosen by -- who knows whom -- and to set up Oliver and his Son,
and to pull him down again, and to set up the Rump again, and to pull them down
and set up a Council of State, etc. were all one Cause; And that one day it was
Treason not to be for one Sovereign, and another day not to be against that,
and for another. Your Army did not betraytor them, when they forced out one
part as Traitors first, and thrust out the major part, after imprisoning and
reproaching many worthy wise and religious men, and when they pulled down all
the rest at last? Had you or I more hand in these matters? Whether you know
your self I know not, but I am sure you know not me, nor what you talk of.

. 17. It follows [ Sometimes a great Opposer of Tradition, and anon a great
defender thereof.]

Answ. 1. If you take Tradition equivocally, you calumniate but by
equivocation; but if [ thereof] mean [ the same Tradition] your falsehood has
not the cloak of an equivocation. Prove what you say by any words of mine? It
is between twenty and thirty years I think since I largely opened my judgment
of Tradition, in the Preface to the second edition of my book called the Saints
Rest, which I never changed since. If you will deny that your Father delivered
you the Bible (or any other) or that the Church has used both Bible and
Baptism from the Apostles days till now, Let the reproach of such Tradition be
your glory, if you will; It shall be none of mine. But do you write a book to
prove the Tradition of Adult Baptism from Christ's time to ours, and when you
have done renounce and scorn it? See Reader, how he valueth his own work?

. 18. He adds [Sometimes a violent impugner of Popery, and yet at last who
has spoken more in favor of it?]

Answ. Here again if by [ Popery] and [ it] you mean the same thing, You hold
on the same course: Prove it true, and take the honor of once writing a true
accusation. I have not hid my judgment about Popery, having written about
seven or eight books against it in above twenty years time, by which you may
see in comparing them whether I changed my judgment. If you cannot, refuse not
to blush.

But I was and am a defender of that which is Popery and Antichristianity with
you, the Church Membership, Covenant Interest and Baptism of Infants, and it is
like many more parcels of the Treasures of Christ, which you zealously rob him
off, and give to Antichrist; As too many Sectaries do, the greatest part (I
doubt more than nine parts of ten) of his Kingdom or Church universal: And as
Divines use to prove that carnal minds are enemies and haters of God, because
they confess, honor and worship him both in Name, and in respect of many of
his Attributes and relations and works, yet in respect of others they are
averse to him; so I would be a monitor to you, and such like Sectaries, to take
heed of going much further, lest before you know what you do, while you honor
Christ's name, and cry up some of his Grace, and doctrines, you should really
hate, oppugn and blaspheme him, and take Christ himself for Antichrist, and his
Churches and servants for Antichristian. If you will take him for Antichrist
that takes Infants into the visible Church, I think it will prove to be Christ
himself.

. 19. Reader, How big a volume would thou have me write in answering such
stuff as this? Tears are fitter than Ink, for such fearless, rash, continued,
visible falsehoods, to be deliberately published to the world as truths, by one
that calls himself a man, and a Christian, and seems zealous to new
Christen most of the Christian world. Unless I should tire my self and thee. I
must stop, and cease this noisome work: Only one charge more which runs through
much of his book, I will answer, because it concerns the cause it self.

. 20. He often tells you that when I have called my book [ Plain Scripture proof]
I yet there and after contradict my self, by saying that the controversy is
difficult] and by saying that in the ancient Churches men were left at liberty
to Baptize their children when they would.

And 1. His very words prove that this is no contradiction: For these very
words I will make plain to a boy of ten years old, and yet the world must know
in print that he is not able to understand them, and that this is worthy the
consideration of his proselytes. 2. My meaning I opened long ago, which he
concealeth: The Proofs of Infants Church Membership are Plain: the proof
therefore of their right to Baptism is plain though not in the same degree? but
there are objections of difficulty which may be brought against it, which every
weak Christian (nor Minister neither) cannot answer. And the hardest is that
which is little taken notice of by themselves, but I (impartially) opened in my
Christian Directory. And is it a contradiction to say that a doctrine that has
Plain Proof, may be assaulted by difficult ob^ections? And yet such as a sober
Christian should not be changed by, unless on the same reasons he will forsake
all Christianity, and his everlasting hopes: For I take the doctrine of the
Souls Immortality to be such as may be Plainly proved: But truly I take it to
be five degrees above the ability of this Writer, to answer solidly all that
can be said against it. I take it to be Plainly provable that the Scripture is
certainly true: And yet I take it to be quite above this confident man's ability
well to solve all the difficulties objected? were it but those poor ones of
Benedictus. Spinosa in his late pestilent Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. I
think I have plain proof that God is not the Author of sin, and man is not
moved in it and all his acts as an engine by unavoidable necessitation: But I
despair that ten years study more should enable this Writer, clearly to solve
the objections of Hobbes or Camero about it. In a word, though we have Plain
proof that Christ is the Son of God, I should be loath that the faith of this
Nation should lie upon the success of a dispute about it, between a crafty
Infidel and this self-conceited man.

. 21. And why should my impartiality in acknowledging the Churches liberty as
to the time of Baptism, at first, be so unkindly received? I meant not, nor
said, that Christ had left it Indifferent and to their Liberty, but that they
left one another at liberty herein: Because 1. The first and great work was in
settling the Churches by converting Jews and Gentiles to the faith: And the
Adult who were the active members, were they that the Apostles had most to do
with, (and therefore whose case is expressly spoken of.)

2. Because it was a known thing that the Infants of Church Members had ever
been Church Members and were in possession of that Relation when Christ and his
Apostles set up Baptism.

3. And it was a granted case, that all Sanctified persons devoted themselves
and all that they had to God; and every thing according to its capacity: And
therefore their Infants according to their capacity, which God himself had
before expounded.

4. And it was never the meaning of Christ to lay so much on the outward
washing, as many Papists and Anabaptists do: But as the uncircumcised Infants
in the Wilderness were nevertheless Church Members and saved; so when Infants
were in the Covenant of God by the Parents true and known consent, their
damnation was not to be feared, upon their dying unbaptized by surprise.

5. But yet obedience to God being necessary, many Parents hastened their
childrens Baptism, at two or three days old. Others staid till the eighth day:
others longer; and multitudes had children that were in several degrees entered
on the use of reason, when the Parents were converted, and it remained doubtful
whether they were (as to the Covenant) at their Parents choice or their own:
And to this day there want not those that think that Baptism was not instituted
to be the ordinary initiating Sacrament of the children of Church Members, but
only of Proselytes; And that Christians Infants took their places in the Church
of course, but Proselytes from without only were to be Baptized. Though this be
an error, it is probable that there were some then, as well as now of that
opinion. But nothing more occasioned (as far as I can find) the delay of
Baptism, than the fear of the danger of sinning after it, especially of
apostasy. All held that all sin past was pardoned in Baptism. And Heb. 6. and
10. and other texts, and the common doctrine of the Church made them think it a
very perilous thing to sin wilfully after illumination and the acknowledgement
of the truth. And therefore abundance delayed their own Baptism till age, and
many were backward to Baptize their children, lest childish folly and youthful
lusts, and worldly temptations, should draw them to trample upon the blood of
the Covenant; And on such accounts, all were not Baptized at one age. And
diverse that were Baptized at age upon their own conversion from Heathenism,
were not suddenly so knowing, as to be acquainted with all the cases about
their childrens rights, but must have a considerable time to learn. For it was
(be it spoken without offense to stricter men) a General and Narrow sort of
Knowledge which the Apostles and the Primitive Churches required in the adult
as necessary to Baptism, yea when they had at last kept them long under
Catechizing. For even in Augustines time, though all used the same words of
Baptism, so few had a clear understanding of the very Baptismal form or words,
that (writing (ubi supra) de bapt. contr. Donat.) he says that as to the
Meaning of those words not only the Heretics, sed ipsi carnales parvuli
Ecclesiae, si possent singuli diligenter interrogari, tot diversitates
opinionum fortassis, quot homines numerarentur: Animalis enim homo non
percipit, etc. Annon tamen ideo non integrum sacramentum accipiunt?

. 22. There remains a Catalogue of my heinous errors which he has put in the
preface to his first edition, and in the end of the second, and which he and
such as he have taught many honest weak people in London, both Anabaptists and
Independents to talk frightfully and odiously of from one another behind my
back. What should I say to him and them? Shall I answer them that never speak
or write to me? Shall I take this man's accusation for a confutation or
conviction? Is so deadly an enemy of Antichrist conceited of a
self-infallibility, or that I must take my faith or trust from Mr. Danvers,
though not from the Church, Pope, or General Council? If not, what did the man
think that a recitation should do with me? Did not I know what I had written
till he told me?

. 23. But it is others that he tells it to* Those others will read my own words
or, they will not? If they will, I will not be so censorious of them as to
think that they need any more to his frustration: If they will not, must I
write another book to tell them what I have written in the former? How shall I
know that they will any more read the last than the first? If Satan have so
much power over them, that he can make them err, and lie and slander and
backbite as often as a man professing zeal for the truth, will be his instrument
and messenger, it is not my writing more books that can save them. The end must
tell them, whether I or they shall be the greater losers by it.

. 24. I have therefore but these two ways now to take: 1. Whereas this man
says, that my doctrine seems heinous to every one of my Nonconforming
brethren, and most Protestants, and that I have lost my self among my friends,
I do demand as their duty and my right, the Means of my conviction and
reduct^on from those brethren (if any) whom he does not belie: I profess my
self ready privately or publicly to give them an account of the reasons of all
my doctrine, and thankfully to retract whatever they shall manifest to be an
error. And I challenge any of them to prove that ever* I refused to be
accountable to them, or denied a sober answer to their reasons, or refused to
learn of any that would teach me, or to study as hard to know as they? or that
ever partiality, faction or worldly interest, bribed me to deal falsely with my
conscience, and betray the truth. And if after this claim, they will be silent,
I will take them for consenters, or if by backbiting only any will still
notify their dissent, I will take them for such as I take this writer, and in
some respect worse though not in all.

. 25. II. My second remedy is, I will go willingly to School to Mr. D. and
having said so much for the Learning, against the Disputing way, I will become
his hearer and reader, if he have any thing to teach me, that savoureth of
Truth and Modesty more than this noisome fardel does which he has published.
And to that end I will here give him a Catalogue of the contrary opinions to
mine, which I desire him solidly to prove. If he hold not the contrary
doctrines, why does he exclaim against mine, as heinous? If he do hold the
contrary to what I have with due and clear distinction and explication opened,
(and his Readers after the perusing of all my own words together be of his
mind) I then take these following to be their own opinions, and part of their
Religion, which I desire them to make good, and teach them me by sufficient
proof.

CHAP. VIII. A Catalogue of some Doctrines of Mr. Danvers and the rest that
with him accuse my Christian Directory, if indeed they hold the contrary to
mine which they accuse (as must be supposed by their accusation) which as a
Learner I entreat any of them solidly to prove.
OF the Question 49. p. 826. as cited by him (The falsehood of his inserting [in
a Popish Country in their way of Baptizing] in that cited place which spoke
only of the Lutherans, I pass by as weary of answering such: But

I. That it is a sin for any man (supposing Infant Baptism a duty) to offer his
child to be Baptized where it will be done with the sign of the Cross, or such
ceremonies as the Lutherans use, though he profess his own dissent and
dissallowance of those ceremonies, and though he cannot lawfully have it done
better, but must have that or no Baptism at all?

II. That in the ancient Churches of the second, third, and fourth ages, it had
been better to be unbaptized than to use a white Garment in Baptism as they
did, or to be anointed as then, or to taste Milk and Honey, though the Person
offering his child to such Baptism, had professed his dissent as aforesaid?

III. That all the Churches of Christ in those second, third, and fourth, and
following ages, who were Baptized thus (Infant or adult,) had no Baptism but
what was worse than none: (Though Church history certify us that this use was
so universal, that it is hard to find any one Christian in all those or many
after ages that ever was against the lawfulness of it, or refused it.)

( By the way, it was but one of your tricks which you know not how to forbear,
p. 372. ed 2.
to foist in [Peril of Law] when I had not such a word or sense as Peril: As if
you knew of no Obligation there but from Peril.)

IV. Your page 373. ed. 2. [That anointing, using the white Garment, Milk and
Honey, were Blasphemous rites, and Popish before Popery was existent? or if
otherwise, that All Christ's Church was Popish then?

V. Your Pref. ed. 1. [That Christ's Ministers rightly ordained and dedicated to
God in that sacred office, are not so much as Relatively holy as separated to
God therein?

VI. That Temples, and Church Vtensils devoted and lawfully separated by man to
holy uses, either are not justly Related to God as so separated, or though so
separated and Related are in no degree to be called Holy?

VII. Your Pref. 16. [That no Reverence is due to Ministers and Church
utensils?]

VIII. Ibid. [To be uncovered in the Church; and use reverent carriage and
gestures there, does not at all tend to preserve due reverence to God and his
worship?

IX. Ibid. [That the unjust alienation of Temples, Vtensils, lands, days,
which were separated by God himself, is no sacrilege: no not to have turned
the Temple of old, and the sacred things to a common use unjustly: nor the
Lords day now. ( But thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou more than commit
Sacrilege? Even teach men so to do, and say It is no Sacrilege? no not when
God himself is the separater and man the unjust alienater? And yet is
Infant Baptism a sin?)

X. Ibid. [That it is no sacrilege unjustly to alienate things justly
consecrated and separated to God by man (as Ministers, Lands, Vtensils, etc.)
(Remember Ananias and Saphira.)

XI. Ibid. [That it is a sin to call a Minister a Priest, though it be done in
no ill design, nor with any scandal or temptation to error, and though he that
uses the word profess that he does it but as a translation of the Greek word
[Presbyter] and as God himself does Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. and 20.6. and 1 Pet. 2.
5.9. (Question. Whether it is sinfully used in Scripture?)

XII. Ib. [Accordingly it is sin to use the word [Altar] for [Table] or the
word [Sacrifice] for [worship] (as thanksgiving etc.) though with all the
foresaid cautions, and though God so use them in the Scripture, 1 Pet. 2.5.
Heb. 13.15, 16. Phil. 4.18. Ephesians. 5.2. Romans 12.1. Heb. 13.10. Rev. 6.9. and 8.3,
5. and 16.7. And that all the ancient writers and Churches sinned that so
spoke?]

XIII. That no sober Christians should allow each other the Liberty of such
phrases without censoriousness or breach of Charity and peace] Ibid. pref.

XIV. Ibid. [It is a sin to set a Rail about the Communion Table though it be
not done to any ill design nor with scandal, but only to keep dogs from pissing
or dunging at it, and boys from abusing it.

XV. That in such case, yea though scandal be removed by the public profession
of the Church, it is a sin to come to such a railed table to communicate; even
when no sinful distance between the Clergy and Laity is intended.

XVI. Ibid. [Christians ought to censure and condemn each other, if one come to
such a Table, or Receive kneeling, supposing it a lawful thing.]

XVII. Ibid. [That it is a sin to keep a thankful remembrance of Gods mercy to
his Church, by an anniversary day of solemnity, in giving them any Apostle,
Martyr, or extraordinary instrument of his blessing, as some keep their
birthdays, or wedding-dayes, or days of some great deliverance, and England
the fifth of November; Though it be not terminated in the honor of a Saint,
but of God, nor made equal to the Lords day, nor kept otherwise than
spiritually and piously?

XVIII. Ibid. [That for a man that is against commanding the Abstinence of
Lent, and against obeying such commands as an Imitation of Christ's forty days
fasting, and in all cases of injury to our souls, bodies, or others; yet to say
that he is not able to prove it a sin to obey by mere abstinence, Read Romans 14.
and judge.
when the Magistrate peremptorily commands it, merely in Commemoration, and
not Imitation of Christ's fast, is a sin in him that says it, though it be
true: And consequently though it would do no harm to my self or others, I ought
rather to die than to forbear flesh in Lent, if the King command it?

XIX. Ibid. [That Church Music (and consequently singing which is the prime
Music) is no help to any man in the service of God?

XX. Ib. [That though he find it a help, it is sin for any man to use it?

XXI. That either Christ did not join with the Jews in worship which had Music
(in the Temple) or else he sinned in so doing?

XXII. That the experience of prejudiced self-conceited men, that know not what
melody is, must be set against the experience of others so far as to deprive
them of all such helps and mercies, as the other find no benefit by, (As
singing is now cast out of many Churches.)

XXIII. That it is no wrong to Ignorant Christians to put such whimsies and
scruples into their heads?

XXIV. Ib. [It is a sin to Vow Chastity for any man in the world, though it be
with this exception or condition, [Unless any thing shall fall out which shall
make it a sin to me not to marry]. And though under the most extraordinary
necessities of avoiding marriage, he find such confirmation of his Resolutions
needful?

XXV. Ib. [That it is in no Case lawful to keep a Vow of Chastity, at least
among the Papists? And consequently whereas Christ says, He that can keep this
saying, Let him, It is every man's duty to break Chastity that has once vowed
it, though it were no duty, but a sin before. For doubtless Marriage is a sin
accidentally to some, though not in its own nature, and far from being a duty
to all? But according to this doctrine, if a man were eighty years old, and
utterly impotent, and unable to break his vow of Chastity if he would, he is
bound to do it, which he cannot do, and to break his vow when he cannot break
it? or if an old man's marriage that has no necessity, would undo himself and
his (former) children, he is bound to marry, if he have but once vowed that he
will not; or at least he may do it? (For which of the contraries you choose [
May or Must] I am uncertain.)

XXVI. Ib. [That either it was a sin to put Pictures in the Geneva Bibles, and
a sin to have our Dutch Chimney bricks which contain all the history of the
Gospel, or any other Image of Christ crucified wherever, or once to see such a
Picture; or else it is a sin to have any holy affection stirred up in our
hearts by seeing it: so that though all things are sanctified and pure to the
pure, and I may excite holy affections when I see but a worm or flower, or any
creature, or a house, or any work of man, yea when I see the sins of the
wicked, I may stir up thankfulness for grace; yet if I see in a Chimney piece,
or a Geneva Bible, or elsewhere, the Image of Christ crucified, it is a sin to
excite holy affections thereupon; Though the twenty one Cases which I have
named as unlawful to use an Image in, be every one observed (as the Cases of
danger, scandal and all the rest.)

XXVII. The Image of Christ Crucified in the Imagination or mind of a Believer
is a sin: Therefore it is a sin to think of a Crucified Christ, or to know
Christ crucified, or to love Christ crucified as such: For it is impossible to
think on him, know him or love him as crucified, without the Image of him on
the mind: Therefore Paul determined to do nothing but sin, when he determined
to know nothing but Christ and him crucified: and instead of anathematizing
them that love him not, he should have anathematized or reproved all that love
him as crucified.

Do you and your Companions know that you are renouncing your Baptism, and
Christianity, and the Cross of Christ, while you would rebaptize us all? I
charge it not on you as your meaning: But if it be not the downright
consequence of the words of all my Religious backbiters, who say that the Image
of Christ crucified befitteth not our minds or imaginations, but is a sin
there, I have lost all my reasoning faculty, and know not what Man or Reason
is.

XXVIII. Ibid. and Ed. 2. p. 372. [That the Ordination and Ministerial Office
received by any that live in Communion with the Church of Rome, and
consequently all their baptizings and other ministrations are not only sins but
nullities: (Though they were such as Bernard, Malachie, Patrick, Gerson, Ferus,
Kempis, Gerard Zurphaniensis, etc.) And so none of the English Nation had true
baptism from their first Conversion by Augustine till the Reformation, but all
died unbaptized and should have been baptized again: And so should all baptized
by them in any Kingdoms of Europe or the World: and so Luther, Zuinglius,
Martyr, Musculus, and the rest of our first Reformers, were never Christened,
but all dyed unbaptized persons, and should have been baptized after their
conversion.

XXIX. Ib. That it were better have all Europe unbaptized (Infants and adult)
than such as Bernard, Ferus, Cassander, etc. should baptize them, though they
had leave to protest against all that is sinful in it, and were put upon no
sinful promises, professions, or acts themselves.

XXX. Ib. That it is a sin for those in any Country that can have no other, to
consent that a Papist Priest do teach a Child to Speak or to Read, or to Write,
or teach him Music, Arithmetic, Geometry, Latin, Greek or Hebrew, Logic, or
Grammar, or any Art, though but such as Laborers get their daily bread by.

XXXI. Ib. That it is a sin for those in Italy, or any Kingdom that can have no
other, to let a Popish Priest teach their Children the Creed, Lords Prayer and
Ten-Commandments which all Christians are agreed in: but it is better that they
never learned a word of the Bible, or Christian-Faith, than learn it of such a
Priest: so sinfully did Bishop Usher make the motion to the Priests in Ireland,
that Protestants and they might join in teaching the barbarous people the Creed
and common principles of Religion.

XXXII. Ib. That it is a sin to hear a Popish Priest read Gods word or any good
book, though it were a Protestants, or one of the Ancient Fathers: or to hear
him speak the truest Doctrine, though in a Country where it can no other way be
heard or learned.

XXXIII. Ib. That in such a Country where there is no other, it is a sin to
join with one of them in any Prayer how good soever, though craving a blessing
on our meat, or in a Family, or elsewhere; even in the Lords Prayer.

XXXIV. Ib. That it is necessary to Salvation to believe that the Pope is
Antichrist, and so no man, woman, or child can be saved that believes it not.
And so since Antichrist arose, we have a new Article in our Creed: Even for
those that know not what the Pope is, whether male or female, flesh or fish.

XXXV. Ib. That it is a sin to read any good book in the Church besides the
Scripture, any Chapter in the Apocrypha, any Homily or Sermon, though written
by an Anabaptist, and though we declare what it is, and mention it for no other
end but what it is written for, as we cite Authors as witnesses: (And yet it is
lawful for Mr. D. to publish many (falsely) in Print.)

XXXVI. Ib. That it is a sin to read a Prayer in the Church, though it were the
Prayer of Christ John 17. or of Moses or others in the Psalms, or any others.

XXXVII. Ib. That if one pray Mr. Danvers to pray for him, it is Idolatry, or
if the people or sick pray the Minister to pray for them, or Children their
Parents; or if one should do so by an Angel that should appear to him; or to a
Saint or Angel unseen, imagining that he were present; this is not only
Superstition and so sinful, but also Idolatry; which is giving Gods proper
worship to a creature: And consequently it is the proper worship of God only,
to pray him to pray for us to himself.

XXXVIII. Ib. That it is a sin to bow the knee at the naming of Jesus, though
we renounce all in it that is superstitious and scandalous, and bow equally at
the name of God, Jehovah, Christ, etc.

XXXIX. Ib. That it is a sin to stand when the Gospel is read, though we be
never so weary of sitting, and stand equally at the reading of all the rest of
the Scripture, or at Sermon without distinction; so heynously did the Universal
Church sin for many hundred years in their long standings; and so sinful a
thing it is to hear in a Church or Meeting Place that has no seats, unless we
sit on the ground.

XL. Ib. That it is a sin to kneel while the Ten-Commandments are read, though
it be by women whose custom that posture is (upon a boss) through the rest of
the days exercise; and though it be never so openly declared that we take them
not for a prayer, nor do it to any ill signification or intent.

XLI. Iib. That he sins who does not condemn the Universal Church of Christ
for many hundred years (of the greatest antiquity that we have any records of
since the Apostles) for their worshipping with their faces toward the East;
Though he should himself dislike that practice and never use it, nor consent to
have it used.

XLII. Ib. That it is a sin to say, that any children of any wicked men in the
world, have any guilt of any of their nearer Parents sins, but only of Adams:
(And consequently it must be held that God unjustly threatened and punished any
such children for their Parents sin, from the days of Cain, Cham, Pharaoh,
Ishmael, Esau, Achan, Gehezi, till the days of that Generation threatened
Matthew. 23. And also that no man receives any pravity from Adam neither,
because it must pass to him through his next Parents and be theirs, and he
receives none that is theirs: And so all Nations are justified against all
guilt of any Parents sin but Adam, and warranted to deny to confess any such
guilt, or to be beholden to Christ or mercy for the pardon of it, though David,
Daniel and Nehemiah did otherwise.)

I say again, either Mr. D. and his like do really hold the contraries of the
assertions of mine which he thus notifieth as heinous errors, or not: If not,
he raileth against his Conscience in hypocrisy: If yea, then these
propositions which I have named to you are the contraries to mine. And it is so
cursed a thing to add two and forty New Commandments to the Law of God, that I
who think them to be no better, do again and again desire him, to give me the
full proof of all these strange Commandments, and tell me where they are
written (if I have overlookt them.)

If this cannot be obtained, I call to his imitators and my backbiters to let
me know, whether really they will own all these, and give me leave to tell the
World, and the Ages to come, that these were their Doctrines, for the love of
which they whispered or clamoured against me.

But here he stops and pittieth the Reader, and refers them to my Book it
self: And I will join with him and add, that the Reader that will think that he
knows what I hold or wrote, by this and such like men's citations or reports,
and will not read the Book it self, and all in it together that concerns the
questioned subject, before he judge; I take not my self bound to write more
books to tell him what I wrote in the former, nor do I think that I am
otherwise obliged to rectify his Error, than by Prayer or Counsel,
endeavoring to bring him to some tenderness of Conscience, fear of God and
sobriety of mind.

But his strength lies in frightful exclamations. [O was ever the like yet
heard, etc. to palliate abominations, and reconcile us to Idolatrous Popish
names, as Altar, Priests, Sacrifices, etc. and their baptism.] And yet he might
have known that all these words are often used by the ancienter sort of the holy
Pastors of the Churches after the Apostles, and I remember not that ever one
Christian was against it, or scrupled the use of them: And I before showed that
they are used by the Holy Ghost in Scripture, whom I dare not accuse of
Idolatrous names, or reconciling us to them. Whether all the Papists baptism
administered and received be nullities, and all Papists to be rebaptized, and
all Protestants that were baptized by Papists? are questions which I will not
be so vain as to dispute with one that talks at this man's rate.

But yet we have not done with the high charges of his Preface: He says [Oh!
were not those twenty Queries, so much against the self-evidencing authority of
the Scriptures, in his Admon. p. 142. in favor of Tradition a heinous
provocation, to say no more of them?]

Answ. It seems they were so to you. But really, did you read that book and the
other to Mr. Bagshaw, and yet not fear to follow him and outdo him in
notorious untruths, after so full a conviction and warning as was given him?
Think on it, and again cry out [But alas! whereto will not men run left to
themselves?] I there professed and proved to your friend Mr. Bagshaw that I was
for, and wrote for the self-evidencing authority of the Scripture, and it is
untrue that those twenty Queries or any one of them is against it^ But seeing
you think otherwise, if indeed you hold the contrary to the assertions implied
in those twenty Queries, I am not at the end of the Catalogue of your strange
Doctrines: If you and my revilers own them, so will not sober men: e. g.

XLIII. [Every Christian must see the Copies of the Scripture written by the
Prophets and Apostles own hands: Or at least must understand the Transcripts in
the Original tongues.]

XLIV. [God has promised unerring infallibility to all Scribes in the world
that write out the Bible, and all Printers that print it: Or at least to some
of them, and we may be certain who those are.]

XLV. [Though the several Copies have a multitude of differences, it is certain
none of them are erroneous, or mistaken.]

XLVI. [Those men and women that understand not Hebrew or Greek may be certain
only by seeing a Hebrew and Greek Bible, without a Translators help, that every
word in it is the word of God.]

XLVII. [Either he that will be sure which Copy is without mis-writing, must
first see all the Copies in the world that differ; or else if he never see but
one (or few) he may be certain that it is right in the words in which it
differs from all the rest which he never saw.]

XLVIII. [No corrupt or mis-written Copy of the Scripture can come to a true
Believers hands: Or if it do, he can infallibly tell us the Errata.]

XLIX. A true Believer that never saw the Originals can by seeing a translation
judge of all the diverse readings in the Originals.

L. The Translators are either all infallible in translating* or else a true
Believer is certain which of them is, and which not, and which translation
among many faulty ones is faultless.

LI. He that never saw all Translations, but perhaps but one, can by that one
tell that it is truer than all the differing ones, which he never saw.

LII. All this of Copies and Translations is known to Believers either by
Prophetical Revelation from Heaven, or by the self-evidencing demonstration of
the Copy and Translation which he sees.

LIII. [Every true Believer without being ever told it by man, can tell by the
self-evidencing demonstration of the words, that the Canticles and the Books of
Judges, Ruth, Chronicles, Jonah, are Canonical, and that the wisdom of Solomon,
Baruck, Paul's Epistle to the Laodiceans, Clemens to the Corinthians, etc. are
not Canonical --

LIVE. Either God will give faith to no one that cannot read (among all the
illiterate Kingdoms of the world where the Gospel is to be preached,) or else
all that cannot read, may without ever reading a word be certain by
self-evidence which readings in the differing Copies, and which Translations
are true or false, and which books and verses and sentences are Canonical and
which not.

LV. Either God has promised that every illi^^^^te Christian (that cannot
read) shall hear (...) one else read every word of the Bible to him (in
Originals and Translations, or one) that he may judge; or else by the
self-evidence that person that cannot read, nor never heard half the Bible
read, can certainly tell what words are truly or falsely written, or Translated,
without ever hearing them.

LVI. When the greatests Learned Linguists differ about a Lection, or
Translation, (as the Septuagint, etc.) (such as Lud. Capellus, Usher, Buxtorf,
Bootius, De Dieu, L' Empereur, Walton, etc.) or when such as Luther, Althamer,
etc. differ about a Canonical Book, (as James) it is because they see not that
self-evidence, which every Christian may see, that cannot read nor was ever
told it, that one part, (if not more) do herein err, while their judgments are
contrary.

None of these fifty six are Articles of my Faith, nor Gods Commandments (that
I can find.) I say not that these ignorant Revilers hold all these; but I say
that He (and They) that will openly exclaim against the contrary assertions as
heinous errors, or tell about among the receivers of false reports, that I hold
dangerous errors for saying the contrary to these, does either persuade men
that all these are his Opinions, or else that he is an impudent Hypocrite, in
reviling known truth as heinous error; or else a rash Calumniator that dare
reproach or speak evil of that which he understands not, nor will not, so
much as by reading my plain words, be at the labor to understand.

Perhaps some better minded person will say, It casts poor Christians into
perplexity to hear such doubts about the Scripture readings and translations,
were they not better concealed? Answ. They are not to be talked of unseasonably
to incapable persons: They are not to be told the ignorant instead of a
Catechism: But they are all publicly known to the learned world long ago, and
told the ignorant people by the Papists to ill ends: And if any one will
persuade you to hold the contrary, and make you believe that all or any of
these absurdities and falsehoods are the true Protestant Religion, or any part
of it, and that they that hold the contrary are Popish, it is time to vindicate
the Protestant Religion and all sober godly Protestants, from the scorn of such
imputed dotages.

But this is the unhappy fruit of overdoing: There are some men among us, so
overwise and overrighteous in defending the sufficiency of the Scriptures, that
they would persuade us, that it is sufficient to expound it self without a
teaching Expositor, and to preach it self without a Preacher, and (by
consequence from their generals) to Write and Print it self without a Writer or
Printer, and to bring it self down from the Apostles to every man without the
hand or tongue of man, and to preserve it self from corruption without the care
of man, and to translate it self without a Translator; And that all Printed
Sermons, or books of Divinity, all Catechisms, all Sermon notes for memory, all
forms of Prayer, yea the dividing the Bible into Chapters and Verses, and
Printing Contents, and Citations or References (much more the Geneva Notes and
Pictures) are all sinful additions to the Word of God. As if the sufficiency of
the Statutes of the Land lay in Keeping, Printing, Transcribing, Pleading and
Expounding themselves, without the use of Scribes, Clerks, Lawyers, Law Books
or Judges.

I am well assured that God needs not our Lies to his Glory, and that truth
and falsehood do so ill agree, that though falsehood may steal a cloak from
truth, yet truth will never be beholden to falsehood for friendship and defense;
And if ever Lies pretend any kindness or service to the truth, it is but
treacherously to supplant it, and will turn to its disservice and injury at
last.

In a word, All the Devils in Hell, and all the Consistory at Rome, could not
easily find out a more effectual way (as far as I can understand) to turn
multitudes to Popery, than 1. By calling truth and sober Principles
Antichristian, Popery and Idolatrous: 2. And by describing the Religion of the
enemies of Popery, as made up of Lies and Dotages: 3. And by falling all
together by the ears, and breaking into a multitude of Sects, and condemning
each other as unmeet to be communicated with; and so making men believe that
they must be Papists or distracted Dotards, whose self-conceitedness in
Religion has made them mad: I say, nothing that I know of does tend more to
multiply Papists, than this; (unless I may except the way of sensuality and
violence, murdering some and drawing others by fleshly and worldly motives:)
Nor do I know any thing in the world, that more quieteth the Consciences of
Persecutors and Scorners, in all that they do and say against us, and hinders
them more from all conviction and repentance.

Mr. Danvers ends his book, Ed. 1. with a smart reflection on Mr. William
Allen and Mr. Lamb for forsaking the cause of Anabaptistry and Separation which
they had written for: And I will end mine with a few words concerning them,
concluding with a free and faithful Admonition to Mr. Danvers, to consider
whether He or They should be most earnestly called to Repentance, and most
speedily practice it.

CHAP. IX.
REader, having the following vindication of Mr. Allen put into my hand, I
think it not unmeet upon this occasion to undeceive some who to render his
example in receding from the way of Separation wherein he was sometime engaged
upon the account of Infant Baptism, the less imitable, and his endeavors to
draw off others, the less successful; have given out that he did but turn with
the times for worldly ends when the King came in. Whereas I can bear him
witness that that return was made by him the year before the coming in of the
King, as did sufficiently appear to me both by Letters which then passed
between him and my self about that affair, and also by his book called A
Retractation of Separation, published by him that same year. Which Book I would
entreat the sober Reader to get and lend to some of the separating mind: they
will find no temporizing or formality in it, but a spirit of Christian love and
peace. And if the reasons in that Book and in his persuasive to peace and unity
since published, be such as none of the Separatists can confute or stand
before, they will have no reason to impute the Authors change to carnal reason
or worldly interest. I question not but experience after trial, which is wont
to make teachable men wiser, put him upon reviewing the grounds of his
practice, and so had a great hand in that alteration which he made. And I would
have those who account it a disparagement to a man to alter his Judgment at
any time, to tell us at what age we come under that law, when we must grow no
wiser nor no better.

And what I say of Mr. Allens alteration of his judgment, I must say also of
Mr. Lambs, whom those that easily judge before they know, have accused also as
turning with the times, when as on my knowledge his change was in 1658. or the
beginning of 1659. For by letters I did solicit him to that alteration and
received his answers, sooner than I knew of Mr. Allens change: And I perceive
that Mr. Lambs words and example are slighted by very many, upon two
accusations, 1. That he is run into the other extreme of overmuch conformity:
2. That he is over hot. As to the first, my distance makes me a stranger to
his mind and practice. But as long as he conformeth not as Ministers do, but to
that which belongs to a private man, what does he more than Mr. Tombs has
largely written for? And Mr. Nigh has written to prove it lawful to hear
Conformists in the Parish Churches, and for the Magistrates to appoint public
Teachers for the people. 2. And as to the second (not justifying my own
earnestness, much less others which I am not acquainted with) to calm the minds
of the offended I may well say, 1. That it is no wonder if a man that is
naturally of a warm and earnest spirit, do show it most when he thinks that he
speaks for God, and Truth, and the Church, and men's Souls. 2. That it is no
wonder if a man that was drawn himself so deep into the guilt, as to be a
Teacher of an Anabaptists Church and to write for them, be an earnest expresser
of his Repentance when he is recovered, and earnestly desirous to save others
from the snares in which he was entangled, and to do as much for Truth, Unity
and peace, as ever he did against it.

What follows are Mr. Allens own words.

Worthy Sir,
I Having some intimation that you are about to make some return to the Author
of a late Treatise of Baptism, do apprehend that if you think fit to Print this
following Paper at the end of your Book, you may do the good office of removing
a stumbling block, at which some are too apt to dash their foot, and thereby
also further caution men against being misled by giving too much credit to the
quotation of Authors, as managed by that Treatisor.

In reading a Treatise of Baptism of the first Edition, Penned by H. D. I
observed that in the two last pages of his Postscript, he mentions two
discourses that were publi^hed about one and twenty years ago* the one by my
self and the other by another; and says that both of us are gone back to that
which therein we call will worship and Idolatry.

Indeed I am sorry that that author should put me upon any necessity of
reflecting so much upon him in vindicating my self, as to tell the world that
upon this occasion I having twice reviewed that Book of mine, did not find so
much as the mention of either of those two words will worship or idolatry, upon
any occasion whatsoever. Nor am I conscious to my self of ever being so absurd
as once to think that to be idolatry, which he most untruly says I call so in
that Book. That cause doubtless whatsoever it is, is little beholding to such
an Advocate as thinks to reconcile men to it by abusing dissenters.

As for the alteration I have made, I gave the world an account of the reasons
and grounds of it, in my Retractation of Separation, published in the year
1659. which was before the turn of times, and in my persuasive to Peace and
Unity, since published. And if this Author could have solidly discovered the
insufficiency of those reasons and grounds to justify such an alteration and
my present practice, he would have done his cause better service in my opinion,
than he has done in his Treatise by laboring to support it by a
misrepresentation of persons and their opinions. As for me, I can truly say I
have had great satisfaction and peace in my own mind, touching the alteration I
have made upon those grounds, not only at other times, but even then also when
I have been near unto death in my own apprehension. As for the other person he
mentions with me, I suppose he may e're long give the world an account of that
alteration he also is charged with as great fault.

Will. Allen*


An Admonition to Mr. Danvers.
SIR,
YOur vehement importunity having greatly injured me, by occasioning the loss
of some of my time (who have none to spare) upon this writing, which else would
have been needless; you must bear with me while I desire you, sometime alone,
to answer these Questions seriously to your Conscience.

Quest. 1. Whether the untruths in matter of fact which you confidently
publish, be not of so stupendous a magnitude, as should have affrighted the
Conscience of a Turk or Pagan? When no less than four whole Bodies of men are
so slandered by you, the Donatists, the Novatians, the Old Britains, and the
Waldenses, each containing, it is like many hundred thousands: And when so many
whole Books (not particular sentences only) are falsified accordingly?

2. How great a number would your untruths appear, were they all gathered and
enumerated to you? When in all the lines which I have examined I have met with
so few that are not guilty of them?

3. When you accuse my Admonition to Mr. Bagshaw, and thereby show that you
read it, should not the eviction of fourscore undeniable untruths, in matter of
fact, have been a warning to you to avoid the like?

4. Whether you do not more by such notorious scandal to dishonor your self
and all that are such, and hinder your own successes, than many writings
against you could have done?

5. Whether you do not scandalously tempt men to justify the contempt of
Tender Consciences, and what is done and said against them by many public
Revilers on the other extreme, when your Conscience pretending tenderness can
swallow such Camels, while it cannot endure our Infant-blessings?

6. Whether men can judge it probable that such voluminous notorious Forgers
and Slanderers, have so much more illumination than all other Christians, as to
be meet men to call all the Christian world almost to be new Christened, and to
unchristen almost all for about thirteen hundred years (to leave out the
controverted time?)

7. Would you be believed in other things that can deliberately, in two
Editions, do thus?

8. Is it like that God will bless such unmanly scandals, to the Churches good?
(unless as sin by overruling providence may occasion good.) Are these likely
means to propagate truth?

9. What is the matter that men that can do all this, cannot Conform? What
durst I not subscribe to, if I durst do all this?

10. Is it not a dishonor to your rebaptized Churches to be so polluted, and
to have so loose or partial a discipline, as to suffer such public scandals as
these: and to retain such a member as you, and not bring you to repentance or
excommunicate you? Have our worst Parish Churches many greater scandals?

If pride, partiality and passion will not let your Conscience work upon these
things, but you will turn them into gall instead of repentance, at least I
offer them to the Consideration of others, to prevent or remedy their infection.

And remember (which you have told the world now in Print) that you sent your
Bookseller to me, to know what I had to say against your first Edition, before
you published the second; And I have here partly told you what: I was not so
idle as to answer your Reasons, knowing how little a part they are of what Mr.
Tombs has said more largely: And that I answer him at all, is long of you,
who would not let me hold my peace. I heartily desire your Recovery from the
unthankful error, and your Repentance for the sinful means of propagating it,
and for your injury to our early Rights and blessings.

The Third Part: OBSERVATIONS ON Mr. Danvers REPLY TO Mr. WILLS: Detecting his
impenitent proceeding in false Accusation, in hope of his Repentance, and the
undeceiving of others, and to warn this Age to take more heed of the common
sin, of HASTY RASH JUDGING of things which they have not thoroughly examined,
partially taking them on their Leaders trust.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons and Jonathan Robinson. 1675.

A PREMONITION.
REader, there are two stumbling blocks to be taken out of thy way, which I had
rather have had no occasion to mention. The first is the Name and Authority of
that very worthy and excellent man, Doct. T. Barlow, S. Th. Prof. in Oxford,
which Mr. D. over and over cites as for his cause. Of which till he think meet
to speak for himself I only mind thee that, 1. It is a secret Letter to Mr. T.
which they cite. 2. That it is unlikely that he that subscribeth the Articles
and Liturgy of the Church of England, is against Infant Baptism, when the Art.
27. says, The Baptism of Young Children is in any wise to be retained in the
Church as most agreeable with the Institution of Christ.]

II. There is another worthy and eximious Doctor of the same University (Doct.
Th. Tullie) who having thought meet in a Latin Treatise of Justification to
endeavor at large (in a zeal for Orthodoxness no doubt) to confute my supposed
errors (in my Aphorisms about twenty two years ago revoked; taking no notice of
the many Treatises since written by me on that subject, but only of a late
Epistle to Mr. Allens Book,) he has also thought good to warn young men to
take heed that they do not rashly receive my Theology as bringing forth novel
paradoxes, because I hold some guilt in Children of their nearer Parents sins:
exclaiming [ O caecos ante Theologos quicunque unquam fuistis!] It seems that
this Famous Learned man knew not, that this was Augustins judgment (and many
another ancient and modern Writer's,) and that he is less for the Letany than I
(that subscribe or declare not full assent) who heartily pray, Remember not
Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our Forefathers, etc. This having some
respect to the subject of this Book, I thought meet here to give you notice,
that if God, will I hope in time to give the world yet fuller satisfaction on
both these subjects, (Justification, and secondary Original sin:) Though I
thought my unanswered Disputations of Justification, and other Treatises had
fully done the first: And the publishing of some old Papers of Original sin, I
think will fully do the other.

OBSERVATIONS ON Mr. Danvers REPLY TO Mr. WILLS.
CHAP. I. The frightful Aspect of his Reply.
. 1. MY Answer to Mr. Tombs and Mr. Danvers being written about the same time
as my Epistle to Mr. Wills his book, has since then been detained in the
Printers hand, whose delay has allowed me the sight of Mr. Danvers Reply to
Mr. Wills, and the opportunity of animadverting on it, before mine is come
abroad. And upon my most impartial consideration it renews the grief of my
heart to think of these evils which it sets before me.

. 2. 1. That the souls of poor Christians should be under the Temptations of
such writings and teaching as here we find: Where such untruths in matter of
fact are still justified with such a face of confidence, and divulged as for
God, and for the souls of men, that most ignorant persons may be tempted to
think that Modesty and Charity require them to believe, that they are real
truths, it being a harsh unmanly thing to judge that such a person can possibly
be so hardened, as to stand so boldly to all these things, which have such
public historical evidence, if they were all downright falsehoods.

And it is a hard task for a writer to be put to answer a Christian and a
Gentleman as Mr. Danvers does Mr. Wills, Repl. page 120. [ Know that hence you
have a further discovery of the great unfaithfulness and want of conscience in
the Author, for daring thus to abuse the world with a Cheat, and that which he
knows to be a mere forgery of his own] And page 122. [Let it be judged
whether he has not injuriously belied Osiander, belied Cluniacensis, belied
Peter Bruis, belied the truth, which by this forgery he would cover and hide;
abused the world, belied and abused me -- But much more fear his own conscience
by this piece of folly and falsehood.] To be thus at [ Thou liest] and [ Thou
liest] is an unsavory work; Yea in so few lines to give the Lie five times at
least. But for an ignorant Reader to believe what this Author has done till he
needs must, is yet far harder. Though we say, He that will swear, will lie, and
therefore we hardly believe a swearer; yet if a man with many hundred bloody
oaths should assert many particulars of public cognizance, we are ready to
think it inhumane to suspect that the man is so inhumane as thus to swear if
some of them were not true. Alas for the poor Church of Christ, that must have
such sore temptations! How shall they be withstood!

. 3. 2. And how sad is it that a Christian man professing not only Truth and
Godliness, but so much of these as to be above Communion with such as we,
should ever degenerate into such a thing as his present writing does discover!
O what need have we to lay to heart that of Paul, Romans 11. be not high-minded
but fear? and to learn over and over, Jam. 3. and Christ's words to the Sons of
Thunder, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of?

. 4. And alas, that ever the bitter voluminous Reproaches of the zeal of the
present age, should have such a scandal or stumbling block laid in their way,
to harden them in the justification of their reproaches! as if our Zeal were
the Cause or Cover of such heinous sins: Woe to the world because of offenses,
and woe to them by whom they come!

. 5. 4. But what a tremendous warning is this against the spirit of
unwarrantable separation, or true Schism, when the same person shall venture
upon all that is here written by him, who yet takes our Infant Baptism for a
mere Nullity, and the Christian world that has no other to be incapable of the
Church Communion of such as he? Me-think this is a Pillar of Salt. I well
remember that one of the means of keeping my ancient Flock in Concord, was the
terror of these horrid opinions and ways which the two or three that deserted
us, fell into.

CHAP. II. His impenitent false allegation of witnesses against Infant Baptism:
Tertullian, etc. specially Wickliff.
. 1. I have before said, that I have said so much out of Scripture and
Antiquity, for Infants Church Membership and Baptism, to which I have yet seen
no Answer that should satisfy an impartial man, either from Mr. Tombs, Mr.
Danvers, or any other, that I will not lose time and labor in replying to
their frivolous exceptions. And here I meddle directly but with the matter of
fact, because by ostentation of history, Mr. D. would seduce the ignorant into
the belief of gross untruths. I began with Tertullian, who is his first
witness, in his Catalogue, reprinted here in his reply.

. 2. And why have we no satisfactory answer to these things so often replied? 1.
That Tertullians words prove that Infant Baptism was then in use: And it is the
matter of fact that we are searching after? 2. And does he think that
Antichrist was before Tertullians time? 3. The opinion of Tertullian seems
not at all to be against the Lawfulness of Infant Baptism, in general; but
against the eligibleness of it in case of no apparent danger of death. For I
have often proved that the judgment of that age, and some following was, that
none should be compelled to be Baptized, or to Baptize their Infants, but they
should themselves be chusers of the time. For the conceit of the absolute
necessity of Baptism to salvation, came in afterward. And when the seed of the
faithful are Holy, and in Gods Covenant or Promise, upon the Parents Mental
dedication of them to God, and so in a state of salvation, no wonder if they
were not so hasty and peremptory for the sudden Investiture into the Christian
Church state, when they took it to be but the public solemnization of a
Covenant, really made and valid before. And as Nazianzene is for Infant Baptism
(long after) in case of danger, but else for staying three or four years, till
they can speak: so Tertullian seems to prefer delay for such conveniences as
he mentions. 4. And if Mr. D. doubt of this, let him tell me why he says,
cunctatio utilior. 5. And gives the reason from the inconvenience to the
Sponsors. 6. And why he also persuades the unmarried and young Widows to
delay their Baptism, till they are married, or grow corroborate to continency,
lest temptation carry them to sin; And makes this case of the like reason with
that of Infants. Did he think that it was flatly unlawful for maids and young
widows to be Baptized? or only less safe, and eligible, except in danger of
death? The case is plain. 7. And whether he like his other reason, Quid
festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum? And whether Tertullian here
do not tell us that he took those Infants that were Baptized to receive thereby
solemn Remission of sin, if they had any sin? If he thought they had none, we
have little reason to follow his opinion. 8. Whether his own words plainly show
not what I have said of him, that it was (as Constantine, and multitudes
delayed Baptism) for fear of falling afterward, which they thought most
dangerous [ si qui pondus intelligant Baptismi, magis timebunt consecutionem
quam dilationem: Fides integra secura est de salute]

And lib. de Anima Tertullian says, Apostolos ex sanctificato alterutro sexu
sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis praerogativa quam ex institutionis
disciplina -- Omnis Anima in Adam censetur, donec in Christo recenseatur: See
the rest there for Infants birth holiness.

. 3. His renewed reproaches of Cyprian, as having Antichristian doctrine, and
his renewed questioning whether there were ever such a Council as that at
Carthage mentioned, are things so audacious and gross that they need no further
answer. page 90.

. 4. And his citation of Austin page 94. [ that which had not been instituted
in Councils, etc.] is nothing against this authority, or to disprove its
Apostolical traduction; For it is easy for him to see, 1. That it was not
whether Infants should be Baptized that was the question, but whether it should
be done before the eighth day? 2. That this Council was so far from Instituting
Infant Baptism, that it was never brought into doubt or question among them,
but taken as the unquestioned practice of the Church.

But O that such as Mr. D. would give over honoring Antichrist so far (and
rejoicing and hardening the Papists) as to make such as Cyprian teachers of
Antichristian doctrine; and Antichrist to have been the Author of Infants
Christening before Cyprian and Tertullians time? The Papists owe such
adversaries thanks.

. 5. Page 104. He boasts of forty more against Infant Baptism cited by him, as
not yet humbled for his abuse. And because Mr. Wills by mistake granted him
Adrian and Hincmare, he seems to believe himself the more confidently, as if
they had indeed been against Infant Baptism: of which before.

. 6. Page 105. He recites his false story of Berinus, of which before.

. 7. Page 106. He recites his falsification of the Bishop of Apameae. And
turns us for his proofs to some book often called the Dutch Century Writers,
and the Dutch Martyrologie: I suppose both Novel and Anabaptist Authors; And he
may as well turn us over to our neighbor Anabaptists to tell us what is
written in the ancient Historians and Doctors, when we have the books
themselves before us.

. 8. Page 106, 107. He impenitently repeateth his slander of Wickliffe,
referring us to his profs p. 283, etc. Where having before falsely told us that
he wrote another book called Trialogia besides his Dialogues (when it is the
same book that is called Trialogus in the M. S. and Dialogus in the printed
Copy, as he may see by many citations out of the Trialogus in Bishop Usher, de
success. Eccles. which are all in the Dialogus) he tells us of a great many of
Wickliffes words to other purposes, and cannot bring one line or word in which
he denies Infant Baptism: But only 1. The lying accusations of his adversaries
to that end, and 2. His own words which deny two Popish tenants. 1. That
Baptism saves all ex opere operato; When he proves contrarily (of young and
old) that where Grace concurreth, it saves, and else not. 2. That Infants
unbaptized are damned; which in charity he thinks is to be denied: And what is
this against their Baptism?

. 9. Yea Wickliffe expressly asserteth Infant Baptism, Dialog. li. 4. c. 11. I
will give the Reader Mr. Danvers words and his together.

Mr. D. Reply, p. 106, 107. That Wickliffe denied Infant Baptism, I produced so
much evidence to prove it, from page 283. to 289. demonstrating that he not
only affirmed that Believers were the only subjects of Baptism, but withal that
children are not Sacramentally to be Baptized: and what can be more express
evidence in the case?

And Treat. ed. 2. p. 283. That Believers are the only subject of Baptism, as
appears in his eleventh Chap. of his Trialog. And p. 287. as a Lollard he
denies Infant Baptism.

Whether Mr. D. ever saw his cited book I know not: But judge of the man's
credit by the words: He cites the eleventh Chap. not telling us of which book.
But it is the fourth book where the matter is handled as follows.

Wickliffe Trialog. l. 4. Cap. 11. Et primo videamus ubi baptismus in Evangelio
stabilitur: Nam lege Mat. ult. quomodo Christus mandavit suis Apostolis, Ite,
docete, etc. et hinc Philippus baptizans Eunuchum Act. 8. prius instruxit eum
in fide -- et propter hanc formam verborum Christi Mat ult. Ecclesia nostra
adducit fideles pro Infant qui discretionem non attigerat respondentes: et
tales compatres communiter faciunt, quod filii sui quos de baptismo elevant,
sint in Oratione dominica et symbolo instructi: et alii qui discretionem
attigerant, dum instruuntur in fide Christi, ante suum baptismum vocantur
Catechumeni: Hoc autem sacramentum est tam necessarium viatori, quod Christus
dicit Nicodemo, Joh. 3. Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua, etc. Ex tanta itaque
authoritate fidei Scripturae sunt fideles generaliter baptizati: et ordinavit
ecclesia quod quaelibet persona fidelis i^ necessitatis articulo poterit
baptizari -- Nec refert sive immergantur semel vel ter; sive aquae super capita
sua effundantur: sed faciendum est secundum consuetudinem loci quem quis
incolit, tam in uno ritu legitimo quam in alio: Quia certum est quod corporalis
baptizatio sive lotio modicum valet, nisi adsit lotio mentis per spiritum
sanctum, a peccato originali vel actuali. Hoc est enim Principium in hac fide,
quod quicunque rite baptizatus fuerit, baptismus delet quodcunque peccatum
invenerit in homine baptizando. Et quia ad delationem peccati requiritur
satisfactio, et non potest fieri satisfactio pro peccato nisi per mortem
Christi, ideo dicit Apostolus Romans 6. Quicunque baptizati sumus in Christo
Jesu, in morte ejus baptizati sumus.

ALITH. Sed dic rogo clarius quomodo Christus qui tantum odivit signa
sensibilia, tantam necessitatem salvationis posuit in hujusmodi lotione:
Videtur enim derogare divinae liberalitati atque potentiae, quod Deus non
posset intercedere toto merito suo atque passione, salvare Infantem, vel
adultum fidelem, nisi vetula vel alio viante baptizetur communiter infideli:
similiter, delato Infant fidelium ad ecclesiam, ut secundum Christi regulam
baptizetur, et deficiente aqua vel requisitis aliis, stante pia intention
totius populi, interim mortuo naturaliter, nutu Dei, videtur grave damnationem
Infantis hujusmodi definire specialiter, cum nec infans iste, nec populus
peccavit ut taliter damnaretur. Vbi est ergo misericors liberalitas Christi
Dei, si talis proles fidelium propter illud quod non est in potestate eorum
damnabitur, cum Deus secundum principia Theologiae communia sit pronior ad
praemiandum homines quam ad dammandum: et specialiter merito et passione
Christi tantum sua tentoria dilatante?

Which is thus Englished.

And first let us see where Baptism is stablished in the Gospel. For read Mat.
28. how Christ commanded his Apostles, Go Teach etc. And hence Philip Baptizing
the Eunuch, first instructed him in the Faith, Act. 8. And because of this form
of Christ's words Mat. 28. Our Church brings Believers answering for the
Infant who had not attained to discretion: And such Godfathers commonly make
the children whom they take from Baptism, to be instructed in the Lords Prayer,
and the Creed. And others that had attained to discretion, while they are
instructed in the faith of Christ before their Baptism, are called Catechumeni:
And this Sacrament is so necessary to a viator that Christ says to Nicodemus,
Joh. 3. Except a man be born again of water, etc. So that by so great authority
of Scripture belief, the faithful are generally Baptized: And the Church has
ordained that in the point of necessity That is of death.
, every faithful person may be Baptized. Nor is it material whether they be
dipped once or thrice, or the water be poured on their heads: but it must be
done according to the custom of the place where one dwells, as well in one as
in another lawful rite: For it is certain that corporal Baptism or washing
little avails unless there be a washing of the Mind by the Holy Ghost, from
Original or Actual sin. For this is a principle in this belief, that whoever is
rightly Baptized, Baptism blotteth out whatever sin it finds in the man to be
Baptized. And because satisfaction is necessary to the blotting out of sin, and
satisfaction for sin cannot be made but by the death of Christ, therefore says
the Apostle, that as many of us as are Baptized into Christ, are Baptized into
his death.

ALITH. But tell me plainlier I pray you, how Christ who so much hates
sensible signs, has put so great necessity of salvation in this washing. For
it seems to derogate from Gods liberality and power, that God cannot by all
his merit and passion intercede to save an Infant or an adult beliver, unless
he be Baptized by an old Woman or some other viant, commonly an Infidel: so
also, when the Infant of believers is brought to the Church, that () according
to Christ's Rule he may be Baptized, and for want of water or other requisites,
the peoples pious intention continuing, he is dead in the mean time naturally
by the will of God, it seems hard to define that such an Infant is damned;
specially when neither the Infant nor the people have sinned that he should so
be damned: Where then is the merciful li^erality of Christ-God if such a child
of believers shall be damned for that which is not in their power? when God,
according to the common Principles of Theology, is proner to reward men than
to damn them, and specially when the merit and passion of Christ have so far
stretched out their tents?

To this Wickliffe answers, 1. In this Chap. that ^ome things he speaks
assertively, and some things reputatively; and so revieweth the case. And 1.
says that Christ approves outward signs, but not the abuse of them. That is,
1. When the signs of the old Jewish Law are kept. 2. By an inmodest espo^sing
them, and preferring them before Gods Decalogue. 3. By burthening the Church
with them which Christ would have free; even more than the Jewish Church was
burdened: And thus the Religious now (says he) abuse them the two last ways.

And in the Twelfth Chapter he proceeds to answer the rest [ Videtur mihi
probabile quod Christus satis posset sine lotione hujus, infantes spiritualiter
baptizare, et per consequens salvare: unde dicitur communiter quod triplex est
baptismus Ecclesiae, viz. baptismus fluminis, baptismus sanguinis, baptismus
flaminis, et quilibet eorum comparibus sufficit ad salutem -- Nec audeo
asserere quod Infantes occisi pro Christo sint damnati -- Baptismus autem
flaminis est bapt. sp. sancti, qui est simpliciter necessarius cuilibet homini
si salvetur. Ideo duo baptismi priores sunt signa antecedentia, et ex
suppositione necessaria ad istum tertium baptismum flaminis. Ideo absque
dubietate, si iste insensibilis baptismus ad fuerit, baptizatus est a crimine
mundatus. Et si iste defuerit, quantumcunque adsint priores, baptismus non
prodest animae ad salutem. Ideo cum recte sit insensibilis, and tantum nobis
ignotus, videtur mihi imprudens praesumptio taliter salvationem hominis vel
damnationem ex baptismo definire. Reputamus tamen absque dubietate Quod
Infantes recte baptizati flumine, sint baptizati tertio baptismate, cum habent
gratiam baptismalem. -- Non enim licet fidelibus supponendo baptismum flaminis,
baptismum fluminis omnino relinquere, sed necesse est data opportunitate
circumstantiae ipsum accipere. Et cum omnia quae eveniunt de necessitate
eveniunt, dici potest quod talis homo non potest salvari sine tali baptismate.
Thus Englished.

[ It seems to me probable that Christ can sufficiently Baptize Infants
spiritually without this washing, and by consequence, can save them. Whence it
is commonly said, that there is a threefold Baptism of the Church, that is, the
Baptism of water, the Baptism of blood, and the Baptism of the Spirit: And
every one of them to the meet, suffices to salvation -- Nor dare I assert that
the Infants Mat. 2. killed for Christ are damned. But the Baptism of the spirit
is the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, which is simply necessary to every one that
he be saved. Therefore the other two Baptisms are antecedent signs, and
suppositively necessary to this third Baptism of the spirit. Therefore without
doubt where that insensible baptism is, the Baptized person is cleansed from
his sin: and if that be wanting, let the former be never so much present,
Baptism profits not the soul to salvation. Seeing therefore this is
insensible, and so much unknown to us, it seems to me imprudent presumption
so to define men's salvation, or damnation by their Baptism. But yet we hold
without doubting, that Infants rightly Baptized with water, are Baptized with
the third Baptism, when ( or seeing) they have Baptismal grace. -- For it is
not lawful for the faithful, on supposition of the Baptism of the spirit, to
cast off the Baptism of water, but it is necessary to receive it, when the
opportunity of circumstance is offered. And seeing whatever comes to pass,
does come to pass of necessity, it maybe said that such a one cannot be saved
without such Baptism.]

And to the question of an old woman Baptizing children in necessity, he says,
[Credimus tamen quod quaecunque Vetula vel abjecta persona rite lavante hominem
cum verbis sacramentalibus Baptismum flaminis Deus complet.] The Reader must
pardon the Latin to the Author or Printer, which may thus be Englished. [ But
we believe that what old woman soever or abject person rightly washes one with
the Sacramental words, God fulfilleth the Baptism of the spirit.]

It seems that whereas Tertullian (Mr. D.'s first witness) was for Laymens
Baptizing in case of necessity, but not for women's, that Wickliffe was for
women's also.

And to the next qu^stion, Whether Infants unbaptized when Baptism could not be
had, be all damned? he answers ( Et per haec respondeo ad etc.) that is [And
by this I answer your third objection, granting, that God if he will, may damn
such an Infant, and do him no wrong, and if he will he can save him: And I dare
not define either part: nor am I careful about reputation, or getting evidence
in the case; but as a dumb man am silent, humbly confesing my ignorance, using
conditional words viz. If he will.
; because it is not yet clear to me, whether such an Infant shall be saved or
damned: But I know that whatever God does in it will be just and a work of
mercy, to be praised of all the faithful: And let not them like presumptuous
fools, pour out themselves, that of their own authority, without knowledge,
define any thing in that matter.] -- Qui autem dicit, etc. But he that says
that in this case put, an Infant shall be saved, as it is pious to believe, he
does superfluously uncertain himself That is, determine an uncertainty.
, more than will profit him. But there are some things in Parents power though
lapsed into a thing Past, for which it is necessary by Gods just judgment,
that so it should come to pass: Therefore he that defines, that neither
Parents nor people so sinned, that it should so come to pass, does speak as a
Pie on the head of his own knowledge. But we believe it as a point of faith,
that nothing befalls a man after the first grace, unless some part of mankind
either merit or demerit, that this shall come to pass.]

In the next (thirteenth) Chapter, he proceeds to answer the question [
Quomodo animae talium Infantium sine peccato actuali decedentium punientur
(Having before spoken of Infants dying unbaptized unavoidably) that is, How the
souls of such Infants shall be punished? whether all equally or unequally? and
whether only with the punishment of loss, or also of sense?] And he concludes
contrary to the greater part of the Papists, that they shall have both the
punishment of Loss and Sense; and (Note that) that [ Necesse est peccata
originalia hominum esse inaequalia, sicut decedentes in originalibus sunt
propter illa inaequaliter condemnandi: Nam juxta dicta omnes condemnati pro
originalibus sunt condemnandi tam poena damni quam poena sensus: sed
impossible est quod condemnentur aequaliter omnino illis poenis: ergo
relinquitur quod peccata quibus illas poenas demeruerunt, inaequalia sunt
dicenda.] That is, [It must needs be that the Original sins of men are unequal,
as those that die in Original sins are unequally to be condemned for them: For
as is said, all that are condemned for original sin are condemned both with the
punishment of Loss and of Sense; But it is impossible that they should be
damned altogether equally with those pains. Therefore it remains that the
sins by which they deserved those punishments be said to be unequal].

Reader, I have been the larger in transcribing and translating the words of
Wickliffe, because an Author is not so well understood by a line or two
dismembered from the rest, as by whole discourses: and so that his sense may be
past all controversy: Here it is visible that Wickliff was so far from denying
Infant Baptism, that 1. He expressly asserteth it, 2. He never so much as notes
it for any controversy, nor makes any doubt or question about it. 3. Yea he
takes it to be bold presumption for any to take upon them to know, whether an
Infant that dies unavoidably unbaptized be saved or not, but only says God
can do it if he will, and he can damn him. 4. And to those that say that the
Parents are not in the fault, nor the people, seeing they intended his Baptism,
he says, that many things come to pass for past sins of Parents, and people,
and therefore that cannot be concluded; and nothing after the first grace
comes to pass unmerited. 5. And he concludes that those of them that are
damned for original sin, are punished with pain of loss and sense, but
unequally, having unequal original sins. 6. But Baptism he asserteth does put
away all sin in the rightly Baptized. 7. And that when Infants are rightly
Baptized with water, they are Baptized with the third Baptism having Baptismal
grace. 8. That it is according to Christ's rule that Infants be brought to the
Church to be Baptized.

And now Reader, judge what a sad case poor honest ignorant Christians are in,
that must have their souls seduced, troubled and led into Love-killing
alienations, and separations and censures of Christ's Church, and of their
particular brethren, by such a man as this? And whether they that dare use
souls at this rate, are so much better than us, as to be above our communion?
Nay whether those that lately revile the Zeal of dissenters, as cherishing the
most odious crimes, be not too much scandalized and hardened by such dealings?
When a man as pleading for Christ and Baptism dare not only print such things,
but stand to them in a second edition, and defend them by a second book, and
Rage and be Confident in reviling those that tell him of his untruths?

. 10. But he has many pretended reasons to prove that Wickliff was against
Infant Baptism, and some of them out of the very Chapters which I have
transcribed: 1. Says he, He asserted two Sacraments. 2. That believers must be
baptized in pure water, (And what are these to the purpose?) 3 That believers
are the only subjects of Baptism (A gross untruth) (But he gives you the words
that prove it [Ideo absque dubitatione si iste insensibilis baptismus affuerit,
baptizatus a crimine est mundatus: and si ille defuerit, quantumcunque essent
priores, baptismus non prodest animae ad salutem]. I gave you the words before.
And did the man think that this is any thing to his purpose? Wickliff says, [
Water Baptism saves no soul (young or old) without the Baptism of the Spirit.]
Therefore says Mr. D. Wickliff says, that Believers are the only subjects of
Baptism.] Will he make the Church of his mind by such palpable falsehoods as
these?

But he adds, [ He says that persons are first to be Baptized with that he
calls the insensible Baptism, before water, etc.] Answ. 1. Utterly false: It is
his own forgery. Wickliff says no such thing that it must be first: Nay I
doubt he says quite contrary as I have recited. [ Ideo duo baptismi priores
sunt signa Antecedentia, and ex suppositione necessaria ad istum tertium
baptismum flaminis.] See here how far this man is to be believed. 2. But though
Wickliff called Water Baptism an antecedent sign, yet most Protestant Writers I
think hold that believers Infants have by virtue of Gods Covenant the Baptism
of the Spirit, (that is, a seed or disposition to future gracious acts if they
live); and that they are in a state of salvation before they are Baptized,
being the children of the faithful by them dedicated to God, by heart-consent,
and that Baptism is but the public solemnization of the same Covenant, and
delivery of the blessings by way of investiture. Let Mr. D. read but all the
testimonies cited by Mr. Gataker in his book of Baptism, against Dr. Ward, and
Bishop Davenant, and he will see this is no opinion proper to the Anabaptists:
And I scarce believe that he can prove me and all Protestants that hold that
opinion, to be therefore against Infant Baptism: How then would it have proved
Wickliff so?

4. He says that Wickliff says that Baptism does not confer, but only
signify grace given.] Answ. 1. And what is that to prove, that he was against
Infant Baptism? 2. And how proves he this? Why, Fuller out of Cochleus says
so.

Answ. 1. But Cochleus is one of the most notable Liars of all the Papists that
opposed Luther, and has left his Calumnies to posterity! And must he be
believed against Wickliff? 2. And Fuller wrote but about twenty years ago: And
must one of our neighbors tell us what Cochleus says was the opinion of
Wickliff, when we can read his words our selves? 3. But (to make this like its
fellows) even this much is untrue, Fuller tells us no such thing out of
Cochleus, but tells us that Gregory charged Wickliff with eighteen Errors; Tho.
Arundel with twenty three; the Council of Constance with 45. Tho. Waldensis
with 80. Dr. Luck with 266. and Cochleus with 303. and then he recites 62.
out of Waldensis, where the words are. 4. And Waldensis is known to be a false
accuser of him in many particulars, though a learned Papist. 5. And even this
Waldensis that says his worst, and sought to make the most of his errors,
never here accuses him as denying Infant Baptism: And would he not have done
it, had it been true?

But Mr. D. (that by this trick which he is so ready at, can make Heresies and
Heretics also too easily) tells us of a popish Heresy, viz. for Baptism [ to
take away all sin, to confer grace, to work regeneration and save the soul, as
still held by them that teach young children to say, that by their Baptism they
were made children of God, members of Christ, and Inheritors (that is, heirs)
of the Kingdom of heaven.]

Answ. 1. By this it seems the English Protestants and all the rest that take
this to be true doctrine, hold a Popish Heresy. 2. Let the Reader peruse
Gataker against Davenant of Baptism, and he will find almost all the ancient
Fathers Latin and Greek of the same judgment: And what a pleasure is this to
the Papists to be told that almost all the ancient Writers held their heresy?
And then indeed Where was our Church and the Kingdom of Christ before Luther,
or rather before those whom he opposed? 3. It is unquestionable true doctrine
that as Marriage-consent in private, lays the first ground of Marriage
rights, which by solemn Matrimony are openly and regularly delivered by
investiture, which perfecteth the title: even so, the Heart-Consent or
Covenanting (of the person, or parents for Infants) does lay the first ground
of Christian right, which is solemnized and perfected regularly by Baptism,
which by the way of tradition or public investiture, does take away all guilt
of sin, Sacramentally regenerate, and save, and make us children of God,
members of Christ and his Church, and heirs of heaven, who were so before by a
Private initial right, of which the Church did take less cognizance: And one
would think that no Anabaptist should deny this, (called Heresy) as to the
adult.

5. He next adds from Wickliff, They are fools and presumptuous which affirm
such Infants not to be saved, which die without Baptism] so Fuller words it out
of Cochleus.

Answ. 1. False still: It is not out of Cochleus, but Waldensis. 2. And what is
this to the question of Infant Baptism?

He adds, [And Wickliffs own words as c. 2. de Trialog. Quod desinentes
parvulos fidelium sine baptismo, etc.]

Answ. Still false: 1 I have before transcribed the words out of the Printed
book which are far otherwise. 2. It is not desinentes but qui quicquam
definiunt. 3. It is not of all children dying without Baptism, but of those
that could not have it, being prevented by death, when it was desired. 4. He
says this of those that determine that they are saved also. 5. And instead of
c. 2. this is lib. 4. c. 12.

6. He says, [That all truth is contained in the holy Scripture, and that
which is not originally there, is to be accounted profane; And that we are to
admit of no science or conclusion that is not proved by Scripture testimony,
and that whoever holds the contrary opinion cannot be a Christian but flatly
the Devils Champion] with more such cited partly out of Cochleus by Fuller,
(false again) and partly de Verit. Script.] a book of Wickliffs which I have
not, and I conjecture he never saw: For 1. I told you before the very words of
Wickliff that condemn only such abuses of outward signs, as show him to be of a
contrary opinion. 2. Will any sober man believe that he damned all as no
Christians, but Champions of the Devil, that thought that some Conclusions
Physical, Mathematical, Metaphysical, Medicinal, Logical, etc. may be true that
are not proved by Scripture testimony? and so that almost all Christians in the
world are no Christians?

7. Says he [That he slighted the Authority of General Councils, as Fuller out
of Cochleus, etc.

Answ. 1. False again as to the Author. 2. But what is that to Infant Baptism?

But his direct proof is out of Waldensis saying that Wickliff says that
children are not sacramentally to be baptized.

Answ. 1. I have not Waldensis at hand, but have little cause to believe Mr. D.
2. And Fuller who undertaketh to recite Waldensis charge, has not a word of
any such sense. 3. If bitter Papists so accuse him, is it therefore true? Judge
by his own words. Indeed Wickliff held that sacramental baptism saves none
(young or old) without the baptism of the spirit; and that it may be separated
from it: And hence was the Papists noise against him.

8. Says he [As a further argument that he denied Infant Baptism, may appear,
because he did so vehemently impugn Confirmation, etc.

Answ. 1. Here we have Fuller out of Cochleus falsely again. 2. Are all
Protestants against Infant Baptism, that are against the Popish Sacrament of
Confirmation? What a prover is this man? Is Dallaeus that has written so large
a disputation of Confirmation, an Anabaptist? And the English Nonconformists
too? 3. But in very deed, Mr. D.'s falsehood and Wickliffs opinion for
Infant Baptism, may very probably be gathered from that (not fifteenth as he,
but) fourteenth Chapt. of Confirmation: For, 1. He reprehendeth the Bishops for
adding so many Ceremonies to Infant Baptism, never blaming their baptism it
self. 2. He argues against confirming children, as superfluous, because the
spirit is given in baptism it self [ and confirmatur ex hoc quod baptizatos
nostros dicimus regulariter Spiritum Sanctum accipere eo ipso quo legitime
baptizantur, that is, And it is hence confirmed, in that we say that our
baptized ones do regularly receive the Holy Ghost, in that (or by that very
thing) that they are lawfully baptized.] And he had before said that they are
offered to Baptism in the Church according to Christ's Rule.

. 11. After all this Mr. D. adds Wickliffs opinions against Popery to the
number of 29. But what all this is to the case of Infant Baptism, what man
besides himself can tell? But let me tell him that I would not have him too
easily believe bitter adversary Papists, lest he forfeit the little relicts of
his own credit: And that it is not like that Wickliff was against enjoining the
Lords-Prayer as he cites: Yea, I would not have Mr. D. come so near the
Papists yet as Wickliff did. How does he like such words as these [Trialog. li.
4. c. 22. fol. 138. Et talis est triplex Ecclesia; Ecclesia scilicet Militans,
Dormiens, and Triumphans -- Ecclesia Dormiens est praedestinati in Purgatorio
patientes -- that is, There is such a threefold Church: The militant Church,
the sleeping Church, the triumphant Church: -- The sleeping Church is the
Predestinate suffering in Purgatory.]

And lib. 2. c. 10. see what he says of Angels and adoration of them. And c.
11. of Angels offices, and their being virtually every where. And what he says
of Kings, and Matrimony ( quod excedit alia Sacramenta, etc.) li. 4. c. 19, 20.
fol. 132, 133. Nor would I say that omnia quae eveniunt de necessitate
eveniunt, as fol. 120. a. Or that Deus potest esse Asinus si velit, ut fol. 90.
b.

One of the worst things I like in Wickliff is, that he plungeth himself into
the deepest School-subtilties, or difficulties, with less subtilty or diligence
than the case requires, and than Schoolmen use. And indeed I like not diverse
of his conclusions; as lib. 2. c. 14. fol. 41. [ Quod Deus necessitat creaturas
singulas activas ad quemlibet actum suum:] It is supposed that Hobbs by the
same Doctrine overthrows all the Christian faith: And I believe that his
doctrine there fol. 41. and elsewhere, for merit, and how temporale sit causa
praedestinationis aeternae, will displease some. And his distinction of Mortal
and Venial sin, as li. 3. c. 5. fol. 52. And that he makes final impenitence
the sin against the Holy Ghost; And that none can know what sin is mortal in
us, and what not? And cap. 6. Concedi potest quod multi praesciti sunt in
gratia secundum praesentem justitiam: It may be granted that many reprobates
are in (a state of) Grace, according to their present righteousness --
Praesciti autem nunquam sunt in gratia finalis perseverantiae: The Reprobate
are never in the grace of final perseverance. So that he held that present true
grace was lost by some, as Austin did, which he explaineth cap. 7. And cap. 8.
again he is at his Omnia eveniunt necessitate absoluta reviewing what he had
said, and concludes that [ no man can do better than he does; but he could if
God would] and denies not sin to be hereby necessitated, etc.

. 12. Page 115. He again impenitently renews his slander of Berengarius, as
being against Infant Baptism: Concerning whom says Usher de success. Eccles.
cap. 7. p. 207. [ Author Actorum, etc. The Author of the Acts of Bruno (found
in the Library of the Noble Baron Carew of Clopton) who says he was at this
examination, says, that they (some of Berengarius followers) said that baptism
profited not children to salvation, as also Deodvinus Leodiensis first from
common fame, and then Guitmundus Arch. Aversanus on the credit of Leodiensis
report that Bruno Andegavensis and Berengarius Turonensis [quantum in ipsis
erat baptismum parvulorum evertisse] did as much as in them lay overthrow the
baptism of children; But we find no charge ever brought against Berengarius
concerning Anabaptism, in so many Synods as were held against him: Nor do they
seem to have denied any thing else, who are said to deny that baptism profits
little Ones to Salvation, but that Baptism conferreth Grace ex opere operato:
As gathering from the Apostles words, He that planteth and he that waters is
nothing, but God that gives the increase: So Alanus li. 1. cont. haer^t. sui
temp. takes them as if they had said [Baptism has no efficacy either on young
or old; therefore m^n are not bound to be baptized.]

And that this was the plain case is proveable, in that it was just the case of
Wickliff and the Waldenses, who were said to do as much as in them lay to cast
out Infant Baptism, because they thought that every wicked Priest did not
sanctify them ex opere operato, and infallibly convey Gods grace to the
unprepared.

But his proofs are [1. The Magdeb. tell us that Berengarius maintained his
heresies, which they set down to be denying Transubstantiation, and Baptism to
little ones, under five heads, which Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury answers
at large in his book called Scintillaris: and as to that of denying
Infant Baptism he answers by saying, he does thereby oppose the general
Doctrine and universal Consent of the Church.

Answ. 1. I have not the Magdeb. at hand, but he has little to do that will
ask Illyricus, and Gallus and Amsdorfius what Lanfrank writes, if he have his
book before him. The publisher of Lanfranks book against Berengarius gives us
notice of no other. Trithemius de script. Eccles. knew of no other but this,
which is in Bibl. Patr. Tom. 6. p. 190. And I have looked over every line of it
(such labor do these men put us to) and I find not one word where any such
thing is mentioned by Lanfrank: but only his accusations of Ber. about
Transubstantiation: He never once charge him as denying Infant Baptism, nor
mentions it. See, Reader, into what hands the poor seduced ones are fallen.

. 13. His second proof is this, Cassandra in his Epistle to the Duke of Cleve
says, that Guitmund Bishop of Averse does affirm that he did deny baptism to
Little Ones, etc.

Answ. 1. Cassander in neither of his Epistles to the Duke of Cleve mentions
any such matter. But in his Preface to his Book for Infant Baptism to the Duke
of Cleve, he says that Guitmund says [ Quod inter caeteros errores,
parvulorum baptismum everterit, quem tamen errorem in publicum non produxit,
quod eam blasphemiam ut Guitm. loquitur, ne pessimorum quidem hominum aures
toleraturas sciret, and in Scripturis sacris locum ejus erroris tuendi penitus
non videret.]

Mark here Reader, 1. Berengarius is not said to deny Infant Baptism, but to
overturn it, (that is, by some consequence it is like.) 2. He did not publish
this his opinion, but held it unpublished: And how then did Guitmund know it?
3. Was Berengarius as honest or as stout a man as he is supposed, and yet when
Infants were daily baptized, would never speak out his thoughts of the evil of
it? 4. Either he baptized Infants himself, or not. If he did, was he against it
then? What a Knave do they make him that so say? If not, his opinion must needs
be published by his practice, when they whose ears could not tolerate it, would
less tolerate the refusing of their Childrens Christning. 5. Was that an honest
man that would secretly hold an opinion which he knew he had no Scripture for?
6. Note that even Cassander there tells us, that indeed the Waldenses though
agreeing much with the Catharists, did yet both approve and use Infant Baptism,
p. 671. and that this error slept till his age when Stork and Muntzer raised it.

. 14. 2. But what need we ask Cassander what Guitmund said? What childish play
is this? His own book is as common as Cassanders in Bibl. Patr. To. 6. p. 215.
And Guitmunds words are these [ Berengarius opened those things by which he
might please worldly men, that love always (if they may do it unpunished) to
sin: to wit, destroying as much as in him lay Lawful Marriages, and overturning
Infants baptism: So that in one the Devil by his mouth persuaded the worst men
that it was lawful to abuse all women; and in the other [ Cassato baptismate
Infantiae in profundum omnium malorum, utpote postmodum baptizandis, impune
ruere: Lege Epist. Leodiensis Episcopi contra Berengar. ad Henr. Reg. Franc.
and eisdem pene verbis eadem ipsa ibi scripta reperies] that is, [making void
the baptism of Infancy, they might rush unpunished into the depth of all
evils, as being afterward to be baptized. Read the Epistle of the Bishop of
Liege to H. R. of France against Berengarius, and there you shall find these
same things written, almost in the same words.]

And now, Reader, judge further, 1. Whether this Papist who never knew the
matter himself, and whose book shows him a silly bitter fellow professing to
transcribe or take his words from the Bishop of Liege who took it from fame, be
to he believed in his accusations of such a man, when Lanfrank that disputed
with him before the Pope, nor the Pope himself, nor any of the many Synods that
examined him, and constrained him to recant, ever mention such a thing? Were
these Persecutors think you blind or merciful herein? 2. If he be to be
believed in this, why not in the first article, of the lawfulness of abusing
all women commonly? 3. Do not the very words [ quantum in se, and everterit]
and [ cassato baptismate] open the case, that malice gathered this as a forced
consequence only of some words of Berengarius? It is like because he defined a
Sacrament to their dislike, which Lanfrank reproves him for.

And so sottish a fellow was this Guitmund that his fellow Papists are put to
disown him for saying that their Eucharistical Host cannot be corrupted or
putrify, or be eaten by Mice, or any Bruits, but only seems so to be: ib. p.
230. l. 2.

. 15. His third proof is [In the Bibl. Patr. Paris p. 432. it is recorded that
Durandus -- writes -- the denying and as much as in them lay the destroying the
baptism of Infants, etc.

Answ. 1. Did this man ever see the Books he cites, who cites page 432. of
the Bibl. Pat. as if were but one Tomb or Volume, that long ago was eleven
great Volumes, and now many more? It is like Marg. le Bigness Edit. is that he
means. The Epistle is Tom. 3. p. 319. of the Bigne Paris 1624. The Author,
says Usher de succes. Eccl. p. 196. is falsely called Durandus, and is
Deoduinus or Dietwinus. His words are [ Fama supremos Galliae fines
praetergressa totam Germaniam pervasit, jamque omnium nostrum replevit aures,
qualiter Bruno Andeg. Episc. item Berengarius Turonensis -- astruant Corpus
Domini non tam Corpus esse quam umbram and figuram Corporis Domini, Legitima
conjugia destruant, and quantum in ipsis est, baptismum parvulorum evertant.]
This is it that Usher cited: 1. You see here is nothing but a Papist Prelates
tale to a King, upon far fetched fame, 2. Charging him equally, yea more with
destroying marriage, 3. And saying but [ quantum in se] of baptism; 4. And part
of the fame is that the King had called a Council to examine these things;
which Council never taking notice of any such matter confuteth the fame. And
does Mr. D. the great enemy of Antichrist persuade poor Anabaptists to believe
such fellows and tales as these?

. 16. In his Reply he adds fourthly [ Thuanus witnesses that Bruno
Archbishop of Triers did persecute Berengarius for denying Infants baptism, as
p. 242.

Answ. 1. Again he tells us of Thuanus, and tells not where, as if we must read
over five volumes in folio to be able to disprove such a Tale-teller as this?
But he says Usher says so de success. Eccl. page 252. But all still is false:
my book there has not such a word. Vshers words are page 207. and them also he
most horribly falsifieth. They are but these [ Brunonem queque Trevirorum Arch.
Dioecesi sua expulisse quosdam ex Berengarii Sectatoribus qui illius Doctrinam
in Eburonibus Atuaticis and aliis Belgii populi^ disseminabant, narrat
Thuanus.] That is, [ Thuanus says that Bruno Archbishop of Trevers expelled
out of his Diocese some of Berengarius's followers, who sowed his doctrine,
etc.] so that here is no talk of persecuting Berengarius, but some of his
followers, nor a word of Infant Baptism. Was ever such a reporter as this man
before taken for a credible person? I confess I remember not that ever I read
the like, among Papists or any other Sect.

In Thuanus the words are found in his Epistle to the King before all his
works, excellently dissuading him from blood and persecution, and there is not
one syllable of Infant Baptism; but only that which Usher cited: yet durst this
man justify these horrid falsehoods in a second Edition and a Reply.

CHAP. III. Mr. D.'s Justification of his slander of the Waldenses, Confuted
more largely.
. 1. IN his Reply p. 108. he reassumeth this Calumny. And first he recites
their Confession to prove it: as if he wanted matter to fill his Book, not
having one word against Infant Baptism in that which is by himself recited: But
it must be inferred, if such a man as this be to be believed, because faith is
required (in the adult, and them that Covenant for Infants) and because
Traditions and Inventions are disclaimed, and such like. Had the man dealt by
the Waldenses but as he does by me, when citing my words he will prove that my
words are for him while I am against him, (as if I understood not what I say)
it had been much less. But to face down the world that the Waldenses denied
Infant Baptism for such silly reasons, is intolerable. It is not worth the
labor to show him how the Protestants agree with the Waldenses in all the
points where he feigneth a disagreement, p. 112.

. 2. Yet does the man break out into admiration that he having with exactness
given a particular account of all those Confessions word for word, -- and
proved by ample demonstrations, 1. That none of them were extant till the
sixteenth Century, etc.

Answ. Wonderful! That such a man should talk of exactness and demonstration.
Stay Reader a little, and tell me whether it call not for shame and tears that
one such Book should be written by a Christian? Much more that this calumny
should be thus over and over audaciously justified?

. 3. In Roger Wendover (our chiefest ancient Chronicler, and one that he often
cites himself, and therefore should have read) In Hen. 2. fol. 319. b. You
have a Confession of the Tholousians called Boni homines in which are these
words [ Credimus etiam quod non salvatur quis, nisi qui baptizatur; and
parvulos salvari per baptisma.] That is, [We believe also that none is saved
but he that is baptized, and that little children are saved by baptism] (For we
find that it was the denial of the saving virtue of wicked Priests baptism (to
young or old) as working ex opere operato, which occasioned their accusations:)
would you have a fuller proof?

Usher de succes. Eccl. c. 6. p. 155, etc. gives us the Catalogue of their
opinions as reported by Aeneas Sylvius (after Pope Pius the second) where there
is somewhat of theirs against Confirmation, Chrism, Extreme Unction, etc. but
not a word against Infant Baptism; adding the consent of Jacob. Picolomin.
Anton. Bonfin. Bern. Lutzenburg. Another Catalogue he gives out of the Magdeb.
hist. Centur. 12. c. 8. col. 1206, 1207. as taken out of an old M.S. where is
not a word against Infant Baptism: Yea recites Will. Reynolds a bitter Papists
Catalogue, where there is no such thing: Yea, mentions nine points more in
which Parsons, Sanders, Coccius say they differ from us, but none of this. And
page 242. c. 8. he tells you of Gretsers own confession that they were none but
the Waldenses that Hoveden speaks of, that made the foresaid Confession,
though accused of Arianism. See more testimonies of many others, page 306, 307,
308.

Thuanus (falsely cited by him as before of Berengarius) lib. 6. an. 2550.
recites their opinions, page 185, 186. not mentioning a word of this; nay,
telling us that some falsehoods were reported of them, does not so much as
number this among the fictions. And page 188. he tells you of an inquiry made
into their Original and Doctrine by Gul. Bell. Langaeus, commanded by Authority
thereto, wherein no such thing is mentioned of them, but their avoiding Popish
superstitions.

In the first Confession recited by Perin (p. 60.) they own baptism, but say
not a word against Infant Baptism.

The same is true of the second Confession recited by him, p. 62, 63.

In the end of Perin you have their Catechism, and the sum of their Doctrine
out of several of their old Books; and therein not a word against
Infant Baptism, but expressly they assert it: Cap. 6. p. 41, 42, 43. in their
Doctrine of the Sacraments, they say [And for this cause we present our
Children in haptism; which they ought to do, to whom the children are nearest,
as their Parents, and they to whom God has given this charity.] Just as
Wickliff* Judge now of this man's words?

. 4. But his second Demonstration is from the witness born against it by some
of their most eminent leading men, viz. Berengarius, Peter Bruis, Henricus
Arnoldus --

Answ. Berengarius is not used to be reckoned as one of the Waldenses, but if
you will so call him, I have confuted the slander of him before.

His proof against Bruis is Peter Cluniacensis, of whom I have said enough to
Mr. Tombs which I will not recite.

. 5. It is true that some Papists do rail at the Waldenses with abominable
calumnies, as guilty of the most odious heresies, [denying the resurrection,
and the salvation of Infants, asserting the common use of women, and abundance
such:] Insomuch that it is become a hard question whether really there were any
such people, or whether all were slanders: and among other things they charge
them with denying Infant Baptism. And the Authors go so much on fame, and show
so much falsehood, that many think that all are fictions. But Bishop Usher (de
succes. Eccl.) and some others bring many testimonies to prove that in that age
there were abundance of Manichees that came into Lombardie, and from thence
came into the country of the Waldenses; and that for their sakes the Papists
accused the Waldenses of all these villainies and heresies with Anabaptism, as
if they had been all of a mind. And though I confess that the horrid lies of
abundance of Papists of Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius and other such, and some
experiments in this age, have given men occasion to question whether all were
not mere forgeries, and that nothing is to be believed that they said of those
times; yet I am ready to think that there were some such persons as they
describe that were against the Resurrection, and for common uncleanness, and
denied Infants salvation and baptism, even such Manichees and Arrians as
aforesaid: Not that I think it any whit strange that fame among such worldly
persecutors should belie others as much as this comes to; but because of the
historical reports of such Manichees recited by Usher ubi sup. page 225, 226,
etc. cap. 8. and Vignier Hist. Eccles. an. 1023. And that they falsely took the
Waldenses to have been of the Manichees mind, as living among them, is all the
cloak that any reasonable charity can afford to those old ones that falsely
accused them: And to the later slanderers ( Coussordus, Gretser, etc.) this
will be no cloak, much less to Mr. Danvers if in his zeal for his Sect and way,
he will own the slanders of blinded Papists, when he cries them down himself,
and has had time and means to know their calumniation.

To all this, let the Reader add but the perusal of the gross contradictions of
their accusers against each other, (yea the same Author as reported by
Coussardus saying one thing, and as published by Gretser saying the contrary, I
mean Raynerius.) And let him consider of the testimony of Vignier concerning an
old Copy of their Doctrine showed to the great and excellent Chancellor of
France, Mich. Hospitalius, wholly agreeing with the doctrine of the later
Waldenses, and renouncing only the Popish superstitions: And the testimony of
Poplinerius that by many old fragments and monuments which he had seen, in the
language of their Country, and by the Acts yet kept of the Disputation between
the Bishop of Apanica and Mr. Arnolt, and by their own Confessions which many
assured him they had seen, the old Albigenses doctrine was altogether conform
to the Protestants doctrine, Usher, p. 308. c. 10. And then judge whether the
charge of Anabaptistry, and all Manichaean abominations be credible.

. 6. But (says Mr. D.) Cassander testifies in his Epistle to the Duke of
Cleve that Peter Bruis and Henricus denied baptism to little ones, affirming
that only the adult should be baptized.

Answ. Read but Cassanders Pref. and judge of the Credit of this man's
accusations. 1. Cassander says, that it was the Manichees and Priscillianists
(who were Gnostics says Sulpit. Severus who lived in Priscillians time) that
brought in the errors after mentioned by him, which swarmed in Bernards days;
And that this Heresy bred them that were called Catharists, a name belonging
to one of the three sects of Manichees: but in France they were called
Albigenses, from the place, and that it was to these Manichean and Priscillian
errors, that they added the denial of Infant Baptism. (...) He says, Peter
Bruis, and Henry, seem to have been the chief Authors of this addition; but in
a far differing sense from the later Anabaptists; For Peter and Henry equally
denied Baptism and salvation to Infants, or any but actual believers. 3. And
for the surmise of Peter and Henry he takes the word of Peter the Abbot
Cluniacensis: so that Cassander does but what Mr. D. does, even report
Cluniacensi. 4. And he professes that the Waldenses called Picards, whose
relicts were in Moravia and Bohemia to that day, [did approve and use
Infant Baptism as consentaneous to the Gospel] as I before cited him.

. 7. His next proof is [Dr. Prideaux says in his Lat. Councils, that Peter
Bruis and Arnold of Brixia, were in the second Laterane Council censured for
the heresy of rejecting Infant Baptism, etc.]

Answ. I have seldom read an Author whose Proofs are liker one another: 1. Why
must we be told what Dr. Prideaux says of the acts of an old Council, as
easily known by us as by him? 2. Reader, there is not the least proof of any
such matter meddled with in that Council: Peter Crab does not so much as name
that Council: Binius only tells you that the Acts of the Council are not
extant, but that Abbas Vrspergensis, and Otto Frisingensis give us some account
of what they did, whose words have not a syllable about any such subject, but
only that they condemned the Schismatics who adhered to Peter Leo, an
Antipope. 3. But how came Dr. Prideaux so to mistake? Answ. Those Papers of Dr.
Prideaux were posthumous shreds, which whether he would have owned we cannot
tell. But that which he says, is that there were thirty Canons lately
published as that Council's, which Bellarmine himself rejects as false: And
seeing I never saw that forgery I cannot say whether any such thing be in it,
which Prideaux's words recite: But it must be from that or from nothing. And is
this a good proof for Prideaux to tell you what a forged writing says, which
Crab and Binius and Bellarmine eject or take for false? 4. But what if that
Council had so accused Bruis and Arnold, are they to be (believed of them? But
there is no such thing proved.

. 8. His next proof is from Bernard, of whom I need to say no more than what
Cassander, Usher and others have often said, that it was the foresaid Manichean
Heretics called Catharists that Bernard describes by the name of Apostolic.
And that he went by fame (as Leodiensis did) which falsely accused the
Albigenses among them as guilty of the same heresies; And that the same Bernard
accuses those that he spoke of, of other heinous things; If you believe from
him that the Albigenses were guilty of the one, you have the same testimony
that they were guilty of the other.

. 9. His next proof is the report of a late Papist Jos. Vicecomes, l. 2. c. 1.
Whom he also after mentions in his Reply, who as truly numbreth Luther,
Calvin, and Beza with the adversaries of Infant Baptism. If such witnesses be
his proof, he could not have chosen better for his turn than him and Cochleus,
and some such calumniators, of which sort I could name him more.

. 10. His last witness is, Dr. Hammond confesses that Peter Bruis and Henry
his Scholar and the Petrobrusiani and Henricani that sprung from them opposed
Infant Baptism.]

Answ. 1. Not a word of Dr. Hammonds books is cited to prove this, but Mr.
Tombs his Review. And must we know of Mr. Tombs what Dr. Hammond held? No
wonder then if I and the world must learn what I hold my self, and what I have
written, from such as Mr. Danvers and Mr. Tombs. And why not also from all the
rest that have written against me? 2. I think it not worth my labor to search
over Dr. Hammonds books to see whether he has said this or not: seeing I know
that he was my neighbor and lived so lately that he had no other means to know
what these two men and their followers held, than what we and others have as
well as he. You must give us elder proofs than this. 3. And if it were asserted
by him or proved by others, it were no proof that the Waldenses denied
Infant Baptism; but it would only follow that Bruis and Henry were Manichees
and not Waldenses, which seems to be the mistake of their later accusers at
least.

. 11. Page 120. He proves Mr. Wills guilty of unfaithfulness, want of
conscience, cheating, forgery; and after, page 122. of manifold Lying. Because,
1. He knows that Cluniacensis -- has given no such wicked and false
testimony, etc. And how proves he that? [ For both Osiander and the Magdeb.
from whom he had it, give an account of Fifteen particulars etc.] Answ. 1. Does
that prove that Cluniac. has no more? 2. Do they say that those fifteen are
all? 3. And does that prove that Mr. Wills knew it, who never says, that he
ever saw Cluniacensis book? as it seems Mr. D. did not. 4. Does Mr. D. himself
know it, of a book never read? See how this accuser proves Lies? For my part I
have not at hand either Cluniack or Osiander, or the Magdeb. and will not be at
the labor to get and search them for nothing.

. 12. Page 121. he says, [ He knows that these particulars he mentions, were
not charged on Peter Bruis but on the Albigeo's in the following Century by
other hands than Bernard and Cluniacensis who were dead long before.

Answ. 1. How know you another man's knowledge? 2. Long before what? Before any
such accusations on the Albigenses? Read Bernards Sermon. 66. in Cant. Says
Usher (than whom few men ever knew such matters better, or more truly reported
them) de succes. c. 8. p. 232. Bernard Sermon. 65. and 66. in Cant. mentions
their opinions partly common with the Manichees, partly with the Orthodox. And
that the Manichees were before among them he before proved at large, and that
they (called Cathari) were by ordinary error mistaken for Waldenses and
Leonists. And p. 236. says he [ Sic and Apostolicis Bernardus Clareval.
Catharis Eckbertus Schnang. Popelicanis Guido Armorican. atque Albigensibus
Regordus Regis Franc. Chronographus, haeresin attribuit quam Apostolus
praedixerat -- detestantem nuptias, and carnem comedere prohibentem. (Which in
Bernard and Ecbertus are commonly to be seen) Quod ut de Manicheis in terra
Albig. commorantibus admitti potest, ita de toto Albig. genere dictum
falsissimum esse constat, sive cum Thuano a Pet. Valdo sive cum Papir. Massonio
a Pet. Bruisio eorum originem placeat repetere -- And p. 237, 238. he says, A
Petro Brusio and ejus successore Henrico qui (ut ex Pet. Cluniacensi
intelligitur) -- per annos viginti doctrinam suam disseminarunt Albigensium
sectam deducit P. Massonius, -- Apostolicos etiam de quibus Sermon. 66. in Cant.
agit Bernardus, eosdem esse opinatur Tham. Waldensis cum Publicanis.

. 13. Page 123. he proves that the Waldenses did deny Infant Baptism, from the
Decrees of 12. several Princes, and Popes. For proof of that he refers us to
his former book. When I look there I find as cited p. 248, etc. his evidence is
as follows.

1. Dr. Usher out of the Fragments of Aquit. by P. Pithaeus tells us, that in
the time of Robert King of France, they of Aquit and Toulouse, (principal
places of the Waldenses) did deny Baptism (for so they called denying Baptism
to little ones) etc.

Answ. Mark Reader the trustiness of this man. 1. He makes denying Baptism (to
signify) only denying it to Infants, without a word of proof; 2. He leaves
out the denying of our Redeemer, denying Lawful Marriage, and the eating of
flesh, etc. though conjoined in the testimony. 3. He feigneth this to be said
of the Waldenses, which is expressly said in the history to be spoken of the
Manichees? Is not this an excellent Prover? The words of Pithaeus history cited
by Usher de succes. p. 229. are these, Emersisse in Gallia Manichaeos, etc.
Pith. [Evestigio exorti sunt per Aquitaniam Manichaei seducentes -- suadebant
negare baptismum, signum crucis, Ecclesiam, and ipsum Redemptorem seculi,
honorem Sanctorum, conjugia legitima, esum carnium -- simili modo apud Tholesam
inventi sunt Manichaei, and ipsi igne cremati sunt: and per diversas Occidentis
parts Manichaei, exorti -- Of the real presence here is nothing.

. 14. 2. Says Mr. D. [Dr. Usher also tells us out of Pap. Masson. that 14.
Citizens of Orleans, were convict of the same heresy, for denying Baptismal
grace, and the real presence, annd burnt alive, Herbert, Lisius and Stephen --

Answ. Here note, 1. The history cited by Usher (Johan. Floriacensis, referente
Masson.) says, [ abnegabant sacri baptismi gratiam] but not a word of Infants:
And it was known that the Waldenses opinion was that Priests did not ex opere
operato give the Holy Ghost, nor Baptism without the Holy Ghost, save any
(young or old). 2. It adds that they denied pardon of sin to be received,
Marriage, meats which God created, and fat.

. 15. 3. He adds, [Dr. Usher tells us, -- Many of this Sect were about Milan,
etc.

Answ. Vshers words are out of Chron. Herman. Contract. [Quosdam haereticos,
etc. certain heretics among other opinions of ill error, of the Manichean
Sect, execrating the eating of all Animals -- were hanged -- ]. 1. He proves
by this, that they were not the Waldenses, but Manichees. 2. Not eating flesh
is charged on them. 3. But not a word there of Baptism of young or old.

. 15. 3. He adds, [ Also out of Radulph. Ard. -- that several whom they
called the Manichean Sect denied Baptism, etc.]

Answ. Note 1. Ardens words cited by Usher are, [ Tales sunt etc. Such are the
Manichean heretics at this time -- who falsely say they keep the life of the
Apostles; saying that they lie not, nor swear at all; and on pretense of
abstinence, and continence, do damn eating flesh and marriage: They say that it
is as heinous a crime to go to a Wife, as to a Mother, or Daughter: They damn
the Old Testament: of the New, some they receive, and some not: and which is
worse, they predicate two Makers of the World, believe that God made Invisibles
and the Devil visibles. So that they secretly adore the Devil, who they think
made their bodies. The Sacrament of the Altar they say is mere bread: Baptism
they deny: They say none can be saved but by their hands: They deny the
Resurrection of the body.]

1. Here is not a word of Infants; 2. They are described and called fully
Manichees. 3. If this testimony be true, believe it: If not, trust it not, or
at least forge not such words as are not here.

. 16. He adds, [Pope Leo the Ninth in his Decret. to Bishop Aquit. about
1050. commands that young children be Baptized, because of original sin].

Answ. I will not turn to see whether it be so* but what is this to the purpose?
The Pope bids Baptize Infants: Ergo not only the Manichees but the Waldenses
denied it? I deny that consequence.

. 17. He adds, [ Greg. 7. decreed 1070. that those young children whose Parents
were absent or unknown, should according to the Tradition of the Fathers be
Baptized.]

Answ. If this prove that the Waldenses were against Infant Baptism, it will
prove that Papists, Protestants and all are so? what proving is this? Of
Bernard (next cited) we spoke before.

. 18. His next witness is, [ Ecbertus a great Doctor against the Cathari, etc.

Answ. Note Reader, that this Great Doctor was a Monk, and after an Abbot* who
says that the Catharists against whom he wrote, 1. Deny and damn Marriage. 2.
And all eating of flesh, because it comes by copulation. 3. That they say that
the Devil made all flesh. 4. That they do not only say Baptism profits not
Infants, but more commonly though more privately, that no water Baptism
profits any one to salvation -- And that Christ was not truly born of a
Virgin, nor had humane flesh, but a show of it, nor rose from the dead, but
seemed to die, and rise. They are Manichees: They keep the feast of Manicheus
death: That they hold that men's souls are nothing but the apostate Spirits cast
out of heaven, which by good works here may procure salvation:] If all this be
true, were these the Waldenses? and is this Mr. D.s proof -- Bibliot. Pat. To.
4. p. 2. p. 79. etc.

. 19. His next proof is, [ Erbrardus another great ^octor, etc.]

Answ. This Erbrardus professes to confute in the heretics that he deals
with, 1. That the Law is not of faith, but is to be reprobate etc. 2. He
proves it against them that the Prophets and Patriarchs are saved. 3. That it
was the true God that gave Moses the Law. 5. That God made all things, and that
they falsely held a Good and a Bad Maker of the World. 6. That children should
be Baptized. 7. That it is lawful to marry. 9. For the Resurrection, and so on.
And are these Waldenses and this man to he believed of them too?

. 20. Ermingendus another great Writer is his next proof.

Answ. This Ermingardus alias Ermengandus, (we pardon him the misnaming)
writes against Heretics that hold, 1. That an evil God made the World. 2.
That there are two Gods, a Good, and a Malignant. 3. That it was not the true
God that gave Moses the Law. 4. That Moses was a Magician. 5. That Marriage is
unlawful, and so on as the rest, even to the denial of the Resurrection. And
about Baptism ( Cap. 12. page 1249. Bibl. Pat. To. 4. Part. 1.) that Baptism
profits neither young nor old without the imposition of their hands.] Is this a
good witness that the Waldenses were against Infant Baptism?

Reader, I am almost at the end of his proofs here, and yet have not patience
thus to lose precious time, in opening the rest of his abuses: The few
remaining are like the rest! Yet here he foundeth his proof of Twelve Decrees,
and ends with an insultation against me and others.

. 21. In his Reply, p. 125. he adds Reinerius; which gives me occasion to tell
the Reader, that if he will peruse this one Author, he will better understand
the truth of the whole business, than by reading many confounders that speak
upon fame they know not what. This Rhei^herus tells us, that he was one of the
Arch-hereticks, and among them seventeen years; that is the Catharists: He
tells us upon his own knowledge, not only how many sorts of them there were,
whom (being then an Inquisitor) he calls heretics, but also how many
Churches the Catharists had, and what number each Church had, and where they
were, and what every Sect held, as different from the rest. Whereas many
ignorant writers of those times confound them. From him we have distinct notice
that the Manichees and Catharists then held the horrid heresies charged on the
Waldenses, and that the Leonists or Pauperes de Lugduno (the true Waldenses and
Albigenses) were indeed free from them; and about Worship and Church
Government, they differed from the Pontificians as the Protestants do: But for
doctrinals (about Predestination, Free Will, Man's Power, Venial sin,
Justification, Merit, etc.) there is no regardable difference charged on them.
Cap. 5. he gives you a Catalogue of the Leonists opinions, of which twenty are
against the Papal Government: Then he says, they damn the Sacraments of the
Church: And here come in the words cited by Mr. D. Where note, 1. That he
makes them say that [ Catechism is nothing] 2. Item quod ablutio, quae datur
Infantibus nihil profit.] That the washing which is given to Infants, profits
not. [3. That the Godfathers understand not what they should answer to the
Priest.] 4. That they reject exorcismes, and the benedictions of Baptism --
that a Priest in mortal sin may not consecrate the Sacrament, etc.] And let the
Reader note that the Popish doctrine then was, that all Baptized Infants were
certainly saved, because Baptized, how wicked soever the Parents, Priest, and
Godfathers were: And that all these (Priests, Parents, and Godfathers) were
then so often grossly ignorant and wicked, as became the scandal of all good
people. And note that here Reinherus says not that they rejected Baptism of
Infants, nor held it unlawful, but that, 1. Ablutio, the outward washing. 2.
Quae datur, which de facto was then given Infants, 3. Nihil profit, profits
nothing, plainly meaning no more but that the children of wicked ignorant
Parents, presented by Godfathers that know not so much as what to answer the
Priest, and Baptized by wicked Priests who tell them that ex opere operato they
are now certainly in a state of salvation, are not saved by this washing,
unless they have also the Baptism of the spirit, which is not this way
ascertained to them.

And accordingly they meant of Catechizing; that is, of the Popish Catechizing
only; And of the other Sacraments, as under the Popish notion of a Sacrament
which gives grace ex opere operato. And when he says that [ Sacramentum
Conjugii damnant] he opens the mystery of that accusation. 1. They denied
Marriage to be a Sacrament. 2. And he says [ Dicentes mortaliter peccare
conjuges, si absque speprolis conveniant.] It seems they were too rigid for
Chastity, but not against Marriage.

. 22. And that this is the true meaning of Reinherus appears, 1. By the
phrase of the context. 2. In that he never offers to confute any such error
of theirs, as the denial of the lawfulness of Infants Baptism. 3. And speaki^g
Cap. 6. of the Orthibenses he further expounds all [ Parvulis vero non
prodest nisi fuerint perfecti in secta illa] the words before being [ De
baptismo dicunt, quod nihil valeat, nisi quantum valiant merita baptizantis.]
So that it is not Antipaedobaptism that he accuses them of, but that Baptism
profits not Infants unless the Baptizers (or Parents) be good: that is, as
aforesaid, when done by wicked Priests to the children of the wicked.

. 23. And for further evidence, the next Historian added by Gretser, (Bibl.
Patr. To. 4. Part. 2. p. 776.) Pet. Pilichdorf seems one of the most learned
and acquainted with what he wrote of any other that have then written against
the Waldenses, and he refuteth their opinion of the invalidity of Sacraments,
when administered by wicked Priests, c. 16, 17. But never says a word of their
denying Infant Baptism, even when he accurately and copiously in Thirty six
Chapters reckons up and confuteth their differences from the Papal Church. And
can we think such a man (and almost all that confound them not with the
Catharists that were Manichees) would overlook this, in such a persecuting
bloody time; when they racked every word of the poor dissenters to make a
heresy of it?

. 24. To Pilichdorf is added another accurate confuter of their opinions, that
has not a word of any such charge.

And next is added an exact Catalogue of their (supposed) errors to the number
of Thirty seven, and not a word of this among them all.

And next is added the Modus examinandi haereticos; And next de erorribus
Begehurdorum; and have not a word of it.

What the Papist doctrine was you need no better informer than Lucas Tudensis
foregoing ( Part. 1.636. who writes against worse persons (though Gretser
intitleth it against the Albigenses) and yet charge them not with this) viz.
Cap. 1. li. 2. [ In case of necessity every Neophyte maybe Baptized, of any
Layman, Jew, Heretic, or Gentile. But for the dignity of the Sacrament it
must be done by a Presbyter or Deacon, if there be opportunity, and received
from any other, it is not at all to be iterated. By this Sacrament, both
Infants and adult are Regenerated of Water, and the Spirit, and receive
remission of all sins, with the adoption of the children of God.

. 25. If all this will not clear the Waldenses at Mr. D.'s bar, and if he look
that we should take notice of his Dutch Martyrologie, and his Merningus, let
him that erreth, err still.

CHAP. IV. His Impenitence in Calumniating the Donatists (and Novatians)
reprehended.
. 1. Page 132. of his Reply he returns to this notorious calumny, and
charging Mr. Wills with disingenuity he falls to his wonted way of proving, 1.
From Sebastian Frank and Twisk, whom I neither have at hand, nor am obliged to
believe in telling me what the Donatists held, nor to believe that Mr. D. here
so differs from himself, as truly to report them. Once for all, It is usual
with Writers to charge the Anabaptists as following the Donatists in
Rebaptizing, but not in denying Infant Baptism: For the Donatists baptized
again both Infants and adult. And it is like this deceived this temerarious man.

. 2. Next he repeateth his falsehoods of Cresconius, Fulgentius, Vinc. Victor,
which I have showed to be done in great temerity.

. 3. Thirdly he repeateth his stupendous slander of Austin as with much zeal
and fury in many Books opposing the Donatists for denying Infant Baptism; of
which in them all (as far as I can find) he has not one syllable, but the
clear contrary, as is proved by me.

. 4. Because Eckbertus and Emericus charge the Waldenses herein as conforming
to the Donatists and Novatians. 1. It was not the Waldenses they spoke of as I
proved, but the Manichean Catharists; 2. Or if they confounded them they
wronged them; 3. And if they say as he reports, they belied the Donatists;
and why then should I believe them? 4. But this time-robber has tempted me
once more to peruse Eckbertus the Abbot, and to read his Sermon. 7. and 8. and
wherever this subject is his theme, and I find not one syllable of any such
matter in him of either Donatists or Novatians; such a man have we now to deal
with.

. The rest of his recitals are not worthy the recital: The Answer before given
is sufficient. Only I say again that his contempt of so full a testimony as the
Decree of a Council at that time [ for receiving without rebaptizing such as
the Donatists baptized in Infancy] cited by Cassander as a certain proof, is a
proof that there is worse than a weak judgment in fault.

CHAP. V. His renewed Calumny of the old Britains reproved.
. 1. REpeating and defending Fabians foppery, he argues that it could be
nothing else in which they are said to contradict the Apostolic Catholic
Church? Answ. 1. If Beda say that Augustine tells them that in many things they
do contrary to the Roman Catholic and the Apostolic Church, does it follow
that the three things in which he requires their concurrence were all part of
those many? To preach the Gospel to the Saxons was one. Is that a point that
they differed from all the Apostolic Church in? When it seems to be from no
other reason, than that they would not own the Saxons that had conquered them,
nor the Papal power that would usurp upon them: And on the same reason they
might as well refuse to baptize the Saxons children. 2. But there is no such
thing in the words of Bid, as I have showed [ but according to the manner of
the Church of Rome, etc.] And who knows not that the Church of Rome, and all
in its communion then called the universal Church, used in baptism, the White
Garment, the tasting Milk and Honey, and Chrysme, as an Apostolical tradition or
such as they knew no original of? Tertullian and Epiphanius alone are full
witnesses of this, if there were no more.

. 2. There is nothing in the rest that I think needs a word more of answer
than I before gave. And I fear being guilty of idle words and lost time in
writing needlessly.

CHAP. VI. Of his venturous report of Bishop Ushers censure of me.
IN his Reply page 51. he says [ I have an honorable regard to his person,
and due value to his labors, especially where he has laid out himself to
promote practical holiness (and wherein as I have judged his greatest
excellency lies) supposing had he let Controversies alone, and addicted himself
thereto, he would much more have furthered the peace and union he pretends to
promote: It having been, as I have heard, a judgment that Bishop Usher made of
him, that if he persisted in Polemical writings, he was like to prove a
troubler, rather than a promoter of peace.]

Here, 1. See how he fears not to make reports of the dead by this hearsay?
No wonder if by this sort of men I my self am by backbiting so frequently
traduced, and said to Preach and Print that which never was in my mouth or
books or thoughts?

2. Should one ask him whom he heard this from, do you think we should get a
satisfying answer? No one is here named.

3. It is possible Bishop Usher upon the coming forth of my Aphorisms (which
had many crudities, and many quarrelled at it more than there was cause,) might
fear any thing that looked like unusual.

4. But I ask the Reader whether this be a probable report, when he
understands,

1. That I was for some weeks familiar with the Bishop, and he never spoke a
syllable to me of such importance. 2. That when Doct. Kendal and I were
together with him, and our question was what was Augustins jugement of
Redemption, Perseverance, and some other things, he expressly averred that my
Assertion in all those was the truth. 3. But I imagine this following might be
the occasion of the report. Dr. Kendal had some acquaintance with and interest
in the said Archbishop, and he having written two disputations against me, I
had answered the first, and had drawn up part of the answer to the second: But
Mr. Vines and Dr. Kendal desired me to meet at Bishop Vshers lodging in order
to the ending of our difference. There the Bishop motioned that we should
promise to write against each other no more: which we did, and I cast by what I
had begun. But yet Doct. K. after in a Latin Treatise broke that promise
(which occasioned my verses in the end of my Dispute of the Object of
Justifying Faith against Mr. Warner, which some understood not.) Now it is not
unlikely that the Bishop might say that if Dr. K. and I persisted in that
Dispute, it would but trouble the Church. I am sure he said no more to me, nor
so much.

As for Mr. D.'s judgment, I deserve not the honor he gives me, but indeed I
think that of most men that I have had to deal with in that kind, he is one of
the unfittest to make himself a Judge, who is fit to meddle with Controversy,
or to judge himself much fitter than me. Doubtless his knowledge has cost him
much less time and study than mine has done me; And if his advantage be in
greater illumination of Gods Spirit, as I seriously profess to fear lest I
should want it, for my manifold sins against the Spirit, and therefore have
cause most earnestly to beg for it; so I could wish that he had better
manifested it, than in these two Voluems he has done: at least by an ordinary
humane friendship to historical truth. For my part I had never more published
any thing in this cause, if my sense of the hurt and danger of their
Separations and Divisions of Christians, and destruction of Love and Peace, had
not moved me much more, than any great zeal against bare rebaptizing, in it
self considered, especially if hypothetically done.

Postscript.
. 1. SInce the writing of this, I have perused Smaragdus, Peter Abbas
Cluniacensis, and Bernard, which were not before at hand. And I shall give you
a true account of their testimonies.

I. As for Smaragdus, I never before read him, but on this occasion getting his
exposition on the Epistles and Gospels I find that there is a great agreement
indeed among Mr. Danvers witnesses, that in his citations he is still like
himself.

. 2. Smaragdus on 1 Pet. 2. in oct. Pasch. fol. 87. says, [ Sinite parvulos
venire ad me, talium enim est regnum coelorum: Hanc enim sanctam, puram and
innocentem infantiam, per baptismi gratiam casta matter gignit Ecclesia] That is
[ suffer little children to come to me, for of such is the Kingdom of God; For
this holy pure and innocent Infancy, the Church their chaste Mother does by the
grace of Baptism beget.]

. 3. And on Mar. 16. in Ascens. fol. 101. [ Cum autem dicatur, Qui vero non
crediderit condemnabitur, quid hic dicimus de parvulis, qui per aetatem adhuc
credere non valent? Nam de majoribus nulla quaestio est: In Ecclesia ergo
salvatoris per alios parvuli credunt, sicut ex aliis ea quae illis in baptismo
remittuntur peccata traxerunt.] That is, [ He that believes and is Baptized
shall be saved, etc. But when it is said, But he that believes not shall be
condemned, what say we here to little ones who by their age are not yet able to
believe? For of the elder there is no question. Therefore in the Church of our
Savior, little ones believe by others, as from others they have drawn those
sins which in Baptism are forgiven to them.

. 4. And in sab. Pentecost. in Act. 19. fol. 103, 104. having at large opened
how Catechumens were instructed before Baptism, and described approvedly their
Ceremonies, of crossing, breathing on them, exorcizing, salt, the Creed to be
recited and understood, he adds, [Quia ergo Parvuli, necdum ratione utentes,
haec minime capere possunt, oportet ut cum ad imtelligibilem aetatem
pervenerint, doceantur and fidei sacramenta and confessionis mysteria, ut
veraciter credant, and diligenti cura custodiant confessionem suam. Plane
diximus; quia quamvis illi necdum loqui possunt, pro illis and confitentur and
loquuntur qui eos de lavacro fontia suscipiunt. Nec immerito: dignum est ut qui
aliorum peccatis obnoxii sunt, aliorum etiam confessione, per ministerium
baptismatis, remissionem originalium percipiant peccatorum.] That is [ But
seeing little ones that have not yet the use of reason, cannot receive these
things, it is meet that when they come to age of understanding they be taught
both the Sacraments of faith and the mystery of confession, that they may truly
believe, and by diligent care may keep their confession: And not undeservedly:
It is meet (or worthy) that they who are obnoxious to (or by) others sins, by
others confession also should by the mystery of Baptism, receive the pardon of
original sins.]

. 5. Yet it is true that this same Author does often call for confession from the
adult, and persuade men not to trust to mere outward baptizing, as may be seen
on 1 Cor. 9. fol. 30. etc. But he could reconcile this to Infant Baptism,
though Mr. D. cannot. See him further fol. 85. c. in Math. 28. and fol. 85. in
1 Pet. 3. and fol. 84. and fol. 19. in Isa. 60.

. 6. II. As to Pet. Cluniacensis (another Abbot near the same time, and
contemporary with Bernard) he is the most plausible of all Mr. D.'s witnesses,
as against two men, Pet. Bruis, and Henry: But, 1. Fol. 1. Epist, 1. he writes
Twenty years after Peter's sowing his doctrine. 2. And though Henry lived in his
time, yet fol. 2. he says, [ Sed quia eum ita sentire vel praedicare, nondum
mihi plene fides facta est, differo responsionem quousque and horum quae
dicuntur indubitatam habeant certitudinem] that is, (having called Henry the
heir of Peter's wickedness, who rather changed than mended his Devilish
doctrine) But because I have not yet testimony fully credible (or am not sure)
that he so thinks, and preaches, I delay my answer till I can have undoubted
certainty of the things reported]. By which it is plain that he knew neither of
them, but went by that same, which commonly then slandered them.

. 7. 3. And in his first Proposal fol. 7. (of Hoffmeisters Edit.) he recites
the words supposed to be theirs, in which they deny as much the Salvation as
the Baptism of all Infants. Ex his domini verbis Mar. 16. aperte monstrant,
nullum nisi crediderit, and baptizatus fuerit, hoc est, nisi Christianam fidem
habuerit and baptismum perceperit, posse salvari: Nam non alterum horum, sed
utrumque pariter salvat: Vnde Infantes, licet a vobis baptizentur, quia tamen
credere, obstante aetate, non possunt, nequaquam salvantur.] So that it is the
salvation of any Infants that they principally here deny; accounting Baptism
needful to salvation.

. 8. And fol. 8. He adds their next charge that fama vulgavit, fame reported,
that they wholly believed not Christ, Prophets, or Apostles, the Old or New
Testament. Sed quia fallaci rumorum monstro non facile assensum praebere debeo
(maxim cum quidam vos totum divinum Canonem abjecisse affirment, alii quaedam
ex ipso vos suscepisse contendant) culpare vos de incertis nolo]: Where he
fully confesses that he knew them not, but went by fame, and that he suspected
himself this fame to be false, calling it a Monster, and proving it contrary to
it self, and professing that he ought not to believe it: But yet lest it should
be true, he goes on to prove the truth of the Scriptures, as he does Infants
salvation and Baptism.

. 9. Now I leave it to the Reader, among many uncertainties, which of these he
will believe most probable: 1. That all the parties were slandered: 2. Or that
Peter and Henry were slandered by occasion of the mixed Manichees, or by the
vulgar lying levity or Popish malice. 3. Or whether Peter and Henry were guilty
as some now, though the rest were not. 4. Or whether they and the Albigenses
and Waldenses, really denied all Infants salvation and Baptism (their very
pretended words being cited.) 5. Or whether they were slandered as to
Infant-salvation, and not as to their Baptism. 6. Or whether all this rose not
from their denying the salvation of the children of all the wicked, as ex opere
operato, by the Baptism of the Priest, and their refusing to bring their own
children to be Baptized by such Priests, and their telling the wicked at age,
that their Infant Baptism would not save them. Believe which of these you find
most cause.

. 10. III. As for Bernard, 1. Though a holy man, yet his conceit that Papal
unity was necessary, and that the Dissenters caused confusion, transported him
with such prejudice against them, as we have now against the vilest Sects. 2.
He was acquainted with Cluniacensis and might believe him. 3. He took things on
trust as he did. 4. He charge even the secret heretics that he writes
against, as holding it unlawful to swear, and yet lawful to forswear, rather
than reveal their case: Sermon. 65. 5. And that in secret they are reported to
commit filthy wickedness, not to be named. 6. That he hears that some of them
reject Paul's writings, and the Old Testament. 7. That they lived scandalously
with Women: and he talks as if it were impossible for men and women to dwell
together, and yet to be chaste. 8. Yet shows that he most uncharitably
suspected them, saying, [ Si fidem interroges, nihil Christianius; si
conversationem, nihil irreprehensibilius; and quae loquitur, factis probat:
Videas hominem in testimonium suae fidei frequentare Ecclesiam, honorare
presbyteros, offerre munus suum, confessionem facere, sacramentis communicare
(and did they deny Infant Baptism then?) Quid fidelius? Jam quod ad vitam
moresque spectat, neminem concutit, neminem circumvenit, neminem supergreditur,
pallent ora jejuniis, panem non comedit otiosus; operatur manibus quibus vitam
sustentat: Vbi jam Vulpos?] And what is the proof against them, [ Vinearum
demolitio testatur vulpem: Mulieres relictis viris, and viri dismissis
uxoribus, ad istos se conferunt: clerici and sacerdotes populis Ecclesiisque
relictis intonsi and barbati apud eos, inde textores and textrices plerumque
inventi sunt. Annon gravis demolitio ista? Annon opera vulpium haec?] And the
way he appoints for their purgation is to put women out of their houses. 9.
Sermon. 66. he charge them for being against Marriage, yea that they took
filthiness to be only in having Wives. 10. And with forbidding to Marry, they
joined abstaining from meats: and so holding devilish doctrine: But that some
allowed Marriage only to Virgins, but not second Marriages: That they abhorred
Milk, and all that was made of it, and all that was procreated by generation,
and that ( de insania Manichaei.) That they held themselves only to be the
Church, and derided them that Baptized Infants: (yet he himself writes largely
Ep. ad Hug. de Sancto Victore, for the salvation of persons that have faith,
and die unbaptized through necessity; alleging Ambrose, Austin, Cyprian; And
concludes Infants saved by others faith, as they were guilty by others sin.)
11. In Epist. ad Hildefonsum he says, of Henry by name, that he was an
Apostate, that made a trade of preaching, to live by in necessity, and what
money he could get of simple people and women more than found him food, he
spent in playing at dice, or other more filthy uses: that after his days
applause by the people he was found at night with whores: that he thus left
every where such a stink behind him, that he could come but once to a place,
naming many Cities.

Now let the Reader judge if Bernard be to be believed what a man this was: If
not, what his testimony is worth.

AS I am writing this, the Hawkers are crying under my window, Mr. Baxters
Arguments for Believers, etc. The men that cite Authors at this rate, cite me
against my self, with the like confidence: Because I have proved in my Treat.
of Confirmation, the necessity of personal Profession in the Adult: And he that
will think that such dealing as this does need an answer, and that if the Adult
must make an intelligent profession, Infants must not be Baptized, let him be
ignorant; for I have not time to satisfy him.

FINIS.
Infant Baptism Asserted and Vindicated by Scripture and Antiquity, in Answer
to Mr. Henry Danvers, with a full detection of his Misrepresentation of Diverse
Councils and Authors both Ancient and Modern, etc. By O. Wills: Sold by Jo.
Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.


