Monthly Preparations FOR THE Holy Communion, By R. B.

To which is added Suitable Meditations before, in, and after Receiving.

WITH Divine Hymns, In Common Tunes; Fitted for Public Congregations, or
Private Families.

LONDON; Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
end of Cheapside. 1696.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SAcramental work is solemn work indeed: And all those helps are valuable and
desirable, whereby the furniture of our minds, the temper of our hearts, and
the conduct of our lives may be answerable to the solemnity of a Sacramental
Table. A mind that is barren or perplexed; an heart that is false or stupid; and
the conscience of a disordered conversation, are bad Companions to attend us to
the Holy Supper of our Lord. The Lord's Body is to be discerned, his Death
showed forth, his tendered self and benefits received, and his next Coming
seriously thought on, and thoroughly prepared for, and joyfully expected by us;
and all this is to be influenced and actuated by this Memorial which Christ
has left with us: Such helps as these, are the more useful by being brief, if
brevity do not render them defective and obscure, as here I think they will
not. No Directory can be better than the Institution, if well discerned and
attended to.

I. The Memorable Person is the Lord Jesus, in his perfections, relations, and
designs. Here therefore let him be considered,

1. As Man, to render him capable of sufferings, service, and contending with
that Enemy of God and Man, who once deceived and enslaved us.

2. As the Son of Man, the chief of Humane Race, for Trials, Faithfulness and
Advancement.

3. As the Son of God, as essentially and most intimately one with God; as Lord
of the Universe, Head over all things to his Church, and of the Church it self.
The brightness of his Fathers Glory, the one Mediator; and so God's way to Man,
and Man's way to God; and one deputed to undertake and perfect our Conduct,
Government, and Salvation.

II. His Sufferings are the things here next to be commemorated. Great were his
Trials, from God, from Hell, and from this World. With great composedness and
gallantry of spirit did he endure them, and work his passage through them to
that exalted state, wherein he had so much to do with God for us: In all these
and in his preparations for them, does he appear most exemplary to us, claiming
and urging our Conformity to his obedient, submissive, and resolved self. And
in his Meritorious Sufferings and Expiatory Death, must we discern and think
severely on, what there and thence was evident; viz. Gods Wisdom, Majesty,
Holiness, and his Governing Justice, and Prerogatives; the sinfulness of sin,
the misery of Revolted Man, the equity and power of God's Violated Law; and the
eminence of the Divine above the Animal Life, Nature, and Concerns.

III. Our Interest in, and Benefit by these his Sufferings, are next to
exercise our thoughts. He died to let us see,

1. How glorious a God we have to do with.

2 What wise and righteous Constitutions we had violated.

3. What dreadful evils we had brought upon our selves.

4. What spirit, strength and reach there is in Divine Threatenings.

5. How hard it is to be recovered, when we are fallen from God, and so what an
Enemy Satan is to Man; and how unwilling to let his Captives go.

6. To show us the riches of God's Grace in him, and his own Dignity; in that
his Sufferings could, and did, merit and obtain of God our Pardon, Adoption
Acceptance, and Eternal Bliss through him.

7. To raise and cherish holy endeavors to return to God in hope.

8. To make us dread the thoughts of ever falling off from God again.

9. To justify our claims to all the Benefits of our Gospel-state and day.

10. To obtain of God for us the Spirit and Means of Grace, thereby to fit us
for our present Work and Trials in this our Probationary state, and to suit and
bring us to his Father and himself in Glory, and that with universul
Satisfaction, and Advantage, and Applause.

11. To put himself into a capacity of interceding for us in Heaven, and
blessing us from Heaven as our High Priest upon his Throne.

12. To put us into, and to keep us in a Covenant-state and frame, that thus we
may deal and walk with God, as Children, as interested in his Son, as inhabited
and actuated by his Spirit, and as united with all the Family of God and
Christ, in the same Principles, Practices, Concerns, and Hopes, in order to the
exercises of all the sympathies and services of mutually Christian Love, Ephesians.
iv. v. 1-6.

IV. Our Commemoration of Christ thus represented to us, as upon the Cross, and
as determining to come again, is our next work.

1. The Sacramental Elements, and the Observed Institution, is the Memorial.

2. The Remembrance contains,

1. Head-work, in discerning, remembering and believing the Sacramental Doctrine
of this Supper to be true, and of great consequence to us: Christ Crucified,
and determining to come again.

2. Heart-work, in forming the temper, purposes, hopes and comforts of our
hearts unto what this Supper imports, and our acceptance of what is tendered
here; and our obliging our selves to do and be as Christ would have us.

3. Life-work; in keeping up our Christian practice and profession as we are
here directed and obliged to; for a more full account whereof, and greater
fitness for it, thou art commended to this helpful Treatise, by Thine to his
poor power for Christ,

Matthew Sylvester.
Feb. 3. 1695/6.
A Monthly Preparation for our Holy Communion with Christ and his Church, in
the Lord's Supper.
THIS is a holy Feast that is purposely provided by the King of Saints, for the
Entertainment of his Family; for the refreshing of the weary, and the making
glad the mournful Soul. The night before his bitter Death, he instituted this
Sacramental Feast; He caused his Disciples to sit down with him, and when they
had partaked of the Passover, the Sacrament of Promise, and had their taste of
the old wine, he gives them the new, even the Sacrament of the better
Covenant, and of the fuller Gospel Grace: He teaches them that his Death is
Life to them: and that which is his bitterest suffering, is their Feast: and
his sorrows are their Joys; as our sinful pleasures were his sorrows. The
slain Lamb of God our passover that was Sacrificed for us, that takes away the
sins of the world, was the pleasant food; which Sacramentally he himself then
delivered to them, and substantially the next day offered for them. The bread
of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world,
John 6. 33. He is the living bread which came down from Heaven: If any man eat
of this Bread he shall live for ever: and the Bread which he gives is his
flesh which he has given for the life of the world. verse 50, 51. Except we
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, we have no life in us:
Whosoever eats his flesh and drinks his blood, has eternal life, and he will
raise him up at the last day: For his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is
drink indeed: He that eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, dwells in
Christ, and Christ in him: As the living Father has sent the Son, and he
lives by the Father, so he that eats him, shall live by him. This is that
bread that came down from Heaven: not as the Fathers did eat Manna and are
dead: he that eats this bread shall live for ever.

I shall here only give you some brief Directions for your private duty herein.

Direct. 1. Understand well the proper ends, to which this Sacrament was
instituted by Christ; and take heed that you use it not to ends, for which it
never was appointed. The true ends are these, 1. To be a solemn Commemoration
of the Death and passion of Jesus Christ, Mat. 26. 28. Mar. 14. 24. Luke 22.
20. to keep it, as it were, in the eye of the Church, in his bodily absence
till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26. 2. To be a solemn renewing of the Holy
Covenant which was first entered in Baptism, between Christ and the Receiver;
and in that Covenant it is on Christ's part, a solemn delivery of himself
first, and with himself the benefits of Pardon, Reconciliation, Adoption, and
right to Life eternal. Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 24. And on man's
part, it is our solemn acceptance of Christ with his Benefits, upon his terms,
and a delivering up our selves to him, as his Redeemed ones, even to the Father
as our reconciled Father, and to the Son as our Lord and Savior, and to the
Holy Spirit as our Sanctifier, with Professed Thankfulness for so great a
benefit. 3. It is appointed to be a lively objective means, by which the Spirit
of Christ should work to stir up and exercise, and increase the Repentance,
Faith, Desire, Love, Hope, Joy, Thankfulness, and New-Obedience of Believers;
by a lively Representation of the evil of sin, the infinite love of God in
Christ, the firmness of the Covenant or Promise, the greatness and sureness of
the Mercy given, and the Blessedness purchased and promised to us, and the
great obligations that are laid upon us. And that herein believers might be
solemnly called out to the most serious exercise of all these Graces, 1 Cor.
11. 27, 28, 29, 31. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 21. 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26. 2 Cor. 6. 4. and
might be provoked and assisted to stir up themselves to this Communion with God
in Christ, and to pray for more as through a sacrificed Christ. 4. It is
appointed to be the solemn Profession of Believers, of their Faith, and Love,
and Gratitude, and Obedience to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and of
continuing firm in the Christian Religion. And a Badge of the Church before the
World. Acts 2. 42, 46. and 20. 7. 5. And it is appointed to be a sign and means
of the Unity, Love, and Communion of Saints, and their readiness to Communicate
to each other.

The false mistaken ends, which you must avoid, are these. 1. You must not with
the Papists, think that the end of it is to turn Bread into no Bread, and Wine
into no Wine, and to make them really the true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.
For if sense (which tells all Men that it is still Bread and Wine) be not to
be believed, then we cannot believe that ever there was a Gospel, or an
Apostle, or a Pope, or a Man, or any thing in the World. And the Apostle
expressly calls it Bread three times, in three Verses together, after the
Consecration, 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28. and he tells us, that the use of it is
(not to make the Lords Body really present, but) to show the Lords Death till
he come; that is, As a visible representing and commemorating sign, to be
instead of the Bodily presence till he come.

2. Nor must you with the Papists use this Sacrament to sacrifice Christ again
really unto the Father, to propitiate him for the quick and dead, and ease
Souls in Purgatory, and deliver them out of it. For Christ having died once
dies no more, and without killing him, there is no sacrificing him: By once
offering up himself, he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; and
now there remains no more sacrifice for sin: Having finished the sacrificing
work on Earth, he is now passed into the Heavens, to appear before God for his
Redeemed ones. To. 6. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 9. 26. and 10.
12, 26. and 9. 24.

3. Nor is it any better than odious impiety to receive the Sacrament, to
confirm some Confederacies or Oaths of Secrecy, for rebellions or other
unlawful designs; as the Powder-Plotters in England did.

4. Nor is it any other than impious profanation of these sacred Mysteries for
the Priest to constrain or suffer notoriously ignorant, and ungodly persons, to
receive them, either to make themselves believe that they are indeed the
Children of God, or to be a means which ungodly men should use to make them
godly; or, which Infidels or Impenitent persons must use to help them to
Repentance and Faith in Christ. For though there is that in it which may become
a means of their Conversion, (as a Thief that steals a Bible or Sermon Book,
may be converted by it,) yet is it not to be used by the Receiver to that end.
For that were to tell God a lie, as the means of their Conversion; for
whosoever comes to receive a settled pardon, does thereby profess repentance,
as also by the words adjoined he must do; And whosoever takes, and eats, and
drinks the Bread and Wine, does actually profess thereby, that he takes and
applies Christ himself by Faith: And therefore, if he do neither of these, he
lies openly to God; and lies and false Covenants are not the appointed means
of Conversion. Not that the Minister is a lier in his delivery of it: For he
does but conditionally seal and deliver Gods Covenant and Benefits to the
Receiver, to be his, if he truly Repent and Believe: But the Receiver himself
lies, if he do not actually Repent and Believe, as he there professes to do.

5. Also it is an impious profanation of the Sacrament, if any Priest for the
love of filthy lucre, shall give it to those that ought not to receive it, that
he may have his Fees or Offerings; or, that the Priest may have so much money
that is bequeathed for the saying a Mass for such or such a Soul.

6. And it is odious profanation of the Sacrament, to use it as a League or
Bond of Faction, to gather persons in to the party, and tie them fast to it,
that they may depend upon the Priest, and his Faction and Inerest may thereby
be strengthened, and he may seem to have many followers.

7. And it is a dangerous abuse of it, to receive it, that you may be pardoned,
or sanctified, or saved, barely by the work done, or by the outward exercise
alone. As if God were there obliged to give you Grace, while you strive not
with your own hearts, to stir them up to love, or desire, or faith, or
obedience, by the means that are before you; or as if God would pardon and save
you for eating so much Bread and drinking so much Wine, when the Canon bids
you; or, as if the Sacrament conveyed Grace, like as Charms are supposed to
work, by saying over so many words.

8. Lastly, It is no appointed end of this Sacrament, that the Receiver thereby
profess himself certain of the sincerity of his own Repentance and Faith: (For
it is not managed on the ground of such certainty only by the Receiver; much
less by the minister that delivers it.) But only he professes that as far as
he can discern by observing his own heart, he is truly willing to have Christ,
and his benefits on the terms that they are offered; and that he does consent
to the Covenant which he is there to renew. Think not therefore, that the
Sacrament is instituted for any of these (mistaken) ends.

Direct. 2. Distinctly understand the parts of the Sacrament, that you may
distinctly use them, and not do, you know not what. This Sacrament contains
these three parts. 1. The Consecration of the Bread and Wine, which makes it
the Representative Body and Blood of Christ. 2. The Representation and
Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ. 3. The Communion: Or, Communication
by Christ, and Reception by the people.

1. In the Consecration, the Church does first offer the Creatures of Bread and
Wine, to be accepted of God, to this Sacred use: And God accepts them, and
blesses them to this use; which he signifies both by the words of his own
Institution, and by the Action of his Ministers, and their Benidiction. They
being the Agents of God to the People, in this Accepting and Blessing, as they
are the Agents of the People to God, in offering or dedicating the Creatures to
this use.

2. This Consecration having a special respect to God the Father, in it we
acknowledge his three grand Relations. 1. That he is the Creator, and so the
Owner of all the Creatures; for we offer them to him as his own. 2. That he is
our Righteous Governor, whose Law it was, that Adam and we have broken, and who
required satisfaction, and has received the Sacrifice and atonement, and has
dispensed with the strict and proper execution of that Law; and will rule us
hereafter by the Law of Grace. 3. That he is our Father or Benefactor who has
freely given us a Redeemer, and the Covenant of Grace, whose Love and Favor we
have forfeited by sin, but desire and hope to be reconciled by Christ.

3. As Christ himself was Incarnate and true Christ, before he was sacrificed
to God, and was sacrificed to God, before that sacrifice be communicated for
life and nourishment to Souls: So in the Sacrament, Consecration must first
make the Creature to be the Flesh and Blood of Christ representative; and then
the sacrificing of that flesh and blood must be represented and commemorated;
and then the sacrificed flesh and blood communicated to the Receivers for their
spiritual life.

II. The Commemoration chiefly (but not only) respects God the Son: For he
has ordained, that these consecrated Representations should in their manner
and measure, supply the room of his bodily presence; while his body is in
Heaven: And that thus as it were in effigy, in representation, he might be
still Crucified before the Churches eyes; and they might be affected, as if
they had seen him on the Cross. And that by Faith and Prayer, they might, as it
were, offer him up to God, that is, Might show the Father that sacrifice once
made for sin, in which they trust; and for which it is, that they expect all
the acceptance of their persons with God, and hope for audience when they beg
for mercy, and offer up prayer or praise to him.

III. In the Communication, though the Sacrament have respect to the Father, as
the principal Giver; and to the Son as both the Gift and Giver; yet has it a
special respect to the Holy Ghost, as being that spirit given in the flesh and
Blood, which quickens Souls; without which, the Flesh will profit nothing:
And whose operations must convey and apply Christ's saving benefits to us. John
6. 63. and 7. 39.

These three being the parts of the Sacrament in whole, as comprehending that
sacred Action and participation which is essential to it. The Material parts,
called the Relate and Correlate, are. 1. Substantial and Qualitative. 2. Active
and Passive. 1. The first are the Bread and Wine as signs, and the Body and
Blood of Christ, with his Graces and Benefits, as the things signified and
given. The second are the Actions of Breaking, Pouring out, and Delivering on
the Ministers part, (after the Conscration) and the Taking, Eating, and
Drinking, by the Receivers, as the sign: And the signified is, the Crucifying
or Sacrificing of Christ, and the Delivering himself with his Benefits to the
Believer, and the Receivers thankful Accepting, and using the said gift. To
these add the Relative Form, and the Ends, and you have the definition of this
Sacrament.

Direct. 3. Look upon the minister as the Agent or Officer of Christ, who is
Commissioned by him to seal and deliver to you the Covenant and its benefits:
And take the Bread and Wine, as if you heard Christ himself saying to you, Take
my Body and Blood, and the Pardon, and Grace which is thereby purchased. It is
a great help in the Application, to have mercy and pardon brought us by the
hand of a Commissioned Officer of Christ.

Direct. 4. In your preparation beforehand, take heed of these two extremes. 1.
That you come not profanely and carelessly, with common hearts, as to a common
work: For God will be sanctified in them that draw near to him, Levit. 10. 3.
And they that eat and drink unworthily, not discerning the Lords Body from
common Bread; but eating as if it were a common meal, do eat death to
themselves, instead of life. 2. Take heed lest your mistakes of the nature of
this Sacrament, should possess you with such fears of unworthy receiving, and
the following dangers, as may quite discompose, and unfit your Souls for the
joyful exercises of Faith, and Love, and Praise, and Thanksgiving, to which you
are invited. Many that are scrupulous of receiving it in any, save a feasting
gesture, are too little careful and scrupulous of receiving it in any, save a
feasting frame of mind.

The first extreme is caused by prophanness and negligence, or by gross
ignorance of the nature of the Sacramental work. The latter extreme is
frequently caused as follows; 1. By setting this Sacrament at a greater
distance from other parts of God's worship, than there is cause: So that the
excess of Reverence does overwhelm the minds of some with terrors. 2. By
studying more the terrible words of eating and drinking damnation to
themselves, if they do it unworthily, than all the expressions of Love and
Mercy, which that Blessed Feast is furnished with. So that when the viewes of
infinite Love should ravish them, they are studying wrath and vengeance to
terrify them, as if they came to Moses, and not to Christ. 3. By not
understanding what makes a Receiver worthy or unworthy, but taking their
unwilling infirmities for condemning unworthiness. 4. By receiving it so
seldom, as to make it strange to them, and increase their fear, whereas, if it
were administered every Lords day, as it was in the Primitve Churches, it would
better acquaint them with it, and cure that fear that comes from strangeness.
5. By imagining, that none that want assurance of their own sincerity, can
receive in Faith. 6. By contracting an ill habit of mistaken Religiousness,
placing it all in poring on themselves, and mourning for their corruptions, and
not in studying the Love of God in Christ, and living in the daily praises of
his Name, and joyful thanksgiving for his exceeding Mercies. 7. And if besides
all these the Body contract a weak or timorous melancholy distemper, it will
leave the mind capable of almost nothing, but fear and trouble, even in the
sweetest works. From many such causes it comes to pass, that the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper is become more terrible, and uncomfortable to abundance of
such distempered Christians, than any other Ordinance of God; and that which
should most comfort them does trouble them most.

Quest. 1. But is not this Sacrament more holy and dreadful, and should it not
have more preparation, than other parts of worship?

Answ. For the degree indeed, it should have very careful preparation: And we
cannot well compare it with other parts of worship; as Praise, Thanksgiving,
Covenanting with God, Prayer, etc. Because that all these other parts are here
comprised and performed. But doubtless, God must also be sanctified in all his
other worship, and his Name must not be taken in vain. And when this Sacrament
was received every Lords day, and often in the week besides, Christians were
supposed to live continually in a state of general preparation, and not to be
so far from a due particular preparation, as many poor Christians think they
are.

Quest. 2. How often should the Sacrament be now administered, that it neither
grow into contempt nor strangeness?

Answ. Ordinarily in well Displined Churches it should be still every Lord's
day. For, 1. We have no reason to prove, that the Apostles example and
appointment in this case, was proper to those times, any more than that praise
and thanksgiving daily is proper to them: And we may as well deny the
obligation of other Institutions or Apostolical Orders as that. 2. It is a part
of the settled order for the Lords day's worship: and omitting it, maimeth and
alters the worship for the day; and occasioneth the omission of the
thanksgiving and praise, and lively commemorations of Christ, which should be
then most performed: And so Christians by use, grow habited to sadness, and a
mourning melancholy Religion, and grow unacquainted with much of the Worship
and Spirit of the Gospel. 3. Hereby the Papists lamentable corruptions of this
Ordinance have grown up, even by an excess of reverence and fear, which seldom
receiving does increase; till they are come to worship Bread as their God. 4.
By seldom communicating, Men are seduced to think all proper Communion of
Churches lies in that Sacrament, and to be more profanely bold in abusing
many other parts of worship. 5. There are better means (by Teaching and
Discipline) to keep the Sacrament from contempt, than the omitting or
displacing of it. 6. Every Lord's day is no oftener than Christians need it. 7.
The frequency will teach them to live prepared, and not only to make much ado
once a Month or Quarter, when the same work is neglected all the year beside;
even as one that lives in continual expectation of death, will live in
continual preparation: When he that expects it but in some grievous sickness,
will then be frightened into some seeming preparations, which are not the habit
of his Soul, but laid by again when the disease is over.

2. But yet I must add, that in some indisciplined Churches, and upon some
occasions it may be longer omitted, or seldomer used; no duty is a duty at all
^imes: And therefore extraordinary cases may raise such impediments, as may
hinder us a long time from this, and many other Privileges. But the ordinary
faultness of our imperfect hearts, that are apt ^o grow customary and dull, is
no good reason why it should be seldom; any more than why other special duties
of Worship and Church Communion should be seldom. Read well the Epistle of Paul
to the Corinthians, and you will find that the^ were then as bad as the true
Christians ^re now, and that even in this Sacrament they were very culpable;
and yet Paul seeks not to cure them by their seldomer communicating.

Q 3. Are all the Members of the visible Church to be admitted to this
Sacrament? or Communicate?

Answ. All are not to seek it, or to take it, because many may know their own
unfitness, when the Church or Pastors know it not: But all that come and seek
it, are to be admitted by the Pastors, except such Children, Idiots, ignorant
persons, or Heriticks, as know not what they are to receive and do; and such as
are notoriously wicked or scandalous, and have not manifested their repentance.
But then it is presupposed, that none should be numbered with the adult members
of the Church but those that have personally owned their Baptismal Covenant, by
a Credible Profession of true Christianity.

Quest. 4. May a Man that has knowledge, and civility, and common gifts, come
and take this Sacrament, if he know that he is yet void of true repentance, and
other saving Grace?

Answ. No; for he then knows himself to be one that is incapable of it in his
present state.

Quest. 5. May an ungodly Man receive this Sacrament, who knows not himself
to be ungodly?

Answ. No; For he ought to know it; and his sinful ignorance of his own
condition, will not make his sin to be his duty; nor excuse his other faults
before God.

Quest. 6. Must a sincere Christian receive, that is uncertain of his
sincerity, and in continual doubting?

Answ. Two preparations are necessary to this Sacrament; the general
preparation, which is a state of Grace, and this the doubting Christian has;
and the particular preparation, which consists in his present actual fitness:
And all the question is of this. And to know this, you must further
distinguish, between immediate duty and more remote; and between the degrees of
doubtfulness in Christians. 1. The nearest immediate duty of the doubting
Christian is, to use the means to have his doubts resolved, till te know his
case; and then his next duty is, to receive the Sacrament; and both these still
remain his duty, to be performed in this order: And if he say, I cannot be
resolved, when I have done my best. Yet certainly it is some sin of his own,
that keeps him in the dark, and hinders his assurance; and therefore duty
cease not to be duty: The Law of Christ still obliges him, both to get
assurance, and to receive; and the want both of the knowledge of his state, and
of Receiving the Sacrament, are his continual sin, if he lie in it never so
long through these scruples, though it be an infirmity that God will not
condemn him for. (For he is supposed to be in a state of Grace.) But you will
say, What if still he cannot be resolved whether he have true Faith and
Repentance, or not? What should he do while he is in doubt? I answer, It is one
thing to ask, what is his duty in this case? and another thing to ask, Which is
the smaller or less dangerous sin? Still his duty is both to get the knowledge
of his heart, and to communicate: But while he sins (through infirmity) in
the failing of the first, were he better also omit the other, or not? To be
well resolved of that, you must discern, 1. Whether his judgment of himself, do
rather incline to think and hope that he is sincere in his repentance and
Faith, or, that he is not? 2. And whether the consequents are like to be good
or bad to him. If his hopes that he is sincere, be as great or greater than his
fears of the contrary, then there is no such ill consequent to be feared as may
hinder his communicating; but it is his best way to do it, and wait on God in
the use of his Ordinance. But if the persuasion of his gracelesness be greater
than the hopes of his sincerity, then he must observe how he is like to be
affected, if he do communicate. If he find that he is like to clear up his
mind, aed increase his hopes by the actuating of his Grace, he is yet best to
go: But if he find that his heart is like to be over whelmed with horror and
sunk into despair, by running into the supposed guilt of unworthy receiving,
then it will be worse to do it, than to omit it. Many such fearful Christians I
have known, that are fain many years to absent themselves from the Sacrament;
because if they should receive it while they are persuaded of their utter
unworthiness, they would be swallowed up of desperation, and think that they
had taken their own damnatioa, (as the Twenty fifth Article of the Church of
England says, the unworthy receivers do.) So that the chief sin of such a
doubting receiver, is not that he receives though he doubt; for doubting will
not excuse us for the sinful omission of a duty (no more of this than of Prayer
or Thanksgiving:) But only Prudence requires such a one to forbear that, which
through his own distemper would be a means of his despair and ruin: As that
Physic or Food (how good soever) is not to be taken which would kill the
taker: Gods Ordinances are not appointed for our destruction, but for our
edification; and so must be used as tends thereunto. Yet to those Christians,
who are in this case, and dare not communicate, I must put this Question, How
dare you so long refuse it? He that consents to the Covenant, may boldly come
and signify his consent, and receive the sealed Covenant of God; for consent
is your preparation, or the necessary condition of your Right: If you consent
not, you refuse all the Mercy of the Covenant. And dare you live in such a
state? Suppose a Pardon be offered to a condemned Thief, but so, that if he
after cast it in the dirt, or turn Traitor, he shall die a sorer death; will he
rather choose to die than take it, and say, I am afraid I shall abuse it? To
refuse Gods Covenant is certain death; but to consent is your preparation and
your life.

Quest. 7. Wherein lies the sin of an Hypocrite, and ungodly person, if he do
receive?

Answ. His sin is, 1. In lying and hypocrisy; in that he professes to repent
unfeignedly of his sin, and to be resolved for a holy life, and to believe in
Christ, and to accept him on his Covenant-terms, and to give up himself to God,
as his Father, his Savior, and his Sanctifier, and to forsake the Flesh, the
World, and the Devil; when indeed, he never did any of this, but secretly
abhors it at his heart, and will not be persuaded to it: And so all this
Profession, and his very Covenanting it self, and his Receiving, as it is a
Professing-covenanting-sign, is nothing but a very lie. And what it is to lie
to the Holy Ghost, the case of Ananias and Sapphira tells us. 2. It is
usurpation to come and lay claim to those Benefits, which he has no title to.
3. It is a profanation of these holy Mysteries, to be thus used; and it is a
taking of Gods Name in vain, who is a jealous God, and will be sanctified of
all that draw near unto him. 4. And it is a wrong to the Church of God, and the
Communion of Saints, and the honor of the Christian Religion, that such
ungodly Hypocrites intrude as Members: As it is to the Kings Army, when the
Enemies Spies creep in amongst them; or to his Marriage Feast to have a guest
in rags. Mat. 22. 11, 12.

Object. But it is no lie, because they think they say true in their Profession.

Answ. That is through their sinful negligence and self-deceit: And he is a
lier that speaks a falsehood, which he may and ought to know to be a falsehood,
though he do not know it. There is a lier in rashness and negligence, as well
as of set purpose.

Quest. 8: does all unworthy receiving make a man liable to damnation? Or, what
unworthiness is it that is so threatened?

Answ. There are three sorts of unworthiness (or unfitness) and three sorts of
Judgment answerably to be feared. 1. There is the utter unworthiness of an
Infidel, or impenitent, ungodly Hypocrite. And damnation to Hell fire, is the
punishment that such must expect, if Conversion prevent it not. 2. There is an
unworthiness through some great and scandalous crime, which a regenerate person
falls into; and this should stop him from the Sacrament for a time, till he
have repented and cast away his sin: And if he come before he rise from his
fall by a particular repentance, (as the Corinthians that sinned in the very
use of the Sacrament it self) they may expect some notable temporal judgment at
the present; (and if Repentance didnot prevent it, they might fear Eternal
punishment.) 3. There is that measure of unworthiness which consists in the
ordinary infirmities of a Saint; and this should not at all deter them from the
Sacrament, because it is accompanied with a greater worthiness; yea, though
their weakness appear in the time and manner of their receiving: But yet
ordinary corrections may follow these ordinary infirmities. (The grosser abuse
of the Sacrament it self, I join under the second rank.)

Quest. 9. What is the particular preparation needful to a fit Communicant?

Answ. This brings me up to the next Direction.

5. Let your preparation to this Sacrament consist of these particulars
following, 1. In your duty with your own consciences and hearts. 2. In your
duty toward God. 3. And in your duty toward your Neighbor.

I. Your duty with your hearts consists in these particulars. 1. That you do
your best in the close examination of your hearts about your States, and the
sincerity of your Faith, Repentance, and Obedience: To know whether your hearts
are true to God, in the Covenant which you are to renew and seal. Which may be
done by these inquiries, and discerned by these Signs. 1. Whether you truly
loath your selves for all the sins of your hearts and lives, and are a greater
offense and burden to your selves, because of your imperfections and
corruptions, than all the World besides is? Ez. 6. 9. and 20. 43. and 36. 31.
Romans 7. 24. 2. Whether you have no sin but what you are truly desirous to know;
and no known sin, but what you are truly desirous to be rid of; and so
desirous, as that you had rather be perfectly freed from sin, than from any
affliction in the world? Romans 7. 22, 18, 24. and 8 18. 3. Whether you love the
searching and reforming Light, even the most searching parts of the Word of
God, and the most searching Books, and searching Sermons, that by them you may
be brought to know your selves, in order to your settled peace and reformation?
John 3. 19, 20, 21: 4. Whether you truly love that degree of holiness in others
which you have not yet attained your selves, and love Christ in his Children,
with such an unfeigned love, as will cause you to relieve them according to
your abilities, and suffer for their sakes, when it is your duty? 1 John 3. 14,
16. 1 Pet. 1. 22. and 3 8. Jam. 2, 12, 13, 14, 15. Mat. 25. 40. etc. 5. Whether
you can truly say, that there is no degree of holiness so high, but you desire
it, and had rather be perfect in the love of God, and the obedience of his
will, than have all the riches and pleasures of this World, Romans 7. 18, 21, 24.
Psalm. 119. 5. Mat. 5. 6. And had rather be one of the holiest Saints, than of
the most renowned prosperous Princes upon Earth? Psalm. 15. 4. and 16. 2. Psalm.
84. 10. and 65. 4. 6. Whether you have so far laid up your treasure, and your
hopes in Heaven, as that you are resolved to take that only for your portion;
and that the hopes of Heaven, and interest of your Souls, has the pre-eminence
in your hearts against all that stands in competition with it? Col. 3. 1, 3, 4.
Mat. 6. 20, 21. 7. Whether the chiefest care of your hearts, and endeavor of
your lives, be to serve and please God, and to enjoy him for ever rather than
for any wordly thing? Mat. 6. 23. Joh. 5. 26. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 6, 7, 8, 9. 8.
Whether it be your daily desire and endeavor to mortify the flesh, and master
its rebellious opposition to the Spirit; and you so far prevail, as not to
live, and walk, and be led by the flesh, but that the course and drift of your
life is spiritual? Romans 8, 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13. Gal. 5. 17, 21, 22. 9.
Whether the world, and all its honor, wealth, and pleasures appear to you so
small and contemptible a thing, as that you esteem it as dung, and nothing in
comparison of Christ, and the love of God and Glory? and are resolved, that you
will rather let go all, than your part in Christ? And, which uses to carry it
in the time of trial, in your deliberate choice? Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 18,
19, 20. 1 John 2. 15. Luke 14. 26, 30, 33. Matthew. 13. 19, 21. 10. Whether you
are resolved upon a course of holiness and obedience, and to use those means
which God does make known to you, to be the way to please him, and to subdue
your corruption; and yet feeling the frailties of your hearts, and the burden
of your sins, do trust in Christ as your Righteousness before God, and in the
Holy Ghost, whose Grace alone can illuminate, sanctify, and confirm you? Acts
11. 23. Psalm. 119. 57, 63, 69, 106. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Romans 8. 9. John 15. 5. 2 Cor.
12. 9. By these Signs you may safely try your states.

2. When this is done you are also to try the strength and measure of your
Grace; that you may perceive your weakness, and know for what help you should
seek to Christ. And to find out what inward corruptions and sinful inclinations
are yet strongest in you, that you may know what to lament, and to ask
forgiveness of, and help against. My Book called Directions for weak
Christians, will give you fuller advice in this.

3. You are also to take a strict account of your lives; and to look over your
dealings with God and Men, in secret and public, especially of late, since the
last renewal of your Covenant with God, and to hear what God and Conscience
have to say about your sins and all their aggravations, Psalm. 139. 23. 1 Cor.
11. 28.

4. And you must labor to get your hearts affected with your condition, as you
do discover it. To be humbled for what is sinful, and to be desirous of help
against your weakness, and thankful for the Grace which you discern.

5. Lastly, you must consider of all the work that you have to do, and all the
mercies which you are going to receive, and what Graces are necessary to all
this, and how they must be used; and accordingly lock up all those Graces, and
prepare them for the exercise to which they are to be called out. I shall name
you the particulars anon.

II. Your duty toward God in your preparation for this Sacrament, is, 1. To
cast down your selves before him in humble penitent confession, and lamentation
of all the Sins which you discover; and to beg his pardon in secret, before you
come to have it publicly sealed and delivered. 2. To look up to him with
thankfulness, Love, and Joy, as becomes one that is going to receive so great a
mercy from him; and humbly to beg that Grace which may prepare you, and quicken
you to, and in the work.

III. Your duty toward others in this your preparation, is, 1. To forgive
those that have done you wrong, and to confess your fault to these whom you
have wronged, and ask them forgiveness, and make them amends and restitution so
far as is in your power; and be reconciled to those with whom you are fallen
out; and to see, that you love your neighbors as your selves, Mat. 5. 23, 24,
25, 26, 44. James 5. 16. 2. That you seek advice of your Pastors, or some fit
persons, in cases that are too hard for your selves to resolve, and where you
need their special help. 3. That you lovingly admonish them that you know do
intend to communicate unworthily, and to come thither in their ungodliness, and
gross sin unrepented of: That you show not such hatred of your Brother, as to
suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19. 17. But tell him his faults, as Christ has
directed you, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. And do your parts to promote Christ's
Discipline, and keep pure the Church. See 1 Cor, 5. throughout.

Direct. 6. When you come to the holy Communion, let not the over-scrupulous
regard of the person of the Minister, or the company, or the imperfections of
the ministration, disturb your meditations, nor call away your minds from the
high and serious employment of the day. Hypocrites who place their Religion in
bodily exercises, have taught many weak Christians to take up unecessary
scruples, and to turn their eye and observation too much to things without them.

Quest. But should we have no regard to the due celebration of these sacred
Mysteries, and to the Minister, and communicants, and manner of Administration?

Answ. Yes: You should have so much regard to them, 1. As to see that nothing
be amiss through your default, which is in your power to amend. 2. And that you
join not in the committing of any known sin. But, 1. Take not every sin of
another for your sin, and think not that you are guilty of that in others,
which you cannot amend; or, that you must forsake the Church and worship of
God, for these corruptions which you are not guilty of; or deny your own
mercies, because others usurp them or abuse them. 2. If you suspect any thing
imposed upon you to be sinful to you, try it before you come thither; and leave
not your minds open to disturbance, when they should be wholly employed with
Christ.

Quest. But what if my conscience be not satisfied, but I am still in doubt,
must I not forbear? Seeing he that doubts is condemned if he eat, because he
eats not in Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin?

Answ: The Apostle there speaks not of eating in the Sacrament, but of eating
meats, which he doubts of whether they are lawful, but is sure, that it is
lawful to forbear them. And in case of doubting about things indifferent, the
surer side is to forbear them, because there may be sin in doing; but there can
be none on the other side in forbearing. But in case of Duties, your doubting
will not disoblige you; else men might give over praying, and hearing Gods
Word, and believing, and obeying their Rulers, and maintaining their Families,
when they are but blind enough to doubt of it. 2. Your erring Conscience is not
a Lawmaker, and cannot make it your duty to obey it. For God is your King, and
the Office of your Conscience is to discern his Law; and urge you to obedience,
and not to make you Laws of its own: So that if it speak falsely, it does not
oblige you, but deceive you. It does only ligate, or ensnare you, but not
obligare, or make a sin a duty. It casts you into necessity of sinning more
or less till you relinquish the error: But in case of such duties as these, it
is a sin to do them with a doubting Conscience, but (ordinarily) it is a
greater sin to forbear.

Object. But some Divines write, that Conscience being Gods Officer; when it
erreth, God himself does bind me by it to follow that error, and the evil which
it requires becomes my duty.

Answ. A dangerous error tending to subversion of Souls and Kingdoms, and
highly dishonorable to God. God has made it your duty to know his Will, and
do it. And if you ignorantly mistake him, will you lay the blame on him, and
draw him into participation of your sin, when he forbids you both the error
and the sin? And does he at once forbid and command the same thing? At that
very moment, God is so far from obliging you to follow your error, that he
still obliges you to lay it by, and do the contrary. If you say; You cannot. I
answer, Your impotency, is a sinful impotency; and you can use the means, in
which his Grace can help you: and he will not change his Law, nor make you
Kings and Rulers of your selves instead of him, because you are ignorant or
impotent.

Direct. 7. In the time of administration go along with the Minister throughout
the work, and keep your hearts close to Jesus Christ, in the exercise of all
those Graces, which are suited to the several parts of the administration.
Think not that all the work must be the Minister's. It should be a busy day
with you, and your hearts should be taken up with as much diligence, as your
hands be in your common labor; but not in a toilsome weary diligence, but in
such delightful business as becomes the guests of the God of Heaven, at so
sweet a feast, and in the receiving of such unvaluable gifts.

Here I should distinctly show you, I. What Graces they be that you must there
exercise. II. What there is obiectively presented before you in the Sacrament,
to exercise all these Graces. III. At what seasons in the administration each
of these inward works are to be done.

I. The Graces to be exercised are these (besides that holy fear and reverence
common to all worship) 1. A humble sense of the odiousness of sin, and of our
undone condition as in our selves, and a displeasure against our selves, and
loathing of our selves, and melting Repentance for the sins we have committed;
as against our Creator, and as against the Love and Mercy of a Redeemer, and as
against the holy Spirit of Grace. 2. A hungring and thirsting desire after the
Lord Jesus, and his Grace, and the favor of God and communion with him, which
are there represented and offered to the Soul. 3. A lively Faith in our
Redeemer, his death, resurrection and intercession; and a trusting our
miserable souls upon him, as our sufficient Savior and help; And a hearty
acceptance of him and his benefits upon his offered terms. 4. A joy and
gladness in the sense of that unspeakable mercy which is here offered us. 5. A
thankful heart toward him, from whom we do receive it. 6. A fervent Love to
him that by such Love does seek our Love. 7. A triumphant Hope of life eternal,
which is purchased for us, and sealed to us. 8. A willingness and resolution to
deny our selves, and all this world, and suffer for him that has suffered for
our Redemption. 9. A Love to our Brethren, our Neighbors and our Enemies, with
a readiness to relieve them, and to forgive them when they do us wrong. 10. And
a firm Resolution for future obedience, to our Creator, and Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, according to our Covenant.

II. In the naming of these Graces, I have named their objects: which you
should observe as distinctly as you can, that they may be operative. 1. To help
your Humiliation and Repentance, you bring thither a laden miserable Soul, to
receive a pardon and relief: And you see before you the Sacrificed Son of God,
who made his soul an offering for sin, and became a Curse for us to save us who
were accursed. 2. To draw out your desires, you have the most excellent gifts
and the most needful mercies presented to you that this world is capable of:
Even the pardon of sin, the Love of God, the Spirit of Grace, and the hopes of
Glory, and Christ himself with whom all this is given. 3. To exercise your
Faith you have Christ here first represented as crucified before your eyes: and
then with his benefits, freely given you, and offered to your acceptance, with
a Command that you refuse him not. 4. To exercise your delight and gladness,
you have this Savior and this Salvation tendered to you; and all that your
souls can well desire set before you. 5. To exercise your Thankfulness, what
could do more than so great a Gift, so dearly purchased, so surely sealed, and
so freely offered? 6. To exercise your Love to God in Christ, you have the
fullest manifestation of his attractive Love, even offered to your eyes, and
taste, and heart, that a soul on earth can reasonably expect; in such wonderful
condescension, that the greatness and strangness of it surpasses a natural
man's belief. 7. To exercise your hopes of life eternal, you have the price of
it here set before you; you have the Gift of it here sealed to you; and you
have that Savior represented to you in his suffering, who is now there
reigning, that you may remember him, as expectants of his Glorious coming to
judge the world, and glorify you with himself. 8. To exercise your self-denial
and resolution for suffering, and contempt of the world and fleshly pleasures,
you have before you both the greatest example and obligation, that ever could
be offered to the world; when you see and receive a Crucified Christ, that so
strangely denied himself for you; and set so little by the world and flesh. 9.
To exercise your love to Brethren, yea, and Enemies, you have his example
before your eyes, that loved you to the death when you were Enemies: And you
have his holy servants before your eyes, who are amiable in him through the
workings of his Spirit, and on whom he will have you show your love to himself.
10. And to excite your Resolution for future odedience, you see his double
Title to the Government of you, as Creator and as Redeemer; and you feel the
obligations of Mercy and Gratitude; and you are to renew a Covenant with him to
that end; even openly where all the Churches are witnesses. So that you see
here are powerful object before you to draw out all these Graces, and that they
are all but such as the work requires you then to exercise.

III. But that you may be the readier when it comes to practice, I shall as it
were lead you by the hand through all the parts of the administration, and tell
you when and how to exercise every grace, and those that are to be joined
together I shall take together, that needless distinctness do not trouble you.

1. When you are called up and going to the Table of the Lord, exercise your
Humility, Desire and Thankfulness, and say in your hearts, What Lord, do thou
call such a wretch as I? What! me that have so often despised thy mercy? and
wilfully offended thee, and preferred the filth of this world and the pleasures
of the flesh before thee? Alas, it is thy wrath in Hell that is my due: But if
love will choose such an unworthy guest, and Mercy will be honored upon such
sin and misery, I come Lord at thy call: I gladly come: Let thy will be done;
and let that mercy which inviteth me, make me acceptable, and graciously
entertain me; and let me not come without the wedding Garment, nor unreverently
rush on holy things, nor turn thy mercies to my bane!

2. When the Minister is confessing sin, prostrate your very souls in the sense
of your unworthiness, and let your particular sins be in your eye, with their
heinous aggravations; The whole need not the Physician, but the sick. But here
I need not put words into your mouths or minds, because the Minister goes
before you, and your hearts must concur with his Confessions, and put in also
the secret sins which he omitteth.

3. When you look on the Bread and Wine which is provided and offered for this
holy use, remember that it is the Creator of all things, on whom you live,
whose Laws you did offend; and say in your hearts, O Lord, how great is my
offense? who have broken the Laws of him that made me, and on whom the whole
Creation does depend? I had my Being from thee, and my daily Bread; and should
I have requited thee with disobedience? Father, I have sinned against Heaven
and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.

4. When the words of the Institution are read, and the Bread and Wine are
solemnly consecrated, by separating them to that sacred use, and the acceptance
and blessing of God is desired, admire the mercy that prepared us a Redeemer,
and say, O God how wonderful is thy wisdom and thy love? How strangely do
thou glorify thy mercy over sin that gave advantage to glorify thy justice?
Even thou our God whom we have offended, have out of thy own Treasury satisfied
thy own justice, and given us a Savior by such a Miracle of Wisdom, Love, and
Condescension, as men or Angels shall never be able fully to comprehend: so
did thou love the sinful world, as to give thy Son, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. O thou that have prepared
us so full a remedy, and so precious a gift, sanctify these Creatures to be
the Representative Body and Blood of Christ, and prepare my heart for so great
a gift, and so high and holy and honorable a work.

5. When you behold the Consecrated Bread and Wine, discern the Lords Body, and
reverence it as the Reprsentative Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; and take heed
of Profaning it, by looking on it as common Bread and Wine; Though it be not
Transubstantiate, but still is very Bread and Wine in its Natural being, yet
it is Christ's Body and Blood in representation and effect. Look on it as the
consecrated Bread of life, which with the quickening Spirit must nourish you to
life eternal.

6. When you see the Breaking of the Bread, and the Pouring out of the Wine,
let Repentance, and Love, and Desire; and Thankfulness, thus work within you. O
wondrous Love! O hateful sin! How merciful, Lord, have thou been to sinners?
and how cruel have we been to our selves and thee? Could Love stoop lower?
Could God be merciful at a dearer rate? Could my sin have done a more horrid
deed, than put to death the Son of God? How small a matter has tempted me to
that, which must cost so dear before it was forgiven? How dear paid my Savior
for that, which I might have avoided at a very cheap rate? At how low a price
have I valued his Blood, when I have sinned and sinned again for nothing! This
is my doing! My sins were the Thorns, the Nails, the Spear! Can a Murderer of
Christ be a small offender? O dreadful justice! It was I and such other sinners
that deserved to bear the punishment who were guilty of the sin; and to have
been fuel for the unquenchable flames for ever. O precious Sacrifice! O
hateful sin! O gracious Savior! how can man's dull and narrow heart, be duly
affected with such transcendent things? or Heaven make its due impression upon
an inch of flesh! Shall I ever again have a dull apprehension of such Love? Or
ever have a favorable thought of sin? Or ever have a fearless thought of
justice? O break or melt this hardened heart, that it may be somewhat conformed
to my crucified Lord! The tears of Love and true Repentance are easier than the
flames from which I am redeemed. O hide me in these wounds, and wash me in this
precious blood! This is the Sacrifice in which I trust: This is the
Righteousness by which I must be justified, and saved from the Curse of thy
violated Law! As thou have accepted this, O Father, for the world, upon the
Cross, Behold it (till on the behalf of sinners; and hear his Blood that cries
unto thee for mercy to the miserable, and pardon us, and accept us as thy
Reconciled Children, for the sake of this Crucified Christ alone. We can offer
thee no other Sacrifice for sin; and we need no other.

7. When the Minister applies himself to God by prayer, for the efficacy of
this Sacrament, that in it he will give us Christ and his benefits, and pardon,
and justify us, and accept us as his reconciled Children join heartily and
earnestly in these requests, as one that knows the need and worth of such a
mercy.

8. When the Minister delivers you the consecrated Bread and Wine, look upon
him as the messenger of Christ, and hear him as if Christ by him said to you,
Take this my broken body and blood, and feed ^^ it to everlasting life: and
take with it no sealed Covenant, and therein the sealed testimony of my love,
and the sealed pardon o^ your sins, and a sealed gift of life eternal so be it,
you unfeignedly consent unto my Covenant, and give up your selves to me ^^ my
redeemed ones. Even as in delivering the possession of House or Lands, the
deliverer gives a Key, and a Twig and a Turf, and says, I deliver you this
house, and I deliver you this Land: So does the Minister by Christ's Authority
deliver you Christ and pardon and title to eternal life. Here is an Image of a
sacrificed Christ of Gods own appointing, which you may lawfully use: And more
than an Image; even an investing Instrument, by which these highest mercies are
solemnly delivered to you in the name of Christ. Let your hearts therefore say
with Joy and Thankfulness, with Faith and Love, O matchless bounty of the
eternal God! what a gift is this! and unto what unworthy sinners! and will God
stoop so low to man? and come so near him? and thus reconcile his worthless
enemies? Will he freely pardon all that I have done? and take me into his
family and love, and feed me with the flesh and blood of Christ? I believe;
Lord help mine unbelief. I humbly and thankfully accept thy gifts! Open thou my
heart, that I may yet more joyfully and thankfully accept them: Seeing God will
glorify his Love and mercy by such incomprehensible gifts as these, behold,
Lord, a wretch that needs all this mercy! And seeing it is the offer of thy
Grace and Covenant, my Soul does gladly take thee for my God and Father, for my
Savior and my Sanctifier: And here I give my up self unto thee, as thy
Created, Redeemed and (I hope) Regenerate one; as thy Own, thy Subject and thy
Child, to be saved and Sanctified by thee, to be beloved by thee and to Love
thee to everlasting: O seal up this Covenant and pardon, by the Spirit, which
thou sealest and deliverest to me in thy Sacrament: that, without reserve, I
may be entirely and for ever thine!

9. When you see the Communicants receiving with you, let your very hearts be
united to the Saints in love, and say, How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob! How
amiable is the Family of the Lord! How good and pleasant is the unity of
Brethren? How dear to me are the precious numbers of my Lord! though they have
yet all their spots and weaknesses, which he pardons, and so must we. My
goodness O Lord extends not unto thee; but unto thy Saints, the excellent
ones on earth, in whom is my delight. What portion of my estate thou requirest
I willingly give unto the poor, and if I have wronged any man, I am willing to
restore it: And seeing thou have ^^oved me an enemy, and forgiven me so great a
debt, I heartily forgive those that have done me wrong, and love my enemies. O
keep me in thy Family all my days, for ^ day in thy Court is better than a
Thousand, and the door-keepers in thy house are happier than the most
prosperous of the wicked, Numb. 24. 5. Psalm. 133. and 15. 4. and 16. 2, 3. Luke
19. 8. Psalm. 84. 10.

10. When the Minister returns Thanks and Praise to God, stir up your Souls
to the greatest alacrity; and suppose you saw the Heavenly Hosts of Saints and
Angels praising the same God in the presence of his Glory; and think with your
selves, that you belong to the same Family and society as they, and are
learning their work, and must shortly arrive at their perfection: Strive
therefore to imitate them in Love and Joy; and let your very souls be poured
out in Praises and Thanksgiving: And when you have the next ^iesure for your
private thoughts (as when the Minister is exhorting you to your duty) exercise
your love and thanks and Faith and hope and self-denial and Resolution for
future obedience, in some such breathings of your Souls as these: O my gracious
God, thou have surpassed all humane comprehension in thy Love! Is this thy
usage of unworthy prodigals! I feared lest thy wrath as a consuming fire would
have devoured such a guilty Soul; and thou would have charged upon me all my
folly: But while I condemned my self, thou have forgiven and justified me; and
surprised me with the sweetest embracements of thy love. I see now that thy
thoughts are above our thoughts, and thy ways above our ways and thy love
excels the love of man, even more than the Heavens are above the earth. With
how dear a price have thou Redeemed a wretch, that deserved thy everlasting
vengeance! with how precious and sweet a Feast have thou entertained me, who
deserved to be cast out with the workers of iniquity! shall I ever more slight
such Love as this? shall it not overcome my Rebelliousness; and melt down my
cold and hardened heart? shall I be saved from Hell and not be thankful? Angels
are admiring these miracles of Love? and shall not I admire them? Their love to
us does cause them to rejoice, while they stand by and see our Heavenly feast?
And should it not be sweeter to us that are the guests that feed upon it? My
God how dearly have thou purchased my Love? How strangly have thou deserved and
sought it? Nothing is so much my grief and shame, as that I can answer such
Love, with no more fervent fruitful Love. O what an addition would it be to all
this precious mercy, if thou would give me a Heart to answer these thine
invitations, That thy Love thus poured out, might draw forth mine, and my Soul
might flame by its approaching unto these thy flames? And that Love draw out by
the sense of Love, might be all my life? O that I could Love thee as much as I
would Love thee? Yea as much as thou would have me Love thee? But this is
too great a happiness for earth! But thou have showed me the place where I may
attain it! My Lord is here, in full possession: who has left me these pledges,
till he come and fetch us to himself, and feast us there in our Masters Joy; O
blessed place! O happy company that see his Glory, and are filled with the
streams of those Rivers of consolation! yea happy we whom thou have called from
our dark and miserable state, and made us Heirs of that felicity, and
passengers to it, and expectants of it, under the conduct of so sure a guide! O
then we shall Love thee without these sinful pauses and defects! in another
measure, and another manner than now we do: when thou shall reveal and
communicate thy attractive Love, in another measure and manner than now! Till
then, my God, I am devoted to thee; By right and Covenant I am thine! My soul
here bears witness against my self, that my defects of Love have no excuse;
Thou deservest all, if I had the Love of all the Saints in Heaven and Earth to
give thee. What has this world to do with my affections? And what is this
sordid corruptible flesh, that its desires and pleasures should call down my
Soul, and tempt it to neglect my God? What is there in all the sufferings that
man can lay upon me, that I should not joyfully accept them for his sake, that
has Redeemed me from Hell, by such unmatched voluntary sufferings? Lord,
seeing thou regardest, and so regardest, so vile a worm, my heart, my tongue,
my hand confess, that I am wholly thine. O let me live to none but thee, and to
thy service, and thy Saints on earth! And O let me no more return unto
iniquity! nor venture on that sin that killed my Lord! And now thou have chosen
so low a dwelling, O be not strange to the Heart that thou have so freely
chosen! O make it the daily residence of thy spirit! Quicken it by thy grace;
adorn it with thy gifts; employ it in thy Love, delight in its attendance on
thee; refresh it with thy joys and the light of thy countenance; and destroy
this carnality, selfishness and unbelief; And let the World see that God will
make a Palace of the lowest heart, when he chooses it for the place of his own
abode.

Direct. 8. When you come home, review the mercy which you have received, and
the duty which you have done, and the Covenant you have made: And, 1. Betake
your selves to God in Praise and Prayer for the perfecting of his work: And, 2:
Take heed to your hearts that they grow not cold, and that worldly things or
diverting trifles, do not blot out the sacred impressions, which Christ has
made, and that they cool not quickly into their former dull and sleepy frame.
3. And see that your Lives be actuated by the grace that you have here
received, that even they that you converse with may perceive that you have been
with God. Especially when Temptations would draw you again to sin; and when the
injuries of Friends or Enemies would provoke you, and when you are called to
testify your Love to Christ, by any costly work or suffering; remember then
what was so lately before your eyes, and upon your heart; and what you resolved
on, and what a Covenant you made with God. Yet judge not of the fruit of your
Receiving, so much by feeling, as by faith: for more is promised than you yet
possess.

Here follows the Authors solemn Resignation of himself to Father, Son and Holy
Ghost.
O My God, I look to Thee, I come to Thee, to thee alone: No man, no worldly
creature made me; none of them did redeem me; none of them did renew my soul,
none of them will justify me at thy Bar, nor forgive my sin, nor save me from
the penal Justice: none of them will be a full or a perpetual felicity or
portion for my soul. I am not a stranger to their promises and performances: I
have trusted them too far, and followed them too long! O that it had been less,
(though I must thankfully acknowledge, that Mercy did early show me their
deceit, and turn my enquiring thoughts to thee:) to thee I resign my self, for
I am thine own! to thee I subject all powers of my Soul and body, for thou art
my Rightful Sovereign Governor: from thee I thankfully accept of all the
benefits and comforts of my life: in thee I expect my true felicity and
content: to know thee, and love thee, and delight in thee, must be my
blessedness, or I must have none. The little tastes of this sweetness which my
thirsty soul has had, do tell me that there is no other real joy. I feel that
thou have made my mind to know thee, and I feel thou have made my heart to love
thee, my tongue to praise thee, and all that I am and have to serve thee! And
even in the panting languishing desires and motions of my soul, I find that
thou, and only thou, art its resting place: and though Love do now but search,
and pray, and cry, and weep, and in reaching upward, but cannot reach, the
glorious light, the blessed knowledge, the perfect love, for which it longs;
yet by its eye, its aim, its motions, its moans, its groans, I know its
meaning, where it would be, and I know its end. My displaced soul will never be
well, till it come near to thee, till it know thee better, till it love thee
more. It loves it self, and justifies that self-love, when it can love thee:
it loathes it self, and is weary of it self as a lifeless burden, when it feels
no pantings after thee. Were thou to be found in the most solitary desert, it
would seek thee; or in the uttermost parts of the earth, it would make after
thee: thy presence makes a crowd, a Church: thy converse makes a closet, or
solitary wood or field, to be kin to the Angelical Chore. The creature were
dead, if thou were not its life; and ugly, if thou were not its beauty; and
insignificant, if thou were not its sense. The soul is deformed, which is
without thine Image; and lifeless, which lives not in love to thee, if love be
not its pulse, and prayer, and praise, its constant breath: the Mind is
unlearned which reads not thy Name on all the World, and sees not HOLINESS
TO THE LORD engraven upon the face of every creature. He doteth that doubts
of thy Being or Perfections, and he dreameth who does not live to thee. O let
me have no other portion! no reason, no love, no life, but what is devoted to
thee, employed on thee, and for thee here, and shall be perfected in thee, the
only perfect final object, for evermore. Upon the holy Altar erected by thy
Son, and by his hands, and his mediation, I humbly devote and offer thee THIS
HEART: O that I could say with greater feeling, This flaming, loving,
longing-Heart! But the sacred fire which must kindle on my sacrifice, must come
from thee; it will not else ascend unto thee: let it consume this dross, so the
nobler part may know its home. All that I can say to commend it to thine
acceptance, is, that I hope it is washed in precious blood, that there is
something in it that is thine own; it still looks toward thee, and groaneth
to thee, and follows after thee, and will be content with gold, and mirth,
and honor, and such inferior fooleries no more: it lies at thy doors, and
will be entertained or perish. Though alas, it loves thee not as it would, I
boldly say, it longs to love thee, it loves to love thee; it seeks, it craves
no greater blessedness than perfect endless mutual love: it is vowed to thee,
even to thee alone; and will never take up with shadows more; but is resolved
to lie down in sorrow and despair, if thou will not be its REST and JOY. It
hates it self for loving thee no more; accounting no want, deformity, shame or
pain so great and grievous a calamity.

For thee the Glorious blessed GOD, it is that I come to Jesus Christ. If he
did not reconcile my guilty soul to thee, and did not teach it the heavenly art
and work of Love, by the sweet communications of thy love, he could be no
Savior for me. Thou art my only ultimate end; it is only a guide and way to
thee that my anxious soul has so much studied: and none can teach me rightly
to know thee, and to love thee, and to live to thee, but thy self: it must be a
Teacher sent from thee, that must conduct me to thee. I have long-looked round
about me in the world, to see if there were a more lucid Region, from whence
thy will and glory might be better seen, than that in which my lot is fallen:
But no Traveller that I can speak with, no Book which I have turned over, no
Creature which I can see, does tell me more than Jesus Christ. I can find no
way so suitable to my soul, no medicine so fitted to my misery, no bellows so
fit to kindle love, as faith in Christ, the Glass and Messenger of thy love. I
see no doctrine so divine and heavenly, as bearing the image and superscription
of God; nor any so fully confirmed and delivered by the attestation of thy own
Omnipotency; nor any which so purely pleads thy cause, and calls the Soul from
self and vanity, and condemns its sin and purifieth it, and leads it directly
unto thee; and though my former ignorance disabled me to look back to the Ages
past, and to see the methods of thy providence, and when I look into thy Word,
disabled me from seeing the beauteous methods of thy Truth; thou have given me
a glimpse of clearer light, which has discovered the reasons and methods of
grace, which I then discerned not: and in the midst of my most hideous
temptations and perplexed thoughts, thou kepst alive the root of faith, and
kepst alive the love to thee and unto holiness which it had kindled. Thou have
mercifully given me the witness in my self; not an unreasonable persuasion in
my mind, but that renewed nature, those holy and heavenly desires and delights,
which sure can come from none but thee. And O how much more have I perceived in
many of thy servants, than in my self! thou have cast my lot among the Souls
whom Christ has healed. I have daily conversed with those whom he has raised
from the dead. I have seen the power of thy Gospel upon sinners: All the love
that ever I perceived kindled toward thee, and all the true obedience that
ever I saw performed to thee, has been effected by the word of Jesus Christ:
how often has his spirit helped me to pray! and how often have thou heard those
prayers! what pledges have thou given to my staggering faith, in the works
which prayer has procured, both for my self and many others? And if Confidence
in Christ be yet deceit, must I not say that thou have deceived me? who I know
can neither be deceived, or by any falsehood or seduction deceive.

On thee therefore, O my dear Redeemer, do I cast and trust this sinful soul!
with Thee and with thy holy Spirit I renew my Covenant; I know no other; I have
no other; I can have no other Savior but thy self: To thee I deliver up this
soul which thou have redeemed, not to be advanced to the wealth, and honors,
and pleasures of this world; but to be delivered from them, and to be healed of
sin, and brought to God; and to be saved from this present evil world, which is
the portion of the ungodly and unbelievers: to be washed in thy Blood, and
illuminated, quickened and confirmed by thy SPIRIT; and conducted in the ways
of holiness and love: and at last to be presented justified and spotless to the
Father of spirits, and possessed of the glory which thou have promised. O thou
that have prepared so dear a medicine for the cleansing of polluted guilty
souls, leave not this unworthy soul in its guilt, or in its pollution! O thou
that know the Father, and his Will, and art nearest to him, and most beloved
of him, cause me in my degree to know the Father; acquaint me with so much of
his will, as concerns my duty, or my just encouragement: leave not my soul to
grope in darkness, seeing thou art the Sun and Lord of Light. O heal my
estranged thoughts of God! is he my light, and life, and all my hope? and must
I dwell with him for ever? and yet shall I know him no better than thus? shall
I learn no more that have such a Teacher? and shall I get no nearer him, while
I have a Savior and a Head so near? O give my faith a clearer prospect into
that better world! and let me not be so much unacquainted with the place in
which I must abide for ever! And as thou have prepared a Heaven for holy souls,
prepare this too-unprepared soul for Heaven, which has not long to stay on
earth. And when at death I resign it into thy hands, receive it as thine own,
and finish the Work which thou have begun, in placing it among the blessed
Spirits, who are filled with the sight and love of God. I trust thee living;
let me trust thee dying, and never be ashamed of my trust.

And unto Thee, the Eternal Holy Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the
Son, the Communicative LOVE, who condescendest to make Perfect the Elect of
God, do I deliver up this dark imperfect soul, to be further renewed, confirmed
and perfected, according to the holy Covenant. Refuse not to bless it with
thine indwelling and operations; quicken it with thy life; irradiate it by thy
light; sanctify it by thy love; actuate it purely, powerfully and constantly
by thy holy motions. And though the way of this thy sacred influx be beyond the
reach of humane apprehension; yet let me know the reality and saving power of
it, by the happy effects. Thou art more to souls, than souls to bodies, than
light to the eyes. O leave not my soul as a carrion destitute of thy life; nor
its eyes as useless, destitute of thy light; nor leave it as a senseless block
without thy motion. The remembeance of what I was without thee, does make me
fear lest thou should withold thy grace. Alas, I feel, I daily feel that I
am dead to all good, and all that is good is dead to me, if thou be not the life
of all. Teachings and reproofs, mercies and corrections, yea, the Gospel it
self, and all the liveliest Books and Sermons, are dead to me, because I am
dead to them: yea, God is as no God to me, and Heaven as no Heaven, and Christ
as no Christ, and the clearest evidences of Scripture verity are as no proofs
at all, if thou represent them not with light and power to my soul: Even as all
the glory of the world is as nothing to me without the light by which it is
seen. O thou that have begun, and given me those heavenly intimations and
desires, which flesh and blood could never give me, suffer not my folly to
quench these sparks, nor this brutish flesh to prevail against thee, nor the
powers of hell to stifle and kill such a heavenly seed. O pardon that folly and
wilfulness, which has too often, too obdurately and too unthankfully striven
against thy grace; and depart not from an unkind and sinful soul! I remember
with grief and shame, how I wilfully bore down thy motions; punish it not with
desertion, and give me not over to my self. Art thou not in Covenant with me,
as my Sanctifier, and Confirmer, and Comforter? I never undertook to do these
things for my self; but I consent that thou should work them on me. As thou
art the Agent and Advocate of Jesus my Lord, O plead his cause effectually in
my soul, against the suggestions of Satan and my unbelief; and finish his
healing saving work; and let not the flesh or world prevail. Be in me the
resident witness of my Lord, the Author of my prayers, the Spirit of Adoption,
the Seal of God, and the earnest of mine inheritance. Let not my nights be so
long, and my days so short, nor sin eclipse those beams, which have often
illuminared my soul. Without thee, Books are senseless scrawls, studies are
dreams, learning is a Glowworm, and wit is but wantonness, impertinency and
folly. Transcribe those sacred precepts on my heart, which by thy dictates and
inspiration are recorded in thy holy word. I refuse not thy help for tears and
groans: but O shed abroad that love upon my heart, which may keep it in a
continual life of love. And teach me the work which I must do in Heaven:
refresh my soul with the delights of holiness, and the joys which arise from
the believing hopes of the everlasting joys: Exercise my heart and tongue in
the holy praises of my Lord. Strengthen me in sufferings; and conquer the
terrors of Death and Hell. Make me the more heavenly, by how much the faster I
am hastening to Heaven: and let my last thoughts, words and works on earth, be
likest to those which shall be my first in the state of glorious immortality;
where the Kingdom is delivered up to the Father, and GOD will for ever be All,
and In all: of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things, To whom be
glory for ever.

Amen.
A Pathetical Meditation on the Passion of Christ; to be read by Communicants
before their reception of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
Quest. WHat is the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper?

Answ. It consists of two visible signs, Bread and Wine, which by the Lords
appointment was to represent to the receiver his bloody death, that so his
Disciples may keep it fresh in their memories.

Q. But is it only to remember that there was a Christ, and that he was
crucified, and no more?

Answ. Experience tells us that such a bare remembrance as that, does little
move upon the heart and upon the affections, and so will do little or no good.
It is not the remembrance of any man's death that does of it self affect me, but
as I consider him as a Father, or as a Husband, or as a Friend, with many other
expressions of his love to me when living, this will exceedingly work upon the
heart, so as to cause sorrow and grief, and the like.

Quest. What is it then that I must call to mind when I think upon a bleeding
and dying Christ, so as to affect my heart?

Answ. The cruel and bloody nature of his Death; here you may consider the
whole story of his Arraignment, his being betrayed by his own Apostle, his
being spit upon and crowned with thorns, his being mocked and jeered by putting
a reed into his hand instead of a scepter, afterward his bearing of a Cross,
and his being nailed to it in his hands and feet; after that, his being pierced
through with a sp^ar; this Mat. 27. will fully acquaint you with. Secondly, the
causes of his Death; it was no natural disease, neither was it for any evil
done of his own, but for us, He bore our iniquities upon the cross. Thirdly,
the effects of his death, which was to obtain power of his Father to conquer
the Devil, and pull us out of his hands; to break our hearts, and to conquer us
to himself, to pardon our sins, and to give unto us eternal life with himself
in glory, and this upon our faith and sincere repentance. Now from all these
things are your Meditations to be raised, before you come to this Sacrament,
and when you are receiving of it.

An Example of Meditation I have here set you down as follows.

Away these wanton wandering wordly thoughts, you are clogs to my soul. Away
all trifling worldly business, I cannot now attend your call, my heart has now
something else to do. Adieu my Friends, farewell my Husband, Wife and Child, I
must go see my bleeding Lord, that is dearer to me than you all. Come now my
soul, thou art alone, thou know the way make have and seed; look yonder, see
how the people flock; cross but this vale, and climb but up this mount, thou will soon arrive at bloody Golgotha, where thou shall see thy bleeding and
dying Siviour to sigh and linger out a dying life on the Cross in love for
thee. This, this might, Oh my Soul, have been thy day, and thou might have
been the prisoner; this I say might have been the day in which thou might
have drunk the bitter cup of the fierce anger of God. But look yonder! there he
goes that must drink up the dregs, and all for thee. Look again! there he goes
that must lay down his life that thou may be reprieved. But come, my soul,
draw up a little nearer, thou can not see him well at so great a distance;
stand here and thou will see him passing; look, there he goes with a train of
Virgins following. But see how cruelly these barbarous Jews do use him, they
make him bear his Cross himself, and press his wearied fainting limbs above his
strength; see how they laugh and scoff, and wag their heads as if he were their
May Game. Methinks my heart boils up with rage to see these cruelties revenged:
Oh! how could the blessed God forbear to see his blessed Son thus wronged? Why
did he not send twelve Legions of Angels for his rescue? Why does he not send
down fire from Heaven upon the heads of these his Sons enemies, and so consume
them? But stay my foolish heart, thou know not what spirit thou art of; this
debt was owing, and it must be paid; God requires so much, and it must be
given, or thou can not be saved. Thy Lord did know this well enough, for this
he came from Heaven, and committed himself to the rage of men; he knew he must
endure all these revilings, and does it grieve thy soul to see him thus abased?
Stay but a while, and thou shall see him more; look up, my soul, come, tell me
what thou see? Oh I cannot, sorrow ties my tongue, I cannot speak; I see and
hear those things that I want a power to utter. I see a troop of Virgins
following him, their weeping Eyes, their blubbering lips, their sighs and
throbbings speak them mourners. I see my Lord looks toward them, and kindly
chides their loving sorrow, Why weep ye, Oh ye Daughters of Jerusalem? weep not
for me. My Lord! what need was there for that question? Should not they weep
when thou must bleed? Would not their eyes have been flints if that then they
should not drop tears for thee, when as thou were about to pour out thy life
and blood for them? Ah! could they choose, or do less than weep to see thine
innocent self among a herd of Tigers! what should a Lamb do there? they saw
thee in their ravenous jaws about to tear thy heart, to suck out all thy blood,
and leave thee dead. Have I not sat and read, and read and wept viewing over
the story; and could they forbear that with their watery eyes saw this scene
then acted? But whither, O whither, O ye blinded Jews, are ye dragging this my
Lord? My spirit begins to faint, I now can look no longer, my heart now begins
to swell with grief, it must now break, or I must vent it at mine eyes in
streams! Look! see the Hammer and Nails, the Hammer lift up to strike. Bloody
man! thou durst not sure; surely thou do not know whose hands and feet thou
art now piercing; it is the Prince and Savior of the World Foolish heart! see
how thou art mistaken; look, see it is done, the nails are driven to the head!
see how the crimson tears run trickling down his hands and feet, and see how
hardened hearts be laughing at it! Oh silly foolish blinded men! what laugh you
at? This very Christ whom now you mock, shall be your Judge; this very man
Jesus whom you have thus abused shall come attended with thousands of Angels,
with the sound of Trumpets, and shall sit upon your life and death. Him whom
you now have nailed to a Cross, has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior.
What then will you do when that great and terrible day of the Lord shall come?
How will you look him in the face whom you have spit on? How will you dare to
speak a word for your selves to him whom you have nailed to a tree and
crucified? His wounds in hands, side and feet shall all bear witness against
you, and his innocent blood that you have spilt shall cry aloud about the
throne for vengeance against you; your flouts shall then be turned into tears,
and your taunts into lamentations. And how will you then look and cry when God
passes sentence on you, and thrusts you down to Hell to bear the punishment of
your sins? this is the Lord that came to spare your lives, yet your wickedness
spared not his; and how at length can you think to escape with yours?

But once again, look up my soul, and see what is become of thy nailed and
crucified Lord: Ah me! he is not quite dead, look how he gasps and pants for
life! Oh how his looks are changed! How pale and wan do I see his cheeks! the
blood and all the spirits are quite drawn from them. Methinks he should be
dead, for see how weak his neck is grown, that it is not able to support his
head that lies a dying on his bleeding breast. What yet not dead! see how he
shakes and stirs his dying limbs! what gasps and groans do I hear him fetch, as
if his soul were struggling to get out? Hark, hark, he speaks! Oh let me catch
the least breath of my dying Savior. What says my Lord? Hark, what do thou
not hear! What? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? I am amazed to hear
these words. How could thou suspect thy Fathers love? How could he be far
from thee, who was one with thy self? But Oh! this is but the voice of his
Manhood, and not of his Godhead. It was the voice of the dying and bleeding Man
Jesus, not the voice of the God Jesus.

But, Oh my Lord, what are those pains and gripes thou feel, that brings
forth these complainings? But why do I ask this question? has he not been all
this while a drinking up the cup his Father gave him, the bitter, and sour, and
poisonous cup of his Fathers wrath, which I and all the world had else drunk
of? he just now swallowed down the last mouthful of the dregs, whose bitter
noisome taste has sent forth these doleful lamentations; for mark, he had no
sooner spoke these words, but he gasped his last.

The causes of his Death.

And must the Son of God be humbled thus? must he that was from everlasting,
raised and advanced above every man in heaven and earth; he that lay in the
arms and breast of God, loved by the Father, and his only Son; honored,
adored, admired and beloved of ten thousand times ten thousands of Angels; But
must this God leave all this glory, and change that sweet Heavenly and
delightsome Palace for so mean, so low, so dirty a cottage, as to be born a
man. And must his entertainment at first be no better than a stable or a manger
could give him? No sooner must he begin to live, but must an enemy assault his
life? Must he travel up and down the earth, and spend his time and strength in
preaching glad tidings to miserable undone men, and fill the world with signs
and wonders, and not deserve so much of men as a house to dwell in, or a hole
to put his head in? and after all this humble, holy, long-suffering life, must
he be thought of by this unthankful and unbelieving world as one not worthy to
live, and not have a breathing in that air which he both made and gave them to
breath in? but must he at length be laid hold of by a traitorous Judas that he
had once taken for one of his Apostles; and must he suffer all this? But ah!
alas! what is this? must he be also crowned with thorns, and must he sweat and
bleed? Oh far more than tongue can utter! Oh astonishing condescension! thus
did the Son become a servant, and learned obedience by his sufferings, and
served three and thirty years apprenticeship in the pain and travel of his soul
here on earth, a longer time than Jacob served for his beloved Rachel, and that
because he loved us better, and therefore gave a better dowry for us. But had I
lived to have seen this Prince of Glory thus disguised, this Eastern Sun thus
benighted in a cloud, this Glorious God thus wraped up in rags of flesh, should
I have known him, or not? my sensual heart, I doubt thee much; would thou
have cleaved to him and loved him better than thy life, and have said, Though
all leave thee, I will not; and with Paul, I am willing and ready not only to
be bound, but to die for thee. What think thou, Oh my soul! could thou
have left Husband, Wife, Father and Mother, and all the rest of thy Friends,
and have sold all that thou have, and followed him, what him whom the Prophet
foretold? Isa. 53. 23. He has no form or comeliness in him, that you should
desire him: he is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted
with griefs. Tell me, tell me, could thou have divorced thy self from all,
and have taken this seemingly uncomely person for thy Lord, and only Husband?
Ah me! I do not know my heart; but surely, had I known him as I do now know
him, I should not have stuck at any thing for him. For what if his Face did
want comeliness, seeing it came so with tears and grief for thee? and will thou
love thy friend the worse, because he shares in sorrow with thee? for thou
can not but know that he came from Heaven to take to himself a Spouse on
Earth; and if I was one that he loved, and grieved for to see my stubborn heart
so hard to yield, was this the cause he wanted beauty? On such a want as this
is lovely, and me thinks my heart could have cleaved the closer to him, There
was no beauty or comeliness in him, and what of that? my ugly and deformed soul
deserves more loathing; my righteousness, the comeliest part about me is but
rags, or a menstruous cloth; if there were no more desirableness in him than in
me, Oh had I loved him then, and left all for him, it were no wonder: but that
he should love me, I rather stand amazed! There was no beauty in him, it may be
so; but could it be otherwise expected from him who came to work in fire and
smoke, who came to quench the Flames of Hell, and to satisfy Gods wrath and
justice? to pull out filthy souls from the jaws of lustful sensual flesh and
blood? it was not beauty but strength that was here needful. A glance of an
amorous eye would not have wounded Satan, and made him fall from Heaven like a
flash of Lightning. A comely countenance could not have enchanted and unbar'd
Hell gates, and made them fall, and break before him into shatters. What need a
fair hand to touch our filthy rotten souls, and (...) them up in menstruous
blood, and wash (...) clean; or what need such clean hands to (...) about the
rusty iron gates wherein I (...) world lay bound in chains, and to (...) down,
to take our cankered bolts and (...) them off; to take us by the hand to (...)
up, and lead us out? Alas! there needs no such eye, face, or hand for such a
work. It is powerful, all-conquering strength that is here required. It was a
powerful victorious arm that here was needed, and such a one he had. But what
should he do with a beauteous body that must be so abased and abused as his
was? an uncomly face will serve where it must be spit on. What must he do with
a fair soft delicate hand, which must be pierced; another kind of hand is good
enough to knock a nail into. And what needs his body be of a clear, white,
thin, transparent skin? will not any serve that body that must be bruised and
wounded as his was; nay, as it was necessary his should be? But why thus
necessary? either he must be thus dealt with, or else my sin cannot be
pardoned. Either he must be despised of men, or I must be of God. Oh! he must
drink up this bitter cup with all its dregs, or else I must have drunk it up my
self. It was I that sinned, and I must have suffered: this cursed, proud and
earthly heart of mine rebelled and broke the Laws, and should have suffered and
born the punishment; had not he stepped in and born the stroke off from me, I had
been now burning in everlasting flames, and have been lingering out this time
in torment, which I am now spending in the sweet thoughts of my escape. And is
not this all true? speak out, my Soul; has not the Prophet said as much?
Surely (says he) he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace lay upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. All
we like sheep are gone astray, we are every one turned to his one way, and the
Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. He was oppressed, he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he was brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearers was dumb, so he opened not his
mouth. He was taken from prison and judgment, and who shall declare his
generation? for he was cut off from the land of the living. And for the
transgression of my people was he smitten. Thou feast thy debt, and thy
Saviors payment of it; these are no fictions; thou have just now read a sure
word of Prophecy that has confirmed it. Those wounds, those stripes, those
bruises which thou read of, he bore for thee, and which were due to thee. It
was thou that should have been led from prison to judgment, from prison to
the Judgment Seat of the great God, who should have sat as Judge; he should
have arraigned thee, sentenced thee, and have sent thee to the slaughterhouse
of Hell, where thou should have been weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
thy teeth. But Oh amazing love and grace! the Son of God that loved me better
than his life, stepped off his Throne and took my nature on him, and became a man
like to me (only sin excepted) he came and bid me comfort my trembling heart,
he would put himself in my condition, and become the prisoner; and if my sin
would cost his life, he would freely part with it. Methinks I feel my bowels
turn, my spirits melt within me; was ever love like to his love? he was a
stranger to me: why did he not let me die? It was his Father I did wrong, why
did he not let me suffer? What if my punishment was as great as Hell? surely I
did deserve it. What if my pains and screeches were eternal? Ah! I was a
creature, a worm, a fly, a nothing to him, and what need he have cared? but he
loved me; and could he love a prisoner at the Bar? I was a sinner, a vile
polluted one, methinks he should have loathed me; but he did wash thee, and
make thee clean again. Ay, but I was his Fathers enemy, and so no friend to
him; or would he love an enemy? or did he not know so much? but how could that
be when he saw my heart, and the enmity that was in it? yes, he did, and yet he
loved thee; even while we were enemies he died for us. But why did he love an
enemy? or how could he do it? I know not why, it is past my reason to imagine
it: Oh inexpressible love! Oh love past thought! I cannot fathom thee with my
reason, thy ways are unaccountable; he loves because he will love. And though
his love displeases us, yet it pleases him to love us. What ails my heart? I
cannot find it stir? What, dead under the reviving thoughts of thy dearest
Redeemer! I just now said, he loved thee though an enemy, and when thou lovedst
not him; I see the enmity is not quite removed, thou can not love him yet:
Arise, shake up thy self, and look about thee, thou do not sure see thy
mercy; surely thou understandest not what thou ought to understand. Come
away, Oh come away, lift up thy drowsy head, I will make thee look and love,
while I set thee all on burning, and make thee ere I leave thee confess thou
love him. Think, think, Oh my soul, that thou had just now sinned and broke
that law which threatened death, and upon the breach does find thee guilty.
Think that thou saw a flaming Cherubim, a messenger of the Court of Heaven
flirt in at that door and arrest thee for High treason and give thee a summons
to rise from the seat thou sit on, to make a sudden answer for thy life.
Look then, my soul, Ah! I looked just now, I see that door wide open: What Is
this a spirit? Ah me, I am undone, for I have sinned! I think the room shakes
under me, or else it is my heart that is trembling. What Is this I hear! I must
now answer for my life: O what shall I say! I know not what; I have sinned, my
Conscience tells me that I have sinned, the witness within will cast me, I see
the Indictment writ with blood on my heart; the pride, sensuality, and the
earthliness of which I am charged with, I am not able to deny one tittle. Oh
for a mountain to cover me: Oh whither shall I go, wither shall I fly? That
Bed, these Curtains, this closet cannot hide me. My Mother, Father, Wife or
Child, can not help me: O who then shall? I run, whither, I know not; vengeance
will find me out where ever I go. Oh cursed and subtle Satan! are all thy fair
promises and inticements come to this! O my wicked cursed foolish heart! that
ever I should believe him before my Creator, that told me, the day I sinned I
should surely die. Oh that for a little simple transient pleasure I should so
madly hazard my eternal life and now I must be cast to Hell to bear the
punishment of my folly. Think once again, think that this were the day, and
this the very place in which God should come and sit in Judgment on thee.
Methinks I see the Heavens bow themselves: Oh what a crackling do I hear in the
Clouds; look yonder! see who comes! it is my Judge; his countenance is as a
flame of fire, he utters his voice like Thunder, the mountains skip, or rather
shake, or rather tremble. Now, now, is the time of my utter destruction near at
hand. Oh how shall I look him in the face! his looks do already affright me! I
shall not say one word, and I have not one Friend that will say one word for
me. It Is true, I see a terrible glorious Troop of Angels that do attend him,
but they are all his friends, and therefore all my enemies: I dare not speak a
word to them; and alas! if I should, they are all but his servants, and
fellow creatures with my self; alas! they cannot, yea they will not help me.
It Is true, there is one, that one that seems as one with God, the beams of
whose countenance are far brighter than all the Host of Heaven: Besides, if God
have a Son, it may be it is he; methinks he is a mirror of his Fathers Glory;
but this I know not; be what he will, he cannot pity me a sinner, the doors of
hope are all shut up, and now as a miserable wretch I must prepare to hear my
sentence; the Judge is set, and with trembling heart and joints I stand a
prisoner at the Bar for my life, and now I must attend his call.

God speaks,] Sinner, where art thou?


The Sinner answers] Lord, here am I.


God speaks] How dare thou thus abuse (...) Grace, and kindle up my zeal
against (...) that now as stuble it will cons(...) this the thanks that thou
(...) all the love that I have sh(...) Must I make a whole world and (...) it
to thee, and as if that was to(...), I bid thee freely take my self and all,
and would not this content thee? Was I not as a Father to thee, the time thou
lovedst me, and did obey me? Did I not make thy seat a Paradise, and strewed
thy paths with pleasure? Did I not rejoice over thee as a young man over his
bride? What evil have thou found in me, that thou should thus rebelliously
revolt and break my Laws, and for a trifle sell my favor, and hazard my
Eternal pleasures? Speak sinner, was it not so?


The sinner answers] My God, these weeping eyes and bended knees confess so
much.


God speaks] Had I not told thee that sin would cost thee thy life, then thou
had had some excuse: have I said it, and will the great God change? sinner,
thou must die; I told thee so before, and now I tell thee again, the God of
Heaven cannot lie. Get thee gone thou cursed wretch into eternal flames, and
keep that Devil company in chains and torments, with whom thou have rebelled
against me, and go see what pleasures thou have in sinning.


The Sinner answereth] Thou great God and terrible Judge; I do confess thy
sentence just; but if there be any powels of mercy in thee, pity me, or I die
for ever. Mercy, mercy, Lord! for I am thy creature, the workmanship of thy
hands. If there be any thing in the trembling heart and hands, and knees of
this thy sentenced prisoner, that will move compassion, O pity, pity a
condemned sinner.


God speaks.] What! stays he longer to trouble my patience! I say, be gone thou
cursed; though thou art my creature, know that my wrath has kindled on better
creatures than thou art; get thee to Hell, and the howling Devils will tell
thee as much.


The sinner speaks] Ah, woe, woe, woe to me, for ever cursed I am, and cursed must
I go for ever, My righteous Judge, and ye Glorious Angels adieu for ever: Live,
live for ever blessed and happy in his love; I might have lived, and joyed, and
gloried in that God that made both ye and me; but like a wretch that I am, woe
that ever I was born, I sold his favor, and so my eternal life, for a thing of
naught, a vain lust, a sinful pleasure that lasted but for a season, and I go,
I go into eternal flames. What says my heart to this Methinks the very thoughts
of it do make my heart to quiver, and my flesh to shake all round about me; I
feel no strength in all my joints.


God speaks] So, so, I am glad something moves thee.

But think again, that the Devil did take hold of thee, and drag thee from the
place thou fittest on, to Hell; suppose the Father frowning on thee, and all
the Angels shouting thee down to Hell, and glorying in thy damnation; but think
again thou saw when all were joying to see thee sentenced to Hell, that he
that sat just by the Judge, whom thou thoughtest even now to be his Son, but
knew it not. Look! look! methings I see him rise off his Throne; see, see,
how the Angels fall to adore him, methinks he is a coming near thee. Oh how my
heart does tremble: Oh what will he torment me before my time! Ah me! my doom
is great enough already.


Sinner speaks] Thou will not send me to a worser place than Hell; my Judge
has passed my sentence, thou can not send me into worser than flames, or
punish me longer than everlastingly.


Christ answers.] Oh how my bowels turn! this sinner knows not what is in my
heart; he thinks I am his enemy. Sinner, shake off thy tears, and wipe thine
eyes, thou shall not die.


The sinner speaks again.] Oh thou glorious God or Angel, or I know not what to
call thee, do not delude or deride a poor Caitiff wretch in the midst of
misery: Why will thou raise me to such a pinnacle of hope, to cast me down, and
make my fall the greater? My Judge has passed the sentence, I must die; and
who can reverse the doom? Ah! I must go; see my prison-door wide open; the
smoke and flashes come to meet my despairing soul half way.


Christ speaks] And now my heart begins to break, my love can keep no longer
in; how causlesly does this wretch torment his heart! he knows not who I am: I
must reveal my self. Sinner, I love thee; I say thou shall not die: Come, feel
my heart and pulse how they beat, and tell how strong my love within does act
them; Do thou not fee I have left my Throne, and am come down to the Bar
where thou stand condemned? But why do thou weep? Come, let me wipe thine
eyes, and bind up thy bleeding and despairing heart: I tell thee thou shall not
die: If Heaven will have blood, it shall have mine, so it will but spare thine.
Sinner, if thou knew who I am, thou would not doubt one tittle: I tell
thee I am his Son, his only Son, that but now condemned thee: I know he is
just, and justice must be satisfied. But do not thou fear, if one of us must
die, it shall be I: I will pour out my blood a sacrifice for sin, and appease
his wrath, and make you friends again. Ye innumerable company of Angels, (yet
servants at my Father will) why do ye rejoice to see my prisoner sent to Hell?
this cursed soul over whom in glory you do now triumph, I do resolve to die
for, and to buy her to my self a Spouse, and to make her blessed with your
selves, and give her a Princes's place on a Throne that is by my self.


Sinner speaks] Is this a dream! or am I waking? the goodness, greatness, glory
of this sudden unexpected blessed change, tempts me to doubt whether it be
true, or whether it be some unruly fancy that does delude this wretched heart
of mine? What for the Son of God to debase himself so low as to take my nature,
and so my cause, and become the prisoner! What! and though he knows he shall be
cast! Will he hear the sentence, and quietly bear bolts, and shackles, and
chains, which should have fettered me? Yet more than this, Does he know it is
impossible to get a reprieve from his Father and judge? and that he must most
assuredly drink the bitterest dregs of Death, more bitter than Devils or damned
Souls in Hell has yet ever tasted of? For it is impossible the Cup should pass:
And can he, will he, dare he venture? But stay, I must be a Spouse! to be
exalted from this Dunghill to be a Princess to the Son and Heir of Glory! Hold,
hold, here is enugh, it is a dream, an idle fancy of a distempered brain; I
shall never find a heart to believe one Syllable. But yet, methinks, if it be a
dream, it is a Golden one. Is it possible that such a damned wretch as I, could
harbor such silken gilded thoughts of such love, grace, mercy and tenderness
of the Son of God? Oh my heart! if they were not true, how came they into my
mind, or how came they to stay? or could they, if but mere fictions, make such
a change in my heart? Could they so victoriously conquer all my fear, silence
all my doubts, allay the heats of a scorched and be-helled Conscience? But why
a dream, poor wretched heart? Did thou not see him step off his Throne? Was
it a time to dream or sleep in, when thou were before the judgment seat, while
God was frowning, and the Devils dragging thee to and fro to get thee away to
Hell? O then, just then, he stepped down, drew near and took thee by the hand,
and spoke these reviving words to thee: Doubt this, and doubt thy judgment. But
why a dream? I am not now in Hells torments, whither I was just now sentenced:
My heart is now at ease and quiet; surely something must be the reason why the
Devil that but now had hold of me, has left me. Where is the Conscience that
but now was burning in me; But Oh, cannot the presence of the Lord put me out
of doubt? Do not his words that were so kind, his tender dealing with me, does
not his stooping to me, taking me by the arm, and the gentle lifts that he
gives to my drooping soul, speak him present? Oh! do not my head, eyes, arms,
heart, breast, and the case of every joint and limb about me, witness the same?
Away my unbelieving heart, what a stir is here to make thee believe a thing so
evident? Doubt my mind, and freely doubt, I Will give thee leave, when thou have
any occasion or reason for it. But why should I doubt that which is past all
doubt? May I not believe my senses? I both saw and heard him speak the words;
or shall I misdoubt his faithfulness? I know he is the Son of God he cannot
lie, but it is true? yet, my God, I pray thee be not angry with my scrupulous
heart; thou see in tears I make the doubt, let it be an argument to me of
sincerity: I do not ask that question as one that would be fain persuaded it is
true: Can thou think, my Lord, that I would not be reconciled, and cheerfully
accept of Grace when thou so freely offeredst it? O but Lord, speak these words
to my heart which thou have already spoke to my ear, and thou will melt it into
love and thankfulness, and I shall never doubt it more.


Object. But yet, but what can Heaven love so much?

Answ. Thou silly worm! how idly do thou question? must Heaven, and so its
love, be bound up to so narrow and contracted thoughts as thine are? What, can
God love no more than thou can? Love is a perfection, and God is infinitely
perfect, so must be infinitely and incomprehensively loving. Thou fool, go
sound the Sea, and tell me its greatest depths; give me the height of yonder
Stars, this possibly thou may do; for the Seas are not so deep but they have
a bottom, nor the Stars so high, but they may by art be known. But, Oh the
heights, and depths, and breadths, and lengths of the love of our Redeemer! He
is God, and his breasts are so full of love, that they flow and overflow with
love; they have no bottom. Do but try, my soul, cast thy self into this
bottomless lovely Ocean, into this endless Bosom; and when thou have been
sinking millions of millions of years, tell me whether you come to ground. Ye
glorious Angels, and ye blessed Spirits of just men made perfect, that live
above, you that have been wading downward these five thousands of years, do ye
feel a bottom? or are ye near one? Away, away, my foolish heart; if this be all
thou have to plead, he may redeem thee, and take thee for his Spouse, and
betroth thee to himself, notwithstanding all this.

Object. But Oh this filthy loathsome fleshly self, this base unthankful earthly
heart, that can prefer a dunghill, dross, and dirt, before him that can freely
lay out his love to a creature like my self: But Oh how hard, and stiff, and
unrelenting am I to my God. But Oh he will slight me, because I have often put
him off, and slighted him; he cannot love and die for such a one as I am.

Answ. Cease, fool, thy reasonings; he cannot love an enemy, because thou can
not; he cannot die, because thy cowardly heart will not suffer thee! Why should
he fear the grave, that had power over it? And what though thou art unworthy of
his love, if he will have thee and make thee worthy? Thy heart is base, and
what of that, if he will mend it? thy filthy rotten and polluted soul he
intends to wash and cleanse it till it is without spot and wrinkle, or any such
thing. Thy stubborn proud earthly and lustful heart, he can make humble,
tender, soft and yielding. And when he has made thee as he would, why may not
he take thee to himself, and lay thee next his heart, and delight over thee
everlastingly?

Object. But will his Father yield to this? I am too poor a match for the Son
and heir of all things: But will he, can he suffer his Son to die to buy such a
beggarly thing to himself as I am?

Answ. A way these silly simple childish thoughts; how like an inhabitant of
this earthly sensual world do thou reason? thou will not under-match, and
therefore will not God his Son? Thou fool, thou will not because thou can
find another equal. But do thou not know that God can find none equal to his
Son; he must stoop, or else go without. It Is true, he might have gone without,
but what if he would not, why should not Heaven have its will as well as thou?
Thou have no dowry, and he does need none, and yet thou arguest as if Heaven
would make traffic with his Son and his love, as we silly worms do here; but
we are beggars, and so are Angels, and all the glorious Hosts above, they are
his Creatures, hang and depend upon him, and cannot subsist one moment happy
without suplies and helps of his Grace; and why may he not bring a beggarly man
as near to himself, as a beggarly Angel, if so it pleases him?

Object. But does it so please him?

Answ. How often have I told thee it does please him and have thou not
believed? Come, if thy hearing will will not satisfy, let thy seeing do it.
Look, if thou have eyes. Come tell me, does not Heaven look as though it was
pleased with the offer of his Son? What cloud or darkness do thou see about
the Throne? What sign or token of displeasure can thou at all discover? Open
thine eyes, view the God of Glory. Do his looks bespeak him to be thy Father or
thy Judge? And can thou not be read both Husband, Father and Lord, and all in
his countenance? What not see it! surely thou art blind: If he had not told as
much from his own mouth, his eyes and looks bespeak his love and favor loud
and clear enough to thee. But does he not tell thee, to put thee out of all
doubt, this is my well-beloved Son, hear him, hear him: What Is that? believe
him whatsoever he says, why, what says he? O dull and stupid heart! have thou
forgot already! He said he will pay his life for thine; and does not his Father
bid thee hear him? He said he would reconcile thee, love thee, and make thee
friends again; And is it not comfort when the Father bids thee believe him: he
said, he will pardon, wash and cleanse thee, and take thee to himself, and
betroth thee to him for ever, and after all will give thee to see his Glory,
even the same Glory which he had before the World. And the Father is willing to
all this, for he tells thee his Son, is his well-beloved Son, and bids thee
believe him, and misdoubt not one syllable. And can thou after all this doubt
that the Father is not willing? But do not his Angels likewise, who are
ministering spirits, with voice and looks proclaim as much, that Heaven is
well-pleased with the Son, and with his Death and Passion, and so with thee in
him? Do not the Angels admire the mystery of Redeeming Grace, that makes them
so desirous to peep into it? Why did they proclaim his coming into the World,
and sing for joy that there was good will in Heaven to men on earth? or why do
they so diligently attend thee by night and day? Thou see them not keep guard
about thy Chamber Door, and round about the Curtains of thy bed. Why do they
attend thee from room to room, and follow thee down stairs, and out of doors,
if it were not but that thou art some great Princess, nearly allied to their
Lord and Master? Thou do not see this, blame then thine eyes, and the
infidelity of thy heart; shall it be less true, because thy base infidelity
cannot digest it? Thou might doubt God, Heaven, and every thing else on that
score; but have thou not it from his own mouth, that the Angels are ministering
spirits for the heirs of Glory? Come, tell me, I say, tell me quickly, I must
have an answer, Can this, and all this be true, and Heaven yet not be pleased?
If God with his Son and Angels be all content that thou should be restored,
and so exalted to such dignities as to be heir unto the Crown of Heaven; if
these be pleased, who is there in Heaven that can else be displeased? What
says my heart? what not yet one word? Oh how long shall I be troubled and
pestered with my unbelief! Oh my God, strike, chide, and break this flint,
reprove this stubborn and unbelieving heart, I cannot persuade it that thou
love me, or art willing to love me: I urge thy word, and my best reason to
prove it, but I cannot make it yield. Oh break, I pray thee, this Flint or
Adamant upon thy downy breast of love; strike, and one blow of thine will make
it fall in pieces, and confess at length that thou art well pleased with thy
Son, and fully satisfied that he should bleed and die for me. But let me try
thee once again, if thou have lost thine ears and eyes; I Will see if thou have
lost thy feeling too. Thou say thou can not believe that God is willing to
accept the Son for thee, or that thou so vile a wretch can be accepted of by
the Father through the merits of his Death and sufferings. Come, tell me, is
not this thy language? I know thou dare not to speak so much in words. But
ah! my Heart, I find thou have got a Tongue as well as my Mouth, that often
mutters and speaks a different language. But tell me if thy unbelief has any
ground for it? What makes it then that thy self is so free from fears and
terrors, when thou should believe the Almighty, of thy Bodies Death,
Resurrection, and coming to Judgment, if thou thoughtest him not thy friend,
and reconciled to thee in his Son? if not, methinks thy fears should fright
thee, and trembling seize on every joint; and yet thou will foolishly mutter
against thine own feeling.

Soul Speaks] O blessed God! I feel thou have overcome; I yield, I yield, I
have not left a word to speak against thy love; thy Son has offered
satisfaction, and thou have accepted it; thou have laid down, O my Savior, thy
life for mine; and thy Father and my Father is well pleased with it: Blood is
paid, Justice is satisfied, Heavens doors are widened, thine arms opened to
receive me; nothing is wanting but by heart; make it such as thou will have it,
and then take it to thy self. Come up, my soul, thou have an heart, and there
is a Christ; the Father thou see is willing, and the Son is willing, give but
thy consent, and he is thine for ever. Fear not thy hardness, blindness,
deadness, loathsomness, all these cannot hinder, if thou be but willing. He
has been in the world to ask the worlds consent already, and also thine; thou
can not doubt of his good will; speak but the word, and he has thine too.
What stickest thou at? surely thou art a sluggish spirit; what do thou ail?
Half of this ado would find a heart for a little mire or dirt, or something
else that is worse, and is not Christ better? But ah! yet I feel a piece of
unbelief still working in thy very bowels, as if that Jesus that died at
Jerusalem were not the Son of God, and the Redeemer of the World. And is this
all? O were I certain thou would never doubt more, how freely should I make
satisfaction? But Oh! I faint and tire with the trips and stumblings of my
unbelief. But mount, my Soul, thou must resolve to tire and put to silence all
thy unbelieving bablings, or they will thee; which, if they do, never expect an
hours peace or quiet more; thou must resolve to conquer thy unbelief, or to be
conquered; thou know her tyranny too well to let her go away the victoress.
He was not the Christ, thou say, but tell me why?


Object. His Parentage was too low and mean; what the Savior of the world a
Carpenters Son! how can it be!

Answ. My unbelief, in the first place thou lie, his Mother was a Virgin, and
her Conception knew no Father but the Almighty power of the overshadowing Holy
Ghost; he was more truly the Son of God than Joseph's Son. And was his birth,
think thou, so mean, whose Parentage was so glorious?

Object. His birth but mean and beggarly; no sooner born, but cradled in a
manger; and could Heaven suffer this?

Answ. It consists. But yet it was as glorious: for did not a Star proclaim him
born? and did not a whole Host of Angels sing and shout it up for joy? and did
not wise men, yea and Kings, bring Incense, Myrrh, and Frankinsense, being but
as so much tribute, unto the newborn King and heir of all things, as if by
instinct they knew they held their Crowns of him? a greater honor than ever
any new born Prince has yet received before him, or ever shall or will do
after him.

Methinks, my unbelieving heart, I could dare to tell thee, that room was no
stable, it was a Palace; and did not the cost, presents, and glorious presence
of Kings speak as much?

Object. But his days were spent in poverty, meanness and disgrace; and can I,
dare I, trust my soul with such a one, and take him to be the Son of God?

Answ. And now I wonder at thee! it is true what thou say, if thou look
upon him one way; his life was such as thou tellest me of; but it is a strong
argument against thy self; for just such a one was the Christ to be, according
to the Prophets; the 53 Chap. of Isa. shows as much. But yet if thou truly
understandest what true pump and glory means, even to an eye of sense as well
as to that of faith, Solomon's life imbroidered with all his glorious acts, was
not comparable to this life of his. Was it not filled with miracles and
wonders? was he not proclaimed the Son of God with voices from Heaven? did he
not conquer Devils, and therefore the Kingdom of Hell? Was ever Prince on Earth
honored with so great a Conquest? Were not his miraculous Feasts more splendid
than those of Princes? the fare was but poor and mean, but the miracles made it
rich and glorious. Had I been present, should I not have wondered and gazed
more at the Master of this Feast, and have taken more pleasure to have seen him
sit down with these five thousands, than with a Table full of Princes and great
men? Alas, it were a trifling sight to this. Methinks my unbelief that pleads
so much for sense, sense it self pleads too strongly against thee, for thou
can not argue one Syllable.

Object. But would the Son of God be hanged and crucified? could Heaven have
suffered this? could not the Savior of the World save himself? how could he
then save me?

Answ. Had thou not the blindness of the Jews, thou could not reason thus
like them; but was it not necessary it should be so? Did not the Prophets
foretell his death, and such a death? Had he not died, and died as he did, I
might then have had some ground to doubt him whether he were the Messiah or
not, for it was needful that the Prophecies should be fulfilled, Dan. 9. But
yet as wretched and as contemptible a going out of the world as he had, and his
manner of dying on the Cross, how vile soever it seemed to be, yet was there
not enough to silence all the doubts that could possibly from thence arise, and
much for the confirmation of my faith in the wonderful Eclipse of the Sun, the
rending of the veil of the Temple, the opening of the Graves, the raising of
the dead, and afterward his own rising the third day, and ascending up to
Heaven in a Cloud? If my faith might have staggered in seeing him on the Cross
dying, it could not when it saw him risen, and in the Clouds ascending.

Object. But were those wonders true and certain?

Answ. But have thou any ground to doubt them? are they not written in thy
Bible? and art thou not certain that it is the word of God? or have thou not
sufficient reason to believe it to be so? But have thou not a whole Nation, yea
Nations that do believe the same? and before this age, did not our Fathers, and
Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers, and so continued a testimony of ages from
the time that they were done, to this day, witness to the truth of them, and
that so unanimously and resolutely that ten thousands have rather chosen to
lose their lives, than the truth of them. Now put all these together, and tell
me, can thou doubt? Away, I see thou do but trifle; consess the truth, or I
am resolved to heed thee no longer. Come, take and embrace that crucified
Jesus, account all things else but as loss, and dross, and dung in comparison
with him; stick not at his outward meanness, scruple not at his ignominious
dying, it is the very Christ the Savior of the world. Oh why should thou
thus torment me? Do thou not see all thy Fellow Christians to glory in that
Cross, and in that Christ that died on it? Do they not bear it as a badge of
honor, and shall it be to thee as shame? Do not all the Christian World eat
and drink as often as they can the Symbols of this their dying Lord? And do
they not all sing, and joy, and triumph in it? and will thou the while lie
vexing thy self over a company of needless fears and scruples? Farewell all
needless doubts and tormenting questions, I see my faith is built on a Rock,
blow winds, beat waves, you cannot now move me. Blessed God I thank thee, for
thy Son, thou have given his life for the spoiler, thou have bowed his back to
the enemies, long furrows have they plowed upon it, and the day of his calamity
they laughed at. Lord: thou have wounded him for my sins, and bruised him for
my iniquities. These speak the depth of thy counsels, and the ways of thy mercy
past finding out, and the tenderness of thy bowels. Thou have made him my Rock,
and my shield, and my strong tower, and in the day of my sorrow through him
thou will hear me. To thee, O God, will I make my vows, and to thee will I pay
them; I will humble my self before thee. I will always lie at the feet of my
Redeemer. Lord! his Gross and his shame shall be no more a stumbling block to
me, I will take it up and follow him, it shall be my Crown, my Song, and the
glory of my rejoicing. I will enter into thy Courts with joy, and in the
Congregations of thy Saints shall be my delight; I will remember thy
loving-kindnesses of old, and the days in which thou did afflict thy only Son
for the sins of my Soul. I will call to mind the Covenant of thy Grace; and my
heart shall praise thee, when I see it founded on blood. Then will I betroth my
self to thy Son; join thou, Lord, both our hands and hearts, and we will strike
up a match for ever. Praise thou the Lord, Oh my soul, and all you that love
and fear him, praise his holy name.

The SACRAMENT.
The Dress.
Lord, where am I! What! all the Children of the Bride-chamber up and dressed,
and I slumbring in my bed! Tell me ye fairest, what make you up so early? Alas
our Lord was up before us all. He called us up by break of day, and wondered
that we were not triming our lamps, knowing with whom we were to feast this
day. Oh well then I will rise up too. Oh what a show do these bright and
glittering Saints make in mine eyes? What a brightness do these pearls and
diamonds cast in mine eyes! they do strike me into amazement. Oh what a lovely
humble look does crown their brow and what a comely countenance has joy and
Heavenly delight cast on their cheeks surely they did not thus dress themselves
it was my Father that made them thus prepared to entertain his Son. But where
are my Clothes? Now for the fairest, sweetest robe of thoughts and wishes that
can be sound, or that the wardrobe of my Father can afford me. Oh how naked am
I! But where are my silken golden twists of Faith to hang the jewels of joy and
love, and humility upon? I am never dressed till they be on. Oh where, where are
they? I saw them by me but just now. I said them by my heart before I went to
bed. Oh what was I so long a reasoning about? Oh what long and many threads did
my reason spin even now, but to make these twines to tie up my joy, and to
raise up my love, and to hang my Heavenly delight upon? But ah! I fear this
envious world has with her vanities stolen them away, or hid them from me; or
the envious Devil, or unbelief have been ravelling or snarling of them, that
now I am as far to seek as ever. Whither, O whither shall I go to find them
out? Now, will the Bridegroom come, and I am not ready? I cannot, dare not go
to day. Now will my Lord be angry, and ask me why I came not, and I have no
answer to make him. And if I go undrest, he will ask me, where is my
Weding-garment, and then I shall be speechless. Ah foollsh simple heart! that
thou should take no more care but to let these thoughts of earth so entangle
themselves with thy so pure and heavenly contemplations! Now how to get them
loose again, thou know not; this thou might by heed and care have
prevented; but now what help? Lord, I have sinned; O holy Father pardon this
time, and I will take more heed. Oh come and unty my thoughts from this earth,
and come and dress me up as best pleases thee. Come, be not discouraged, Oh my
Soul! Let but thy attire of Grace be whole, that is, sincere, thy God, and so
thy Savior will accept thee. Though thy garments are not so much perfumed with
Heaven, as thy brethrens are, but yet if they are but white and free from the
spots of flesh and spirit, thou will be looked on and liked of well enough. Thy
Lord does know that all have not Talents alike; and where he gives but a
little, he expects but little. A faith that it richly embroidered over with
love and delight, is not given to all; and is not expected from any but from
those to whom it is given. Thou have an honest, willing, serious heart, that
thinks it does despise and trample under feet the nearest, dearest pleasures,
profits and glories in the world, in compare with him that gave himself to
death for thee; and had rather anger flesh and blood, the dartest friends,
and all the world than him, by sinning against him in the least. If this be
true, fear not, thou have thy Weding-garment on, thou art well clad; as mean so
ever as it is, it is such a one as Heaven gave thee, and such a one as thy dear
Redeemer can, and will embrace thee in.

The Presence Chamber.
Fear not, O my soul, I charge thee do not faint. Let not thy weakness, and the
poverty of thy grace, discourage thee: ^ee how thy Lord draws nigh. Fear not, I
say, he will not ask thee, Friend, how came thou hither not having on thy
Wedding garment? He sees thy heart, and sees thou have it on. Oh he comes! and
it is out to whisper thee a welcome in thine ear; it is but to fall about thy
neck and kiss thy be-tear'd cheeks, and bid thee a kind welcome to thy bleeding
Lord.

Soul. Oh did I think to be thus much made of! I thought he would not have
minded me; but I did no sooner appear and set my feet within the doors, but he
ran to meet me; he took me in his arms, he brought me hither, and set me here.
Is this a house, or is it a Palace? Is this a Court for Princes, or for Angels?
Never did place more ravish me into amazement than this place! Beautiful are
thy gates, O Zion! O how pleasant is the habitation of the most high! Is it the
place or the company that strikes me into astonishment! Now I can say, most
feelingly say with David, My delights are with the Saints of the most high, and
the most excellent of the earth. Their poverty, their disgrace, their contempt
amongst whom they live, do not puzzle my quickey'd Faith; these are the Kings
Daughters that are all glorious within, their garments are of needle work,
imbroidered over with pure gold, fine-spun gold. These! O these! how poor and
mean soever they are, or may seem to be, these shall sit with Christ to Judge
the World. Oh! how my soul is ravished with delight, to see and look on those
with whom I shall live for ever! If they are so lovely now, what will they be
hereafter, when our God shall take them, and scowr off their rust, and wash
their Garments bright in the Sunshine of his countenance, and change those
mortal and corruptible bodies into immortal and glorious ones; and set them
upon Thrones, about himself, and lade their heads with Crowns of massy gold;
and when I shall hear them warbling out the everlasting Praises of the Lamb,
whose Body and Blood we shall sit down to feed on!


Communion-Plate.
Never was Gold or Silver graced thus before,
To bring this Body and this Blood to us, is more
than to Crown Kings,
or be made Rings
For Star-like Diamonds to glitter in.
The Bread.
Welcome Fairest, take and eat; it is the sweetest dainties, dearest morsel
Heaven can afford thee. Welcome, my Dear, to the Table of my Lord. Welcome a
thousand times, I bid thee; yea, welcomer than thine own heart can wish. Take,
eat this morsel, it cost my life; it is a portion thy Father sent unto thee by
me, and bid me remember thee of his love to thee. He bids thee remember a
Fathers love, Ay, a Saviors. He has a heart to give thee, and so have I. Take
this in earnest of them both in one. Take freely; if thou were not welcome, I
would have told thee; I would have asked thee for thy Weding-Garment, knew I
not thy heart; or if I were uncertain of thy love, I would have scorned thee as
unworrhy of my presence; did I know thou love any thing above me, I would
have hid my face, and never have spoke thee a welcome so feelingly and kindly
to thy soul. Tell me, O tell me! do thou not love me? I know thou do; and
above Father or Mother, Wife or Child, Lands or Living, or Credit; I know thou
do. And will thou not take the Cross and sollow me? I know thou will, I see
and know the labor of thy love; I remember the pains and travel of thy soul; I
saw thee follow me on thy knees in tears, and begged my life rather than thy
life. I know thy heart, I saw it bleeding before my Throne; I took it in my
arms and bound it up, and in that breast I remember I put it up again; I saw
thee when no eye saw thee; I heard thee, and had compassion on thy groanings,
whilst thou were complaining that I had shut out thy prayers; I will remember
since thy heart did first fall sick with love, since the time thy flesh began
to die, and since thou laidst thy self in the grave down by me, and were
willing to die to all this vain empty glory of the world, because I died and
left it. I know thee well enough, Thou art mine, and I am thine. Take it, I
charge thee; eat it as thou love me; and whilst thou feedest, remember the
love of thy dearest Redeemer.

Soul. Oh it is the sweetest meat that ever tongue did taste; it sends a relish
to my very heart; I find it digest s as it descends; I feel my nerves and
sinews strengthen; I never knew that bread was the staff of life till now; Oh
how fit is my soul now for Christ? How easy do I now find his yoke; how light
his burden! Methinks I could watch or pray, or read more earnestly, resolvedly,
believingly, than ever. Oh! methinks I can take his Cross and bear it strongly,
and take the shame and despise it sully. Oh it is a feast of fat things! The
richest banquet of love that ever I was at; it was but a little that I took,
and it fills me full, my hungry stomach now cry, it is enough, I find it now
verified to my soul and spirit, that he that eats of this bread shall never
hunger more. Well, I need not starve when there is such bread in my Fathers
house. I need not, I will not, I cannot feed any longer on husks with the swine
of the world. I fed on air and smoke before; I never tasted substantial bread
till I tasted of this. This is the staff of my life, and upon this will I
support my self to my very grave.


The Wine.
Christ. Come my Dearest, I have drunk, and thou shall pledge me: I have
broached my side, and drew it on purpose for thee. This is a Wine of mine own
making, when I trod the Winepress of my Fathers wrath. It is my blood; but take
and drink it; it was the cause of my wounding, but to thy soul it shall prove
healing. I died and bled, it was but to make this Banquet for thee. I have
brought thee into my Wine-cellar, and my Banner over thee shall be love. Fear
not, take and drink, thou have an ulcer in thy heart, and this shall cure it;
spots and stains of guilt on thy soul, and this shall purge them away; thy
spirits are faint, this shall revive thee, thou art afraid to see thy Fathers
face, this shall make thee to draw near the Throne of Grace with boldness.
Drink, I charge thee; drink on thy love and loyalty to me. I command thee as
thou will have thy heart to mend, thy wounds to cure, thy spirits to revive,
thy fears to scatter, thy soul to love and obey me, take, O take this cup into
thy hand, taste it, and praise my love.


Soul. Lord! I have taken, I have drunk as thou have bid me, I neither could,
or dare deny thee. Can I refuse thy blood when I have accepted thy self? Or can
I accept my pardon at thy hands, and refuse the Seal thereof? I know I am vile,
I am vile, but thou have pardoned me. Lord, I have abused thy love, a thousand
times refused thy offered self, and withstood the tenders of thy Grace; but
thou have covered all my sins, thou have freely justified me by thy Grace, and
made a full atonement for me by thy blood; this is that thou freely biddest me
take, and I have freely drunk it. Never was Wine so full as this is. Never was
Bowl so full of pleasure as this. I have swallowed down my life and pardon at
one draught: I took it from my Saviors hand, it was a cup of his own
preparing. If ever drink was sugared, this was! I never tasted better rellisht
Wine in all my life!

The richest Cordials cannot match this draught Divine,
Spirits of pearls dissolved would but dead this Wine.
Oh when my hopes but kissed the purple dews, they hung and cleaved so,
As if they were loath to let thee go.
They strove and strugled to get near my heart,
As if intending there to take a part.
I dare not say them nay; blood from that Bowl
May the best room command within my soul.
What a sudden, strange, yet happy alteration do I find within! my languid
spirits are revived; my winter is over. Methinks I feel my life and joy to
spring a main. My Aarons Rod (a dry stick but now) does bloom and flourish. My
newly ingrafted soul is full of Infant-clusters.

Blood at the root of Vines
They say produce the richest Wines.
Oh! if my Lord will undertake to dress this Vine, and trickle down his blood
into my root, then draw it up into each branch of Grace by the warming beam of
his reviving love; then let my Dears est come, let him come as he has
promised, and bring my Father and his Father with him, and sup both with me and
in me. Let them come, and I will bid them a welcome, I shall have a fruit to
present them with, which they themselves shall say is pleasant; I shall not
send my Father away now so often complaining, I came to seek for grapes and
fruit, but behold wild ones.


The Conclusion.
Oh! how unwillingly do I rise! methinks I could sit here and feast my heart
and eyes for ever. What running-Banquets does my Lord afford me here! surely he
should not need to fear that I should surfeit on himself. But alas! I must be
gone, what shall I do in yonder hungry soul-starving world again? I have been
feeding on my Paschal Lamb, and now I must go and eat my sour herbs; but if it
be his will, I must obey; if it be so, I must arise: I know thou have prepared
the endless feast above, where I shall ever sit and enjoy thy love, and glut my
hungry eye and heart on the Banquet of thy everlasting self. As yet I am now on
earth, my toil and work lies heavy on my hands, I have yet an afternoon to
labor out, God knows my work is hard, too hard for me my self to perform. I
scarcely should have lasted out so long, but that ometimes at such seasons as
this is, he repaired my sinking spirits by pouring in the Cordials of his
Blood. Now I must go and perhaps find as sharp conflicts with my self as ever.
I know the World and Hell have been laying their snares and gins to catch my
new-fledg'd soul; and all conspire against my welfare. Now it is well if I
escape a fall, a bruise, a breaking of my bones, in which sad plight I have so
often lain, that my Lord might have took me for dead, but that my groanings
told him loudly I lived. Lord! must I leave this feast? must I go? Take me then
by the hand, and lead me; if I must walk, let me see thee by me, that I may
know I walk with my God. Lead me away, and I will go with thee; and let me not
go till thou bring me hither again; I cannot, will not live without thee.
And do thou Lord, say, I must not, shall not.

If both our hearts in love so well agree,
What then shall separate my Christ from me?
A Meditation on the Death of Christ, Preparative to the Scrament: Penned for
his private use.
BUT is he dead? Oh sad! yet joyful news! how strangely is my soul amazed, and
diversely moved and troubled by these contrary passions! methinks I could pull
up the floodgates of my sorrow, and vent it out in tears; but something bids me
hold. Shall I mourn for him that is just now past his state of mourning? He Is
dead! and what of that? And so are all his griefs, his bloody sweats, his sighs
and groans concluded, He has drunk on the brook in the way; bitter while they
were in his mouth, and he was living; but sweet now they have sunk into his
belly, and he in Heaven. Sweet to him, because it was his work, and he has
finished it; and sweet to me, because it was the portion of sorrow, death, hell,
that I must have taken. And can thou mourn! methinks if thou did love,
thine heart should rather sympathize with his: He is singing, and shall thou be
sighing? He is joying that his work is done, and now is welcomed into Heaven by
God his Father, and shouting up by Angels voices, as the great Conqueror of
the hearts of men on earth, and that now in triumph he is returned. And will a
mournful weed, a wet eye, and a cloudy brow, become thee at these times of
Festivals? Shall the Heavenly Angels be joyful, and thou sad? How strangely
will this be construed! Will it not be said, thou do not love him? or thou
do envy his recovered glory that he had left, and now again has taken? Or
that thou can not endure to see him wear his Princes Crown in Heaven, that
for a time he had laid aside to come down to the earth to fetch thee thence to
Heaven? But ah! my Lord, thou will not sure interpret sorrow thus; thou have
not sure forgot to give a meaning unto tears, to teach a sigh to speak, and
then to know its language! Has my Lord forgot so suddenly that he was on
earth, and that he sweat, and groaned, and wept, and bled, as well as I do now?
What though now all tears, and sorrow, and sighing is done away, and he cease
to be any longer subject to our infirmities? yet sure he knows it is not thus
with us. I am not yet in Heaven, nor am I yet quite past the vale of sorrow;
and it cannot then be strange to him, if he sees sometimes our faces look of a
sadder hue than those that are in Heaven. But why should thus my tears be
checked, and my throbbing heart be chidden; were it for a thing of naught I
might be counted fool or child; but shall my Savior die, and vent his Soul in
a stream of blood, and all in love to me? and shall he thus forsake the world,
and die and then be laid in the grave, and I be denied the liberty of following
him thither as a mourner? Shall it be said of the Prince of Glory, that he died
and had the burial of an Ass? because there was none to sorrow forth those
words of, Ah my Lord! What! shall it be granted to a Wife to mourn for the
death of a beloved Husband? and to a Child at the burial of a beloved Father?
Shall not such be blamed, but rather pitied? And shall their friends come in
and confess the loss and the ground of their sorrow just, and rather sit them
down and bear them company in their grief? And must I of all be thus censured?
Away with an Husband, Wife, or Child to me: Is he not more to me than ten
Husbands? Might I not have had an hundred that would have never done half so
much for me as he has done? That first left his glory for my sake, and then
laid down his life, and took the stroke upon himself that I my self deserved,
and all because he loved me? Was ever friend like this friend! and ever love,
like this love! Many waters cannot quench love; but neither waters, blood,
death, nor many deaths could quench his love to me. But shall he love, and die
in love, and thus be forced to leave me, because he loved me, and I not mourn
the absence of my best Beloved? How unreasonable may any this deny me! But ah!
what a bitter-worded check did I even now receive; as if my sorrow would arise
from the envying of his now glorious state, and not from any love I bare him!
Oh! what needle-pointed words are those! methinks they have pierced mine heart
in every part and from each prick has started forth a drop, that has set it
over with a bloody dew! But how can it once be thought that envy should get a
room in an heart that is full of love, with which it swells, it bubbles up, and
runs all over? it cannot be. Bear witness heavens! I do not grieve that you
contain him, but that I on earth have lost him! Oh my God! I am not sorry that
thy Son has past his sufferings, and is arrived to rest, and got again into
thy bosom, his ancient nest of love and pleasure. Oh you blessed Orders of
Seraphim and Cherubims, and you innumerable company of the spirits of the just
men made perfect! I do not envy that you have my Lord with you, that you see
his face, and live and walk, and joy in the light of his countenance: Alas! we
your poor Brethren could not make him so welcome here on earth, as you can
there: we loved him as sincerely as you, and believed in him, and took delight
too in him; but yet nothing near so much as you. You know him better than we
do; for you know him as you are known, and therefore know better how to prize
him. We know him but in part, and the value, price, and love could but be in
the like proportion. He is therefore far much better there than here; and how
shall I then either envy him or you! And what, my soul! should I wish him back
again? what if I thought I could prize and love him more, and could promise the
like for all his beloved disciples? I could not alike engage for the wicked,
envious, malicious, unbelieving world; I could not promise he should meet with
no other Herod to seek his life, or that the hard-hearted Jews would give him
better entertainment, whom they dare yet curse with the name of Conjurer,
though Moses and their Prophets bore witness to him, and though they received a
seal from Heaven in voices, thunders, signs, and an innumerable company of real
Miracles. Oh no! my Lord! though I could wish to see thy face again on earth,
yet not in such a state of misery in the midst of a den of Bears, and Lions, as
not long since thou wast. Ah! thou know I took no delight to hear that
traitorous news of thine own Apostle that had betrayed thee; and that it filled
mine heart with anguish to hear how shamefully and scornfully thou wast abused.
Thou saw me blush when I heard thy face was spit on; my head did ache when
thine was crowned with thorns. Anguish and indignation did loose my nerves, and
with a palsy shook mine hands, when thine had a Mock Scepter put into them, a
reed, and a scoff, Hail Jesus King of the Jews. And did not mine heart break
and bleed to hear that thine was pierced! Ah my Lord! and shall I yet find an
heart to wish thee here again! No, no, I am glad thou have escaped their bloody
hands, and now got quite without their reach. I am glad thou have got to
perfect ease and rest; and know no pains, nor griefs, nor sorrows. Oh! take
a full possession of thy Fathers breast, and sit thee down upon his Throne,
Thou art a King for ever. And take delight in these thy soul did travel, die
and bleed for on earth. I will repine at nothing that shall advance thy glory.
But Oh! thou cruel bloody unbelieving world! you wicked murtherous bloody Jews!
though I rejoice my Lord is safe arrived home, and quietly landed within his
Haven; yet from you I cannot hold mine anger, that made his Sea a Sea of blood,
and drained his heart, to make it deep, and filld his sails with sighs and
groans, that caused his voyage to be so doleful. What good got you to stand and
laugh to see him sorrowful? to scoff and jeer to hear his lamentations? what
cursed rage was that to make such haste to fetch him vinegar and gall to
prolong his life, to lengthen out his dolors? How could you find such barbarous
hearts to triumph over a bleeding dying lamb, that was so innocent? How could
you taunt at him when you heard him praying for you, Father forgive them! and
so tenderly excusing you, for they know not what they do! Methinks that kindly
harmless carriage should have pierced your hearts; those melting words should
have dissolved them; and instead of piercing him, I should have thought you
pierced. And ah! but that I know an unbelieving heart my self, and understand
what hardness means, I should stand and wonder! Oh! it is too hard an Adament
for downy words, and doleful sounds, and tender carriages to break and shatter!
How often have I outstood all those my self! And when I served my flesh, how
little did I mind them! And when they have been presented to me in the Gospel,
or in a Sermon told that all these tortures he endured for me, and I in part
believed it too, yet, was I not as a man bereft of my senses, and I was no more
moved in mine heart, as if I had not heard or understood, and were quite
bereaved of sense and reason. But had I thus continued in my senseless
unbelieving state, and as I lived so died; yet how deservedly should I have
born the wrath of God, and have been sent to Hell as a recompense of mine
unbelief? And yet, you careless secure Jews, can you think to escape when God
comes to make inquisition for blood? How will you do if this sin shall find you
out? If God requires blood for blood, what will become of yours? If he had been
no more than a common man, the Law would then have required your lives for
payment. But how if in the end he prove a Prophet? nay more than that, the Son
of the most high God, the Prince and Savior whom God had promised to raise,
the Messiah whom Moses and the Prophets bare witness to, and him that you so
longed and wished to see! How will you look! what will you say! what answer will
you make when all these truths are cleared? where will you hide your selves for
shame? and what will you do when confusion shall thus take hold upon you? What!
will you then confess the fact, or will you deny it? with what face can you do
the first? And if you do the latter, the curse you and your Fathers drew upon
your selves, Let his blood be upon us and our children! stand still on record
against you, and will cry you guilty. Will you excuse it with your unbelieving
ignorance? But how will you be able to rub your brows into so much confidence?
How dare you say you were ignorant of him, when you say you know both Moses and
the Prophets, and they bear witness of him? You asked a sign, and did he not
give you both signs and wonders? How often did he cure your Lame? How
wonderfully did he heal your Lepers, and those sick of the Palsy, yea of all
manner of diseases? How did he open the eyes of the blind! and give light to
them that was born blind! yea, restore the withered hand, and make the crooked
straight, and open the ears of the deaf, and cast out Devils, and raise the
dead! Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made
that same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

A Prayer before the Receiving the Holy Communion.
MOST Holy God, I am as stubble before thee, the consuming Fire. How shall I
stand before thy Holiness, for I am a sinful Creature, laden with Iniquity,
that have gone backward, and provoked the Holy One of Israel; when I was lost,
thy Son did seek and save me; when I was dead in sin, thou made me alive.
Thou saw me polluted in my blood, and said unto me live. In that time of
love thou coveredst my nakedness, and enteredst into a Covenant with me, and I
became thine own. Thou did deliver me from the power of Darkness, and
translate me into the Kingdom of thy dear Son; and gave me remission of sin,
through his blood. But I am a grievous Revolter, I have forgotten the Covenant
of the Lord my God, I was engaged to love thee with all my heart, and to hate
iniquity, and serve thee diligently, and thankfully to set forth thy praise.
But I have departed from thee, and corrupted my self by self-love, and by
loving the world, and the things that are in the world, and have fulfilled the
desires of the flesh, which I should have crucified. I have neglected my duty
to thee, and to my neighbor, and the necessary care of my own Salvation. I
have been an unprofitable Servant, and have hid thy Talents, and have
dishonored thee, whom in all things I should have pleased and glorified. I
have been negligent in hearing and reading thy holy Word, and in meditating and
conferring of it, in public and private Prayer and Thanksgiving, and in my
preparation to this holy Sacrament, in the examining of my self, and repenting
of my sins, and stirring up my heart to a believing and thankful receiving of
thy grace, and to love and joyfulness, in my Communion with thee, and with one
another of thy People. I have not duly discerned the Lord's Body, but have
profaned thy holy Name and Ordinance, as if the Table of the Lord had been
contemptible. And when thou have spoken peace to me, I returned again to folly;
I have deserved, O Lord, to be cast out of thy presence, and to be forsaken, as
I have forsaken thee, and to hear to my confusion, Depart from me, I know thee
not, thou worker of iniquity. Thou may justly tell me, thou have no pleasure
in me, nor wilt receive an Offering at my hand. But with thee there is abundant
mercy. And my Advocate Jesus Christ the Righteous, is the Propitiation for my
sins; who bare them in his Body on the Cross, and made himself an Offering for
them, that he might put them away by the Sacrifice of himself; have mercy upon
me, and wash me in his blood; cloth me with his Righteousness; take away my
iniquities, and let them not be my ruin; forgive them, and remember them no
more: O thou that delightest not in the death of sinners, heal my
backslidings, love me freely, and say unto my soul, that thou art my
salvation. Thou will in no wise cast out them that come unto thee, receive me
graciously to the Feast thou have prepared for me; cause me to hunger and
thirst after Christ, and his Righteousness, that I may be satisfied: Let his
flesh and blood be to me meat and drink indeed, and his Spirit be in me a well
of living water, springing up to everlasting life. Give me to know thy Love in
Christ, which passes knowledge. Though I have not seen him, let me love him.
And though now I see him not, yet believing let me rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory; though I am unworthy of the crumbs that fall
from thy Table, yet feed me with the Bread of Life, and speak and seal up Peace
to my sinful wounded soul. Soften my heart that is hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin; mortify the flesh, and strengthen me with might in the
inward man; that I may live and glorify thy Grace, through Jesus Christ our
only Savior. In whose words I conclude, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer after the Receiving of the Holy Communion.
MOST Glorious God, how wonderful is thy Power and Wisdom, thy Holiness and
Justice, thy Love and Mercy in this work of our Redemption, by the Incarnation,
Life, Death, Resurrection, Intercession, and Dominion of thy Son! No power or
wisdom in Heaven or Earth, could have delivered me but thine. The Angels desire
to pry into this Mystery, the Heavenly Host do celebrate it with praises,
saying, Glory be to God in the Highest; on Earth peace; good will toward men.
The whole Creation shall proclaim thy praises, blessing, honor, glory and
power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and honor, and
glory; for he haeth redeemed us to God by his blood, and made us Kings and
Priests unto our God. Where sin abounded, grace has abounded much more. And
have thou indeed forgiven me so great a debt, by so precious a Ransom? Will thou indeed give me to reign with Christ in Glory, and see thy face, and love
thee, and be beloved of thee for ever? Yea Lord, thou have forgiven me, and
thou will glorify me, for thou art faithful that have promised. With the blood
of thy Son, with the Sacrament, and with thy Spirit, thou have sealed up to me
these precious promises. And shall I not love thee, that have thus loved me?
Shall I not love thy Servants, and forgive my Neighbors their little debt?
After all this shall I again forsake thee, and deal falsely in thy Covenant? God
forbid, O! set my affections on the things above, where Christ sits at thy
right hand. Let me no more mind earthly things, but let my Conversation be in
Heaven, from whence I expect my Savior to come and change me into the likeness
of his glory. Teach me to do thy will, O God! and to follow him, who is the
Author of Eternal Salvation, to all them that do obey him. Order my stops by
thy Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. Let me not
henceforth live unto my self, but unto him who died for me and rose again. Let
me have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them.
And let my light so shine before men, that they may glorify thee. In
simplicity and godly sincerity, and not in fleshly wisdom, let me have my
Conversation in the world. O that my ways were so directed, that I might keep
thy Statutes! Though Satan will be desirous again to sist me, and seek as a
roaring Lion to devour, strengthen me to stand against his Wiles, and shortly
bruise him under my feet. Accept me, O Lord, who resign my self unto thee, as
thine own; and with my thanks and praise, present my self a living Sacrifice to
be acceptable through Christ. Useful for thine honor. Being made free from
sin, and become thy Servant, let me have my fruit unto holiness, and the End
Everlasting Life. Through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. In whose words I
farther pray, Our Father, etc.

A Divine Soliloquy.
O My Soul! thou have been feasted with the Son of God, at his Table, upon his
Flesh and Blood, in preparation for the Feast of Endless Glory; thou have seen
there represented, what sin deserves, what Christ suffered, what wonderful
Love, the God of infinite goodness has expressed to thee. Thou have had
Communion with the Saints; thou have renewed thy Covenant of Faith, and
thankful Obedience, unto Christ. Thou have received his renewed Covenant of
Pardon, Grace and Glory to thee; O carry hence the lively sense of these great
and excellent things upon thy heart. Remember, O my Soul! thou came not (to
that holy Table) only to enjoy the mercy of an hour, but that which may spring
up to endless Joy. Thou came not only to do the duty of an hour, but to
promise that which thou must perform while thou live on Earth. Remember
daily, especially when Temptations to unbelief, and sinful heaviness assault
thee, what pledges of Love thou have received. Remember daily, especially when
Flesh, and Devil, and World, would draw thy heart again from God; and
temptations to sin are laid before thee, what Bonds God and thy own Consent
have laid upon thee. Remember, O my Soul! if thou art a Penitent Believer, thou
art now forgiven, and washed in the Blood of Christ. O! go your way, and sin no
more; no more through wilfulness, and strive against your sins of weakness.
Wallow no more in the Mire, and return not to thy Vomit. Let the exceeding Love
of Christ constrain thee, having such Promises, as 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. O cleanse
thy self from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God.

Amen.
Hymns suited to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. To be sung in the common
Tunes.
A Hymn for the Sacrament.
HYMN I.
I.
A New and well composed Song,
With raptures filled of Love,
And ecstasies of Joy, let us tune
Unto our Lord above.
Awake my drowsy sleepy Soul,
Awake dull heavy heart,
And all my faculties and powers,
Join, in and bear a part.
II.
Let judgment weigh the argument,
Let fancy it adorn,
Let memory bring forth its store,
Thoughts, offer your firstborn.
God did assume the shape of Man,
With flesh his glory veiled,
Himself he humbled unto death.
He to the Cross was nailed.
III.
Made sin, us to acquit from sin;
Accursed, us to bless,
Of Righteousness he wrought a Robe
To hide our nakedness.
Darling of Heaven he was and is,
The Father's chief delight:
Angels wonder, the Saints above
Are ravished at his sight.
IV.
Arrayed he is with Majesty,
Angels do him attend;
All power is his in Heaven and Earth,
All to his Scepter bend.
A glorious Crown is on his head
Most lovely is his face,
Treasures of wisdom are with him,
For us he is stored with grace.
V.
His Love does pass dimensions,
His Love exceeds all thought,
Stronger than death, this Love to us
Salvation has brought.
Hence all the Clouds away, away,
Darken no more mine eye,
Fain would I see this lovely one,
Whose dwelling is on high.
VI.
Open thine Eye, here Jesus stands,
He looks, he breathes, he moves:
By Faith thou may discern him plain,
In this sweet Feast of Loves.
And art thou here indeed, my Lord!
Draw nearer yet to me,
And nearer, nearer, my dear Lord;
Too near thou can not be.
VII.
Come my Beloved, let me view
Thy beauteous lovely face;
Thee I would fold in arms of love,
Fain I would thee embrace.
I feel, I feel a flame within,
Dear Lord, I thee admire;
Thy sparkling beauty which I see,
Has set me all on fire.
VIII.
Thy kind looks have me overcome,
The glances of thine Eye,
Sweetly my Soul transported have,
I feel an ecstasy.
Unutterable Joys I feel,
How sweet! how sweet! how sweet
Is this taste of thy Love, whilst I
And my Beloved meet!
IX.
Sure this the Gate of Heaven is,
Methinks I Am entering in,
Where I shall always see thy face,
And no more grieve or sin.
Ten thousand praises let us give
Unto our Lord on high;
Let heart, and lip, and life combine
To make the melody.
HYMN II.
I.
O Come let us join all like one,
The Lord to magnify;
Let us together lift his name
In sweet sounds to the Sky.
Sweet Hymns of Love come let us sing,
Let Love us act and move;
Let Love our voices tune to praise
Our God, for God is Love.
II.
God's Love the lofty Heavens above,
In height does far transcend:
Its depth, the Sea; its breadth and length
Is without bound or end.
God's Love to us is wonderful:
To us who Rebels were,
God gave his only Son to die,
That Rebels he might spare.
III.
From guilt and reigning power of sin,
And Satan's slavery;
From fire of Hell us to redeem,
God gave his Son to die.
Christ suffered in our stead, he was
More harmless than the Dove:
That God should lay our sins on him;
This, this indeed is Love.
IV.
O come let us give God our Loves,
Let every heart take fire;
Let flames come forth and join in one,
And unto Heaven aspire.
^weet Spirit come, like Southern Gales,
Within us breathe and move;
Blow up our spark into a flame,
That we may burn with love.
V.
That we with all our hearts may love,
Our hearts Lord circumcise:
Of Love persum'd with sweet Incense,
Accept the Sacrifice.
VI.
Draw near, O God, unvail thy self,
Our cloudiness remove;
O shine! and smile on us, that we
may see thy face and love.
VII.
Dear Jesus, come and visit us,
A stranger do not prove;
Heal wounds of sin, speak peace that we
Thy voice may hear and love.
VIII.
Our selves we offer with our hearts,
Our whole selves we resign
To thee who art the God of Love,
We are and will be thine.
HYMN III.
I.
GOD has us brought into his Courts,
And Chambers of his Love,
That he might feed and feast us here,
With dainties from above.
Heaven opened is before our Eye,
The Vail is rent, that we
May upward look, and his dear Son
Crowned with Glory see.
II.
This Jesus crowned was with Thorns,
Scourged with cruel hands,
His flesh was torn, when to the Cross
He tied was with Bands.
Tears trickled from his mournful eyes,
Sweat dropped from his face,
Blood flowed from his hands and feet,
And side, in streams apace.
III.
His groans were strong, his cries were loud,
Pressures of wrath did lie
Upon his Soul, with sense of which
In anguish he did dye.
He harmless was, and innocent;
No guilt upon him lay,
But as our Surety he our debts
Did by his sufferings pay.
IV.
Thus did he Justice satisfy,
By dying in our room,
That we might justified be
By Faith, that to him come.
The Bread we eat at this great Feast,
Christ's flesh is, and his blood
Is represented by the Wine;
This, this indeed is food.
V.
Here is the heavenly Manna, which
Our God to us does give:
Who eats other bread shall die;
In eating this we live.
A hidden life of Grace we have,
Breathing desires and love;
Christ is our Life, the Author, Spring,
By whom our Graces move.
VI.
Come let us look unto our Lord;
This Glass will show his face,
Not veiled over with dark Types,
As heretofore it was.
God-man, that name is wonderful;
So is his beauty; so
His love is full of wonders, both
Beyond our reach to go.
VII.
Yet where we cannot comprehend,
Looking, let us admire,
Admiring love, loving rejoice,
And to enjoy aspire.
Our Lord is present at this Feast;
He looks, let us meet his Eye
With ours; sweet glances, looks of love
It may be we shall spy.
VIII.
Come Lord draw near, we long, we long
Thy face to see, thy love
To taste, thy voice to hear, within
To feel thy Spirit move.
Thou art all fair, thou have no spot,
Thy beauty is divine:
Thou art all love, embrace us Lord
In those sweet Arms of thine.
IX.
We look, we wait, we hope, we trust,
We long, we love, we burn.
Ravish thou do our hearts, whilst thou
To us thine Eye do turn.
With all the powers of our Souls
Dear Jesus we thee praise,
In songs of joy and thankfulness
Our voices we do raise.
X.
Hosanna's we, Hosanna's we
Do sing with one accord
In Hallelujah's of triumph
We join to praise the Lord.
Ye Angels and triumphant Saints,
Praise ye our Lord above,
Whilst we his Servants here below
Do sing his praise with love.
HYMN IV.
I.
THousands of thousands stand around
Thy Throne, O God, most high;
Ten thousand times ten thousand sound
Thy praise, but who am I?
Thine arm of might, most mighty King
Both Rocks and hearts does break;
My God, thou can do every thing
But what would show thee weak.
II.
Most pure and holy are thine Eyes,
Most holy is thy Name;
Thy Saints, and Laws, and Penalties,
Thy holiness proclaim.
Mercy is God's Memorial,
And in all Ages praised;
My God, thine only Son did fall,
That Mercy might be raised.
III.
Thy bright back-parts, O God of Grace,
I humbly here adore;
Show me thy glory and thy face,
That I may praise thee more.
Mysterious depths of endless love
Our admirations raise.
My God, thy Name exalted is
Far above all our praise:
HYMN V.
I.
TO whom, Lord, should I sing, but thee,
The maker of my Tongue?
Lo, other Lords would seize on me,
But I to thee belong.
As thou Lord, an immortal Soul
Have breathed into me,
So let my Soul be breathing forth
Immortal thanks to thee.
II.
Sing and triumph in boundless grace,
Which thus has set thee free;
Extol with shouts my saved Soul
Thy Savior's love to thee.
Sweet Christ, thou have refresht our Souls
With thine abundant grace,
For which we magnify thy Name,
Longing to see thy face.
III.
Down from above the blessed Dove
Is come into my breast,
To witness God's Eternal Love,
This is my heavenly Feast.
This makes me Abba Father cry,
With confidence of Soul!
It makes me cry, my Lord, my God,
And that, without control.
IV.
Thou art all power, thou art all love,
And so thou art to me;
Blessed be my God now and henceforth,
And to Eternity.
HYMN VI.
I.
LORD give me a believing heart,
Advance it more and more;
Rebuke those doubts and scruples that
Are crowding at my door.
Lord let thy Word and Spirit guide
Thy Servant in thy way;
May I walk closely with my God,
And run no more astray.
III.
All they that sit down with thee must
Be decked with thy Grace;
Thou smil'st on such Communicants,
And they behold thy face.
Come holy Spirit, come and take
My filthy Garments hence,
The guilt, the stain, the love of sin,
Will give my Lord offense.
III.
Let nothing that is not divine,
Within thy presence move,
What e're would cause thee not to shine
In tokens of thy Love.
Awake Repentance, Faith and Love,
Awake O every Grace!
Come, come, attend this glorious King,
And how before his face.
IV.
Let not my Jesus now be strange,
And hide himself from me;
O cause thy face to shine upon
The Soul that longs for thee.
HYMN VII.
I.
WE to our heavenly Father give
The tribute praise we owe,
Who by his purifying Grace
Prepares us here below.
Lo here is the most amazing proof
Of great and matchless Love!
Not that our Early love to God
Did his prevent and move.
II.
His motives all to pity us
From his own bowels flow;
Thence came the richest gift of Heaven
To Guilty Men below.
That to his glorious grace all praise
Might be entirely paid:
Who, that he might forgive our sins,
Christ's Blood our Ransom made;
III.
Let then this glorious gift of God
Yet more our Souls refine,
That his pure Image may in us
With greater glory shine.
Draw us, dear Lord, and toward thee
We with swift wings will move,
Thou Object of our highest hopes,
And of our dearest Love.
IV.
Thanksgiving is an heavenly work,
It Is all in Heaven they do,
To thank and praise the Lord most high,
On Earth is sweet work too.
O! blessed are the Saints above,
How active is your state!
You ever bless the Lord our God,
Not at our broken rate.
VI.
But, O! how weak are crawling Worms?
How short our Sabbath Days?
We die more hours by far in sleep,
Than we do live in praise.
O glorious God! accept our wills,
And weaknesses forgive;
We wish our Souls were like the Saints,
Unlike them as we live.
V.
But, O my God! reach down thy hand,
And take us up to thee,
That we about thy Throne may stand,
And all thy Glory see.
All glory to the sacred Three,
One Everlasting Lord,
As at the first, still may he be
Beloved, obeyed, adored.
HYMN VIII.
I.
COme let us adore the King of Love,
The King of sufferings too,
For love it was that brought him down,
And set him here below.
Love drew him from his Paradise,
Where Flowers that fade not grow,
And planted him in our poor dust,
Among us, Weeds below.
II.
O narrow thoughts, and narrow speech!
Here your defects confess.
The life of God, the death of Christ,
How faintly you express.
O thou! who from a Virgin root
Made'st this fair Flower to spring,
Help us to raise both heart and voice,
And with more spirit sing,
III.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One undivided Three,
All highest praise, all humblest thanks
Now and for ever be.
HYMN IX.
To the Tune of the 100 Psalm.
I.
TUne now your selves my heart strings high,
Let us aloft our voices raise,
That our loud song may reach the Sky,
And there present to thee our praise.
To thee, blessed Jesus, who came'st down
From those bright Spheres of Joy above,
To purchase us a dear bought Crown,
And woe our Souls t'espouse thy Love.
Long had the World in darkness sat,
Till thou with thy all-glorious light
Began to dawn from Heavens fair Gate,
And with thy beam dispelled their night.
We too, alas! still here had stood
As common slaves in this same shade,
But Jesus came, and with his Blood
Our general Ransom freely paid.
And now, my Lord, my God, my All,
What shall I most in thee admire,
That power which made the world, and shall
The world again dissolve with Fire!
Oh no! thy strange humility,
Thy wounds, thy pains, thy Cross, thy death
These shall alone my wonder be,
My health, my joy, my staff, my breath.
To thee, great God, to thee alone,
Three Persons in One Deity,
As former Ages still have done,
All Glory now and ever be.
HYMN X.
I.
THE Mighty Jesus, filled with love
Did these dark Regions leave:
The heavenly Hosts all wandering stood
King Jesus to receive.
The great Jehovah sets a Throne,
Installs our glorious King;
Both Heaven and Earth must him adore;
And loud Hosannah's sing.
II.
There sits the King of Peace and Love,
A Savior is his name,
Mercy his Nature and delight,
And ever so the same.
Come all that fear, come all that want,
And speedy succor find;
He n're denies a praying Soul,
He is so good and kind.
III.
Behold and wonder at his Love,
We are his daily care,
His ear, his heart, is always fixed
To hear and answer prayer.
Be not afraid to bring your Suit,
Come with a cheerful heart.
Weak cries, mixed prayers cannot bar
A grant to his own part.
IV.
Satan, it is true, presents his Plea,
And Justice brings its claim;
But all are silent when he pleads,
His Blood, his Love, his Name!
Let holy Souls then daily go
To Jesus on his Throne,
And love that all-prevailing Friend
Who says we are his own.
HYMN XI. As the 67th Psalm.
I.
O This ungrateful World!
To kill so kind a Friend,
That made the Lord of Glory die,
What might this act portend?
But wonder, holy Souls,
God's thoughts all thoughts transcend:
Christ murdered by a Rebel World,
And yet he is our Friend.
II.
It Is true, Christ left the Earth,
But is enthroned above,
Not to revenge this cruel act,
But lives and reigns in love,
II.
Sweet is his work on high,
Peace is the charming voice;
Let but a Soul embrace his Call,
The heavenly Host rejoice.
Behold he stands and calls,
Come Sinners, come to me,
My Love, my Kingdom shall be yours
To all Eternity.
III.
Believe my faithful Word,
All my designs are Grace,
Take now the Earnest of my Love
Before you see my face.
Never be strange to me,
I wait to hear your cry,
Let me but know your pressing wants,
And you shall have supply.
IV.
Never distrust my Love,
I Am, this is my Name;
Sin makes me hide my face a while,
When yet my Love's the same.
Never regard your Foes,
They are no match for me;
Plead still my Conquests with your God,
And you shall Victors be.
HYMN XII.
I.
Filled with the sense of sin and wrath,
And black despair drew nigh,
To Christ I fled for succ'ring Grace,
He heard my mournful cry:
Under his pleasant shade I sat,
Sweet notes of Love I heard;
My welcome was above my thought,
How was I loved and cheered!
II.
He came to me, but not alone,
Divine fruits were my fair;
I waited what he first would say,
Your sins now pardoned are:
Peace with Jehovah is my gift,
No frowns appear above;
Go boldly to my Father's Throne,
Love waits your Soul to love.
III.
The Book of Life, your Name is there,
And ever there shall be,
Love wrote it there, Love keeps it there
To all Eternity.
Ask what you will, I have God's Ear,
He never me denied:
Come with your fears, come with your wants,
And you shall be supplied.
IV.
I give my Angels for your Guard,
You are their daily care,
Let Satan tempt and shoot his Darts,
They can prevent the snare.
O Lord! what can I now reply,
What, love at such a rate!
But this I Will pray, O let my Love
Bear an Eternal Date.
Another.
I.
The time is past when humane Race
Became God's Enemy:
The World never saw so black a Night,
When Adam eat the Tree,
Vast gulf of Woes became his due,
Which had no bounds nor end;
What e're he did, what e're he thought,
Still guilt did him attend.
II.
God saw this sad tremendous Fall,
His Truth said, might thy Word
Justice required, the Sinner's Blood
No pity him afford;
But Love, that charming Attribute
Prepared a kind Reply,
The Pleas of Justice I Will adjust,
My only Son shall die.
III.
Blessed was the day when Adam heard
That chearing word of Grace,
I Will send the Lord of Glory here,
And hide my angry face.
Hear what he says, he knows my heart,
My Mercy shall rejoice,
Peace he will proclaim, the War will cease,
If you obey his voice.
IV.
Go trembling Sinner, go to him,
Fear not your former guilt,
His Death has answered my demands,
And I will you acquit.
Come take the Pledge, believe my Son,
I am your own, your All,
I have a Father's hand and heart,
To hear you when you call.
V.
My Christ did lovingly invite
Me to his charming Feast;
He added to his wondrous Love,
Made me a wiliing Guest.
I came and found a Banquet rare,
He brought me Angels food,
He bid me take and eat my fill,
For my Eternal good.
VI.
He spoke such chearing words of Grace,
What do you want, my Friend?
What, can you doubt my kind design?
Consider and attend.
Sin cannot now defeat my Love,
Since pardons I will give.
Sin seems an unresisted Foe,
It shall not always live.
VII.
You feel a dreadful War within,
Lusts claim a rightless Throne,
But this united force I Will break,
Since now you are my own.
Satan with all his Darts and Snares
Shall prove a fruitless Foe;
You are designed for Heaven's Bliss,
He to Eternal Woe.
VIII.
Never distrust my wondrous Love,
The best is yet behind,
No Tongue nor Thought can represent
How good I Will be, and kind;
Refresh your Souls with what I give,
Wait till you come on high:
I long till all my Members see
What Is in Eternity.
Another.
I.
What made the Lord of Glory die?
Shall God the answer make?
Our guilty Souls may trembling stand
To hear Hehovah speak:
But God has spoke, he sent his Son,
But stay dejected heart,
Not to condemn a Rebel World,
But to regain his part.
II.
The Death of Christ no vengeance cries,
It is a sign of Peace;
It pardons sins, and pays our debts,
And gives our Souls release;
Let Law and Conscience bring their charge,
Let Justice plead our guilt:
The Death of Christ can silence all,
And God will us acquit.
III.
Oh Soul! shall banished fears return,
When you can pardon plead.
Hold fast this charming Pledge of Love,
For you it is decreed;
Let Angels sing their highest Note,
Let Earth triumph below,
Let the Redeemed of the Lord
Their Savior's Glory show.
Books sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower End
of Cheapside.
A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above one hundred seventy six
Sermons on the lesser Catechism composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at
Westminster: With a Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture.
By Tho. Watson, formerly Minister at St. Stephen's Walbrook, London.

A Paraphrase on the New Testament, with Notes, doctrinal and practical. By
plainness and brevity fitted to the Use of Religious Families, in their daily
Reading of the Scriptures; and of the younger and poorer sort of Scholars and
Ministers, who want fuller helps. With an Advertisement of Difficulties in the
Revelations. By the Late Reverend Mr. Rich. Baxter.

Six hundred of select Hymns and Spiritual Songs collected out of the Holy
Bible. Together with a Catechism, the Canticles, and a Catalogue of Virtuous
Women. The Three last hundred of select Hymns collected out of the Psalms of
David. By William Barton, A. M. late Minister of St. Martins in Leicester.

Spiritual Songs: Or Songs of Praise to Almighty God upon several occasions.
Together with the Song of Songs, which is Solomon's: First turned, then
paraphrased in English Verse. By John Mason.

Penitential Cries, in Thirty two Hymns. Begun by the Author of the Songs of
Praise and Midnight Cry; and carried on by another hand.

Sacramental Hymns collected (chiefly) out of such passages of the N. Testament
as contain the most suitable matter of Divine Praises in the Celebration of the
Lord's Supper. To which is added one Hymn relating to Baptism, and another to
the Ministry. By J. Boyse. With some by other hands.

A Collection of Divine Hymns upon several occasions; suited to our common
Tunes, for the use of Devout Christians, in singing forth the Praises of God.

The Psalms of David in Meter: Newly translated and diligently compared with
the Original Text and former Translations: More plain, smooth, and agreeable to
the Text than any heretofore.

Of ^^ee Justification by Christ. Written first in Latin by John Fox, Author
of the Book of Martyrs, against Osorius, etc. And now Translated into English,
for the benefit of those who love their own Souls, and would not be mistaken in
so great a Point.

An Earnest Call to Family-Religion: Or a Discourse concerning Family Worship.
Being the substance of Eighteen Sermons. Preached by Samuel Slater, A. M.
Minister of the Gospel.

The Preaching of Christ; and the Prison of God, as the certain Portion of them
that reject Christ's Word. Opened in several Sermons on 1 Pet. 3. 19. By Samuel
Tomlyns, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel of Christ in Marleborough.

Ornaments for the Daughters of Zion: Or the character and happiness of a
Virtuous Woman; in a Discourse which directs the Female Sex how to expess the
Fear of God in every Age and State of their Life; and obtain both Temporal and
Eternal Blessedness. Written by Cotton Mather.

The Confirming Work of Religion, and its great things made plain by their
primary Evidences and Demonstrations; whereby the meanest in the Church may
soon be made able to render a rational account of their Faith.

The present Aspect of our Times, and of the Extraordinary Conjunction of
things therein; in a Rational View and Prospect of the same, as it respects the
public hazard and safety of Britain in this day. These two last by Robert
Fleming, Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures, and Minister at Rotterdam.

England's Alarm: Being an account of God's most considerable Dispensations of
Judgment and Mercy toward these Kingdoms, for 14 years last past; and also of
the several sorts of Sins and Sinners therein; especially the Murmurers against
this Present Government. With an Earnest Call to speedy Humiliation and
Reformation, and Supplication, as the chief means of prospering their Majesty's
Councels and Preparations. Dedicated to the King and Queen.

A Family-Altar Erected to the honor of the Eternal God: Or, a so emn Essay to
promote the Worship of God in Private Houses: Being some Meditations on Gen 3.
5, 2. 3. With the Best Entail, or Dying Parents Living Hopes for their
Surviving Children, grounded upon the Covenant of God's Grace with Believers
and their Seed. Being a short Discourse on 2 Samuel 23. 5. By Oliver Heywood
Minister of the Gospel.

The Gospel Mystery of Sanctification opened in sundry practical Directions,
suited especially to the case of those who labor under the guilt and power of
In-dwelling sin. To which is added a Sermon of Justification. By Walter
Marshall Minister of the Gospel, etc.

Death improved, and immoderate Sorrow for Deceased Friends and Relations
reproved. Wherein you have many Arguments against Immoderate Sorrow, and many
profitable Lessons which we may learn from such Providence. By E Bury,
formerly Minister of Great Bolas in Shropshire, Author of the Help to Holy
Walking, and the Husbandman's Companion, etc.

The Poor Man's Help, and Young Man's Guide: Containing, 1. Doctrinal
Instructions for the right informing of his Judgment. 2. Practical Directions
for the general course of his Life. 3. Particular Advices for the well managing
of every day with reference to his Natural Actions; Civil Employments,
Necessary Recreations, Religious Duties, particular Prayer, Public in the
Congregation, Private in the Family, Secret in the Closet, Reading the holy
Scriptures, Hearing the Word Preached, and Receiving the Lord's Supper. By
William Burkitt, M. A. of Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge, and now Vicar of Dedham
in Essex, and Author of the practical Discourse of Infant Baptism.

A plain Discourse about rash and sinful Anger; as a help for such as are
willing to be relieved against so sad and too generally prevailing Distemper
even amongst Professors of Religion; being the substance of some Sermons
Preached at Manchester. By Henry Newcome, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel
there, and Author of the Improvement of Sickness.

The Rod or the Sword, the present Dilemma of the Nations of England, Scotland
and Ireland, considered, argued and improved on Ezekiel. 21. 14. By a true Friend
to the Protestant Interest, and the Protestant Government.

A Present for such as have been Sick and are recovered: Or, a Discourse
concerning the Good that comes out of the Evil of Affliction: Being several
Sermons Preached after his being raised from a Bed of Languishing. By Nathaniel
Vincent, M. A. and Author of the Conversion of the Soul. The true Touchstoue of
Grace and Nature. Discourse of Conscience. Treatise of Prayer and Love, etc.

Some passages in the Holy Life and Death of the Late Reverend Mr. Edmund
Trench, most of them drawn out of his own Diary. Published by Joseph Boyse
Minister in Dublin.

Advice to an Only Child, or Excellent Counsel to all Young Persons, containing
the sum and substance of Experimental and Practical Divinity. Written by an
Eminent and Judicious Divine, for the private use of an Only Child. Now made
public for the benefit of all.

An account of the Blessed Trinity, argued from the Nature and Perfection of
the Supreme Spirit, coincident with the Scripture Doctrine, in all the Articles
of the Catholic Creeds; together with its Mystical, Foederal, and Practical
Uses in the Christian Religion. By William Borough Rector of Cheyns in Bucks.

A Discourse of Justification, being the sum of Twenty Sermons. By Walter
Cross, M. A.

Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery.

A Discourse concerning Trouble of mind; in three parts. By Timothy Rogers, M.
A. Also a Treatise of Consolation, by the same Author.

A plain and Familiar Discourse on the Sacrament. By Bishop Kidder.

Roberts on the Sacrament.

Vines on the Sacrament.

Day's Sacramental Catechism.

Doolittle's Second Part of the Discourse on the Sacrament, concerning Christ's
Sufferings.

FINIS

