MORE REASONS FOR THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION, AND No Reason Against it. Or a Second
Appendix to the Reasons of the Christian Religion, BEING I. An Answer to a
Letter from an unknown Person, Charging the Holy Scriptures with
Contradictions. II. Some ANIMADVERSIONS On a Tractate De Veritate, Written by
the Noble and Learned Lord Edward Herbert, Baron of Chizbury, etc. and Printed
at Paris 1624. And at London 1633. Resolving Twelve Questions about
Christianity.
By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1672.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir Henry Herbert, Knight. etc.
SIR,
THe reasons are many which induce me to presume to direct these Papers first
to you, and to tell the world how much I honor you: first my personal ancient
obligations to you: secondly, Principally, your approved wisdom and moderation,
and taking part with the ways of Charity and Peace, in your most public
capacity in these trying times: thirdly, your Relation to the Noble Author on
whose writing I here Animadvert; which as it is your honor to be the Brother
of so learned and ingenious a Lord, and the Brother of so excellently holy as
well as learned and ingenious a person, as Mr. George Herbert, Orator to the
University of Cambridge, and a faithful Pastor in the English Church; so it
obliges me the more to give you an account of this Animadversion. It is long
since I sought after the Book, as provoked by the Title and the honor of the
Authors name, and received it from you as your gift. The premised Letter from
an unknown person of the same name, occasioned me to review it: The sad case of
many of my acquaintance, and the increase of Infidelity of late, especially
among debauched sensual Gallants, and the danger of England hereby, and the
Temptations against which the best of Christians have need of help, were the
Reasons of my presumption, it being my Calling to propagate and vindicate the
Christian Faith: I am so far from writing against his whole Book, that I take
most of his Rules and Notions de Veritate, to be of singular use. And had so
great a wit had but the Internal Conditions due to such an Intellectual
apprehension, as his and your holy and excellent Brother had; no doubt but our
supernatural Revelations and Verities, would have appeared evident to him, and
possessed his soul with so sweet a gust, and fervent ascendent holy LOVE, as
breaths in Mr. G. Herbert's Poems, and as would have made them as clear to
him in their kind, as some of his Notitiae Communes. The truth is, as he was
too low to us, who number not our Divine Revelations with the Veresimilia, but
with the Certain Verities; so he was too high for the Atheistical Sensualists
of this age: And I would they would learn of him, that the Being and
Perfections of God, the duty of worshipping him, and of holy Conformity and
Obedience to him, and particularly all the ten Commandments, the necessity of
true Repentance, and the Rewards and Punishments of the Life to Come, with the
Souls Immortality, are all Notitiae Communes and such Natural Certainties, as
that the denial of them does unman them. To know this and to live accordingly,
would make a great alteration in our times: And Christianity could not be
disrelished by such, that so know and do. I may well suppose that your
approbation of the Cause I plead for, will make it needless to me to Apologize
for my boldness in meddling with such an Author, while I do it with all
tenderness of his deserved honor:

I remain Your obliged Servant, Richard Baxter.
Jan. 17. 1671/2;.
SIR,
I Was right glad, when I first heard that you had written, and put to Print, a
Book of the Reasons of the Christian Religion; and I did immediately buy the
Book, hoping that in the Reading and Perusing of it, I might have received
satisfaction as to any doubt or scruple, and an answer satisfactory to all
Objections, that in Reason may be raised against the Grounds of the said
Christian Religion; because I did think you to be as able to say and write as
much as any man in that thing, having as I thought studied it as much as any
that I had heard of; but in the reading and perusing it, I contrary to my
expectation found it to be short of giving me satisfaction.

For the greatest occasion of any doubt or scruple in any thing tending or
relating to the Christian Religion that I at any time had or have, were from
that variousness and contrariety, if not contradictions, which are, or at least
seem to be, in the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists and other Books
received for Scripture.

But you in answer to that Objection, page 412. say, Nothing but ignorance
makes men think so; understand once the true meaning, and allow for the errors
of Printers, Transcribers, and Translators; and there will no such thing be
found.

But you neither tell me which are those errors, nor yet how I may know them.

1. Therefore I humbly pray you (in writing) to tell me, whether that which is
written in the first Chapter of Matthews Gospel, verse 8, 9. where Matthew
writes, that Joram begat Ozias and Ozias begat Joatham, be any error of the
Transcribers, Translators or Printers, or the contrary to it, which is written
in the second book of the Kings, and in the books of the Chronicles; if not,
how may they be understood, for in those books it is written that Joram was
Father to Ahaziah, and Ahaziah was Father to Joash, and Joash was Father to
Amaziah, and Amaziah was Father to Azariah, and A zariah was Father to Joatham;
by the account of which Books, there is above an hundred Years between the
death of Joram the son of Jehosaphat, and Joatham,

2. And Secondly, Whether that which is written by Luke in his Gospel, Chapter
24. verse. 9, 10. 22, 23. where Luke writes, that Mary Magdalen and other Women,
told the Disciples, that they had seen a Vision of Angels, which said, that
Jesus was risen from the dead, and was alive; whether this be any error of the
Transcribers, Translators and Printers, or any of them; or the Contrary which
is written by St. John in his Gospel, for he writes Chap. 20. verse 2. That
Mary Magdalen told two of the Disciples, and said to them, They (I suppose
meaning the Adversaries) have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we
know not where they have laid him.

If not how may I understand them to be both true Testimonies or Reports, for
it seems by Luke, ver. 11, 12. and 23, 24. of his 24. Chapter, that Mary and
the other Women had told those things of their seeing the Angels, which said
that Jesus was risen and alive, before that Peter ran or went to the Sepulcher.

3. And Thirdly, Whether that which is written by Matthew, in the 28th. Chapter
of his Gospel, that the Angel said to Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, fear
not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus which was Crucified, he is not here, for
he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord lay, and go quickly
and tell his Disciples that he is risen from the dead, and behold he goes
before you into Galilee, there shall you see him, so I have told you,

And they departed quickly from the Sepulcher with fear and great joy, and did
run to bring his Disciples word, and as they went to tell his Disciples, behold
Jesus met them, see Mat. 28. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. v.

Whether I say was this which is written in St. Matthews Gospel, that I have
here Transcribed, said to the Women, and that the Women returned from the
Sepulcher to tell the Disciples, before that Mary M^gdalen said to him that she
supposed to be the Gardener, If thou have born him hence, tell me where thou
have laid him, and I will take him away, John 20. 15. or whether there be any
error of Transcribers, Translators or Printers in those Texts; if not, how may
I understand them to be true reports.

Sir, I shall trouble you with no more but these few places which I have
proposed in three Questions or Particulars, although there are several other
Texts, that I do not understand how they may be reconciled, but if you shall by
strength of Argument Grounded upon sound Reason, make appear that it was
nothing but Ignorance has made me to think that those Testimonies agree not,
but are contrary one to the other; and that they may be so understood as that
no such thing will appear in them, then I shall be ready and will with you
conclude and say so too, and for the future suppose that other places of those
books which are received for Scripture, as seem to be contrary to one another,
may be Reconciled, though I do not understand how;

But on the contrary, if you do not endeavor by such sound and plain Arguments
to make it appear that these Texts here Transcribed by me, may be understood so
as that no contradiction is in them.

I must think that it was nothing but Ignorance that made you say that which
you have said, in answer to that and some other objections,

Therefore I humbly and earnestly pray and beseech you, both in defense of your
own writings as also in defense of those Books in which you say you think that
no one error or contradiction in any matter can be proved, to make it appear in
truth and plainness.

If you judge I have erred from the truth, I hope you will endeavor to to
convert me from the error of my way, if any such be; which if you shall do, no
doubt but it will be a good work, see James 5. ult.

Sir, It is your advice, that in such kind of Scruples, the doubtful should
apply himself for satisfaction to some Minister; therefore do I write to you,
and if you shall not give me a gentle and plain Answer, I shall be discouraged
to make my Scruples known to any other; therefore in expectation of your plain
Answer, I Remain

Your Loving Friend in the Bond of Peace.

SIR,
TWo sorts of persons use to trouble me and others, with their Objections
against the Christian Religion. First, Some Papists, who profess to believe it,
but in design do act the part of Infidels, that they may loose men from all
Religion, in hope to bring them over to theirs, when they have taken them off
all other. For he that can make another man believe that he was hitherto
totally misled is likest to become the Master of his Faith: For men are apt to
think that none can so easily and certainly show them the truth, as he that
has showed them their error. And when men once think that according to the
Grounds of the Reformed Churches, they can have no certainty of Faith, they
will the easilier be brought to the way of those men, who promise them that
certainty which they make them believe that others want.

Secondly, The other sort are Infidels, who of late are grown numerous and
audacious, and look so big and speak so loud, as to acquaint us that it is not
they that are silenced (in their speaking place) nor driven five miles from
every City and Corporation.

Which sort you are of, I know not: I read your name, and that you are a
Sojourner; but finding that you write not as a tender Doubter, who desires to
be concealed, but as a Confident gain-sayer of the Christian Verity, and not
knowing how safely to send a Letter to the place where you say you sojourn, I
have thought that it will be most pleasing to you to come to you by the same
way, as the book did which you except against (which was written upon the
provocation of a paper Scattered among the Scholars of Oxford, when the Oxford
Oath and Act were made in the time of the great Plague, as by one that was
unsatisfied in the Grounds of Christianity; but I strongly suspected was
written by a Papist, it was made so suitable to their designs.)

In two things you have not dealt righteously and ingeniously with me.

1. In that you have not answered the Grounded Proofs of the Christian Verity
which I have laid down, but nibble at the Answer to some Objections, which is
not the way of a Lover of the truth.

2. In that you take no notice of, or make no answer to, the second part of my
answer to that same objection, about supposed Contradictions in the Scriptures;
where I showed you at large, that if that which you object were granted, it
would not overthrow the certainty of the Christian Faith. Both those should
have been done by an impartial man.

The method which the nature of the Cause requires me now to use, in my answer
to you, shall be in the manifesting these following Propositions.

Prop. 1. That if it could not by us be proved that every word of the Scripture
is true, nor the pen men infallible or indefectible in every particle, yet
might we have a certainty of the Christian Religion.

Prop. 2. That yet all that is in the Scriptures as the word of God is
certainly true; and no error or contradiction can be proved in it, but what is
in some Copies by the fault of Printers, Transcribers or Translators.

Prop. 3. That he that first proves the Truth of the Christian Faith by solid
evidence, may and ought to be certain of that truth, though he be not able to
solve all soeming contradictions in the Scripture, or answer all objections
which occur.

Prop. 4. The true method of one that would arrive at certainty, and not
deceive himself and others, is to lay first the fundamental proofs, and examine
them till he is thereby confirmed, and afterward to try the by-objections as
he is able; And not to begin first at the answering of such by-objected
difficulties, and judging of all the cause thereby. Of these I shall now speak
in order.

And whereas you bespeak Plainess and Gentleness in the Answer, I shall grant
you the first as far as in such have and brevity I am able; And the second as
far as the nature of the cause will bear. But if you account all Christians
deceived fools, you must not expect to be called wise, nor that I should
flatter you, and tell you that Apostasy is a state of safety; For I that
believe Heb. 6. and 10. must think that this were not Gentleness but Cruelty,
and worse than to kill you for fear of displeasing you.

Prop. 1. If it could not by us be proved that every word of the Scriptures is
true, nor the Pen men infallible or indefectible in every particle, yet might
we have a certainty of the Christian Religion.

The reason is, Because every particle in the Scripture, is not an essential
part of the Christian Religion, (no nor any Integral part, if you take the
Christian Religion strictly, for the Doctrine of necessary Belief, Desire and
Practice:) And that part which is indeed the essence (yea or Integrity) of
Christianity, may be certainly proved and believed, without our being able to
prove the certainty or truth of all the rest which is in the Scriptures.

The Holy Scriptures contain all our Religion, and somewhat more; that is, the
Accidents and appurtenances of it. As the body of a man, besides the parts
Essential and Integral has its Accidents; such as are the Hair and the Color
(and some Humors) which are for Beauty and other uses, though not Parts. So
far are the Papists from being in the right, who think that the Christian
Religion is not all (but part) contained in the Scriptures, that there is more
than all that is necessary to salvation, even the appurtenances which have an
aptitude to the adorning and promoting of the rest.

To know who was the Father of every person mentioned in the Bibles
Genealogies, to know what age each person was of whose age is there mentioned;
to know the name of every person, and every Town; to know how far each City was
from another whose distances are there expressed; with a multitude of such like
Historical, Genealogical, Chronological, Topographical, Physical, incidental
passages, is but an appurtenance, and not strictly a part (Essential or
Integral) of the Christian Faith, of Holiness or Religion.

Yet remember that we maintain as certain, that they are all Liars who accuse
God of Lying; And that, whatever some ignorantly talk to the contrary, God
cannot lie. See the excellent Amesius his Disputation, of this Question, An
falsum subesse potest fidei divinae, after his Medulla Theologiae (which book
with his Cases of Conscience, and Alstedius his Encyclopaediae, may (after the
Scriptures and Concordance) make a good Divine, and be a better Library than
the Fathers of the fourth Council. Carth. were acquainted with.) He that
thinks God can lie, destroys the Objectum Formale fidei divinae, and
therefore can have no Faith. If God could lie in one thing, we should never be
sure that he reveals the truth, unless by sense it self and after-experience.
All Faith goes upon such a Syllogism as this [Whatsoever God says is true:
But this God says, Ergo, it is true] So that whosoever believes every word in
the Scripture to be Gods word, must believe it all to be true, or he can
believe none of it at all.

But yet it is possible for a man to believe one part of the Bible to be Gods
Word, and not another part; which needs no proof.

Because that many of the ancient Churches for a certain time, doubted of, yea,
received not the Epistle of James, Peter 2d. the Heb. Apocal. etc. and yet were
truly of the Christian Religion.

First, We deny not but that there are many false and wicked sayings
historically recited in the Scripture (as the saying of Cain, Pharaoh, Gehezi,
the false Prophets, the Devil (of Job, to Christ, etc.) but the Scripture is
nevertheless true: For it is true that all these untruths were spoken.

Secondly, The Disciples of Christ were not absolutely and in all things
infallible, as all Christians do Confess. They were not as perfect in Knowledge
as now they are in Heaven. Either Paul or Barnab as was mistaken about the
fitness of Mark to go with them.

Thirdly, There was a greater assistance of the Spirit promised them when two
or three of them were assembled in Christ's name, than when they proceeded
singly, Mat. 18. 18. But there can be nothing above perfect infallibi^ity and
impeccability to them all.

Fourthly, We confess that Christ's Disciples were not indefectible or sinless.
As their understandings, so their wills and lives, had still some
imperfections. Mark, Paul and Silas did not all perfectly do their duties, in
the case they differed about. Peter did amiss in avoiding the Gentile
Christians, when Paul blamed him openly, Gal. 2. And Barnabas and others did
not do well in being drawn away to the same ^iss^^^lation. When Paul says of
Timothy, I have no man like minded and of others, They all seek their own, He
took not all Christians that had the Spirit to be perfect: If any man had not
the Spirit of Christ, he was none of his, Romans 8. 9. And the very wrangling
de^^^^^ng Galathians, had received the spirit, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. And so had the
wrangling Corinthians Christ in them, 2 Cor 8. 5.

Fifthly, We confess that he who is either infallible or defectible (liable to
error or sia) is of himself capable of being deceived and of deceiving others.
If he were Infallible in respect of the Knowledge of all the Truth, yet while he
can sin (of himself considered) he can be heedless, careless, rash, partial,
and for by respects speak too little or too much. It is the Devils last method,
to undo by overdoing, and so to destroy the authority of the Apostles by over
magnifying them, therefore we will not use his methods, nor deny any of this.

Sixthly, Moreover, we confess that it is possible for a good Christian to
doubt whether those that were but Evangelists (as Mark and Luke) had the same
promise of the Spirits infallible assistance with the Apostles; seeing we find
not that promise so expressly any where made to them. And thereupon he may
possibly think that some errors may consist with their measure of the Spirit,
as it did with many Christians who had the same Spirit.

Seventhly, And we do not believe that the extraordinary operations of the
Spirit were always equally in the Apostles themselves; we suppose the Prophets
could not always Prophecy, nor those that spoke with tongues, use that gift
at their own pleasure, nor yet those that did miracles, healed the sick, or
raised the dead: But that the Spirit wrought, as in various sorts and measures
in several persons, (1 Cor. 12.) so also at various times, and in various
measures in the same person. Whereupon it is possible for a good Christian to
doubt, whether every word in Scripture was written then, when the writer had
the gift of infallibility and indefectibility.

Eighthly, And we do confess our selves, that the Apostles had not the
infallible Spirit given them for every use or thing that they had to do; but
for those matters about which they had special need of it and use for it, to
fulfill their office. The Spirit was not so necessary for them to discern those
things by, which the common sense and understanding of a man, was sufficient to
discern. They could taste sweet from bitter, feel heat from cold, discern light
from darkness, without an Infallible extraordinary Spirit. And so being eye and
ear witnesses, of what Christ did and said, of his words, his miracles, his
resurrection, his ascension, they might infallibly know them by ordinary means.
And so a good Christian may doubt whether they had the Spirit infallibly, to
transcribe and cite every passage in the old Testament, visible to all, or to
relate the things which they saw done with their eyes; or to report the history
of several actions which were then done: (as what was the place and power of
Herod, Archelaus, Pilate, Falix, Festut, etc.) and such other parts of common
History.

Ninethly, And we all confess that the words are but as the Body of the
Scripture and the sense as the Soul: And that the words are for the sense. And
there is more of the Spirits assistance in the sense and soul of the Scripture
than in the words and body: And that there is in the phrase and method somewhat
of (blameless) humane imperfection: And that as David was not stronger then
Goliath, nor his weapons more excellent in themselves, but God would overcome
strength by the means of the more weak; so an Aristotle may be more accurate in
method, and a Demosthenes, Varro or Ci^cro in words and phrase than an Apostle;
And they may be left to the imperfections of their several gifts (diversified
by nature or education) in their style. And God may hide that from the wise and
prudent which he reveals to babes; And by the foollishness of Preaching may
save believers, and confound the wisdom of the world, and by things that are
not, bring to naught things that are, that no flesh may glory in his sight. Nor
do we say that no man may seek or attain more Logic, Philosophy or Grammar
than he finds in the Scriptures.

Tenthly, As Protestants receive not so many Books as Canonical as the Papists
do, so some Protestants have not received so many as the rest: And so many
possibly err in thinking that some part of the Scripture is not the word of
God, and consequently may think it of more uncertain credit.

Eleventhly, Some have thought that Matthew being at first written in Hebrew or
Syriack, and after translated into Greek, that the Translator being unknown,
the credit of the Translation must be the less certain, because they know not
whether the translator was one that had a promise of Infallibility, though
doubtless they err who so conclude.

Twelfthly, Some think, that as certainly there are a great number of various
Readings, which all prove that some of the Copies err, so it is uncertain to
us, whether all those which we have, may not in some words or particles differ
from others which we have not, and from the autographs; seeing each scribe had
not a promise of Infallibility.

Thirteenthly, If some particular Books of Scripture were not extant, or never
known to some men, yet the rest may teach those same men, all the Christian
Religion, to their Salvation. Therefore if they may be Christians and saved
without knowing of that particular Book, they may possibly be so, without
knowing that it is Canonical, or of Divine and certain truth.

Fourteenthly, Yea more, no doubt but it is possible to be saved (and to be
good Christians) without being certain what is contained in any one Book of the
Bible, totally; for he that cannot Read, may possibly not hear the whole Book
from another, at least so as to understand and remember it: And yet he may hear
the same Doctrines out of another Book. Yea more, it is past doubt that a man
may (in some cases or circumstances) be a true Christian who knows not that
there is any Scripture which is Gods Infallible word. For first so all the
believers of the old world were saved, before Moses wrote the Law; And the
Christian Churches were gathered and thousands converted to Christ, many years
before a word of the New Testament was written. Secondly, And all the thousands
and millions of Christians who cannot read, do know that there is such a Book
which has such words in it, but on the credit of other men. Thirdly, And we
know not but the Papists, (who are too great undervaluers of the Scriptures,
and lock it up from the Laity, and over magnify Tradition) may keep thousands
among them without the knowledge that there is a Book which is Gods word; And
yet may teach them the Christian Religion by other means, after to be
mentioned: And it seems by the Epist. Jesuit. and Masaeus Histor. Judic. and
other writings, that in Japan, Congo, China, and other Countries of the East,
they did teach them only by Creeds, Catechismes, and preachings: And I
remember no knowledge that they gave to most of them of the Scriptures: And yet
the most cruel torments and martyrdoms never before heard of, which the
Christians in Japan endured (of which see Varentus history) does put all sober
readers past doubt, that there were many excellent Christians. And if other
means may make men Christians who are never told of the holy Scriptures, than
those same means with the Scriptures, may make them Christians, who are made
believe that all Scripture passages are not the infallible dictates of Gods
Spirit.

I have given you instances enough, to prove that many may be Christians and
have a certain faith, who are not certain of all things in the Scriptures: And
therefore though all these persons are herein defective or erroneous, yet that
Christianity may be otherwise known and proved: Yea though the case of the
Scriptures were as these mistaking persons think. And I told you how many
ways, besides Scripture, the sum and necessary substance of the Christianity
is delivered down from the Apostles to the world; Reas. of Christ. Rel. page
336, 337. First, in the very successive Being of Christians and Churches, who
are the Professors of this Doctrine. Secondly, In a succession of Pastors,
whose office was to preach it. Thirdly, In a succession of Baptism, which is
that solemnizing the Christian Covenant, in which the sum of the Gospel is
contained. Fourthly, In the three breviates or symboles of the Christian
Religion, the Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalogue, which all the Christian
Churches still used. Yea every one that was baptized at age (and the Parent for
the Infant) did openly make profession of the Christian faith, and of Religion
in all the essential particulars. Fifthly, In the Churches use of Catechizing
those who were to be baptized, that they might first know that Religion which
they were to enter. Sixthly, In that constant Communion of all the Churches in
their solemn Assemblies, and setting apart the Lords day to that use; where in
their worshipping of God, they expressed and excercised their Religion.
Seventhly, In the constant preaching of the Gospel by the Pastors. Eighthly, In
the constant Celebration of the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood; wherein
the sum of the Gospel was recited and expressed. And the custom was also to
repeat the profession of their Belief. Ninethly, The frequent disputations of
the Christian Pastors for their Religion against all Heathens, Infidels and
Heroticks. Tenthly, The writings of the said Pastors, Apologies, Doctrinal,
Historical, Commentaries, Devotional. Eleventhly, The Confession and Sufferings
of the Martyrs. Twelfthly, The Decrees, Canons and Epistles of Councils or
Assemblies of the Christian Pastors. Thirteenthly, And after these the Decrees
and Laws of Christian Princes: in all which we have no need of any peculiar
Tradition of the Church of Rome. Fourteenthly, Yea, we may add the Confessions
of Adversaries, who tell us part of the Christians Religion; as Pliny, Celsus,
Julian, etc. All these ways set together, told men what Christianity was.
Fifteenthly, But the fullest and surest discovery of it was, by the holy
Scripture of it self, which was constantly read in the Assemblies of the
Christians. In all this I have but told you, by how many ways and means
materially the Gospel Doctrine was made known.

Now the great Question is, Whether by all these means we might come to a
certainty of the truth of the Christian Faith, in case we could not prove every
word or particle of Scripture to be Gods word, and so to be true. They that
deny it, say, That he that can mistake or be deceived in one thing, may be so
in another, and we cannot take his word as certain, who sometimes speaks
falsely; for we can never be sure that he speaks the truth, But I affirm the
thing questioned, and shall show the mistake of this reason of the Adversaries.

First, It must be remembered that we ascribe Infallibility Primitive and
Absolute to God and no other. Therefore we are certain that so much is true as
is Gods word.

Secondly, We are Certain that all that is the word of God, which he has set
his seal or attestation to, which I have largely opened in the Book which you
oppose; All that which has the Antecedent and Constitutive and Concomitant and
subsequent Attestation of God there opened, we are certain is of God.

Thirdly, We are Certain that the Person of Christ, and his own Doctrine had
all this fourfold Divine Testimony: And therefore that Christ and his Doctrine
are of God, and true. And consequently that Christ was the Son of God, the
Redeemer of the world, the Head of the Church, and whatever he affirms
himself to be.

Fourthly, We are certain that the Apostles as Preachers of this Gospel, and
performers of the Commission Delivered them by Christ, had the same attestation
in kind as Christ himself had: They had the same SPIRIT. Though the antecedent
testimony by Prophecy was not so full of them, as it was of Christ, yet the
Gospel which they preached and left in writing First, Has in it still visibly
to the eye of every truly discerning person, the Image of Gods Power, Wisdom
and Goodness. Secondly, The same Gospel as preached and delivered by them had
the Concomitant Testimony of abundant certain Miracles, Prophesies and holy
works. Thirdly, The same Gospel makes that impression on the souls of true
receivers, which is the Image of Gods power, wisdom and goodness, and so
proves it to be of God. The concurrence of these three is a full and certain
proof.

Now if there be any doubtfulness in any of this, it must be, First, Either
what it is that these Attestations prove, Secondly, Or whether they are really
Divine Attestations. Thirdly, Or whether Divine Attestations are a certain
proof of Truth.

To begin at the last. First, If Divine Testimony be not a certain proof of
Truth, then there is no possible proof in the world. For there is no Veracity
in any Creature, but derivative from God: And then it must be either because a
Lie is as perfect and Good as Truth (which humanity, reason, and all the world
contradicts, and humane society abhors, there being no savages so
barbarous as to think so) or because God is imperfect, either in wisdom to
know what is True and sit, or in Goodness to choose it, or in Power to use it:
That is, that God is not God, or that there is no God (and consequently no
Being) for an Imperfect God, an unwise, an ill, an impotent Being, is no God.
And verily all our Controversies with the Infidel and the Impious, and the
Persecuter, must finally come to this, Whethen there be a God.

II. And that these were really Divine Attestations, I have fully proved in the
Treatise. First, They are Divine Effects, and the Divine Vestigia or Image.
Secondly, And such as none can do but God. None else can give that full
Antecedent Testimony of Prophecy: None else could have done what Christ did;
in his Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension: None could heal all Diseases,
work all Miracles, raise the Dead with a word: None else could do what the
Apostles did; in Tongues, and Miracles, and wondrous gifts, and these wrought
by so many, before so many, for so long a time. No other Doctrine could it self
bear Gods Image of Power, Wisdom and Goodness so exactly, nor make such an
Impresse of the same Image on the souls of men: Nay though this same Doctrine
by the Spirit of God be adopted to such an effect, yet would it not do it for
want of Powerful application, if God by the same Spirit did not set it home:
so that the sanctification and renovation of souls, is a Divine Attestation of
this sacred Gospel. And besides all the past Testimonies (of Christ's and his
Apostles Miracles) here is a double Testimony from God still vouchsafed to all
true Believers to the end of the world; The one is Gods Image on the holy
Scriptures; The other is, The same Image by this Scripture (and the Spirit that
indicted it) printed on all true Christians souls. Divine, Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, has imprinted it self first upon the sacred word, or doctrine, and
by that produces unimitably, holy Life, Light, and Love in holy souls. True
Christians know this: They feel it: They profess it: They have this Spirit in
them, illuminating their minds, sanctifying their wills, and quickening them to
vital operation and execution; And this is Christ's Advocate, and Witness still
dwelling in all his members. I speak not of an immediate verbal or impulsive
revelation in us, but of a Holy indwelling nature, principle, operation,
conforming the soul to God, and proving us to bear his Image. This is Christ's
Witness in us, that He is Christ indeed and True; And this is Our Witness, that
we are the Children of God: And it is our Inherent earnest and pledge, first
fruits and foretasts of the glory which Christ has purchased and promised. If
you know no such thing in your self as this, you have resisted the Holy Ghost,
or Quenched the Spirit. And if you would not have him dwell and operate in your
heart, no wonder if you cannot see him in the holy word: And if you would not
consent that he Rule your Mind and Life, no wonder if you deny him also in that
word which he did make to Rule you.

If you question the Real existence of these several Testimonies of Gods
Spirit, First, Those that were given to Christ and his Apostles, I have plainly
proved to you in the Treatise, were delivered down to the world three ways. 1.
By the most credible humane Testimony, to produce a humane Faith. 2. By such a
Connection and such Circumstances of those humane Testimonies as amount to a
Natural Infallible Certainty (As we have of the Wars in England, and that there
was such a man as K. Charles, K. James, etc. and that our Laws were made by the
King and Parliament, that London was burnt, that there is such a City, etc.
even to them that see not any of these.) 3. By new Divine Attestations to these
Attestations; so that there concurreth. First, A full humane Faith. Secondly, A
Natural Certainty. Thirdly, A Divine Faith, to the ascertaining us, that Christ
did die, rise, ascend, work miracles, give the Spirit, and by it the Apostles
wrought the like.

Secondly, And the other two Testimonies still show themselves: They are yet in
Being. The sacred Gospel is among is and on it the Life, Light, Love
foredescribed. The Believers sanctified by this Gospel are among us; and have
within them the Impressed Life, Light, Love. We see it (where distance,
selfishness, prejudice or malignity hinders not) shining (though as through a
Lanthorn) and working (though imperfectly) in others: And they that have it may
so feel it in themselves, as will preserve them against the Cavils of
Unbelievers.

As the Great Creator has his standing Testimony in the Natural Conscience of
mankind, which in despite of the Devil shall keep up some Natural Religion in
the world; And they that have not a written Law, are a Law unto themselves,
showing that God has a Law in their hearts; So the Gracious Redeemer has his
standing Witness in the sanctified, even his holy Spirit, the Divine Nature,
the New Creature, the Image of God, the Father, Son and Spirit dwelling in
them, by Divine Life, Light and Love, so as shall keep up a Church of holy ones
to Christ, in despite of all the powers of Hell, even the spirits of Death, of
Darkness, and of Malignity; And so much for the Validity of Gods Attestation.

III. All then that remains doubtful, or further to be spoken to, is, What it
is that God has thus attested by the Holy Ghost.

And First, We are sure it is not nothing; It is not nothing that all this is
done for: nor nothing that makes this change on souls. Secondly, We are sure
it can be no less than the Truth of the Person, Office and Doctrine of Christ
himself: He has certainly by this proved his own Verity and Veracity: for his
own Miracles and Resurrection were seals affixed hereunto: Thirdly, We are sure
that the same Gospel spoken by himself, was confirmed also when spoken or
written by his Disciples. Else the same should be sure and not sure. Fourthly,
We are sure that the Apostles Miracles, etc. confirmed all their Commissioned
work. I have proved this in my Treatise of the Lords Day. Whatever Christ
Promised them the Spirit for, that he gave them the Spirit for. He that finds
his Promise with the Performance, may know that it was the Promise which was
Performed. Therefore our work is to find out that Promise.

And First, We find their Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go and Disciple me all
Nations, Baptizing them into the Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatever I have Commanded you. And
the Promise is, Lo, I am with you always to the end of the world. And Joh. 16.
7, 12, 13, 14, 15. It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not
away, the Advocate will not come unto you: But if I depart I will send him unto
you. I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now.
Howbeit, when he the spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all the
truth: For he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that he
shall speak; and he shall show you things to come: He shall glorify me; for he
shall receive of mine, and show it unto you, Luke 24. 49. And behold I send the
promise of my Father upon you: But tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, till ye
be endued with power from on high; so Act. 1. 5. Ye shall be Baptized with the
Holy Ghost not many days hence, Verse 8. But ye shall receive power after that
the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses to me, both in
Jerusalem and to all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the
earth. John 17. 8. I have given to them the words which thou gave me, and
they have received them, Verse 17, 18. Sanctify them through thy truth: thy
word is truth: As thou have sent me into the world, so I have also sent them
into the world: And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might
be sanctified through the truth. John 14 26. But the Comforter, which is the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto
you.

Add to these the Texts which mention the Performance of these Promises; as
John 20. 22. Act. 2. Act. 15. 28. Heb. 2. 3, 4. So great salvation, which at
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that
heard him: God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and
with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will, 1
Pet 1 12. The things which are now reported unto you, by them that have
preached the Gospel unto you, by the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven. Romans 15.
19, 20. Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God, so
that from Jerusalem, and round about by Illyricum, I have fully preached the
Gospel of Christ. Gal. 3. 2. This only would I learn of you: Received ye the
Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?

By all this it is evident, that the Spirit was given them to enable them to
understand the Gospel, and to preach it to the world; to remember all that
Christ had taught them: to help them to deliver the Covenant of Grace, and draw
men into it, and Baptize them; To gather Churches, and to teach them to observe
all that Christ had commanded them, and made part of his Laws. To teach them
all truth which was Evangelical or part of their Ministerial Office. To enable
them to be most certain and full in their Testimony of what they had heard from
Christ, and seen him do, which was part of the Gospel. In a word to to perform
all their proper Office.

I do not at the present suppose you to take these Texts for the word of God:
For I must suppose you to be an Infidel: But I only offer them as part of the
certain historical evidence, concurring with all the forementioned history and
evidence of the fact, to prove what it was which the Apostles miracles were
used to confirm. This same Gospel they preached every where, when they wrought
these miracles. And if they confirmed not the Gospel, or Christian Religion,
they confirmed nothing. So that it being certain that this Spirit and Miracles
were real, and certain that they were the Testimony of God, and certain that it
was the Truth of Christ's person, actions, doctrine, sufferings, resurrection,
ascension, and Covenant and Commandments, which they attested, and all that is
properly the Gospel or Christian Religion, what hinders our certainty of all
this. If it were a doubt whether the Spirit attested more, it is never the more
doubtful, whether he attested this much. The Apostles constantly preached this
Gospel; They Baptized persons into the New Covenant; They opened the Articles
of the Faith to them, and caused them to profess that Faith; They engaged them
into the promise, and directed them in the practice of a godly, righteous and
sober life: And they confirmed all this by miracles. And is not all this then
made sure? (Yea, before they wrote any of the Scriptures:)

And now to the Objection, [He that speaks falsely in one thing is to be
believed certainly or as infallible in nothing] I again answer, it is a blind
Objection. God only is absolutely infallible. All men are fallible in some
things: We are not to believe that the Apostles could err in nothing at all.
Peter knew not what he said, when he talked of dwelling on the Mount. They could
err, and they could sin: And he that sins, erreth: They were not absolutely
perfect; But it is in certain particulars, even in the Declaration of the
Gospel, that God would not suffer them to err or to deceive. Those words which
the Holy Ghost did by inspiration dictate to them, it is certain that all those
words the same Holy Ghost attested: That is, To all the word of God.

And thus much being past doubt, what if we were now at a loss about some
Appurtenances of the Gospel, whether they were any of the Spirits dictates, or
any part of the word of God: or any proper part of that which the Apostles were
Commissioned for, and Spiritually Enabled to teach? What if in some points
which they could know by common sense infallibly as well as other men, any one
should think that they were left merely to that certainty of sense. What if one
be uncertain which are the Parts, and which but the Appurtetenances of the
Gospel in some things which salvation is not laid on? Or were uncertain whether
the Spirit did determine the Speakers tongue or pen about every such
Appurtenance? What Is this to the invalidating of any of the rest? If indeed
when they speak by the Spirits Revelation, they spoke falsely at any one time,
we could never be sure that they spoke true. But when we are sure that all is
true which they speak by the Spirit, and sure that they spoke the Gospel, or
delivered the Christian Religion by the Spirit, and are only not sure whether
every word in Genealogy, or by circumstances were spoken by the Spirit, nothing
will follow hence, but that every word of God is true, and every word of the
Apostles which was a word of God: And it is perverseness to argue, They* may
err when they speak their own words as men: Therefore they may err when they
speak Gods words by the Spirit.

First, The Testimony of the Internal sanctifying Spirit, is infallible. And so
much as this Spirit attesteth to me is true, And I am sure that this Spirit
attesteth the truth of the Gospel in me; for the substance of the Gospel is
imprinted on my heart; and by the impression I know the seal. But what if I
find on me no part of Gods Image, which was made by the name of Jorams Father
or Son; what if I feel no Testimony of the Spirit in me, which tells the age of
such or such a man there named; Nor can prove by the Spirit in me, how far
Bethany was from Jerusalem; What if the mention of Paul's Cloak and Parchments
did not sanctify me? Must I be uncertain of that which did?

Secondly, What if I read a promise in the Scripture that God will never fail
me nor forsake me? but will preserve me in safety to his Kingdom? If I were
uncertain whether this promise extended to every hair of my head, so that none
of them should perish? or to the preservation of my Color, and such like
accidents; Will it follow, that I cannot be sure that I my self, my soul, my
person, shall not be forsaken?

What if I have a promise that all things shall work together for my good; And
I am uncertain whether sins or my own follies, or rashness, or the creeping of
every worm in the world, or the shaking of every leaf be numbered with those
[All things.] Must I be uncertain therefore whether any thing shall work for my
good? or whether sufferings for Christ shall do it?

Thirdly, What if I be uncertain whether the vegetative faculties or soul in
man, be material or immateterial? Must I be as uncertain whether man have an
immaterial (or incorporeal) soul? and whether the intellectual powers be such
or not?

Fourthly, What if I be in doubt when the Law does summon a man to any place,
or command him any office, whether it meant that he shall not change his
clothes, or leave them off, nor cut his hair or nails, but bring all with him?
Does it follow that I must be as uncertain whether the person himself must come
or not?

Fifthly, What if I be disputing whether a Tree be wood? and I cannot tell
whether the leaves, their ribs, or stalks be truly wood or not? must I
therefore be uncertain of all the rest?

Sixthly, What if we dispute whether all the Kings officers are to be obeyed?
and it be a doubt to me, whether a Prelate or an Apparator be the Kings
Officers? can I therefore be assured of no others?

Seventhly, When a witness swears to any writing, that it is true, or to any
interrogatories; If I be uncertain whether it be the true spelling, or Syntax
of the words, or the propriety of every phrase, or every circumstance of the
matter which he attesteth, must I therefore be uncertain whether he attest any
thing at al?

This one consideration may show the unreasonableness of such conclusions; That
all Systems Physical and Moral, have their great Essential or principal parts,
and their smaller Integrals, and their Accidents, which are no proper parts.
And the Great and Principal parts are few, plain, discernable and necessary to
the being or the greatest Ends: The Integrals are numerous, small, hardly
discernable, and necessary only to Perfection. The Accidents are some of them
yet of a lower nature, less necessary, nnd less discernable. At the master
trunks its easy to know which is a vein, and which an Artery, and which a
Nerve, and what is their number: But when you go to their extremities, they
will appear innumerable, small, and scarce discernable. I can know many grand
trunks or boughs a tree has, when I cannot know the number of the thousands of
sprigs at the extreamities, nor just where the woody nature cease, and the
leaves or frutex does begin. So I can easily know in the frame of Grace, that
Faith, H^^^ and Love are the fruits of the Spirit, and so is every true part of
Holiness. But to know of every particular thought whether it be the fruit of
the Spirit, and a real part of holiness or not, is not so easy.

Even so in our present case we can easily prove that all that is Gods word and
uttered and sealed by his Spirit is true. But to come to a full certainty of
every book whether it be truly Canonical, and every Copy that varieth in some
readings from others, or of every Genealogical Chronological Topographical, or
Historical word; every phrase, location, order of sentences, citation of the
Prophets, whether it were certainly all done by the Infallible inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, is a thing that requires more knowledge than every true
Christian has, as not having the same clearness and notoriety of Evidence as
the Gospel or substance of Christianity has. No (...) that all Gods word is
True, Truth is equally Truth, it having not a magis and minus; but all Truth is
not equally notorious or evident.

^^^^ 2. Yet all that is in the Scriptures expressed as Gods word, is certainly
true; And no error or contradiction is in it, but what is in some Copies, by
the failing of Preservers, Transcribers, Printer, or Translators.

The Reasons why I have premised the former Propositions is, First, For your
own sake, Secondly, For the sake of many Infidels that now have the same
mis-apprehensions, Thirdly, And for the sake of many thousand weak, dark and
tempted Christians: That you may not think that you may renounce Christianity,
if you could prove a Contradiction or mistake in the Scriptures; there being
greater certainty of our Religion, than of every single word in the Bible. And
that every Christian may not think that he must needs doubt as much of
Christianity it self, and of all the Gos^^^^ as he does whether such a Text
(...) word, or have any contradiction to another; And that he can have no more
certainty of the Gospel, than he has of Jorams son, or whether Matthew did
rightly apply the Prophecy that Christ should be called a Nazarene, Mat. 2.
23. or the name of Jeremy, Mat. 27. 9. or whether Jude be Canonical, and the
Epistle to Laodicea, and Clemens Romans ad Cor. not Canonical; or whether Henochs
prophecy cited by Jude be Divine; with many such like. We need not spread the
sails so wide to the temptations of Satan as if we must let go all, if we doubt
of the divine authority of any one word.

But yet that indeed every word is Divine and sure, which is delivered as Gods
word, I now assert.

My meaning in that limitation is this: There are some passages (as I said)
spoken only historically, and contain the Narration of some words of the Devil
(as to Job, Christ, and as most think, to Saul at Endor etc.) and some words of
wicked men, and some words of weak and common persons: And all these are not
mentioned as the words of God: As the words of Job's Friends, which God
reproved; The words of the old Prophet that lied in the name of the Lord to the
young Prophet to his destruction: The words of Jonas, I do well to be angry;
and the words of Christ's Enemies, Perfecutors, etc. Yea the mention of the Old
Prophet remembers me, that all words spoken as in Gods name, and that by a
pretended, yea by a real Prophet, are not therefore the words of God; Micheah
only may say true, while Zidkiah and all the rest of Ahabs Prophets may lie,
as in the name of the Lord. Balaam and the aforesaid old Prophet, and many such
may say true, when Gods Spirit does inspire them, and yet lie at another time
in Gods name. And what Paul means by his [not the Lord but I] I leave to
consideration. Whether in 1 Cor. 14. all those that he corrects for a
disorderly using even the Miraculous gifts of tongues and prophesying, etc. had
their Timeing and ordering of their gifts from the same Spirit that gave them
the gifts, you may judge. And some Protestant expositors have doubted, whether
James and the rest were guided by the Spirit, when they persuaded Paul to go
into the Temple, to show the Jews that he observed their Law: Though I think
that Counsel was of the Spirit, because Paul concurred in obeying it. But one
instance I more doubt of my self; which is, when Christ and his Apostles do often
use the Septuagint in their Citations out of the old Testament, whether it be
always their meaning to justific each translation, and particle of sense, as
the word of God and rightly done; or only to use that as tolerable, and
containing the main truth intended, which was then in use among the Jews, and
therefore understood by them: and so best, as suited to the auditors. And so
whether every citation of numbers or Genealogies from the Septuagint, intended
an approbation of it in the very points in which it differs from the Hebrew
Copies; such plain exceptions, being promised I assert that All that is said in
the Bible as by the spirit of God, by men that had the promise of his Spirit,
and especially by the Apostles, is certain Truth and has no Contradiction in
its parts.

Before I give you my Reasons, I think it meet to remove all ambiguity of the
words, [Infallible or Certain] that I may be rightly understood.

First, The consent of all sober Divines and Philosophers teaches us to
diftinguith between objective and subjective certainty, that is, The certain
Truth of the Thing, and the Certainty of our own apprehension of it.

Secondly, The word certain, when applied to the Apprehension, sometime
signifies an infallible apprehension, and sometime a clear and strong
apprehension, excluding both deceit and doubts; and by some abusively to a
strong Apprehension, which excludes Doubts but not Deceits. Thirdly, In the
object Infallibility sometime signifies nothing but Verity, which whoever
believes is not deceived: And sometimes it signifies also such clear
evidence, as is in its kind sufficient to banish all considerable doubting. And
now I conclude.

First, Whatever is True, is objectively certain and Infallibly true; so far as
that no man in Believing it true, is therein deceived or mistaken. All Truth is
Certain Infallible Truth in it self.

Secondly, Few Truths in the world are so Evident as that a blinded prejudiced
indisposed person, may not be ignorant of them, or err about them.

Thirdly, All Truths in the Scripture have not equal evidence, that they are
the word of God (though all that is known to be the word of God, if equally so
known, have equal evidence in the formal reason of says, that they are true.)

Fourthly, All known Truth is infallibly known; that is, He that knows it, is
not deceived, nor can possibly be deceived by taking it to be true: so that as
Infallibility signifies [not* being deceived] all true knowledge is
subjectively infallible and certain; that is, its true.

Fifthly, No man can know that Infallibly, which is not objectively certain:
that which is not True, cannot be known to be true. The strongest and most
confident belief of a falsehood, is a false belief, and more than fallible or
uncertain.

Sixthly, All Gods word being equally true and infallible, the belief of it is
also equally true and infallible. But being not All equally intelligible,
evident (to be his word,) and necessary, the understanding and belief of every
part is not equally easy, strong, past doubting, or necessary*

Seventhly, There is a superficial belief of Divine Revelations (even the
Gospel) which a natural man may have by extrinsick means. And there is a more
clear apprehension, which a Commoner sort of Grace may produce: But that Belief
which is so clear and powerful as truly to sanctify and save the soul, must be
the effect of the special operation of the Holy Ghost (who yet has a course of
appointed means in which we must receive it.)

Eighthly, The reason of this necessity of the Spirits operation of faith, and
then by says, is not because the Gospel wants due Ascertaining Evidence; or
an aptitude to convince and sanctify a soul: For its highly Rational (though
mysterious) and Good. But because by corruption and pravity the mind of man is
so undisposed to know, believe, and love truths of such a nature, as that there
is need of a special Internal higher Operator to set home the work as the hand
of a man sets the seal upon the wax, and to do that by it which the bare
word alone, with the excellentest preacher, cannot do.

Ninethly, Yet is no wicked Infidel excuseable, that says, If I cannot believe
it, I will not believe it; Because First, It is his pravity which is his
disability; Secondly, He is more able for a common superficial belief, than for
a special effectual belief. Thirdly, And if he did by the help of that common
belief, do what he might, and God appoints him in the use of means, to obtain
a special Faith through grace, he should find that God has commanded no man to
labor and seek after grace in vain; and if any man have not that grace and
power which is of necessity to his faith and salvation, it is long of himself,
who uses not his commoner power and grace as he might use them. And so much to
prevent misunderstanding.

Now my Reasons why I take every History, Chronology, Genealogy in Scripture as
certainly true, and every other word, which is spoken by a true Prophet and
Apostle as by the Spirit, (and not disowned by the Scripture it self) but
especially such as you accuse in the Gospel, are these.

First, A Priore, Because it seems to me that the writing of the whole Books
of the New Testament by them, was done in the discharge of the Commission given
them by Christ: And he promised his Apostles his Spirit for the performance of
all their Commissioned office work. This writing is part of the preaching which
Christ sent them for. And no doubt but the Spirit did cause them to write all
the substantial part: And therefore we have reason to think that the smallest
parts are from the same Author, and that he assisted them in the least as well
as in the greatest. Yea the very accidents may have a perfection in their
place, though less perfect in themselves. Though all the Evangelists use not
the same Method, or Order, nor repeat Christ's sayings in the same terms; yet in
respect to the whole frame, it may be best that there should be that diversity
of words, and order, to preserve and declare the same sense and things. And
even their plain and less accurate style and method, may be best as fittest to
its use and end.

Secondly, A Posteriore: There is no Caviller that yet has proved any falsehood
or contradiction in any passages of the Scripture; Though the clearing of some
of them require more than vulgar knowledge.

Thirdly, Saving the controversies about the few questioned Books and some few
sentences, and words, the Church which received the Scriptures as Gods word,
did receive the whole as his word, and as certainly true in every part.

Fourthly, Because that Spirit of Miracles in the Apostles, and that Spirit of
Holiness in us, which attesteth the Christian Religion, does receive it and
attest it as found in the sacred Scripture, (though not as there alone:) And it
puts no exception against any part of the sacred record: Therefore while it
particularly attesteth the chief parts, it infers an attestation to the
smallest. (for that word or line which is not strictly a part but an accident
of the Christian Religion, is yet a part of the Bible which contains it.)

Fifthly, And though all the reasons which I have given, prove, that the Truth
of the Christian Religion may be certainly proved, though we could not prove
every by expression in the Scripture to be true; and though we deny not but the
Penmen manifested their humane imperfections in style and method; yet if each
passage were not True, it would be so great a temptation to the weak, and make
it so difficult to know in some points what is true, in comparison of what it
would be, if all be true, that we have no reason to imagine this difficulty to
our selves, while its unproved.

And having said this, I am here in order to answer your objections: which yet
you should not have expected from me, whilst so great a number of books are
already written which have done it: And why should you bid me write that again
which is written already, unless you had confuted what is written? If you
understand Latin, you may find a multitude of such seeming contradictions,
reconciled, in Sharpius, Magrius, Althamer, Cumeranus, but most fully in
abundance of Commentators: If you understood not Latin, you may read enough in
Dr. Hammond, and many other Annotaters and Commentaries, Mr. Cradock's Harmony,
etc. And you may have enough that understand Latin to translate you the
solutions (as out of Spanhemii Dub: Evangel. Grotius, Jansenius, Chemnitius,
and such others.) And whereas you tell me that I invite men to go to some
Minister for satisfaction, I do so: But if I had invited all men in England to
seek to me, you may imagine how many of them I must fail, though they should
never so much resolve to be Infidels and to perish unless I satisfy them.

But you greatly encourage me to a particular answer, by promising me, that
[you will trouble me with no more but these few places] and that if I clear
these from your imputation of contradiction, you [will conclude] as I do, and
suppose the other places reconcilable.

First, Your first Case is of Mat. 1. 8, 9. Joram begat Ozias, etc. Answ. Here
are two difficulties to be resolved; First, whether Joram begat Ozias, (called
also Azarias.) Secondly, why Matthew leaves out Ahazariah, Joas and Amaziah.

And for the first is it not strange that you should number this with
contradictions? Are we not all called the Children of Adam? and Abraham called
the Father of all the Jews? Is there not a mediate as well as an immediate
Generation and Progeny? Is not causa causae, causa cavsati? Did not your Great
Grandfather beget you in causa, while he begat him who begat him, who begat you
immediately? What more common among the Hebrews, than to call Posterity the
Children of their Ancestors. Even Christ is called The son of David? And use is
the master and expositor of words. And you were born too late, to teach either
God or the World, in what sense to use words so many hundred years ago? This
Language was well understood by them that used the like.

And Secondly, For the next question you must understand the scope of an Author
and his undertaking, if you will understand his words. Matthews design was not
to name every person in all these periods of time, from whom Christ descended;
But first to show for Memory sake, how the line of Christ's Progenitors may be
mentioned by three fourteens in three several periods of time: one from Abraham
to David, and one from David to the Captivity, and one from thence to Christ:
Therein commemorating as many as God was pleased hereby to make memorate, to
their honor, and to show the truth of the descent of Christ from Abraham and
David. Secondly, And God is not bound to give us a reason, why he omitteth any
of their names: But this probability is obvious, that seeing Matthew would for
memory keep himself to the number of fourteen, none were fitter to be left out
than the Posterity of Athalia, and so of Ahab and Jezebel; which God has
fortold should be blotted out or abolished, 1 King. 21. 21, 22. And therefore
he that would have the names of the wicked to rot would not here honor them
with a place among the Progenitors of Christ: And yet the second Commandment
limiting Gods visiting the sins of the Fathers on the Children to the third and
fourth Generation, it is no wonder that the omission does extend no further;
And so suitable is Gods word, to his providence, that these three men were all
cut off by the sword, whose memory is here cut off by Matthew.

II. As to your second pretended contradiction, First, Remember that it was
none of the purpose of any of the Evangelists to say all that could be said,
even of the sayings and doings of Christ himself; much less of any others: And
therefore if that be said in one which is not said in another it is no wonder:
And you must remember what Doctor Hammond has noted of Luke, that Luke 1.
professing that he received his knowledge from others (though directed by the
holy Ghost) he delivered the things themselves, with less respect to the time
and order, when every thing was said and done, than the other did observe, it
being not his design to tell the time and order of each.

These things premised, set them all together and you will find that, First,
Mary Magdalen, Johanna, Maria Jacobi, and Sallome, having bought spices and
going to anoint the body of Jesus, said, [who will roll away the stone for us?]
And when they came they found the stone rolled away by an Angel that sat upon
it. Secondly, That Angel with another, speaks to the women, saying, Fear not; I
know you seek Jesus that was Crucified; why seek ye the living among the dead;
he is not here, he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord was
laid, etc. Thirdly, Then the Women run and tell the Disciples, They have taken
away the Lord and we know not where they have laid him. Fourthly, Peter and
John run to the Sepulcher, and saw the clothes and returned. Fifthly Mary
Magdalen being come back, stood weeping at the door of the Sepulcher, and
looking in, she saw two Angels, one at the head, another at the feet of the
place where Jesus lay; who say, Woman why weepest thou? she said, They have
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. Sixthly, Having
said this, she looked behind her and saw Jesus, not knowing him, who said Woman
why weepest thou? whom seek thou? she thinking him to be the Gardener,
answered, If thou have taken him away, tell me where thou have laid him, etc.
Jesus said to her touch me not, for I am not yet ascended, etc. But go to my
brethren and say unto them, I ascend to, etc. Seventhly, Mary runs and tells
this to the Disciples, that she had seen the Lord, and what he said to her: But
they believed her not. Eighthly, Either at the same time before Mary was gone,
or perhaps after she had overgone them to tell the Disciples, Jesus met the
rest of the women, and said to them, All hail; and they laid hold upon his
feet, and worshipped him. And Jesus said to them, fear not, go tell my brethren
that that they go into Galilee, and there they shall see me Take all the
Evangelists, and tell me. First, Whether here be any more than All set together
say? Secondly, Whether in all this there be any Contradiction?

But if you should take Dr. Hammonds shorter Supposition, First, That Mary and
the women came to the Sepulcher, and find that before they came the stone was
rolled away by an Angel (who had affrighted the Keepers) Secondly, They go in
and miss the body. Thirdly, Mary runs and tells Peter and John. Fourthly, They
run and satisfy themselves, and return to the rest. Fifthly, The women staying
at the Sepulcher, see the Angels; first one, on the stone, and on the right
side of the Monument, and then two, one at the head and another at the feet of
it. Sixthly, The Angels speak all that the Evangelists mention; and Mary to
them. Seventhly, She turns back and sees Jesus, who speaks to her, and to
the rest what is recorded. Eighthly, Then she goes and tells all to the
Disciples. If this order be supposed, what contradiction is here?

Where you say in Luke the women told the Disciples of the Angels first, hefore
Peter went, I answer, First, whether we suppose that they first told them of
the words of the Angels that were without the Sepulcher before Peter went, and
after of the Angels within the Sepulcher (which might be the same Angels, but
not the same; apparition) or whether you only suppose Luke, as in Christ's
Doctrine so in these by-matters of fact, to intend only to deliver the matter,
and not to tell just the time and order, There is no untruth nor contradiction
in either supposition.

III. Your third question is fully answered in the answer of the Former.
According to the first Harmony or supposition, Matthew only mentions one of
the Apparitions of the Angels, and one of Mary's goings to the Disciples. And
so this written in Matthew, was partly before Mary's seeing Christ (viz. The
Angels first appearance) and partly after (viz. her going the second time upon
the second appearance of the Angels to tell them.)

According to the second Harmony, Mary's speech to Christ was after the Angels
(...) And now consider (...) you deal reasonably with Christ and with your own
soul, upon such poor cavils as these to argue against the Christian Faith, and
plead for Apostasy? when the Gospel has all the Divine attestations and
evidences which I have opened in my Treatise, and you are not able to confute
them? which leads me to my Third Proposition.

Prop. 3. He that first preveth the Truth of the Christian Faith by solid
evidence, may and ought to be certain of that Truth, though he be not able to
salve all seeming contradictions in the Scriptures, or answer all objections
which occur! Yea certain of EVERY PARTICLE thereof.

This I prove by these following Arguments.

Arg. 1. From the consent of all mankind, who are forced thus to conclude in
all arts and sciences: There being none of them so plain and sure, but somewhat
may be said against them, which few, if any man can answer. And incommodum non
solvit argumentum must be their reply.

Arg. 2. From the nature of objects and the imperfection of man's knowledge. If
we could be sure of nothing till we can answer all objections against it, we
must come to Zanchez his Nihil Scitur: Nothing in all the world can be sure:
Can no man be sure that there is any such thing as Motion, till he can answer
the Objections that would first prove no Vacuity, and then no Penetrability,
and then an impossibility till a Cession begin at the extremity of natural
beings and continue unto the supposed mobile? Shall we say that a wheel cannot
possibly turn round, because no one part first gives place to the other to
succeed it? Will you be able to answer all the difficulties tossed in the
Schools, or but those mentioned in Mr. Glanvils Scepsis Scientifica, before you
will be sure of any thing of those matters, where these difficulties are found?

He that can answer all objections, First, Is supposed not only to know, but
to know the matter in some perfection. And can none know certainly but those
(who be they) that know in such perfection? 2dly, Yea they are supposed to know
all other matters which may any way relate to the matter in hand. And shall no
man know any thing certainly till he knows all things? For instance.

First, What if the Question be whether there be a God? the Creator of all?
Cannot I be sure of this till I can answer Aristotle's Objections of the worlds
Eternity, and all the rest which every Atheist will allege?

2dly, What if the Question be, whether God be most wise? Cannot I be sure of
it by the notorious effects of his wisdom, till I can answer him that says
[He that makes fools and permits so much madness and confusion in the
world, and leaves mankind in so great ignorance, is not perfectly wise?]

Thirdly, What if the Question be, Whether God be perfectly good? Cannot I be
sure of it, till I can answer all their Objections, who say [perfect goodness
would make all things perfectly good: and would not let the world he in so much
wickedness, nor so many tormenting Diseases to afflict us, nor the innocent
Horse and Ox to be labored, tired, tormented and killed by us at our
pleasure, etc.]

Fourthly, What if the Question were, Whether God be Almighty? Cannot I know
it, till I can answer them who say, that [He that cannot make an infinite world
is not infinite in power? He that has a will which men can violate; he that
indureth all the sin in the world, which he hates, and the ruin and misery of
so many millions whom he loves, is not Almighty?]

Fifthly, What if the Questions Whether man be a rational Creature? whether he
have any free will? whether bruits have reason? whether plants and stones have
sense? Can I know none of these till I can answer all the Objections of the
Somatists against the Soul? and all the Objections of Hobs against free will?
and all the Objections of Chamber for the reason of beasts? and all that
Campanella has said de sensu rerum?

In a Word, What shall we know in the world, if we can know nothing till we can
solve all difficulties and Objections. Therefore I add

Prop. 4. The true method of one that would arrive at certainty, and not
deceive himself and others, is to begin at the bottom, and discern things in
their nearest, intrinsecal and most certain evidences: and afterward to try
the by-objections as he is able: And not to pore first upon the objected
difficulties, and judge of all the cause by those.

The plain truth and case of Christians is, that if God had not done more for
them by giving them his Spirit by the Gospel, and experience of its truth in
the effects, than their Teachers have done by a right instructing them in the
evidences of Faith, or than the Reason of the most does in a clear discerning
of those evidences in the thing or word it self; it were no wonder if Apostates
were more numerous than they are, when so many build on the sand, and are
strangers to the true foundation, and will never see the evidences of the
Christian Verity in it self; no wonder if poor Objejections shake them, that
never understood the nature and Reasons of their own Religion. If the Tree grow
all in top, which exposes it to the winds, and little in the roots which must
hold it fast, no wonder if it be overthrown. When men never knew the great
clear evidences of the Christian Religion, but take it up by Custom, Education
and on the Credit only of the time and place in which they live, no wonder if
every seeming weakness, error or contradiction in Scripture make them doubt.

First, Look to all Learning, Arts and Sciences? Do not learners that would
know, begin at the Elements and Foundation? Do we not begin in Grammar with our
Letters, Syllables, Words, and chief rules? And in all Arts and Sciences with
the Elements and Principles.

Secondly, And Reason tells us that the points that are most necessary, clear
and certain must be held accordly with a more clear, assured confidence than
those that are unnecessary and dark; And that uncertainties must be reduced to
certainties, and not certainties to uncertainties; And that all arguing should
be a notiore, and not a minus not is. And as I said before, as the Trunks of
the Tree, the Veins, the Arteries, the Nerves are few and visible, and easily
and surely known, when the thousands of little branches are hardly visible or
numerable: so is it with the schemes of truths. He therefore that will begin at
these numerous small branches will dote rather than know or learn.

As in the former instances. First, When I see with my eyes, the effects of
Power, Wisdom and Goodness in all the visible works of God, I am sure that it
is perfect Power, Wisdom and Goodness which is the cause of this: I am certain
that nothing can give that which (formaliter or eminenter) it has not to give,
nor can the effect exceed the total cause: I am certain that he from whom all
Creatures Power, Wisdom and Goodness does proceed, must needs himself be more
Great and Wise and Good, than all the world of Creatures set together which he
has made. To this fundamental certainty therefore I must hold if I will not
dote whatever little Objections or pratlings may be used against it.

Secondly, Eternity is a thing incomprehensible, which quite swalloweth up my
understanding; and many little things be said against it? But I am certain that
nothing can make nothing; And if ever there had been nothing, there never would
have been any thing: And to this certainty I will hold.

Thirdly, A holy life has a great many of cavilling Objections raised against
it by corrupted nature. And shall I there begin to make my trial of it? No: I
am first sure that a Rational free Agent and Subject of God, is bound to obey
him, and that the Greatest Good should be Greatliest loved, and that we are
totally our Creators own, and should be totally devoted to him: I am sure I
cannot love the infinite Good too much, nor be too Good, nor do too much Good
to others in the world, nor make too sure of my own felicity, nor too much seek
my ultimate end. And shall not this assurance hold me fast against all the
snarlings and pratlings of the doting drunken world?

So here, I have in the Treatise opened those grounds on which we may be
certain of the necessity of this holiness, of the life to come; and of the
truth of the Christian Faith and hopes. And because God in mercy has not put
off the world with the skeleton of a bare Creed, but also given them the
complete body of sacred Scriptures, to be a full perpetual Record of this
truth, shall I turn his mercy to a snare and sin, and question all, even the
Articles of the Faith, because in the Scriptures there are some things
accidental to Religion, and some things hard to be understood, which the
ignorant and unskilful wrest to their destruction? This is but to be Devils to
our selves, and foolish enemies of our own peace and comfort: As Cicero speaks
against them that pleaded for the souls mortality, as if it were a desirable
thing.

You have nothing else that suiteth the Nature and Interest of a man, and
agrees with the Nature and Interest of God, to set against the Christian
Religion in Competition. If you would have no Religion, you would have no
Hopes, no Safety, no Business or Comfort but Bea^^ial in this world, and you
would be no Men. If you would have nothing but Nature and the Holiness which
Nature clearly calls for, you would have Health in an unhealed Body, and
Health without the Physician and his Means. The Mediator is the way to the
Father, and if you would Love God and be happy in his Love and have the Pardon
of your Sins, you have little reason to reject him that comes to Procure,
Reveal and Communicate that Love and Pardon, which must win your hearts to the
Love of God. And if you would not die in desperation, but have the hopes and
foresight of a better life, you have little Reason to quarrel with a Messenger
from Heaven, which brings Life and Immortality to light. As bad as Christians
are, if personal quarrels and malignity blind you not, and if you will not take
the enemies and persecutors of Christianity for Christians, merely because they
assume the name, you may easily see that serious Christians who live according
to their profession, are persons of another kind of excellency, than all the
unbelieving world.

I know that from some self-conceited ignorant well meaning persons, I must
look to be reviled and called a betrayer of Christianity, because I plead not
for it in their way, and give you any other answer to your objections than
[That when God gives you the spirit, you shall know that the Scripture has no
contradictions, and that Christianity is the true Religion: Till then you
cannot know it; nor must I give you Reasons for it.] But I do my work, and let
who will wrangle and revile.

How far the sayings of some are true or false, [that the Scripture is the
only means of faith or saving knowledge of God?] that [it is Principium
indemonstrabile, as first principles of knowledge are in nature] that [(as
others say) It has evidence of credibility, but not evidence of certainty] (as
if evidence of Divine credibility or or faith, were not evidence of certainty)
[that faith has not evidence; but evidence evacuateth faith, or the merits of
it] with such like, a man of understanding may gather from what is said: And I
must not be so tedious as particularly here to resolve them, having done it (in
Preface to the Second part of the Saints Rest. Edit. 2. etc.) long ago. And
though I have written nothing here which some men cannot make an ill use of,
and some men will not turn to matter of cavil and reproach, I will not
therefore leave it out, whilst I expect that the Cood which Truth is fitted to,
is greater than the evil, which by accident and abuse will follow it.

And because you seem Confident, and think me bound to answer you, and
consequently all others, not knowing how many hundreds may trouble me in the
like kind, I send you this in print, that other men's mistakes and infidelity
also may have the same remedies. But I shall conceal your name and dwelling,
lest the shame of your sin should hinder your patient application of the
remedy, save only by telling you, that it is long ago since I read a noble
Learned Lord who in a Latin Book De Veritate (Contra Veritatem) said much
against the certainty of faith: But it was all but learned froth and vanity. I
Rest

A Servant of Christ, and desirer of your faith and salvation, R. Baxter
Dec. 28. 16^1.
THE SECOND PART OF THIS APPENDIX; BEING Some ANIMADVERSIONS On the foresaid
Treatise De Veritate, Resolving several Questions there included or employed.
HAving let fall the mention of that noble Authors Treatise, it came into my
mind, that it having never been answered, might be thought unanswerable, and so
the more considerable. Therefore I adjoin so much of my Animadversion, as the
cause in hand requires.

And First, I must give the Author the Honor of his great Learning and strength
of wit. Secondly, I must confess that the Teachers of the Church, have been too
often such, as have given him the scandal which he so often expresses, as more
regarding their Interest than Truth, and not making clear the truth which they
have taught, and often wronging it by their omissions or additions, or unsound
explications. Thirdly, I confess the body of his Treatise contains many very
considerable things, in order to the disquisition of truth; especially about
the sutableness of the faculties to the object, the conditions requisite to a
true apprehension, and somewhat about the nature of truth it self: Though that
which he calls Veritas apparentiae, I had rather call, Evidentia Veritatis
rei. And I am not willing to think that I have as many different faculties as
there are different plants in my Garden, or Books in my Study, or Sentences in
those Books; And in several things I miss that accurateness which he pretends
to: But these I shall pass by.

Page 217. he says, [An vero aliud (praeter Paenitentiam) and quidem
convenientius detur medium, unde justitiae divinae sit factum satis non est hic
in animo exponere, -- Hoc solummodo dicimus, (quicquid in adversam partem a
quibusdam suggeratur) quod nisi sola penitentia and fide in Deum, vitia and
scelera quaecunque eliminari possint, and Justitiae Divinae Bonitas Divina adeo
sit (...) ut non sit ulterius quo provecetur, nullum universale ita patere, vel
olim patuisse remedium, ut fuerit quo confugeret misera ex peccati sensu
languentium turba, vel haberet unde gratiam and pacem illam internam
conciliaret; and tandem in id deveniendum sit, ut quosdam, immo long majorem
hominum partem inscios (nedum invitos) and creaverit and damnaverit Deus Opt.
Max. Quod adeo horrendum, and Providentiae, Bonitati immo and Justitiae Divinae
incongruum sonat, ut mitiori immo and equiori sententia dicendum sit, totum
humanum genus ex paenitentia semper habuisse media unde Deo acceptum esse
potuit; quibus si exciderit, non jam ex Dei been placito, sed ex proprio
hominum peccato, perditionem uniuscujusque ex titisse, nec per deum stetisse
quo minus salvi fierent.] The first Question then is

Quest. 1. Whether if Christ, and not only our Repentance, and belief in God,
be taken for a sacrifice and price given to God for man's Redemption, it will
follow that most of the world are damned by Gods will without any Remedy, to
which they covld have recourse for salvation?

Answ. First, It is strange that men should be left Remediless, if Christ, and
not only their Repentance be the Remedy? Surely if Christ had given sinners
nothing, yet he has taken nothing from them.

Secondly, We all confess the universal necessity of Repentance? But this is
partly coordinate (as the end) and partly subordinate (as an effect) and
therefore not contrary to the necessity of a Redeemer? Repentance is our
conversion, and our begun Recovery from sin: And will it follow that the
Physician is unnecessary because health and recovery are necessary? Yea, and
sufficient in their kind?

Thirdly, How does it follow that the Remedy was not Universal, when Redemption
by Christ was universal? Christ so far died for all men, as by his death he
procured them any Grace. But he procured Grace (though not equal Grace) for
all: You confess an universal Grace, and yet an inequallity of benefits: we
say, that Grace was procured by Christ: Do we narrow it at all, by saying,
Christ procured it?

Fourthly, I perceive some men's mis-explication of these things was your snare
and scandal. First, We distinguish between Christ's procurement of our pardon
and salvation by his sacrifice and merit with God, and Christ as the object of
man's faith, or as Believed in by man. We do not make the latter so universally
necessary as the former. For we hold that Infants are saved, that believe not.
But we hold that no one is saved for whom Christ did not satisfy Gods Justice
and merit salvation. Secondly, And that this much causlessly offend you not, we
say, That this satisfaction and merit consists not in an identity or gradual
proportion of Christ's pains or sufferings to all mankinds, but in an Aptitude
of his Sacrifice and Righteousness to attain the ends of God the sovoraign of
the world, (the demonstration of his truth, holiness and right cousness,
together with triumphant love and mercy) better than the remediless damnation
of all the sinning world would have done. Read but Master Trumans Great
Propitiation, which shows you the true ends of the sacrifice of Christ, and
this unjust offense will vanish. Thirdly, And we maintain (as is said) that the
merit and Propitiation wrought by Christ, is not to make our Repentance
needless; But to procure it, and to make it effectual to its ends. He gives us
Repentance and Remission of sins. You confess that we may and must make a New
Covenant with God upon our Repentance: In that Covenant God promises us Grace,
as we consent to be his servants and children. Now if Christ did procure (and
as Gods General Administrator) Give us that promise of pardon and salvation to
the truly Penitent, does not this more oblige us to Repentance, and not less?
And the merit of Repentance (if you will so call it with the Ancients) is quite
of another order, rank and nature than the merit of Christ. Its one thing for
the Innocent son of God to merit Repentance, and pardon to all that will
Repent; And another thing by Repenting (through his grace) to perform the
Condition of the further Grace of pardon or salvation. Fourthly, And yet
further to heal your unjust offense, we do not hold that Christ makes God more
merciful than he was, or that his Redemption is the first cause of our recovery
and salvation, causing God to be willing, who was unwilling before: But that
Gods love and mercy and his own good will is the first cause, which gave us
Christ for a Redeemer as a second cause, an effect of his love, and the Head of
all the means of our Recovery; and the true meriting cause of that Grace and
salvation which God will give us. Nor so meriting as to change God, but so
meriting as to remove the Impediments of his grace as to the Communication, and
as to become the sit Instrument of the Fathers love and mercy, by whom to
Govern the lapsed world, and to communicate grace and life to sinners. Fifthly,
And yet fullier to satisfy your objection, we hold that. All mankind is
brought by Christ under a Covenant of Grace, which is not vain, nor repealed by
God; but as their abuse of the Grace of the Covenant may cast them out. For as
a Covenant of Entire Nature or Innocence was made with all mankind in Innocent
Adam; so a Covenant of Grace was made with all mankind in Lapsed Adam, Genesis 3.
15. in the promised seed: and renewed again with all mankind in Noah. No man
can prove either a limitation of this Covenant to some, (till the rest by
violating it become the Serpents seed, at least) nor yet that ever God did
abrogate it, as it was made to all the world. Sixthly, And we further acquaint
you, that it was not the existent humanity of Christ, that procured Grace and
Life to the world, for those (about) 4000 years before his Incarnation. The
mere Decree and Promise did serve for man's salvation all that time, without the
Existence of his Humanity. Seventhly, Therefore when you grant a necessity of
Believing in God, as merciful, you must needs include Christ in his Divine
subsistence, for you must needs grant that the eternal (...) or wisdom of God,
must be the fountain and determiner of all those means by which his Love and
mercy would communicate recovering grace and life to man. You will not divide
God as the object of our faith, and leave out the wisdom that must manage all.
Eighthly, And yet further to remove your scandal, we maintain that the Jews
themselves were not bound to believe many that are now Articles of our Faith
(that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried, descended to hades, and rose again the third day)
And that his very death and resurrection, were not believed by his own Apostles
till he was risen. Nor understood they the Article of the Holy Ghost. So that
before a more general belief in the Messiah did serve the Jews themselves; That
all this is so we are satisfied by this evidence. First, By the silence of the
Old Testament in the Matter, giving us no proof that ordinary (much less all)
believers, had such a particular knowledge of the office of Christ: And what is
not revealed is not to be believed. Secondly, From Heb. 11. Where faith is
described (as in its latitude) to be the evidence of things not seen, and the
substance of things hoped for, and a believing that God is, and that he is the
rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and a looking for a better country
and for a City that has foundations whose builder and maker is God and a
believing the word and faithfulness of God, etc. And the Holy Ghost when he
purposely describes the faith which the ancients had been saved by, would
never have left out the chief or any essential part. The same I say of Romans 4.
and 2 Cor. 4. 18. and 5. 1, 6, 7. Jam. 2 etc. Thirdly, The Text expressly
tells us. First, Of Christ's Death and Resurrection, and consequently the
offering himself a sacrifice for sin, and ransom for the world, and dying for
us, that the Apostles themselves were ignorant of it till after his
Resurrection, Mat. 16. 21, 22. When Christ told them that he must be killed and
raised again the third day, Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be
it far from thee Lord, This shall not be unto thee, Luke 9. 44, 45. The son of
man shall be delivered into the hands of men: But they understood not this
saying and it was hid from them that they perceived it not. Again, Luke 18. 31,
32, 33, 34. All things written in the Prophets concerning the son of man shall
be accomplished, for he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and be mocked, and
spitefully entreated and s^it on, and they shall scourge him and put him to
death, and the third day he shall rise again. And they understood none of these
things, and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things which
were spoken: So Mark 9. 32. Luke 24. 21, 25, 26. We trusted this had been he
that should have Redeemed Israel-O fools and slow of heart to believe all that
the Prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to
enter into his Glory: And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded
to them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. Here you see that
they knew not that he must die for our sins,, rise again and ascend to Glory:
And that it is no proof that all that were justified before understood these
things, because that Moses and the Prophets had foretold them; For the Apostles
themselves understood it not in Moses and the Prophets. Secondly, They
understood not aright the doctrine of his Intercession, and that he must go to
the Father and then be their high Priest, and that they must come to God by
him, and ask in his name. For it is said, John 16. 5, 6, 7. Now I go my way to
him that sent me, and none of you asks me whither go thou? but because I
have said these things to you, sorrow has filled your hearts -- but it is
expedient for you that I go away. v. 24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my
name, v. 26. At that day ye shall ask in my name. As for them that say that the
Apostles knew that they were to come to God only by a Mediator (as all the
faithful did of old) but yet they knew not that they must come to him by
Christ, and in his name. First, There was no Mediator existent but God before
the Incarnation, though there was to be a Mediator after. Seconnly, This
implies that the Apostles knew not Jesus to be the Christ, and that they went
to God by some other Mediator, which are both false. Thirdly, And if by
mediation be meant the satisfactory price of his Sacrifice, they knew not that
he was to die and to be a Sacrifice for Sin. Fourthly, And it is plain that
they understood not rightly the nature of his spiritual Kingdom and Reign; But
had got an opinion of an Earthly Kingdom for the Jews deliverance and
exaltation: that Christ abides for ever, Joh. 12. 34. in opposition to his
heavenly abode was then a common opinion, Luke 24. We hoped this had been he
that should have redeemed Israel: one would have sat on his right hand and
another on his left: and they strove who should be greatest, Act. 1. Lord will thou at this thime restore the Kingdom to Israel? Jeh. 16. When the Advocate
was to be sent he was to teach them all things, and to testify of Christ, and
to convince the world of the sin of their unbelief, and of the righteousness
and truth of Christ, and of his Judgment or Kingdom and power, as consisting
(quoad exercitium) in the debellation or dejection of the Kingdom of Satan,
and destroying the works of the Devil. By all which (and much more) it
appears that the Apostles, (though then in a state of Justification,) had a
very general and defective knowledge of the Office of Christ; and that though
his Prophetical Office was ordinarily believed (Joh. 4. The Samaritane woman
could say, when the Messiah comes, he will tell us all things) and a temporal
Kingdom expected, yet his spiritual Kingdom, and especially his Priestly
office, by his sacrifice, death, resurrection, heavenly intercession (for all
the old Types and Sacrifices) was little understood by the Disciples. Yea, he
sometimes sorbad them and others to tell men that he was the Christ, because
the great evidences of his Resurrection, Ascension and Spirit, by which it was
to be evinced, were yet to come. And we believe not that all that were saved
before, had more knowledge than the Apostles, so that though all the faithful
Jews believed in the promised seed, even the Messiah, as one that was to be
sent to be their Deliverer and Savior, yet it was by a says that was very
general, and far from that distinctness, which after the Resurrection of Christ
was required, of all to whom the Gospel was promuglate, which I have said the
more of to you, lest you think that we hold what we do not, and so take
occasion to err by supposing us to err, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin Martyr,
Arnobius, Lactantius. and other old Christians do go yet further, then yet I
have conceded to you.

And our very learned Dr. Twisse does argue that God could have saved the world
without a Redeemer if he had pleased, because he saved the faithful under the
old Testament without any existent Mediator (except God himself) or any
existent sacrifice or merit or intercssion of him, and because he saves
Infants without faith. But for the first I take it to be at best too great
temerity or audacity to dispute whether God could have done things better or
otherwise, which he has done so well: (of which I have said more in my
Premonition before my Treatise, called the unreasonableness of Infidelity.
(Though I know that Wallaeus, and many other learned Protestants say the same.)
And as for Infants they are not saved without the Sacrifice, and grace of the
Redeemer, though they know him not; nor are they in the Covenant without the
faith of their Parents or Owners, which is as their own. And if the Spirit of
the Prorphets be called the Spirt of Chrict, 1 Pet. 1. 11. And the reproach of
Moses was the reproach of Christ Heb. 11. 26. We may much more conclude of the
ordinary Believers before his coming, that Christ's Interest and his Spirits
operations and help, extended much further than men's understanding of him, his
undertaking and his future work. No doubt but the eternal (...) that had
undertaken man's Redemption, and thereupon was our Lord Redeemer, gave even to
Socrates, Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Antonine, Epistotus, Plutarch, etc. What light
and mercy they had, though they understood not well from whom or upon what
grounds they had them.

Ninethly, And also we hold that the Jews were not the whole of Gods Kingdom
or Church of Redeemed ones in the world (as I have fully proved elsewhere,) But
that as the Govenant was made with all mankind, so amongst them God-had other
Servants besides the Jews; Though it was they that had the extraordinary
benediction of being his peculiar sacred People. Tenthly, And we hold that as
the Jews had by Promises, Prophesies and Types, more means to know God and the
Messiah to come than other Nations, so they were answerably obliged to more
knowledge and faith than other Nations were, that had not, nor could have,
their means.

If then all the world be under the first Covenant of Grace, and if you confess
this to proceed from the wisdom and goodness of God, and that men are bound so
to believe, and if Christ since his Incarnation has diminished none of the
mercies of God to the world, but rather greatly increased them; and so where
the Gospel is not preached, nor cannot be had, they that refuse it not, are in
no worse case than they were before, how can you say that they are Remediless,
if Christ be the ransom and remedy?

We know that all men partake of a great deal of mercy from God, after the
notorious demerit of their sin. We know that this mercy tells them aloud,
that God deals not with them according to the first Law of Innocence; They
see he pardons them, they feel that he pardons them in part; that is, that
he uses them not as they deserve. We know that all this mercy obliges them to
hope, that he will yet be further merciful; and to repentance, obedience,
thankfulness and love. We know that the Heathen are no left as the Devils,
without remedy, but all the Nations are under Divine obligations, to use
certain means, which have a tendency to their recovery: And we know that God
bids no man to use his means in vain.

Fourthly, Let us therefore first debate this Case, with any unbeliever that
has your objections, Whether you have any fault to find with the Christian
Doctrine of the way of man's salvation, for the first 4000 years, before the
Incarnation of our Lord? If you have, First, Is it with the Author? Secondly,
Or with the terms and conditions of life? First, The Author then was none but
God. The eternal (...), wisdom and word, did interpose to prevent the
execution of strict Justice, by resolving to glorify Love and Mercy. Do you
deny the being of Gods eternal wisdom or word? Do you deny him to be God
himself? Or a Divine subsistence? and dream that it is but some Accident in
God? No? your fair description of God, p. 210. discharges you from the
imputation of so gross an error.

You will say that the Divine power and goodness interposed as well as the
Divine (...) wisdom and word. True: Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt in divisa:
but so that each has an eminency in his own work, though not as separated or a
solitary principle or cause. The Father and Divine Vital Active Power, was
eminently glorified in the Creation; The Son and Divine wisdom is eminently
glorified in the making of the Remedying Medicine; And the Divine Love and
Spirit is eminently glorified in the operation of it, to the Health and
Salvation of the Soul. The son, and the wisdom or word does not finish all the
work himself, but with the Father and Divine power, sends the holy Spirit,
and communicates to man the Love of God. And all together will be glorified in
our glorification.

Secondly, And if it be the terms of life that do offend you. First, It is
either the terms of satisfying the Justice of God. Secondly, Or the terms of
conveying the benefits to man.

First, For the first, there is nothing in it, to give offense. For we dream
not of any extrinsecal agent or action (much less that which was not existent
till 4000 years after) having any proper casuality to change Gods mind or will;
The sum of the Christian Doctrine about the Interposition and Redemption by the
Son, for man upon his fall, is but this; As if God should say I will not
destroy or damn sinful man remedilesly, according to the strict terms of the
Law of Innocence which he has broken; but will give him a remedying Covenant
of Grace; because I will in the fullness of Time, provide better for the
glorifying of my Truth and Holiness, wisdom and goodness, justice and mercy,
than the remediless destruction of mankind would do; even by the Incarnation,
doctrine, sacrifice, merits, etc. of the eternal word.] So that this grand work
of God is the cause of his subordinate works: but not the cause of any real
(but only relative or denominative) mutation in himself. This all sound
Christians are agreed in; And can this offend you?

Secondly, And for the terms of communication of Grace to man, it is either
First, The New Covenant as a Gift of pardon and life, Secondly, Or the
conditions which it requires of man.

First, The former you neither do find fault with nor can do (That God should
give the world a Recovering and pardoning Law.) Secondly, The second is all
that is here liable to your exception. And what do you think amiss in that?
First, Not that Repentance is one of the Conditions of further Grace; for that
you plead for. Secondly, Not that Fides in Deum misericordem, Faith in Gods
revealed me^cy as pardoning sin, is required of man for that also you plead for.

But you would have his goodness and mercy to be a sufficient satisfaction to
his Justice? Answ. First, I hope you will not exclude his wisdom, because you
abhor Atheism as folly. Secondly, And I hope you will distinguish between,
the prime satisfying Cause, and the satisfying means; These plainly differ. The
prime satisfying Cause is Gods wisdom contriving and determining of the
fittest way to communicate his love and spirit. But the prime satisfying means
is Jesus Christ, who was to do that which was fittest to attain the foresaid
ends.

But that which you will accept against is, that the Belief in Christ's future
incarnation was made then necessary to salvation. Answ. First, See that you
feign not the Christian Doctrine to say more of this than indeed it does, which
I have opened to you before. I told you how narrow the Apostles own faith was
before Christ's Resurrection. We know that ^^ the believing Jews, knew not so
much as they, nor so much as the Prophets, and more illuminated men: And we
know that the rest of the world had not so full a revelation as the Jews. But
we know that all that had the notice of his promise, were to believe the truth
thereof: And those that had not the word of promise made known to them, had the
possession of many such mercies as that promise gave, and as intimated much of
the same grace which the promise did: Thefore none could be bound to lessthan
to believe, that God of his mercy would pardon sin and save penitent Believers,
by such a means of securing the honor of his holiness, truth and justice, as
his infinite wisdom should provide. This much you cannot deny. And that the
promise of the Victorious seed (though it seem too obscure to bind men to so
distinct a faith, as ours is) was by Tradition told to Adams posterity, and
that they had a General belief of such an expiation for some time, seems
intimated in the early and almost universal use of sacrificing, of which I
shall speak more anon. Hitherto then I have vindicated the Christian Doctrine
of man's salvation for the first 4000 years.

Secondly, And is there any thing since which should make it more offensive to
you? First, As to the Person of Christ I have said enough in my Treatise (the
Reason of Christian Religion.) Verily I think it far harder to confute those
that feign all the world to be animated by God as the universal Soul, and to
conceive how God, who is most intimate to all things, in whom we live, and move
and are, should not be as nearly united to all things, as Christians believe
him to be to the humane nature of Christ (though undoubtedly it is not so) than
that he should have that near union with his humane nature.

Secondly, And as to Christ's work, I have so largely showed you the necessity,
the reasonableness and the harmonical congruities that I will not repeat them.
In a word, The New Testament is the Doctrine of the eternal (...) wisdom or
word of God Incarnate to communicate the Divine Spirit, and love to man, to be
a sacrifice for sin, the Conqueror of Satan, Death and Sin, the Head over All
things to the Church, the Author of Redemption, the grand Administrator of the
new Covenant, the Reconciler and Restorer of man to God, the Teacher, Ruler and
High Priest of the Church, in order to this our Restoration and Salvation.

Thirdly, But if it be the Time of his coming that does offend you, I have
answered that, and further add. First, What is there in foolish man that
should encourage him to dream, that he better knows the fittest season for
Gods works, than God himself. Secondly, Man was not all the while before,
without the Benefits of this dedesigned and undertaken Redemption: He was still
under a Covenant of Grace. Thirdly, Consider well that God did not intend to
give mankind that had so heinously sinned (by preferferring the Devils word
before his,) a present and a perfect pardon, but only to give a new Law and
Covenant which should be a conditional gift of pardon, to be obtained in full
perfection, in time, and by degrees, we had made our selves voluntarily the
Slaves of Satan: And God would not deliver us all at once. We had forfeited the
heavenly assistance of the holy spirit, and God would not give it us all at
once. Man's time of healing the wounds of his own sin is the time of this life:
and the perfect cure will not be done till our entrance into the perfect world.
And as it is with Individual men, so it is with the world of all mankind. Grace
mitateth nature and does all by degrees, darker Revelations were meeter for the
Infancy of the world, and clearer at noon day, and riper knowledge fitter for
its maturity. And when Satan by Divine permission had played his part, and
seemed to triumph over the sinful world, it was time for Christ to come, by
Power, Wisdom and Goodness meanly clothed to cast down his Temples and Altars,
to subsidue his Kingdoms, and to triumph over the Triumpher.

Fourthly, But if it be the present conditions of the new Covenant since
Christ's Resurrection, that offends you, viz, that the world is required to
believe in him, I have answered that, and now add. First, Remember what I said
before, that no man's condition is made worse by Christ, than it was before his
incarnation. They that neither have nor could have the Covenant of Grace in the
last edition, are under it as they were before in the first edition, further
than as their after sins have deprived them of any of its benefits. Therefore
the coming of Christ has not narrowed the Church, nor repealed or diminished
any grace that before was given, but added much more. Secondly, When there was
more Grace to be given, it was needful that the Condition should be suited to
it. Would you rather be without the Graces and benefits, than be obliged to
Believe: would you be cured by one that you would not believe, nor take for
your Physician? would you be taught by one that you will not believe or take
for your Teacher? would you be ruled by one that you will not believe is your
Ruler? IInd I have proved to you, that God bideth no man believe either without
a meet object, or meet evidence of the credibility, yea the certain verity of
that which he is commanded to believe. And the belief required of us, is but a
means to our love of God and our belief of the everlasting glory, and
consequently is needful to our further duty, to our perfection and our
felicity. Do you not think your self, that the greatest demonstrations of the
Divine Love, are fittest to breed Love in us to God? And is not this wonderful
work of man's Redemption a wonderful demonstration of Gods Love; If you say that
it is incredible because wonderful and incomprehensible, I answer you, It is
the more credible because so wonderful. I cannot believe that any thing is a
work of God, especially one of his great transcendent works which mortal man
can comprehend. The work of the Father and of Omnipotency in Creation is
wonderfully; will you therefore say that there is no world? The work of the
Holy Ghost in Regeneration is wonderful, etc. especially in our perfection in
Glory. And will you say therefore that there is no Sanctification or
Glorification? so the work of the Son and Divine wisdom and word incarnate is
wonderful; And it is the fitter to be thought a work of God.

And would you not say your self that if God should send an Angel from Heaven,
to tell you his will, and tell you what is good and evil, and to tell you the
certainty of the life to come and the Joys thereof, would it not be a singular
help to your Belief of all these things revealed, if he did but give you
sufficient proof that he is sent of God? What perverseness is it then to quarrel
with Gods greatest mercy as incredible, merely because it is wonderful and
great, and therefore fit for God to give. Thefore observe here the error of
those men, that overlook the Benefit, and taking all Duty for a Burden dispute
against the necessity of the Duty: whereas all our Duty is our Benefit, like
the duty of feasting, rejoicing, receiving money or honor when given us? And
the true state of our Question should be, Whether all they that by the Gospel
have the offer of a Savior and Salvation, and all those treasures of mercy
which are brought to mankind by Christ above what they had before his
incarnation, are bound to believe that procurement and offer, and to accept so
great a gift? When the same men that question this, can be willing to accept of
wealth and honors, without disputing whether they may not live without them,
and will say, Quis insimentis inops oblatum respuit aurum? And he that can make
a sorry shift with a Candle, will not dispute whether it be his duty to open
his Windows and let in the light of the Sun; It is Riches of Mercy which all
they dispute against, who think they speak against the necessity of some
difficult duty.

Thirdly, And remember again that your self confess an Inequality of Gods
Benefits, and that he is not bound to give them to all alike, though there were
no inequality of demerit in the Receivers, If then he give more to the Church
by Christ Incarnate, then he did before his Incarnation, or more than he gives
to the world that never hear the Gospel, their Eye should not be evil because
he is good; much less ours who receive the benefit.

Fourthly, And I am glad that all that you require of God for All the world, is
but that their Salvation or Damnation may be brought to their own free choice,
and not their perdition be a thing unavoidable by Gods mere will, without their
culpable mischoosing. And all this we maintain as well as you: And you can
never prove that the Christian Religion does deny it. Nay tell me if you can
what mercy your doctrine gives to all the world, which ours gives them not?
Do you say that they are not under the mere Law of Innocence made with Adam,
but under the Law of grace, which after was given him? so do we. But you say,
that this Law of Grace is the Law of Nature? Let not names abuse us: It is not
the Law of Innocent Nature: But it is so fitted to man's Lapsed State, and does
also so fitly express the Gracious Nature of God, and also has such evidences
in Gods merciful providence and dealing with the sinful world, that in all
these respects, if you call it the Law of Lapsed and reprieved nature under its
reparation, we will not contend about the name.

But you say that all men may be saved, if they reject not their salvation: so
say we, that all should be judged according to that means and Law that is given
them, their Consciences accusing or excusing them in the day when Christ shall
judge the world, as the Gospel tells us. And none perish now for the mere sin
of Adam, nor merely for want of the Innocence required by the first Law; but
for the refusing and abusing some mercy purchased by Christ, which had an apt
tendency to their Repentance and Recovery.

But you lay the main stress on this, that All men may be saved by true says
in God and true Repentance without believing in a Crucified Christ. And we say
that no man in the world shall perish that has true faith in God and true
Repentance; For all such do Love God as God, and do devote themselves to his
glory, to obedience and Love: and do hate sin as sin; and so are holy. And God
cannot cast that Soul into Hell that loves him and bears his Image. Holiness
has so much of God and Heaven in it, that this would be to cast Heaven and
Gods Image into Hell, and to jumble Heaven and Hell together. Do we not then
grant you as much as you can reasonably desire. Tell us but what Heathens or
Mahometans are Holy, truly penitent for all sin, and devoted to God in
obedience and love, and we will grant you that they shall all be saved.

But you were ware that we would tell you that this Repentance and holiness is
not a thing, which sinful man is so easily brought to: And therefore the
Question must be, whether really these Heathens do truly Repent and Love God as
God or not?

Answ. First, Here you may perceive that though before you did but require that
salvation be brought down to the Sinners choice, yet now that will not serve
the turn: Yea, though Faith in God, and true repentance were the terms that you
were satisfied should be imposed on all, yet now you are loath to stand to that,
unless we grant that all these men have the power so to believe and repent.
Well if by power you mean a Natural faculty we grant that they have the power
of Intellection and Uolition. And if it be the object that is in question, we
grant that the object of that Faith and Repentance which you mention your self
is certain and existent; And if it be the evidence of the object that is in
question, we grant that the Being, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, Truth,
Justice and Mercy of God, are revealed to manking, by an evidence sufficient in
its kin, if their souls be but rightly disposed to receive it: And that sin to
be repented of, is discernable in themselves is doubtless. Amyraldus largely
labors to prove, that as God binds no man to natural impossibilities, that
is, to any Act without, First, A faculty that can do it. Secondly, An Object.
Thirdly, Evidence of that Object (As not to see. First, without an eye,
Secondly, That which is not in being, Thirdly, Or that which is a thousand
miles off, or in the dark, without Light) so that all Heathens have first the
natural faculty, Secondly, An object which would save them if truly believed in
and Loved; that is, God: Thirdly, A Revelation of this object: And that the
(...) is such an object as would procure their felicity if duly apprehended.
See also Mr. Trumans Treatise of Natural and Moral Impotency.

But indeed when all is done, the wit of man that is offended with God, as if
he gave not all men a power to be saved, will not be satisfied if that be
granted, unless also he actually save them. Should we grant you all the rest,
if some yet are damned, when God could have saved them, it will not satisfy
them that will be above God, and will judge their Judge.

But because you seem satisfied with less, suppose all the question come to
this, Whether or no those that never had the Gospei, do ever come without it to
true faith in God, and true repentance and so to be saved?

Answ. First, And when we have granted you what you first desired, that none
perish but those that are wilfully impenitent and believe not truly in God,
why must the controversy be carried to men's hearts, and acts. I can read Gods
Law, but I cannot know or read the hearts of millions whom I never saw. Must I
be obliged to know the thoughts of every man in China, Tartary, Japan, or the
Antipodes? Secondly, What number is it that you put the question of, and whose
Repentance you assert? Is it All or but some? If All, he must be mad that
believes it, that All men are true penitent Belivers in God. If but some,
First, Would not your wit quarrel still with God for damning all the rest?
Secondly, And must it be the greater part or the lesser? or would you know on
what number or where to find satisfaction? And what have we to do to judge
another Servants: To their own Master they stand or fall.

Secondly, And methinks you should easily grant at least, First, That
Repentance and Holiness is far easier to them that have the Gospel, than to
them that never heard it. Secondly, And that they are far more common. And so
that far more Christians are holy and saved than of others. For, First, Tell
me; If God should send an Angel from Heaven as aforesaid, with miraculous
evidence of his mission, to call men to repentance and belief in God, and
Glory, would it not be easier for those men to repent, than for others? Nay
would not you the easilier believe in Christ your self if you had but such an
Angel to confirm you? why then should not the word of Christ, who by his
Miracles, Resurrection and the donation of such a Spirit to his Servants,
proved his mission from the Father, be a help to our Faith and Repentance.
Especially when his word has a self evidencing Light also in the Image and
superscription of God upon it. Secondly, You will not deny but that the
difference of common lower means, does make Repentance much easier or harder to
one than another. Take one man that is born in Brasile or Soldania or among any
other savage People; or that is bred up in a Tavern, Alehouse or Whore-house,
or Gaming house, among those that make a scorn of godliness; and take another
that is bred up to Learning, Labor and Godliness, among them that by doctrine
and example do honor and command a godly, righteous, sober life. And has not
one of these abundance more hindrances to his Repentance than the other.
Thirdly, And will not sense and experience make you certain that the Christian
part of the world, has more such helps than all the rest. Is there not more
Reason, Learning, Sobriety, Doctrine, all sorts of Teaching there than among
the rest. Were it but that Christianity has furnished the World with more
helps to repentance and Holiness, the case were clear. Fourthly, And a little
acquaintance with the World, and the History of it, may fully satisfy you,
that de facto, there are actually far more knowing, penitent, holy Persons
among Christians than among any others. When therefore the fact it self is
undeniable, and we see that more Souls are healed by Christ in the Church, than
in the World without, what need we any greater evidence.

And if there were no more in it than this, that the actual knowledge or belief
of Christ incarnate, does make so great an addition to the helps and hopes of
Sinners, and makes conversion from sin to God, and salvation so much more
easy and common (as Aquinas Cont. Gent. argues should not this be received
with the greatest thankfulness, rather than with unreverent arrogant
Contradiction.

But I proceed to overthrow your Fundamental Error [That repentance alone with
the mercy of God is a sufficient satisfaction for our sins to divine Justice.]

First, If it be but proved that de facto God has required and provided
another Sacrifice for satisfaction, then you cannot call Repentance alone
sufficient. But this is proved fully.

Secondly, If the great work of our Redemption by Christ, have all those
blessed ends, tendencies and effects and bring all those benefits to mankind,
which in the treat forementioned I proved; If it was so actual a demonstration
of Gods wisdom and love, of his holiness and truth, his Justice and Mercy as is
there manifested and proved; If it have brought men such helps to Repentance
and Holiness as are forementioned, how perverse will it be then to say that our
Repentance was sufficient without, the Sacrifice and Merit and Intercession and
Administration which did procure and behow it: How absurd is it to say that the
Cure of our Disease is sufficient for us, without the Physician, the Medicine,
the Apothecary, the Application, which we see by certain experience are the
things that work this Cure. And which you your self cannot deny but that they
effect this Cure (of Repentance or Holiness) far more easily and commonly than
it is ever wrought without them? (Nay it is certain that the Grace of Christ,
is absolutely necessary to Repentance and holiness in any one in the world,
(whatsoever be thought of the necessity of the knowledge of Christ incarnate.)

II. Quest. Whether the Notitiae Communes be not many more than this learned
and noble writer does enumerate, viz. First, That there is one only God at
least supreme (whom he very well describes by his attributes.) Secondly, That
this God is to be worshipped, and prayed to, (Religion being ultima hominis
differentia page 214). Thirdly, That the due conformity of our faculties (that
is their holiness and rectitude) is the chief part of Gods worship; especially
Gratitude, Fourthly, That all vices and crimes must be expiated by repentance.
Fifthly, That after this life there is another life of rewards and punishment.

Answ. All these are excellent concessions, as being not only Truths, but such
Notitiae Communes without which a man is scarce a man, but unmanned. Except that
the fourth does erroneously assert the foredisproved sufficient
satisfactoriness in our Repentance. And that this is not a Notitia Communis, I
further thus manifest.

First, By all humane Laws and Justice. No King will make such a Law as this
[Let all the subjects be Traitors, Murderers, Oppressors, Perjured, never so
long, and Repent at any time before they die, and all shall be forgiven] mere
Repentance will not save such persons from the Gallows. Secondly, And as to
more private Justice, no man gives his children and servants such a Law
[Disobey me, burn my house, seek my death, and do all the mischief you can, and
repent at last, and you shall be forgiven] Therefore mere Repentance is not
sufficient satisfaction, according to the Notitiae Communes of mankind.
Thirdly, The reason of the thing does prove it; Because it is not sufficient to
secure the ends of Government, Should such a Law alone be made, (that men shall
be forgiven all the villainies of their lives, if they will but repent at last.)
First, It would encourage the most in the world to live in all manner of
wickedness: If the hearts of men are fully set in them to do evil, because
sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed but delayed; How much
more, if they were sure it should never be executed? Secondly, The Laws and
Lawgiver would be contemned, and lose their Ruling power. Thirdly, The common
good would be prostituted, and cast away utterly, and no man should live in
safety and peace, because of the dominion of wickedness.

Object. Does not Christianity then introduce these evils, which gives pardon
to all the penitent?

Answ. No: First, because that only Christianity does acquaint us of a further
satisfaction to justice than man's repentance, by which all these ends of
Government, may be obtained better than by our perdition. Secondly, Because it
gives us no assurance of life and time of Repentance, but calls us to be
always penitent and ready. Thirdly, Because it tells us of the blindness of
the mind, the power of sin, and hardness of the heart, by which Repentance
becomes so great and hard a work, that without Gods grace it will not be done;
And his grace is to be diligently sought in the use of means; and is so little
at our command, as that the resisting of the holy Ghost, may cause us to be
forsaken of God, and given over to our own hearts lusts, to walk in our own
Counsels, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Fourthly, Because God does not totally and
perfectly pardon all sin, when he does pardon the everlasting punishment
(though some in their ignorance will say so and revile those that will not be
as ignorant.) He pardons not temporal chastisements and death: he remitteth
not the sad penalties of a temporary and partial desertion by his spirit;
horrors of Conscience and fears of Hell. He remitteth not the temporal
punishment by Magistrates, but commands Justice to be done even on the
penitent, even to the loss of life it self. Fifthly, And his mercy is so great,
that through Christ he will forgive the eternal punishment, and will judge men
as he finds them, and not as they have been, before conversion: So that
without Christ you cannot imagine how God should neither send one to Hell or
misery that loves him, and has his Image; nor yet expose his Government,
Laws, and the common good to so much mischief, as the Proclamation of a pardon
to all villainies that are but repented of at last (alone) would cause.

Object. But if the King must not save a Traitor or Murderer because Christ
died and satisfied for him, why should you say that God does so.

Answ. First, Because Christ's Sacrifice and merits, were not to satisfy the
King, but God. Secondly, Because that God who is satisfied by them, has told
us how far and with what exceptions he is satisfied: Not so far as to excuse
men from the Laws of men, or temporal Justice, chastisement or death; but to
save them from everlasting misery, and procure them everlasting happiness, and
to sanctify their unremitted castigatory penalties, to the furtherance of
these ends.

And that there are more Notitiae Communes about Religion than the five
forenamed is easily manifested. It is as common a truth that all men are sinful
and depraved even from the first (however it came to pass) that they are
indisposed to the certain duties and ends, which their nature was formed for.
That God is the universal Governor of man, by moral means; That he is just and
true, that God only can make known to us, what is pleasing to himself and what
reward or punishment he will retribute, That man's darkness is so great, that he
learneth all this from nature alone, with great imperfection, doubtfulness and
dissatisfaction: That therefore a further supernatural Revelation, which is
sure would be a great confirmation and satisfaction to man's minds. And
therefore almost all the world do hearken after Oracles, Prophecies, Visions or
some such further Revelation, as Conscious of the unsatisfactoriness of their
natural light. That all Gods Revelations are certainly true. That whatever
Revelation has First, On the doctrine of it, no contradiction to natural
truth, but the clear Impress of divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness as its self
evidence. Secondly, And makes the same impress by divine cooperation on man's
Souls in sanctifying them. Thirdly, And was attested by a multitude of evident
uncontrolled Miracles, (Resurrection, raising the dead; giving to multitudes a
Spirit of Miracles, etc.) this Revelation has Gods Seal and Witness, and can
be from none but God. These and many more which I have recited in my Treat. are
naturally known Verities: As you very well confess all the ten Commandments to
be (going a little further than I see my self, while you make one day in seven
as separated to Gods worship to be such, of which ellewhere I have delivered my
mind, how far it is a natural or supernatural notice.)

III Quest. Whether the Notitiae Communes are the only certainties in Religion?

Answ. No: Can you possibly deny all certainty of Discourse and Conclusions, Ex
vero nil nisi verum sequitur. will you condemn the Judge as condemning a
Malefactor upon uncertainty, when he thus argues. All wilful Murderers must be
put to death, This is certain in the Law. This man is a wilful Murderer.
(proved certainly by confession, evidence and witness) Therefore this man must
be put to death: so I argue (what ever doctrine is attested by a multitude of
certain uncontrouled Miracles, and by the divine Impress on it self, and the
divine Image wrought by it on all; that truly receive it, is attested by God
himself, and is certainly true. But the Doctrine of Christianity was so
attested: Ergo it is attested by God himself and true.

The major is a Notitia Communis, or naturally known truth. The minor was known
by sense it self to the first Witnesses; (and that was as natural a notice as
any man is capable of, and as sure (whatever the Papists say against it for
transubstantiation:) nothing can be sure, if all sound Men's senses with their
just objects and conditions, are not sure in their Perceptions) And how sure
the distant Believers are I have largely opened in the Treatise: Therefore the
Conclusion must be sure.

Object. But (say the misinformed unbelievers) that which all mankind believes
or knows has its evidence in nature it self, but beliefs of pretended
Revelations, Oracles and Visions are as various as Countries almost, and
therefore uncertain.

Answ. First, To the last part first I answer, in your converse with men, you
will think him unnatural, unsociable, mad, that will either believe all things
or believe nothing. There is credible truth, and there is incredible falsehood:
And will you believe that either God says all that every Liar Fathereth on
him, or else that he never reveals his will to mankind any otherwise than by
his common works. When God has made a Revelation of his Will to the World, the
Devils usual way of hindering the belief of it is by imitation, and by putting
such names and colors on falsehood (by false Prophets) as God does on the
truth: Shall we therefore conclude that either all or none is the word of God.
Or that God says not true unless the Devil say true also. Secondly, And will
you mark the gross error of such Reasoners about the Notitiae Communes. First,
It is certain that no actual Knowledge (conceptive or intellectual Verity) is
born in man, Infants know not these Common. Notions at all. As the Eye is not
born with the actual Species of all things afterward seen, but only with a
seeing, power and disposition; so these are called common Notions, because man's
intellect is so able and disposed to know them, as that they will be known
easily upon the first due evidence or notification of the Object, and therefore
almost all men know them. Secondly, It is certain that this knowing faculty in
man (as this noble Lord says) requires its proper conditions for its true
apprehension of the Object. Now some men's understandings have the help of these
conditions far more than others have (he names to you the conditions himself.)
Thirdly, It is certain that the understanding performs not all its
apprehensions at once or at first, but by degrees and in time as the Objects
are duly presented. As an Infant sees not the first day all that ever he must
see; nor a Scholar learneth not the first day all that he must learn.
Fourthly, It is certain that the latter apprehensions are as sure, if not more
clear then the first: As he that lived twenty years at home, and afterward
travelleth to London, does as certainly then see London as before he did his
Fathers house; so a Scholar does afterward as certainly understand Horace,
Virgil or Homer, as at first he understood his Primmer. Fifthly, It is certain
that as particular notices are multiplied quod actus in time by use and
information, so the knowing disposition of the faculty is increased: And the
notice of a thousand truths does so advance the understanding, and befreind
other truths not yet received, that such a man can know more afterward in a
day, than an ignorant man can learn in a year. Sixthly, By all which it is a
most evident thing, that to make common Notions to be the only certainties, is
a weakness below a rational man: And it is to make the intellect of an Infant
to be the standard or measure of all certain intellectual verities, and to make
the Scholar even before he goes to School as wise (as to certainties) as his
Master and to make a new born Child to have seen as many Objects as Drake, or
de Noort, or Sandys, or Ludovics Romanus in all his travels. In a word the
Notitiae Communes being the very lowest degree of knowledge are thus equalled
with the wisdom of the greatest Philosopher or Divine or Judge: Was this
learned Lord when he wrote this Book sure of nothing, but these common Notions
i^ Religion. Seventhly, To which I might add that even in men's natural
capacities, there is a wonderful difference: As Idiots know little, so Dullards
not much: And must the wisest go no higher than these. Eighthly, And will
Lawyers, Statesmen, Physicians, Philosophers, make this consent of all mankind,
the test of all their certainties? If not, why should we do so in our search
after the greatest Verities, which are most worthy of all the study of our
Lives.

Nothing visible is so analogous to man's soul as fire. The nature of which is
to be ever of an active illuminative and calefactive faculty; but does exetcise
it in such various degrees as the fuel does occasion. There is fire in a flint
or steel, yea in all things: But is it the best way to know what fire is and
can do, by judging of it only as it is in a stone? No: but take your steel and
strike the flint, and add the combustible fuel, and that which is in a stone
can set a City on fire? And nil agit quod agere non potest, whatever act is
produced, proves an antecedent power. So if you would judge what man's soul is,
and can do, and what truth is in the Intellect, it is not in fools but in the
wise that you must discern it.

And by this those may see their error, who are tempted to think that man's
soul is but highly sensitive and imaginative, or not made for heavenly and holy
employments, because so many ignorant and wicked people are otherwise disposed:
whereas the Power and so the Nature of man's soul is certainly gathered from
what the wisest do attain: Because nothing can act beyond its Power: And if the
seize and acts of some men's souls do prove such a Power in them, all
souls of men are of the same species, and therefore the rest might attain it if
they had the same objects, evidences, excitations and improvements. I think all
this is plain truth.

Ninethly, And if by believing you will heartily give up your souls to Christ
and his Spirit, you will find that there is yet a more excellent addition of
knowledge and certainty to be obtained than by all other means could be
procured: At least, as to the Intension and clearness of the Act, if not as to
the extension of it to more objects.

IV. Quest. Whether the aforesaid Common notices do make up all the Religion of
the Catholic Church? And whether the Catholic Church be all the world
believing these common truths.

Answ. The question is either de nomine ecclesiae, or de re. As to the name,
the word is not used in Gods word for any but the Society of Believers as
separated from the unbelieving and ungodly world. As for men themselves, every
one may use this and other words in what sense he please. But how aptly you may
judge.

Quoad rem, I have told you before, how far all the world are capable of
salvation, if that be the question. And I add, The Kingdom of God is a word
of a larger sense, but the Church of God properly so called is Narrower, being
Caetus evocatus. The Kingdom of God signifies, First, All that de jure are
obliged to subjection and obedience; And so all mankind on earth are of his
Kingdom, even Rebels. Secondly, Or it signifies all that consent to
subjection and obedience and profess it: And these are First, Such as profess
subjection to God under some lame, defective, false conception; (as one that
allows them to worship Idols under him, or to live in wickedness, or one that
Governs not the world by a Law, or will not make a Retribution hereafter, or
as one that will pardon and save men, only for their superstition or without a
Savior) And thus almost all Heathens and Infidels are of Gods Consenting
Kingdom, Secundum quid, Eatenus, so far as this comes to, and no more:
Secondly, Or such as profess subjection, and love to God as truly described;
And as reconciled to man and saving them by Christ our Mediator: And these are
quoad actum First, But oral or unsound, not Cordial Professors; And such are
Hypocritical Christians, who are simpliciter of the visible Church. Secondly,
Or sincere Consenters, who are simpliciter of the essential mystical Church of
the Regenerate. Now when we thus open the Case as to the Thing, there
remains, besides the controversy de nomine, no more than how far Heathens
are under a Covenant of Grace, and how far they are capable of salvation, of
which I have said enough before.

V. Quest. Whether all Revelation for Religion must be but Notitiarum Communium
Symbolum, A Creed containing these common notices or truths. (as is asserted p.
221.)

Answ. I have said enough against this before. First; What need God send a
Prophet or an Angel to tell the world that which they all knew certainly
before? Secondly, Full existence assures us (as I have proved in the Treat.)
that mankind has need of more. Thirdly, More tends to perfect man's
understanding, and consequently his will and life: This is undeniable. And man's
perfection is his felicity and end: And therefore more than those common
notices is needful to his end. Fourthly, Else as is said, you will reduce all
the world to the measure of that part which is the lowest, the unwisest and the
worst. You would not in wealth or health be equalled with the basest poorest or
the sickest: nor yet in wit and knowledge of other matters with the most
foolish: And why then in the knowledge, love and practice of Holiness?

VI. Quest. Whether (as some others say) all supernatural Revelations be to be
tried by the common notions known by nature.

Answ. First, It is supposed that all that pretend to Prophecy and Revelation
are not to be believed: And therefore that we must try the Spirits whether they
be of God; and that all trial of things unknown, must be made by some
foreacknowledged principles, if it be a conclusion that must be known.
Secondly, It must therefore next be understood, whether the Truth of the Gospel
be to be known as a simple term, or a self evident proposition, or as a true
conclusion. First, The first kind of knowledge only apprehends the words and
sense; but not the Verity. It is the Truth of the Doctrine that we enquire of.
Secondly, Many Divines assert the second way, and say it is Principium
indemonstrabile; Like [est vel non est:] Doubtless this is not true as to the
Natural Evidence of the proposition, principle or doctrine. But I think that in
the very hearing or reading Gods spirit often so concurreth, as that the will
it self shall be touched with an internal gust or savor of the goodness
contained in the doctrine, and at the same time the understanding with an
internal irradiation, which breeds such a sudden apprehension of the Verity
of it, as nature gives men of natural principles. And I am persuaded that this
increased by more experience, and Love and inward gusts, does hold most
Christians faster to Christ, than naked reasoning could do: And were it not for
this unlearned ignorant persons, were still in danger of Apostasy, by every
subtle Caviller that assaulteth them. And I believe that all true Christians
have this kind of internal knowledge, from a suitableness of the Truth and
Goodness of the Gospel to their now quickened, illuminated sanctified souls.
Thirdly, But yet I believe that this is not All the knowledge of the truth of
the Gospel which we have: There is a common Belief of its truth by other means
which most usually goes before this Generative spiritual reception and belief;
usually they that are converted to holiness by the Gospel are such as had some
Belief of it before, and not such as took it to be false to that moment. And
after Conversion, it is to be known as a certain demonstrable Conclusion; And
so the faith of wise and settled Christians is most rational: And they are thus
made capable to defend it against Temptations and adversaries, and to preach it
rightly to unbelievers.

Thirdly, The premises from which this conclusion is proved [The Gospel is
true] are both of them truths of infallible evidence, viz. [Whatsoever doctrine
is attested by so many and such miracles extrinsecally, by the self-evidencing
impress of Divine Power Wisdom and goodness intrinsecally, and by the
effecting the like Impression in holy Life, Light and Love on the souls of all
sincere receivers, is certainly true, being attested by the spirit of God: But
such is the doctrine of the Gospel: Ergo it is true as attested by the spirit
of God. I said before the first is a natural Verity; The second proposition is
partly of sense and partly of internal and partly external experience, as is
largely manifested.

Now as to the Question, First, No doubt but our Natural faculties must be used
in trying supernatural Truth.

Secondly, No doubt he that disputes with or preaches to an unbeliever so as
to prove what he delivers to be true, must deal with him upon some common
principles which both parties are agreed in; or else there is no room for proof
or for dispute.

Thirdly, But some persons are so ignorant of those certain principles which
infer the truth of Gospel revelation, that they have need first to be convinced
of them: which must be done by inferring them from the first truths or some
principles which they do confess. Fourthly, And as a man would convince others,
by the same method and arguing he must convince himself, and try the truth
which he is in doubt of.

Fifthly, But if any should mean. First, That nothing is true in the Gospel but
these common principles of nature. Secondly, Or that nothing else can be proved
true: Thirdly, Or that it would prove any pretended prophecy, vision or
revelation true, so be it they do not contradict the common truths; All these
are palpable untruths.

VII. Quest. Whether these common Verities infer not the truth of
Christianity.

Answ. This is sufficiently answered in the last. Perhaps the few Verities
mentioned by the Author are not enough to prove Christianity by: But that it
has true evidence in sense and reason is manifested heretofore. And I believe
that he that will by just argumentation follow on the Christian cause with an
unbeliever, if he can hold him to the point from rambling, and suppose him
capable of Historical evidence, may drive him to yield, or to deny common
principles, yea to deny that God is God, and that man is man, and consequently
that there is any being. But the evasion will be by denying notorious matter of
fact, which therefore must be proved by its proper evidence.

IX. Quest. Whether they are necessary conditions of the certain knowledge of a
divine Revelation. First, That it be made immediately to my self. Secondly, And
that I feel a divine afflatus in the Reception? as is said Page.

Answ. No: A Revelation made to others, may be certainly notified to me, else
if an Angel from Heaven should appear to all men in the Town and Country save
one, or if all save one saw a thousand miracles to confirm a Revelation, yet
that one could not be sure of it. But I have by abundance of arguments in a
peculiar disputation in a Treatise called the unreasonableness of unbelief,
long ago fully proved the negative; And again in my Reas. of the Christian
Relig. therefore I will not weary the Reader with repetions.

X. Quest. Whether any concurrence of moral evidence, at least such as Gospel
Revelation has, do truly amount to natural or certain evidence? De Rev. and
Verisim.

Answ. This Question too I have plainly decided in the Reas. of Christian
Relig. I now add. First, The name of moral evidence is here taken by those that
use it, for that which depends on the credit of a voluntary Agent as such:
And the name of natural evidence, signifies that which depends on the nature
of the Object in it self considered. But I somewhat doubt whether all that use
the distinction do commonly understand the difference, or what they say.

Secondly, Note that the All or effect of a voluntary Agent, has nevertheless
a natural Evidence when it is done or existent. If I voluntarily speak or write
or go, my Action is naturally evident to those that see and hear it, as present
sensitive Witnesses of it. If I freely build a House, it is nevertheless
naturally Evident when it is built: Al things existent in the universe were
made by God as a free Agent, and yet are nevertheless naturally evident.

Thirdly, Every thing that is, when it is, (if corporeal) is naturally Evident
to those that have their faculties in those conditions that are necessary, and
have the object in its necessary magnitude, cognation, detection, site,
distance, medium and abode.

Fourthly, The judgment that is made upon sense it self fails (as this noble
Author has well opened) when either the Object, the Evidence the Sense or the
Intellect want their necessary conditions or qualifications; else not.

Fifthly, The Fountain of all Freedom and Morality is the Will of God: And yet
the moral Evidence of truth which is in Gods word, when known to be his word,
is as sure as any natural Evidence of the thing: There being the surest natural
evidence ab effect is at least that there is a God most perfect, that cannot
lie.

Sixthly, The Essences of all things are but imperfectly evident to us; The
existences of corporeal things that are present and duly qualified, are fully
evident. The existence of things absent beyond the reach of sense, is evident
only to the discursive intellect; not by the immediate natural evidence of the
things themselves, but by a borrowed evidence from Causes or Signs; Discourse
improving the Fundamental common truths, for the knowing of the rest, by
proving a certain connection between them. The Praterition of things, and the
Futurition, are both like the distant existence, unknown to sense, and the
immediate apprehension of the intellect; And therefore must both be known also
by collection as conclusions in discourse, or not at all.

Seventhly, Man was not born to know only things present in their existence by
sense, but also to know things absent, things as past, and things as future.
And herein he chiesly differs from a Bruit.

Eighthly, Though the understanding is most confident of things sensible and
present, yet about things absent, past and future it often doubts more and is
less satisfied in its own conclusions from natural principles, than from moral.
Because sometimes the natural Principles themselves (though not the first, yet
the second, or third) may be so obscure as to leave the mind unsatisfied.
Secondly, And the connection among many particulars may be obscure and doubtful.
Thirdly, And in the long Series of collection or arguing, the understanding
suspecteth its own fallibility: so that when Conclusions are far fetched, though
from natural Principles, the mind may be still in doubt about them. And on the
contrary when in the way of Revelation the grounds are clear, and the
understanding has fewer Collections to make and a shorter journey to go, it
may be far better satisfied of the truth.

Ninthly, Man's own necessity is the reason why God does give us supernatural
Revelation, and call us to know by the way of Believing. For, First, Most men
are naturally dull. Secondly, Few have leisure by Learning to improve their
intellects. Thirdly, And fewer have leisure and disposition to exercise them by
long searches and argumentation upon every thing that they should know.
Fourthly, And therefore where Revelation was not, few were wise or virtuous;
And the Philosophers themselves were all to pieces among themselves, and their
disagreements and doubtfulness tended to the gulf of utter Scepticisme. Now as
nothing is more necessary than Religion (as you well profess) so Religion
consists very little in the sensible apprehension of of present existences,
but in the knowledge of things absent or insensible things past, and especially
things to come, the Happiness to be attained, and the misery to be escaped. Now
if all the Poor unlearned Men and Women in the World must have known all these
things only by natural discourse, how little Religion would have been in the
World, when the Philosophers knew so little themselves. And though your
learning and understanding made the immortality of the Soul so clear to you and
the rewards and punishments of another life, as that you number it with the
common notices; yet were not the old Philosophers themselves, so commonly
agreed on it as they should have been; much less all the common People. And if
you say that now almost all the world believes it, I answer it is Gods great
mercy that it is so. But consider whether it be not more by the way of
believing, than of natural instinct or knowledge. For all the Christians, and
all the Mahometans (who believe the words of Moses and Christ also) take it by
the way of believing. And so do most of the Heathens: The Japonians have their
Amida and Zaca: The Chinenses, the Indians, the Siamenses the Peguans, etc.
have all their Prophets: And the very Savages of all the West Indies (or
America) have their Idols, Oracles or Wizards, whom they far more depend on
than their natural discourse about things Invisible, Past or Future. So that
really if Commonuess go with you for a proof that any point is of natural
instinct and certainty as a Notitia Communis, this will be one of the chiefest
of them, that [Religion consisting in the notice of, and due respect to things
absent, invisible, past and future; is to be maintained in the world by divine
Revelation and Faith, and not by the immediate evidence of things, nor by mere
discursive Collections from things so evident.] So that Man's weakness with the
quality of the Objects makes Revelation so necessary, that without it, the
vulgar (who are the main body of the World) would have next to no Religion; And
on the contrary how easy and pleasant, and satisfactory is it for all these
poor People (yea to the most learned) to have these mysterious truths brought
by Revelation to their hands. Now through Gods mercy, all our common People,
Women and Children, Servants and day-Labourers, may know more with ease, than
ever Democritus, Epicurus, Antisthenes, Zeno, yea Socrates, Plato or Aristotle
could reach by all their studies to the last: More I say of Religious necessary
knowledge.

Tenthly, And this being so necessary and so great a mercy to mankind, I wonder
that you put it not among your common notices, that God being perfect in love
and wisdom, and having made man purposely to be Religious, here, and happy
hereafter, will certainly provide for his Religion and Happiness, so necessary
and so excellent a means as Revelation is, God being the Father and Lover of
light and of Souls, and the Devil being the Prince and Friend of darkness;
Consider whether you may not strongly infer from the very nature of God, and
the nature and necessity of man, and the other communications of Gods mercies
to the world, that he will certainly give them this great mercy also.

Eleventhly, It is certain that God has ways of communicating light to man's
understanding immediately and not only by extrinsick sensible objects. The
Father of Spirits who communicates so much to the corporeal world, is not
further from Souls, nor more out of love with them; But (if there be any
difference) may rather be thought to hold a nearer more immediate communion
with them than with Bodies, and to be himself to the mind, what the Sun is to
the Eye, and more.

Twelfthly, It is certain that God can give the standers by that have no
Revelation immediately themselves a fully satisfactory attestation or proof, of
the truth of another man's Revelations. He that denies this, makes God to be
impotent.

Thirteenthly, It is certain that the Attestation which I described in the
Reasons of Christian Religion was such (supposing that such were given, viz. In
the Antecedent Testimony of fulfilled Prophecy, the Constitutive Testimony of
Gods Spirit apparent in the effects on Christ; person and on his Gospel, And
the Concomitant Testimony of all his Miracles and Resurrection and Ascension.
And the subsequent Testimony of the Spirit, on the Apostles, their Miracles and
doctrine, and on the souls of all serious Christians to the worlds end) These
are things (set all together) First, Which none but God could do. Secondly, And
which God would not do to deceive the world; Thirdly, Yea, which God would not
permit to be done to deceive them in so high a matter; Because he is the
Omnipotent, Omniscient, Gracious Governor of the world; And if these
Testimonies were not of God, it were impossible to know any Testimony to be of
God; And seeing w^ ^^ have no surer, it would be man's Duty to Believe and Obey
and be Ruled by a Lie. And if it be our Duty to Believe God to be so defective
either in Power, Wisdom or Goodness, Holiness, Truth, Justice or Mercy as to
rule the World, and the best of the World in the greatest matters, by lying and
deceit, as if he wanted better means: What Wit can devise any remedy against
such deceit as shall be so attested as aforesaid? Or if deceit can be
perceived, how can it be man's Duty to Believe it, seeing man's Intellect is
naturally made for Truth, and abhors falsehood? And how can it be Good to
Obey Deceit and Lies? And when the Devil is the Father of Lies, what blasphemy
is it to charge them on God? By this it will be apparent, that the Question
must be in the upshot, whether there be a God or no God? and so whether there
be any thing or nothing?

Fourteenthly, There is some Moral Historical Evidence of the truth of things
past, which is as certain, and much more satisfactory than the Natural Evidence
of Conclusions, raised by a long series of argumentation: Yea, some which is
truly a Natural Evidence though it depend on the credit of free Agents. The
proof and reasons I have given in the Treat. First, The Will though free is
Quaedam Natura, and has its Natural propensity to known good, as the
understanding also is, and has its Natural propensity to Truth. And the
understanding is not free, of it self, but acts per modum Naturae. Secondly,
There are some of the acts of the Will it self, which are so free as yet to be
necessary. As to will Good sub ratione boni; to will our own Felicity, and nill
our own misery; to will Life and Pleasure, with a simple complacency, though
not always by election: To will all that is fully discerned to have omnimodam
rationem boni, and nill all that is discerned to have omnimodam rationem mali:
Now it often falls out that Historical Narratives shall proceed from some of
these necessary acts. Salvation, Life and Goodness and the necessary means of
all, may be the Motives. Thirdly, There are other acts of the will which though
they are not absolutely necessary, are yet so near to necessary, that they
always go one way, except in some very rare extraordinary case. As for
example, It is not of absolute necessity that a man feed or cloth himself, or
that he murder not himself: But yet he will ordinarily do the first and forbear
the latter, because he is necessarily a lover of himself, and life, and
therefore will not cast himself away, nor destroy himself, without some
conceived cause. Fourthly, There are no causes extant in rerum Natura for the
commonness of some such actions: Therefore it is certain they will not be done,
because there can be no effect without its cause; And the turning of the will
to a man's known corporeal destruction is an effect which has no common cause.
Therefore it is a point of more Natural Evidence and Certainty, than many
Conclusions from Natural premises are, that all the people of Europe or England
will not to morrow kill themselves, nor go naked, nor famish or wound
themselves, etc. And consequently that formerly all never did so, since it was
notoriously so much their interest to do otherwise. For, there was no cause to
produce such an effect.

If it must be a Miracle rebus sic stantibus, which should make all the
Europeans or the English to go naked to morrow, or to kill themselves, than it
is Natural to them to do the contrary, or not to do this (for a Miracle is the
overpowering of Nature.) But the Antecedent is evident, to reason, from
experience. Ergo, etc. There may be Causes for one man's actions, which can
never fall out to All, or to very many.

All the Physicians in England never did persuade all men against Physic, nor
all the Lawyers against Law; nor all the Covetous men in England, the Laborers
or Beggars, were never against recieving Meat, Drink and Money; Because there
never was a cause of such effects: And as it must be a great, powerful, common
Cause, that must do this: so also if the question be whether ever there were a
Parliament in England? Whether ever they made Laws with the Kings? Whether our
statutes were made by such Kings and Parliaments as they are ascribed to, etc.
There is such a concurrent consent of competent Witnesses, as could not be to
it, were it false, because it would be an effect without a sufficient Cause.
Yea, against the tendency or disposition of man's nature which would have caused
the wills of some to contradict it, except a miracle had hindered them. For
among so many there are cross interest notorious. Some Men's interest is against
the thing, while other Men's are for it: And to make multitudes go against their
apparent Interest, and Friends and Enemies of the event to agree, must be done
by the power of truth, or by a miracle: suposing the case such as they could
not be all deceived in.

Fifteenthly, But there is yet a fuller natural evidence of the truth of some
reports; Even when besides the report, there remain some visible unimitable
effects of the reported actions, which could be caused by nothing else. As if
their Fathers told the Grandchildren of Noah of the deluge, they might see
such effects of it as might assure them that it was true. If the Parents of the
man born blind, Joh. 9. were told by him that his eyes were cured, when they
saw it in the effects they must believe it: If uncontroulled History tell our
Children that London was burnt and new built, that Paul's Church was burnt, etc.
that multitudes died of the Plague the year before, etc. When they see the
City, the Church, the Graves, the change of Inhabitants, the proved Testaments
of the deceased, besides uncontradicted testimony here is a natural evidence to
assure it.

Sixteenthly, Though some half witted Philosophers boast much of the certainty
of their Physics in comparison of Morality, the truth is, the most of Physics
are mere untainties, and the wisest see it, and busily pull down others
doctrines, but confess they are yet but searching and groping by extrinsick
effects and experiments to know what to set up in the stead: And so did others
before them: And long may they so search before they find. Whereas there is a
more satisfying Evidence in much of Morality, as being Natural to Mankind, and
such as will no sooner cease to be believed than man will cease to be man:
whereon all the affairs of the world are turned, and converse, Societies, and
all the private Comforts of Nature are maintained: God has made known to us
what pleased him, according to his own wisdom and not at our direction or
choice. And he has chosen that for us which is most useful: It is more
useful to us to know how to live well, and how to be happy, and how to please
and glorify God and do good to one another, than to know Gods skill or
mysteries in his works; to know what is in the center of the earth, or how the
active Nature does operate on the passive, whether cold be a privation or
positive, what is the cause of the continued motus projectorum? Whether Light
and Heat be bodies? or Substances? whether they penetrate other bodies? etc. As
it is more useful for me to know how to keep my Clock in order than how to make
one; to know how to plow, sow, eat, drink to my health, than to know by what
mysterious operations, the Corn or other things do grow, and my food is
digested, etc. Therefore this Learned Lord does truly and wisely enumerate his
Notitiae Communes in Morality and Religion as certainties, the denial whereof
does unman us. God has left such instincts, powers, inclinations, and
conscience in humane nature, as shall naturally (though with some degree of
freedom in the exercise) be an insuperable witness in the world to himself,
and to our common principles and duties.

Seventeenthly, The Historical Evidence of the Gospel of Christ is such as has
all the advantages before described, in its kind. He lived and preached and
wrought his miracles frequently, before thousands, friends and foes: His
miracles were never controlled as Moses did the Magicians, by greater, nor by
any certain Truth which they contradicted: The eye witnesses themselves were
unbelieving till forced by Cogent Evidence: They delivered his Doctrine,
Miracles, Resurrection to the world, not only by credible report, and to the
ruin of their worldly pleasures and interests, with the loss of their lives,
and all this merely for the hopes of a reward in heaven, from God that well
knew whether all were true or not; But also they did all in the power of the
same Spirit which Christ did work by, doing such Miracles as Christ had done:
And this not a few nor in a Corner but in many Countries of the world, and that
by many thousand Christians in one kind or other (tongues, healing, prophecy,
or the like) as well as the Apostles. The certainty of which fact is attested
by the very existence of all the Churches converted by it, with all their
Baptismes, Professions and the rest of the Tradition before named. No Christian
of all this multitude, by any terrors, death, time, was brought to the last to
repent and say that he had deceived the world by a lie, Many Apostates falling
off for fear of sufferings, but none with any such recantation: No adversary
confuting the History, but commonly confessing most of it with more such
evidence which I have opened in the Treat. and must not often repeat lest I be
tedious, And that which is still the Natural Evidence is, that [There is still
existent, First, On the sacred Gospel, Secondly, On the souls and lives of all
serious Christians by its impress the unimitable Image of the Divine Power,
Wisdom and goodness, Life, Light and Love, as the Divine attestation] Only as
this noble Author requires to all true Conceptions and Intellections, so do we
to this, that there be but the necessary conditions in the mind of the receiver.

And whereas he says that commonly Miracles are reported a hundred years
after; Here it was otherwise: The Jews were enraged by them for fear of the
Romans! The Apostles and others wrought them openly; Matthew and John that
wrote Christ's History lived with him and saw what they wrote: so did Peter and
James: Paul wrote what he saw and heard from heaven, Luke wrote the Acts of
Paul which he saw, being his Companion in travels. The thousands were
converted, and Churches in many Countries planted, not by bare words, but by
the Conviction of the Miracles of the Apostles themselves: so that every Church
and Christian was a History of them. And all this they were moved to, with the
hopes of heaven, where truth is known, to deny the world, and mortify the
flesh, and suffer whatever the Gospel would inflict, to preserve their hopes
and comforts founded in this word of faith.

XI. Quest. Whether the common custom of sacrificing throughout the world in
all generations, were not their actual Confession that the sinner deserved
death, and that Gods justice required punishment of satisfaction? and proceeded
not from Divine Revelation in the beginning, when God had new made the Covenant
of Grace? and so was delivered down by Tradition? For my part it cannot come
into my understanding, why else men should think that God is pleased or
appeased by the Creatures death? or how this should become so common throughout
the world. And the two exceptions confirm this to be truth: First, Some Savages
in America use no sacrifices: But they are such as know not God, or so Savage
as to have lost all ancient Tradition.

Secondly, All the Mahometans and Christians use no bloody sacrifice. But that
is because, First, Christians believe that Sacrifices were but types of Christ
and that he put an end to them by his perfect Sacrifice. 2dly, And Mahometans
received it from Christ, being but Christians degenerate first into Arrians,
and then into Mahometans, and still professing to take Christ for the word and
son of God, and his word as true: only hating the Christians for saying that
he is very God. But of this instead of writing after so many, I only refer you
to their writings: And specially to Dr. Owens Latin Tractate on this subject.

XII. Whether Interest make the Judgment of Divines in the Cause of faith more
suspicious or contemptible than other men's? I put this Question with respect to
those words in the Preface. Sed neque auspicaciores ubique posterioris istius
seculi Scriptores dicendi sunt -- Fit ita ut pro Regionum and fidei diversitate
in id potissimum incumbant, ne illos domi male multet inopia, adeoque non tam
quid in se verum, quam quid sibi ipsis utile exquirant. -- Non est igitur a
larvato aliquo vel stipendioso Scriptore, ut verum Consummatum opperiaris.
Illorum apprime interest, ne personam deponant, vel aliter quidem sentiant.
Ingenuus and sui arbitrii, ista solummodo praestabit Author.

Answ. First, It is not to be denied, that there are multitudes of such Carnal
Pastors in the Churches, that are Christians for the case, honor and wealth.
Secondly, But that this should be so with all, I shall disprove, and prove that
none on earth are so credible in this case as Divines. First, Because they have
made it the business of their lives to search out the truth: and therefore
(some of them) must be supposed to have the greatest advantages to know it. So
that for Ability they have no sort of men that are Competitors. For diligence
and helps are the improvers of understanding. And all men are found best at
their own profession; Lawyers in the Law, Physicians in Medicine, Philosophers
in Philosophy, etc. And for your self, your next words are, [Nobis tamen ad
alia omnia fere quam literarum studia (uti oportuit) exequenda, otium fuit:
Partim armis in diversis regionibus, partim quinquennali Legatione, partim
negotiis tum publicis tum privatis, vacavimus] And is not this your
disadvantage? Who is a good Linguist, Lawyer, Physician, etc. that has had but
little leisure for his studies?

Secondly, And as for Will and Interest, it is notorious that thousands of the
Ministry have so little set by worldly Interest, as that it is upon the terms
of greatest self-denial to the flesh, that they take up and exercise their
office; being moved only by the great Interest of their own and others souls:
Their voluntary diligent labors, their holy lives, their contempt of the
world, may convince any of this, that are not blinded by prejudice or malice.
There are few Learned men in the Reformed Churches, but might far better use
their studies and labors, if they took that for best which is most profitable,
advancing or pleasing to the flesh.

Thirdly, You had a Brother of your own, so holy a man, as his sincerity was
past exception; and so zealous in his Sacred Ministry, as showed he did not
dissemble; And I suppose had it been necessary, you would have so maintained
him, that he should not have fled from truth for fear of poverty.

Fourthly, What can you think of all those that gave up their lives for the
Christian says and hopes? Did they go upon such carnal grounds as you mention.

Fifthly, The revolutions of States, and the diversity of Sentiments, and
especially the Interests of the Carnal part, do bring it to pass (by Gods
overruling of all) that usually the most serious Christians and Pastors, are
the sufferers of the age they live in: so that how much has God done hereby to
confute such suspicions and accusations! There are now in England learned and
worthy men, in Church preferments, which doubtless do not so love them as to
buy them with the loss of truth, and that to keep up a Religion against their
Consciences. But if you did so accuse them, sure the many hundred silenced
Ministers now in England that live in poverty, and many of them want Bread,
when they might have preferment as well as others, do live out of the reach of
this accusation: I write not this at all as meddling with their Cause, but as
answering your Exception. I have my self got no more for Preaching the Gospel
these nine years, than if I had been a Layman; I mean I have Preached for
nothing, if the success on men's souls were not something, and Gods acceptance
(so far as I did Preach:) And more than that, I would offer any man my
solemnest oath to satisfy him, that I believe and profess the Christian
Doctrine for its proper evidence, and for the hopes of the blessedness promised
thereby; which if they prevailed not with me above all the riches, preferments
and pleasures of this world, I would never have been a Preacher or a Christian,
nor would continue in my calling and profession one day, much less on the
self-denying terms as I now do.

But, O my Lord, thou have been to me a faithful Savior, a happy Teacher, a
supporting Comforter, in my greatest dangers, distress and fears: Thy service
has been sweet and good! Thy word has been a powerful Light, a Quickening, a
changing, an elevating, a guiding, a comforting word. So far am I from
Repenting that I am thy Disciple or thy Servant, that (now I am not far from my
departure from this world) I do vehemently protest, that I beg no greater mercy
of thee in this world than that I may Believe in thee more firmly, and Hope in
thy promises more confidently, and by thine Intercession receive more of thy
Holy Spirit, by which I may have nearer access to God, and that by thy blood
and merits I may be justified and cleansed from the guilt of all my sins, and
that by thee I may be taught to know the Father, and to Love him as his Love
and Goodness has manifested it self in Thee, and in the gracious works of man's
Redemption; That thou will be the undertaker for my soul and body, through my
life, and that at death I may commend my Spirit into thy hands, in a strong
well grounded Faith and Hope and come to the in the fervent desire of Divine
and Heavenly Love And I ask for no greater felicity hereafter, than to be with
thee where thou art, to behold thy Glory, and to see the Glory of the blessed
Deity, and Live in the perfect Knowledge and Love and Praise of God.

Sixthly, And I may add, that it is not only Clergy men that are Christians:
Besides them the Learned men in the world have defended or stuck to the
Christian Faith: I need not name to you either men of your own rank, such as
the two Mirandula's, the great Du Plessis, Marnixius de Aldeg^nde, Anhaltinus,
(a Prince though a Divine,) Bacon, and many a worthy Noble man of these
Kingdoms, and of many other: nor such Laymen as the Scaligers, Salmasius,
Grotius, Causobone, Thuanus, and multitudes more. Were all these larvati vel
palliati by assed by price or fleshly interest? He that is not a Christian for
Spiritual and Eternal Interest, taking up his Cross and following a Crucified
Christ, on terms of self-denial, even to the forsaking of all for him, not
excepting life it self, and does not by his Cross even Crucify the flesh and
the world, which is the provision for its lusts, is indeed no real Christian at
all.

I had thought to have said somewhat to your page 220, 221. [In omni Religione,
immo and conscientia, sive ex Natura sive ex gratia, media sufficientia dari
unde Deo accepti esse possint, ultro credimus -- ] But I have been long enough,
and the answer may be gathered from what is said before.

The Lord save this Land and the darker world from Infidelity and its fruits;
and give us mo^^ ^f that spirit which is Christ's Agent and witness in us,
effectually to plead and maintain his cause,

Amen.
Jan. 16. 1672.
Caes. Baronius Annal. ad An. 411.
BUt because we are discoursing of such matters, Reader I entreat thee to
suffer me, like the good householder in the Gospel, who brings out of his
Treasury things new and old, to add some things new (or later) to these of
elder date: For what I shall briefly say will much delight thee. For I will not
report unproved things, but what I know to be confirmed by the assertion of
very many learned men, Yea, and by all Religious men out told the people in
their Sermons: And for my part I will bring forth the Author of whom I received
it, and that is, Michael Mercatus Miniatensis PPronotory of the S. R. Church, a
man of most entire fidelity and of eminent knowledge and honesty of life: He
told me of his Grandfather of the same name with himself, Michael Mercatus
senior, between whom and Marsilius Ficinus a man of a most noble wit, there was
an intimate friendship, contracted and increased by Philosophical studies, in
which they both were followers of Plato. It happened on a time that as they
used, they were gathering from Plato (but not without doubting) how much or
what of man remained after death; which Platonic documents where they failed,
were to be under-propt by the Sacraments of the Christian Faith: (for of that
argument, there is extant a learned Epistle of Marsilius to this Michael
Mercatus, of the Immortality of the Soul and God.) And in their discourse when
they had long disputed, they thus concluded it; and giving each other their
right hands, they Covenanted, that which ever of them first died, if he could
do it, he should certify the other of the state of the other life. And having
thus covenanted and sworn to each other, they departed: And after a
considerable space of time, it fell out, that Michael senior, being early in
the morning at his Philosophical studies, unexpectedly he heard the noise of a
horse swiftly running, and stopping at his door, and withal the voice of
Marsilius crying out [O Michael, O Michael, those things are true.] Michael
marvelling at the voice of his friend, rose up and opening the window, he saw
him whom he heard, with his back toward him, in white, riding away on a white
horse, and called after him, Marsilius, Marsilius, and looked after him, but he
vanished from his sight. He being struck with admiration at the strangeness of
the case, took care to enquire what was become of Marsilius, (he lived in
Florence where he died) and found that he died that same hour in which he heard
and saw him: And what did he hereupon? Though he had been a man of approved
honesty, and had lived a life harmless and profitable to all (as it became a
true Philosopher) yet from that time, bidding farewell to Philosophical
Disciplines, and becoming a forward Lover (or follower) of the true Christian
Philosophy only, as more eminent than the rest, he lived the rest of his time
as dead to the world, only for (or to) the life to come; being an example of a
most absolute Christian, who before had been famous among the Philosophers of
his time in praise, as second unto none. So far Baronius; The same is reported
by abundance of other writers.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. penult. for were read was. p. 23. l. 2. r. Indic. p. 30. l. 10. r.
adapted. p. 64. l. 7, 8. r. same apparition; p. 117. l. 15. r. Treat. l. 27. r.
bestow. p. 123. l. 23. r. men's. p. 149. l. 16. r. end.) p. 157. l. 20. for ls.
r. is.


