How to do Good to Many: OR, THE PUBLIC GOOD IS THE Christians Life.

DIRECTIONS and MOTIVES to it.

Intended for an AUDITORY of London Citizens, AND Published for them, for want
of leave to preach them.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself, a People zealous of good Works.

LONDON, Printed for Rob. Gibs at the Ball in Chancery Lane, 1682.

The Contents.
GAL. 6. 10. Doct. To do Good to all men is all men's duty, to which every
Christian especially must apply himself.

I. Who this All means, and in what order, p. 4.

II. What is the Good that we must do, p. 5.

III. The Rules for judging and doing good, p. 5.

IV. What qualifications are necessary hereto? 1. To know good from evil, p. 6.
2. To love all men, p. 8. 3. To love many and the Common good above himself, p.
9. 4. To be good himself, p. 10. 5. Suitable abilities. 6. A large prospect of
the world, and of time to come. 7. Christian fortitude against discouragement.
8. To look to God for his reward, p. 11. And finally believe the life to come.

The Impediments of doing good, p. 12.

V. Particular good works, or directions for public good.

I. Do as much good as you can to men's bodies, in order to the good of Souls,
p. 15.

II. Promote knowledge of necessary truth. 1. Set up Reading Schools. 2. Give
Bibles and good Books, p. 16.

III. Order Families aright, and Educate Children for Christ, p. 18.

IV. Promote a faithful Ministry. 1. Devote not your Children to the Ministry,
that are unqualified, p. 18. 2. Let honest Rich men buy Presentations. The
difference between good and bad Pastors, p. 19.

V. Keep order and Discipline in particular Churches, p. 20.

VI. Promote Love and Concord with all that deserve to be called Christians, p.
21. Who those are, p. 22.

VII. Do your best to keep up sound Religion in the Parish Churches, and do
nothing to deprave or lose it there, p. 24.

VIII. See that no injuries tempt you into Sedition or unlawful Wars: What is
lawful: Patiently trust God; and cut not the Infant of deliverance out of the
Womb, before his time of birth, p. 25.

IX. Do your best to procure faithful and just Rulers? What private men may do:
The great difference between good Rulers and bad, p. 30.

X. Know public sins and dangers to oppose them, p. 31.

XI. Know your duty to your Neighbors, and be not strange to them.

XII. Be such as you would make others, p. 31.

Use of exhortation to do good: Cavils refuted: Motives to do good to many, p.
33.

Specially to Magistrates and Ministers, p. 35.

Consectaries. 1. A selfish fleshly life is the state of Hypocrites, p. 38.

2. How carefully should we take heed of doing hurt, p. 39.

3. Its not enough to leave others to do good by our last Wills.

4. Yet dying men should do what good they can by their Wills, p. 39.

Leaving great Estates to Children who are like to do hurt with them, or no
good, but live in idleness and fullness, proved a great sin, and the objections
answered, p. 40.

5. Humbly proposed to Merchants and Rich men, 1. Whether our Factories might
not be made more useful to promote the Gospel, by Chaplains and Factors? 2.
Whether Armenians, Greeks, and Mofcovites might not be helped? and how? 3. Might
not more be dove for the Natives in our Plantations? 4. Or at last for the
Blacks that are their slaves, p. 45.

6. The great opposition to good in all the World by Satan and his Servants,
the more obliges all Christ's Servants to seek to over do them, and to be
zealous of good works, p. 46.

ERRATA.
Page 1. blot out [1] before Gal. 6. pa. 26. 1. 15 for [Cold] read [Gold] pa.
23. 1. 31. for [with] read [within]

TO THE TRULY CHRISTIAN Merchants and other Citizens OF LONDON.
AS my Disease and the Restraint of Rulers seem to tell me that my Pulpit work
is at an end, so also my abode among you, or in this World cannot be long. What
Work I have lived for, I have given the World more durable notice than
transient words: It has been such as Men in Power were against, and it seems
will no longer endure. What Doctrine it was that I last prepared for you, I
thought meet to desire the Press thus to tell you, not to vindicate my self,
nor to characterize them, who think, that it deserves six months imprisonment;
but to be in your hands a Provocation and Direction for that great Work of a
Christian Life, which sincerely, done, will prepare you for that safety, joy,
and glory, which London, England, or Earth will not afford; and which men or
Devils cannot take from you. When through the meritorious righteousness of
Christ, your holy Love and good Works to him in his Brethren shall make you the
joyful Objects of that Sentence, Come ye blessed inherit the Kingdom, andc.
This is the life that need not be repented of, as spent in vain.

Dear Friends, in this Farewell, I return you my most hearty thanks, for your
extraordinary love and kindness to my self, and much more for your love to
Christ; and to his Servants, who have more needed your releif. God is not
unjust to forget your work and labor of Love: You have visited those that
others imprisoned, and fed those that others brought into want; and when some
ceased not to preach for our affliction, it quenched not your impartial
Charity. It has been an unspeakable Mercy unto me almost all my days, (when I
received nothing from them) to have known so great a number as I have done of
serious, humble, holy, charitable Christians: In whom I saw that Christ has an
Elect peculiar People, quite different from the brutish, proud, hypocritical,
malignant, unbeleiving World! O how sweet has the familiarity of such been to
me, whom the ignorant World has hated! most of them are gone to Christ: I am
following: We leave you here to longer trial: Its like you have a bitter Cup to
drink: But be faithful to the death, and Christ will give you the Crown of
Life. The Word of God is not bound; and the Jerusalem above is free, where is
the general Assembly of the first Born, an innumerable company of Angels, the
Spirits of the just made perfect, with Christ their glorified Head. The Lord
guide, bless, and preserve you.

How to do Good to Many: OR, THE PUBLIC GOOD IS THE CHRISTIANS LIFE, etc.
1 Gal. 6. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good to all Men,
especially unto them who are of the household of Faith.
GOOD is an Epithet of the highest signification of any, in humane Language.
Some think the Name GOD is thence derived. Greatness and Wisdom are equally his
Attributes, but Goodness is the completion, and sweetest to the Creature.
Christ appropriateth it to God, to be good, that is, essentially, primarily,
and perfectly, and universally communicative: When it is said that God is Love,
the sense is the same, that he is the infinite, essential, and efficiently, and
finally amiable, perfect Good.

But tho no one of his Attributes in propriety and perfection are communicable
(else he that has one part of the Deity must have all) yet he imprinteth his
similitude and image on his works: And the impress of his Love and Goodness is
the chief part of his Image on his Saints: This is their very Holiness: For
this is the chief part of their likeness to God, and dedication to him, when
the Spirit of Sanctification is described in Scripture, as given upon
believing, it signifies, that our faithful perception of the redeeming, saving
love of God in Christ, is that means which the Spirit of Christ will bless, to
the operating of the habit of holy Love to God and Man, which become a new and
divine nature to the Soul, and is Sanctification it self, and the true
principle of a holy Evangelical Conversation. And as it is said of God, that he
is Good and does Good, so every thing is inclined to work as it is: Christ
tells us the Good, Tree will bring forth good fruits, etc. And we are Gods
Workmanship Created in Christ Jesus to Good Works, which God has ordained,
that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10.

Yet man does not Good as the Sun shines, by a full bent of natural
necessitation, else the World would not be as it is: But as a free undetermined
Agent, which has need to be commanded by a Law, and stirred up by manifold
Motives, and Exhortations; such as the Holy Ghost here uses in the Text.

Where 1. Doing Good is the substance of the duty: 2. Men are the objects: 3.
To all men is the extent: 4, Especially to them of the Household of Faith, is
the direction for precedence: 5. And while we have opportunity is the season,
including a Motive to make haste. So large and excellent a Theme would require
more; than my allotted time to handle it fully: Therefore I shall now confine
my self to the duty Extended; Do Good to All men.

Doct. To do Good to all men is all men's duty, to which every Christian
especially must apply himself.

All men should do it: True Christians can do it, through Grace, and must do
it, and will do it. A Good man is a common good: Christ's Spirit in them is not
a dead or idle Principle. It makes them in there several measures the Salt of
the Earth, and the Lights of the World: They are fruitful branches in the true
Vine. Every Grace tends to well doing, and to the Good of the whole Body, for
which each single Member is made. Even Hypocrites, as Wooden Legs, are
serviceable to the body, but every living Member much more, except some
diseased ones, who may be more troublesome, and dangerous than the Wooden Leg.
It Is a sign he is a branch Cut off and withered, who cares little for any but
himself. The malignant Diabolist hates the true and Spiritual Good: The
ignorant know not Good from Evil: The erroneous take Evil for Good, and
Falsehood for Truth. The slothful Hypocrite wishes much Good, but does but
little: The formal Ceremonious Hypocrite extols the Name and Image of Goodness:
The worldly Hypocrite will do Good if he can do it cheaply, without any loss or
suffering to his Flesh: The Libertine Hypocrite pleads Christ's Merits against
the necessity of doing Good, and looks to be saved because Christ is Good,
tho he be barren and ungodly; and some ignorant Teachers have taught them to
say, when they can find no true Faith, Repentance, Holiness, or Obedience in
themselves, that it is enough to believe that Christ Believed and Repented for
them, and was Holy and Obedient for them. He was indeed Holy and Obedient for
Penitent Believers; not to make Holiness and Obedience unnecessary to them, but
to make them sincerely Holy and Obedient to Himself, and to excuse them from
the necessity of that perfect Holiness and Obedience here, which is necessary
to those that will be Justified by the Law of Works or Innocence. Thus all
sorts of bad men have their oppositions to doing Good; But to the sincere
Christian it is made as Natural: His heart is set upon it: He is Created and
Redeemed and Sanctified for it; as the Tree is made for Fruit. He Studieth it
as the chief Trade and Business that he lives for. He waketh for it: Yea, he
sleeps and eats and drinks for it; even to enable his body to serve his
Soul, in serving that Lord, whose Redeemed peculiar People are all Zealous of
Good Works, Tit. 2. 14. The Measure of this Zeal of doing Good, is the utmost
of their power, with all their Talents, in desire and sincere Endeavor: The
extent of the Object is to All (tho not to all alike) that is to as many as
they can.

But for order sake we must here consider.

1. Who this All means, and in what order. II. What is Good: And what is that
Good which we must do. IV. What Qualifications he must have that will do Good
to many. III. What Rules he must observe in doing it. V. What works are they
that must be done by him that would do good to many. VI. What motives should
quicken us to the practice. VII. Some useful consectaries of the point.


I. It is Gods prerogative to do good to all; Man's ability will not reach to
it. But our all is, as many as we can do good to. 1. To Men of all sorts: High
and Low, Rich and Poor. Old and Young: Kindred, Neighbors, Strangers, Friends,
Enemies, Good and Bad; none excepted that are within our power.

2. Not to a few only, but to as many persons of all sorts as we can: As he
that has true grace would still have more for himself; so he that does good
would feign do more good; and he that does good to some would fain do good to
many more. All good is progressive, and tends toward increase and perfection;
why are the faithful said, to love and long for the day of Christ's appearing;
but because it is the great Marriage day of the Lamb, when all the Elect shall
be perfected in our Heavenly Society? and that makes it a much more desirable
day than that of our particular glorification at death. The perfection of the
whole body adds to the perfection of every part: For it is a state of
felicity in perfect Love. And Love makes every man's good whom we love, to be
as sweet to us as our own; yea, makes it our own. And then the perfection and
glory of every Saint, will be our delight and Glory: And to see each single
ones love united in one perfect joy and glory, will add to each persons joy and
glory. And can you wonder if our little sparks of Grace do tend toward the
same diffused multiplication; and if every Member long for the completing of
the body of Christ; O how much will this add to every faithful Christians joy?
It will not be then a little flock; not despised for singularity; nor hid in
the Crowd of impious sinners, nor dishonored by infirmities, or paltry
quarrels among our selves, nor with the mixture of hypocrites: It will not be
over-voted or trod down and persecuted by the power, or number of the ignorant
Enemies: O Christians, go on in doing good to all men with cheerfulness; for it
all tends to make up the body of Christ, and to prepare for that glorious
state and day: Every Soul you convert, every brick that you lay in the building
tends to make up the House and City of God.

But as all motion and action is first upon the nearest object, so must ours;
and doing Good must be in order: First we must begin at home with our own Souls
and lives, and then to our nearest Relations, and Friends, and Acquaintance,
and Neighbors, and then to our Societies, Church and Kingdom, and all the
world. But mark that the order of execution, and the order of estimation and
intention differ. Tho God set up Lights so small as will serve but for one
room, and tho we must begin at home, we must far more esteem and desire the
good of multitudes, of City and Church and Commonwealth; and must set no bounds
to our endeavors, but what God and disability set.

II. But What is that Good that we must do? Good is an attribute of Being; and
is its perfection, or well-being: Gods Goodness is perfection it self: And as
he is the fountain of being, so also of Goodness; and therefore his Goodness is
called Love, whose highest act is his essential self-love, which is infinitely
above his love to the world; But yet it is Communicative Love; which made all
things good, and rested in seeing them all good. And as he is the fountain, so
the same Will or Love is the measuring Rule, and the end of all derived good.
The prime notion of the Creatures goodness is its Conformity to the Will of
God: But the second is its own perfection as its own, which indeed is but the
same Conformity.

Therefore the true good which we must do men, is to make them conformable to
the Regulating Will of God, that they may be happy in the Pleased Will of God;
and to help them to all means for soul and body necessary hereunto: And this
for as many as possibly we can.

III. The Rules for judging and doing good are these. 1. That is the greatest
good which is Gods greatest interest: And his interest is his Glory and the
complacence of his fulfilled Will.

2. Therefore the good of the world, the Church, of Nations, of multitudes, is
greater than the good of few.

3. The good of the Soul is greater than of the body.

4. The avoiding the greatest evil is better than avoiding less.

5. Everlasting good is better than short.

6. Universal good which leaves no evil, is better than a particular good.

7. That is the best good as to means which most conduces to the evil:

8. There is no Earthly good that is not mixed with some evil, nor any Commodity
that has not some inconvenience or discommodity.

9. No sin must be done for any good.

10. Some things may be done for good, which would be sin, were it not for the
good which they are done for. It would be sin to give a robber your money, were
it not to save your life, or some other Commodity: It would be sin to do
somethings on the Lords day, which necessity or a greater good may make a duty:
Your own defense may make it a duty to strike another, which else would be a
sin.

11. In such cases there is need of great prudence, and impartiality to know
whether the good or the evil do preponderate: And a great part of the actions
of our lives must be managed by that prudence, or else they will be sinful.

12. Therefore it is no small part of a Ministers duty, to Counsel men, as a
wise, skilful and faithful Casuist.

IV. To do good to many requires many excellent qualifications: This is so far
from being every ones performance, that we should be glad if a great part of
Mankind did not do more hurt than good.

1. He that will do his Country good, must know what is good, and what is bad:
A fools Love is hurtful: He knows not how to use it: He will love you to
death; as an unskilful Physician does his most beloved Patients: Or love you
into calamity, as amorous fondlings often do each other. This is the great enemy
of humane peace: Men know not good from evil: Like him that killed his Son,
thinking he had been a Thief, or like routed Soldiers, that run by mistake into
the Army of the Enemy. Malignity and error make mad and doleful work in the
World, and worst in those that should be wisest, and the greatest instruments
of public good: The Scripture mistaketh not, which tells us of Enemies and
haters of God: And most of the World are professed Adversaries to Christ: The
Jews Crucified him as an Enemy to Caesar, and to the safety of their Law and
Country: And if we may Judge by their enmity to Holiness, the Spirit of Christ
is taken for an intolerable Enemy, by no small part of nominal Christians: The
Laws of Christ are judged too strict: The Hypocrites that bow to him, and hate
his Laws, do call them Hypocrites, that are but serious in the practice of
Christianity, and hate them that have any more Religion than Complements,
Ceremony, and Set words: The Image of a Christian and a Minister is set up in
Militant opposition to them that are Christians and Ministers indeed: If men
that are Called to the Sacred Office, would save Souls in good earnest, and
pull them out of the Fire, and go any further than Pomp and Stage-work, they
pass for the most insufferable men in the world: Elias is taken for the
troubler of Israel, and Paul for a pestilent seditious Fellow, and the Apostles
as the offscouring of all things: Many a Martyr has died by Fire, for seeking
to save men from the Fire of Hell: And when the Bedlam World is at this pass,
what good is to be expected from such men? When men called Christians hate and
oppose the God, the Christ, the Holy Ghost, to whom they were vowed in Baptism;
when Drunkenness and Whoredom, and Perjury and Lying, and all debauchery is
taken for more friendly and tolerable, than the most serious Worship of God,
and Obedience to his Laws, and avoiding Sin: In a word, when the greatest good
is taken for unsufferable evil, you may know what good to expect from such.

They will all tell you that we must Love God above all, and our Neighbors as
our Selves; but to fight against his Word and Worship and Servants, is but an
ill expression of their Love to God: And seeking their destruction, because
they will not Sin, is an ill expression of Love to their Neighbors. When men,
judge of Good and Evil, as Satan Teaches them, and as selfish Pride and
Worldly interest incline them, what wonder if such Love have murdered 30000 or
40000 at once in France and 200000 in Ireland, and have filled the Christian
World with Religious Blood? Read but the doleful Histories of Church
Contentions for 1300 years, the Stories of their Wars and mutual Persecutions,
the Streams of Blood that have been shed in East and West, the inquisitions and
bloody Laws still kept up, and all this as Good Works, and done in Love, and
you would think that the Sacred Roman Hierarchy did Believe that Christ has
put down the Legal Sacrificing of Beasts, that he might instead of it have the
blood of men; and that he who requires his Disciples to lay down their lives
for him, would have a Priesthood kept up to Sacrifice their lives to him, that
will not wilfully break his Laws. And all this is but as Christ foretold us,
that his Servants should be killed as a piece of Service to God. No wonder if
such men offer God a ludicrous mimical sort of Service, and Worship him in vain
by heartless lip-labor, according to the Traditions of men, when they dare
Sacrifice Saints to the Lord of Saints, and quiet their Consciences by calling
them such as they are themselves. But to the honor of Goodness, and the shame
of Sin, to show that they sin against the Light of Nature it self, they put the
Name of Evil upon Good, before they dare openly oppose and persecute it; and
they put the Names of Good upon Evil before they dare defend and justify it.

But alas! it is not only the Ungodly that do mischief, thinking verily that it
is good: How many does the Church suffer by, while they prosecute their
mistakes, who yet do much good in promoting the common truth which Christians
are agreed in?

2. He that will do Good to all or many, must have an unfeigned Love to them.
Hatred is mischievous, and neglect is unprofitable: Love is the natural
Fountain of Beneficence: Love earnestly longs to do good, and delights in
doing it. It makes many to be as One, and to be as ready to help others, as
each Member of the Body is to help the rest. Love makes another wants,
sufferings, and sorrows to be our own: And who is not willing to help himself?
Love is a principle ready, active, ingenious and constant: It studieth to do
good, and would still do more: It is Patient with the infirmities of others,
which men void of love do aggravate into odiousness, and make them their excuse
for all their neglects, and their pretense for all their Cruelties. Could you
make all the slanderers, backbiters, revilers, despisers, persecuters, to love
their Neighbors as themselves, you may easily Judge what would be the effect;
and whether they would revile, or prosecute, or imprison, or ruin themselves,
or study how to make themselves odious, or suborne perjured witnesses against
themselves.

3. Yea, he that will do good to many, must Love many better than himself, and
prefer the Common-good much before his own, and seek his own in the
Common-welfare. He that loves good as good, will best Love the best. And an
honest old Roman would have called him an unworthy beast, that preferred his
Estate or life before the Common welfare. To be ready to do, suffer or die for
their Country, was a virtue which all extolled. A narrow-Spirited selfish man
will serve others no further, than it serves himself, or at least will stand
with his own safety or prosperity. He will turn as the Weathercock, and be for
them that are for his worldly interest. I confess that God often uses such for
common good: But it is by raising such storms as would sink them with the Ship,
and leaving them no great hope to escape by being false; Or by Permiting such
Villainies as threaten their own interest. A Covetous Father may be against
gaming and prodigality in his Children: The men of this World are wise in their
generation: Many that have Abbey Lands will be against Popery. And even Atheists
and Licentious men may be loath to be slaves to Politic Priests, and to come
under Confession, and perhaps the Inquisition: And those that have not sinned
themselves into madness or gross delusions, will be loath to set up a Forieign
Jurisdiction, and become the Subjects of an unknown Priest, if they can help
it. God often uses vice against vice, and if no worldly selfish men were the
Countries or the Churches helpers, it must suffer or trust to Miracles.

But yet there is no trust to be put in these men, further than their own
interest must stand or fall with the Common good: If God and Heaven and
Conscience be not more powerful with a man than worldly interest, trust him not
against the stream and tide, or when he thinks he can make a better bargain for
himself. He that will sell Heaven and Christ for the world, will sell you for
it, and sell his Country for it, and sell Religion, truth and honesty for it.
And if he escape here the end of Achitophel and Judas, he will venture on all
that is out of sight. Christ was the grand Benefactor to the world, and the most
excellent teacher of Love and self-denial and contempt of the world, to all
that will follow him in doing good to many.

4. He that will do much good must be good himself: Make the tree good if you
would have good fruit. Operari sequitur esse. A bad man is an Enemy to the
greatest good that he should do. Malignity abhors serious piety, and will
such promote it? If Elias be a man of Miracles, he shall hear, Have thou found
me, O my Enemy: And Michaiah shall hear, I hate him, for he Prophesies not
good of me but evil. Feed him with the Bread and Water of Affliction.

And a bad Man, if by accident he be engaged for a good cause, is still
suspected by those that know him: They cannot trust him, as being a slave to
lust and to strong Temptations, and a secret Enemy to the true interest of his
Country. Alas! the best are hardly to be trusted far, as being liable to
miscarry by infirmity, how little then is to be hoped for from the wicked?

5. He that will do much good in the world, must be furnished with considerable
abilities: Especially prudence, and skill in knowing, when, and to whom, and
how to do it. Without this he will do more harm than good: Even good men when
they have done much good, by some one miscarriage, tempted by the remnants of
selfishness and Pride, and by unskilful rashness, have undone all the good they
did, and done as much hurt as wicked enemies. There goes so much to public
good, and so many snares are to be avoided, that rash self-conceited halfwitted
men do seldom do much, unless under the conduct of wiser men.

6. He that will be a public blessing to the world, must have a very large
prospect, and see the state of all the world, and foresee what is like to come.
He must not live as if his neighborhood were all the Land, or his Country, or
his Party were all the Church, or all the World. He must know what relation all
our actions have to other Nations, and to all the Church of Christ on earth:
The want of this Universal prospect involveth many in censorious and dividing
Sects, who would abhor that way, if they knew the case of all the Church and
world.

And we must not look only to a present exigent or advantage, but foresee how
our Actions will look hereafter, and what changes may put them under other
judgments, and what the fruits may be to posterity. Many things cause death
which give the Patient present ease.

7. He that will do good to many, must have Christian fortitude, and not be
discouraged with difficulties and opposition: He must serve God for the good of
men with absolute resolution, and not with the hypocrites reserves: He must be
armed with patience against, not only the malice of enemies, but the
ingratitude of friends: The follies, and quarrels, and mutinies and divisions,
and often the abuses of those that he would do good to, must not overcome him.
He must imitate God, and do good to the Evil, and bless those that curse him,
and pray for them that despightfully use him: He must not promise himself more
success than God has promised him; nor yet despair and turn back discouraged:
But Conscience must carry him on to the end through all, whatever shall befall
him.

8. Therefore he must look for his reward from God, and not expect too much
from Man. Men are insufficient, mutable and uncertain: Their interests and many
accidents may change them. The multitude are of many minds and tempers; and if
you please some, you shall displease others. And it is hard to please even one
person long. Some great ones will not be pleased, unless you will prefer their
Wills before the Will of God, your Countries good and your own Salvation: The
poor are so many and so indigent, that no man can answer their desires; If you
give twenty pound to twenty of the poor, forty or an hundred, that expected the
like, will murmr at you and be displeased. What Man ever did so much good in
the world, as not to be accused by some, as if he were a Covetous or a hurtful
man.

Therefore he that will do much good, must firmly believe the life to come, and
must do that he does, as the work of God, in obedience to him, and look for his
reward in Heaven, and not as the Hypocrite in the praise of men, much less as
the worldling in the hope of temporal advantage: He must not wonder if he be
rewarded as Socrates was at Athens; and as Christ and his Apostles were in the
world: Themistocles likened himself to a great Fruit Tree, which Men run for
shelter under in a storm, and when the storm is over they throw stones and
cudgels at it, to beat down the fruit. Reckon not on a reward from men, but
from God. By what is said you may perceive what are the great impediments of
doing good to many, which must be overcome.

I. One, and the worst, is Malignity, which is an Enmity to Spiritual good: For
who will promote that which he is against?

II. Another is unbelief of Gods Commands and Promises; when men take not
themselves to be his Subject and Stewards, nor can take his promise for good
security for their reward.

III. Another is the forementioned sin of Selfishness, which makes a man's self
to be his chiefest love and care, and more to him than Christ's interest, or the
Church or Kingdom.

IV. Another is a false conceit that a man is so obliged to provide for his
Children and Kindred, that all that he can get, how rich soever he be, must be
left to make them rich, except some inconsiderable pittance.

V. Another is the great neglect of Parents to prepare their Children to be
profitable to the Commonwealth, but only to live in prosperity to themselves.
1. Children should be taught as much as may be, to become persons of
understanding, and such wisdom as may make them useful. 2. And especially to be
truly Religious: For then they will be devoted to do good, in love and
obedience to God. 3. They should be taught what it is to be members of
Societies, and what duty they owe to Church and State, and how great a part of
their duty lies in careing for the Common good, and how sinful and damnable it
is to live only to themselves; and how much this selfishness is the sum of all
iniquity. 4. Those Callings should be chosen for them which they are fittest
for, and in which they may do most public good.

VI. And a timorous Cowardly disposition, is a great hinderance to public
good: For such will be still for the self-saving way, and afraid of the dangers
that attend the greatest duties: If they are called to Liberality, they will
fear lest they should want themselves: In all costly or hazardous duty, there
will still be a Lion in their way. They cannot trust God, and no wonder then if
they are not to be trusted themselves.

VII. Lastly, Sloth and Idleness are constant Enemies to well doing. There are
two sorts especially guilty of this; one and the better is some Religious
people, who think that their business is only with God and their own hearts,
and that if they could spend all their time in Meditation, Prayer and such like
exercises, it would be the best kind of life on Earth: Among the Papists
multitudes by this conceit turn Friars and Nun's. Among us such spend all their
time, in hearing Sermons, and in Reading, and Meditating and Prayer, and such
like exercises of Religion toward God, if they are but rich enough to live
without bodily labor: And the Example of Mary and Martha, they think will make
this good.

I know that this is no common error. The wicked are of a far different mind.
And I know no man can do too much to save his Soul: But we may do one sort of
our work too much to the neglect of other parts. We have Souls in flesh, and
both parts have their proper necessity and work: Mary did somewhat else than
hear, tho she wisely preferred it in its season. And no one is made for himself
alone: You feel that Religious exercises do you good: But what good is it that
you do to others? I confess a Monks Prayers for others is a good work: But God
will have Praying and endeavoring go together, both for your selves and
others. Bare Praying God to relieve the Poor and to teach your Children, and
instruct the ignorant, will not excuse you from relieving, teaching or
instructing them: Yea, and your own good will best come in by your fullest
obedience to God: Do what he bids you, and he will take care of your Salvation:
Your own way may seem best, but will not prove best: It will but cast you into
Melancholy and disability at last; six days shall thou labor, is more than a
permission. Its Saint Paul's Canon, he that will not work (if able) let him not
cat. And it was King Solomon's Mother who taught him the description of a
virtuous Woman, Prove. 31. She eats not the bread of Idleness, ver. 27. God
will have mercy and obedience as better than Sacrifice. The Sentence in
Judgment is, upon doing good to Christ in his members; Mat. 25. When many that
heard much and Prophesied shall be cast out, Mat. 7. 21. Doing good is the
surest way of receiving good. The duties of the first, and second Table, must
go together. He that is not zealous to do good as well as to get good, has not
the peculiar nature of Christ's Flock, Tit. 2. 14. And zeal will be diligent and
not for sloth.

2. The other sort of the Idle are rich, ungodly, worldly persons, who live as
if God did give them plenty, for nothing but to pamper their own flesh, and
feed their own and others sensuality: They think that persons of wealth and
honor may lawfully spend their time in idleness: That is, in Sodoms sin, Ezekiel.
16. 49. As if God expected least where he gives most. How little Conscience do
many Lords and Ladies make of an Idle hour or life? when poor men's labor is
such as tends to the Common good; the rich by Luxury, Sacrifice to the flesh
the fruits of other men's endeavors; and instead of living in any profitable
employment, devour that which thousands labor for.

It is not the toilsome drudgery of the vulgar, which we take to be all rich
folks duty. But Idleness and unprofitableness is a sin in the richest: Any of
them may find good work enough that is sit for them, if they be willing.
Children, and Servants, and Friends, and Neighbors, and Tenants, have Souls
and bodies which need their help. None can say, God found us no work to do. Or
that God gave them more time or wealth than they had prosuable use for. Little
do they think what it will be ere long, to reckon for all their Time and
Estates, and to be Judged according to their works. And their own flesh often
pays dear for its ease and pleasure, by those pains and diseases which God
has suited to their sins; and which usually shortens the Lives which they no
better use; or snatch them away from that Time and Wealth, which they spent in
preparing fuel for Hell, and food for the Worm that never dies.

V. But what is it that a man should do, that would do good to all or many?
There are some Good Works which are of far greater tendency than others; to the
good of many, some of them I will name to you.

I. Do as much good as you are able to men's bodies in order to the greater good
of Souls. If nature be not supported, men are not capable of other good. We
pray for our daily bread before pardon and spiritual blessings; not as if it
were better, but that nature is supposed before grace, and we cannot be
Christians if we be not men: God has so placed the soul in the body, that good
or evil shall make its entrance by the bodily senses to the Soul. This way God
himself conveyeth many of his blessings, and this way he inflicteth his
Corrections: Ministers that are able, and willing to be liberal, find by great
experience, that kindness and bounty to men's bodies opens their Ear to
Counsel, and makes them willing to hear instruction: Those in France that are
now trying men's Religion in the Market, and are at work with Money in one hand
and a Sword in the other, do understand this to be true. All men are sensible
of pain or pleasure, good or evil to the flesh, before they are sensible what is
necessary for their Souls. You must therefore speak on that side which can
hear, and work upon the feeling part if you will do good.

Besides this, your Charity may remove many great impediments, and temptations:
It is no easy thing to keep Heavenly thoughts upon your mind, and specially to
delight in God, and keep the relish of his Law upon your hearts, while pinching
wants are calling away your mind and disturbing it with troublesome passions:
To suffer some hunger, and go in vile Apparel is not very difficult: But when
there is a Family to provide for, a discontented Wife and Children to satisfy,
Rents, and Debts, and Demands unpaid, it must be an excellent Christian that
can live contentedly, and cast all his useless care on God, and keep up the
sense of his Love, and a delight in all his Service. Do your best to save the
poor from such Temptations, as you would your selves be saved from them.

And when you give to the poor that are ignorant and ungodly, give them after
it some Counsel for their Souls, or some good Book which is suited to their
Cases.

II. If you would do good to many, set your selves to promote the practical
knowledge of the great truths necessary to Salvation.

I. Goodness will never be enjoyed or practiced without knowledge. Ignorance is
darkness, the State of his Kingdom, who is the Prince of darkness, who by the
works of darkness leads the blind World to utter darkness: God is the Father
of Lights, and gives wisdom to them that ask and seek it: He sent his Son to
be the Light of the World: His Word and Ministers are subordinate Light: His
Servants are all the Children of Light: Ignorance is virtually Error, and
error the cause of sin and misery. And men are not born wise, but must be made
wise by skilful diligent teaching: Parents should begin it: Ministers should
second them: But alas! how many Millions are neglected by both? And how many
neglect themselves when Ministers have done their best? Ignorance and error
are the common Road to wickedness, misery and hell.

2. But what can any others do for such? Two things I will remember you of. 1.
Set up such Schools as shall teach Children to read the Scriptures, and learn
the Catechism, or Principles of Religion. Our departed Friend, Mr. Thomas Gouge
did set us an excellent Pattern for Wales. I think we have Grammar Schools
enough. It is not the knowledge of Tongues and Arts, and Curious Sciences which
the common people want, but the right understanding of their Baptismal Covenant
with God, and of the Creed, Lords Prayer, Decalogue and Church Communion. A
poor honest man, or a good woman, will Teach Children thus much for a small
stipend, better than they are taught it in most Grammar Schools; And I would
none went to the Universities without the sound understanding of the Catechism:
Yea, I would none came thence or into the Pulpit without it,

2. When you have got them to read, give them good books, especially Bibles,
and good Catechisms, and small practical books which press the fundamentals on
their Consciences: Such books are good Catechisms: Many learn the words of the
Creed, Lords Prayer, Commandments and Catechism, by rote, and never understand
them, when a lively book that awakeneth their Consciences, brings them to
sensible consideration, and to a true understanding of the same things, which
before they could repeat without sense or savor. It is the Catechistical
truths which most of our English Sermons press. And the lively pressing them
makes them pierce deeper than a Catechism.

If men that in life, or at death, give a stated revenue for good works, would
settle the one half on a Catechizing English School, and the other half on some
suitable good books, it may prove a very, great means of public reformation.
When a good book is in the House, if some despise it, others may read it, and
when one Parish is provided, every years rent may extend the Charity to other
Parishes, and it may spread over a whole Country in a little time. Most of the
good that God has done for me, for knowledge or Conscience has been by sound
and pious books.

III. A great means of public good is the right ordering of Families all the
week, but especially on the Lords day: Tho the Ministry be the usual means of
Converting Heathens and Insidels, Christian Education by Parents, is the first
means appointed by God for the holy principling of youth: Parents must teach
them with unwearied diligence, lying down and rising up, Deuteronomy. 6. 11. And they
that will expect Gods blessing, must use his appointed means. Nature teaches
men and brutes to provide for their offspring with diligence and patience: And
as Grace teaches believers to expect far greater things for themselves and
their Children, than this world affords, so it obliges them to be at so much
greater diligence to obtain it. An everlasting Kingdom deserves more labor
than a trade of full estate for the flesh. If all Parents did their parts to
make their Children Sanctified Believers, as well as they expect the
Schoolmaster should do his part to make them Scholars, and the Master do his
part to teach them their Trades, we might hope that Ministers would find them
fitter for Church work, and that Godliness would not be so rare, nor so many
wicked Children break their Parent hearts. But of this I have spoken lately in
my Counsel to young men.

Religion is never like to prosper if it be not made a Family work. If it be
there made the chief business of the house, and done with reverent seriousness,
and constancy, if Magistracy and Ministry should fail, yet families would
propagate and preserve it. Begin with a reverent beging the help and blessing
of God: then read his word and call upon his name: Speak serious words of
Counsel to inferiors; spend the Lords day as much as may be in public
worship, and the rest in reading Godly books, and in singing Gods praise and
calling on his Name: Put suitable books into the hands of Servants and Children
to read when they have leisure: Encourage them in it with Love and rewards; and
keep them out of the way of temptation: And then Gods blessing will dwell in
your Families, and they will be as Churches of God. If any complain of
negligent Ministers, or persecuting Magistrates, and will not do their own
Family duties, which none forbids, they condemn themselves.

IV. If you would be public blessings, and do good to many, do your best to
procure a skilful, faithful Ministry in the Church. 1. Send no Son to the
University, who does not first show these three qualifications, a capable
natural wit and utterance, a love to serious practical Religion, a great desire
to serve God in the Ministry, tho it should be in suffering from men. If they
want any one of these, design them to some other Calling; devote not an
undisposed Lad to the Ministry, in hope that God will make him better, but stay
till he is better.

2. Seeing Pastors are here obtruded on the flock, it is a work of great
importance for Religious Gentlemen to buy as many Advowsons or Presentations,
as they can, that they may introduce the best that they can get.

God has hitherto made use of the qualifications of the Ministers, as the
special means for the welfare of his Church. The bare title and office is so
far from sufficing without the skill and fidelity of the persons, that such
have been the great corrupters and disturbers of the Church: When pious men
have heaped up riches and honors on the Clergy, these have been baits for the
worst men to become seekers, and make the sacred Ministry but a trade for
wealth. And if carnal worldly men be Ministers, alas! what plagues may they be
to the people and themselves? They will hate the Spiritual practice of doctrine
which they Preach; when they have told men of a Heaven and Hell, and the
necessity of a holy heart and life, as if they had been in jest; they will
take those for hypocrites that believe them, and live accordingly: They will
take the best of the flock for their Enemies, because they are Enemies to their
hypocrisy and vice: Instead of imitating Saint Paul Act. 20. who taught them
publicly and from House to House, day and night, with tears; they will turn
the Ministry into Complement and formality, and think that by saying a cold
unskilful Sermon, and by roteing over a few heartless words, they have laudably
performed their part. They will take those for their best hearers who will most
honor them and best pay them, tho never so ignorant and ungodly; and their
spleen will swell against the best, and most Religious people, because they
dislike their unfaithful lives and Ministration. If Religion should be in
public danger, these will be the Judas'es that will sell it for gain. They
will do anything rather than suffer much. They are Ministers of the world, and
not of Christ: Readier to make Crosses for others than to bear the Cross of
Christ: For it is Gain that is their Godliness: And when their treachery is
seen and hated, they will hate the haters of it: And the studies of Malignant
men will be their Laboratories, and the Pulpits the place where the sublimate
and essence of malice must be vended: How effectually will Satan's work be done
when it is performed in the formalities of the Sacred Ministry, and in the name
of Christ? O what has the Church suffered by a worldly graceless Ministry
these thousand years and more; and what does it yet suffer by them in East and
West!

But on the other side, a skilful faithful Minister, will Preach sound
Doctrine, and worship God with serious devotion, and live to Christ, and the
Churches good. He will speak the word of truth and life, with truth and
liveliness: As one that believes what he says, and feels the power of it on
his heart: Tho he must have Food and Raiment as other men, it is the saving and
edifing of Souls, which is his work; to which he bends all his studies; for
which he prays and longs, and in which he rejoices; and to which all his
worldly interest, not only gives place, but is made to serve. He will think no
price, no pains or suffering too dear, so that the Souls of men be saved; this
is the riches and preferment which he desires: He has nothing too good or too
dear for Christ, or for the meanest of his Servants when Christ requires it.
He is willing to spend and be spont for their sakes: It is them and not theirs
that he desires. He fears the unbelief and hard heartedness of his hearers,
and lest they should reject their own Salvation, more than all the slanders or
persecutions of the Enemies. In a word; his heart, his study, his life and
business is to do all the good he can; And they that under such a Ministry
remain impenitent and hardened in sin, are the most hopeless, miserable people
in the world.

V. And it greatly conduces to public good, to keep up true order and
Christian discipline in the particular Churches: Tho Popish Church-Tyrants have
turned the Church Keys into a Military Reigning, or revenging Sword, yet
Christ did not in vain commit them into his Ministers hands. Religion seldom
prospers well, where the Church is no enclosure, but a Common; where all
sorts undistinguished meet. Where, as the people know not who shall be made
their Pastors, but must trust their Souls to the care of any that a Patron
chooses; so the Pastor knows not who are his Communicating flock, till he
sees them come to the Lords Table, no, nor when he sees them. When it goes
for a sufficient excuse to the Pastors if the rabble of wicked men Communicate,
or pass for his Churchmembers, tho they Communicate not, if he can but say, I
knew them not to be wicked; (and how should he, when he knew them not at all?)
And that none accused them, when they are meet strangers to each other. In
Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but a
New Creature, and Faith that works by love. And if Christ made his Servants
no better than the world, who would believe, that he is the Savior of the
World? There will be some Tares in Christ's field, till his judgment cast them
out for ever. But if it be not a Society professing Holiness, and disowning
Unholiness, and making a difference between the clean and the unclean, him that
swears and him that fears an Oath, him that serves God and him that
serves him not; Christ will disown them as workers of iniquity, tho they had
eat and drunk with him, and done Miracles in his name, Mat. 7. Much more if it
be a Society where Godliness is despised, and the most Godly excommunicated, if
they differ but in a formality or ceremony from Diotrephes; and the wicked
rabble tolerated and cherished in reviling serious godliness, on pretense of
opposing such Dissenters. Christ will not own that Pastor nor Society, which
owneth not Conscience and serious Piety.

If the Pastors set up their Wills and Traditions before the Laws and Will of
Christ, and call out, who is on our side, instead of who is on Christ's side,
and fall out with the Sheep and worry and scatter them, and cherish the Goats,
and tolerate the Wolves, woe to those Shepherds when Christ shall judge them:
I wonder not if such incline to infidelity, tho they live by the name and image
of Christianity; and if they be loath to believe that there will such a day of
judgment be, which they have so much cause to fear.

But the prudent loving guidance of faithful Pastors is so necessary to the
Church, that without it there will be envy and strife, confusion and every evil
work: and a headless multitude, tho otherwise well meaning pious people, will
be all wise, and all Teachers, till they have no wise Teachers left, and will
crumble all into dissolution, or into shameful Sects: St. Paul told us of two
games that Satan has to play, Acts 20. One by grievous Wolves, that shall
devour the Flock (tho in Sheeps clothing, yet known by their bloody jaws.)
The other by Men from among your selves, who shall speak perverse things, to
draw Disciples after them.

VI. If you would promote the good of all or many, promote the Love and Concord
of all that deserve to be called Christians.

To which end you must 1. Know who those are, and 2. Skilfully and faithfully
endeavor it.

1. Far be it from any Christian to think that Christ has not so much as told
us what Christianity is, and who they be that we must take for Christians, when
he has commanded them all so earnestly to love each other. Is not Baptism our
Christening? Every one that has entered into that Covenant with Christ, and
understandingly and seriously professes to stand to it, and is not proved by
inconsistent words or deeds to nullify that profession, is to be taken for a
Christian, and used in love and Communion as such.

Consider of these words, and consider whether all Churches have walked by this
Rule, and whether swerving from it have not been the cause of corruption and
confusion.

He is a Christian fit for our Communion, who is baptized in infancy, and
owneth it solemnly at age. And so is he that was not baptized, 'til he himself
believed.

He is a Christian that beleiveth Christ to be true God and true Man in one
Person, and trusts him as our only Redeemer by his Merits and Passion, and
our Mediator in the Heavens, and obeys him as our Soveragin Lord, for pardon,
for his Spirit and for Salvation. And as a Christian this man is to be loved
and used, tho he have not so much skill in Metaphysics, as to know whether it
be a proper speech to call Mary the Mother of God, or that one of the Trinity
was crucified, or to know in what sense Christ's Natures might be called One or
Two, and in what sense he might be said to have One Will or Two Wills, One
Operation or Two: And know not whether the tria Capitula were to be condemned;
yea tho he could not define, or clearly tell what Hypostasis, persona, yea, or
substantia signifies in God; nor tell whether God of Gods be a proper Speech.

This Man is a Christian, tho he know not whether Patriarchal, and
Metropolitical, and Diocesane Church forms, be according to the Will of Christ
or against it; and whether symbolical signs in the Worship of God, may lawfully
be devised and imposed by Men, and whether some doubtful words in Oaths and
Subscriptions of Men's imposing, being unnecessary, be lawful, and how far he
may by them incur the guilt of perjury or deliberate lying: And tho he think
that a Minister may preach and pray in fit words of his own, tho he read not a
Sermon or prayer written for him by others, who think that no words but theirs
should be offered to God or Man.

2. If Christ's description of a Christian be forsaken, and mere Christianity
seem not a sufficient qualification for our Love and Concord, men will never
know where to rest; nor ever agree in any ones determination (but Christ's:) All
men that can get power will be making their own Wills the Rule and Law, and
others will not think of them as they do; and the variety of fallible mutable
Church Laws, and terms of Concord will be the Engine of perpetual discord; (as
Ulpian told honest Alexander Severus the Laws would be, which he thought to
have made for sober Concord in fashions of Apparel,) Those that are united to
Christ by faith, and have his sanctifying Spirit, and are justified by him, and
shall dwell with him in Heaven, are certainly Christians, and such as Christ
has commanded us to love as our selves. And seeing that it is his Livery by
which his Disciples must be known by loving one another, and the false Prophets
must be known by the fruits of their hurtfulness, as Wolves, Thorns and
Thistles, I must profess, tho Order and Government have been so amiable to me,
as to tempt me to favorable thoughts of some Roman power in the Church, I am
utterly unreconcilable to it, when I see that the very complexion of that
Hierarchy is malice and bloodiness against Men most seriously and humbly pious,
that dare not obey them in their sinful usurpations, and that their cause is
maintained, by belying, hateing and Murdering true Christians.

And on the other side, too many make Laws of Love and Communion to themselves,
and confine Christ's Church with their little various and perhaps erroneous
Sects. And all others they Love with pity, but only those of their Cabin and
singular opinions, they love with complacency and communion; those that condemn
such as Christ justifies, and say that Christians are not his, are near of kin
to one another, tho one sort show it by Persecution, and the other but by
Excommunication or Schismatical separation. We are all one in Christ Jesus Gal.
4. 28. And therefore I advise all Christians to hate the causes and ways of
hatred, and Love all the causes and means of Love. Frown on them that so extol
their singular sentiments, as to backbite others, and speak evil of what they
understand not: Especially such as the Pamphleters of this Age, whose design is
weekly and daily to fight against Christian Love, and to stir up all men to the
utmost of their power, to think odiously of one another, and plainly to stir up
a thirst after blood: Never did Satan Write by the hand of man, if he do it not
by such as these: The Lord of Love and Mercy rebuke them.

And take heed of them that can find enough in the best that are against their
way, to prove them dishonest, if not intolerable; and can see the Mote of a
Ceremony, or Nonconformity to a Ceremony, in their Brothers Eye, and not the
Beam of Malice or Cruelty in their own. Take heed of those that are either for
confounding Toleration of all, or for dissipating cruelty on pretense of Unity.

That Land or Church shall never truly prosper, where these three sorts are not
well distinguished: 1. The Approved that are to be encouraged: 2. The Tolerable
that are to be patiently and lovingly endured: 3. The Intolerable that are to
be restrained. They may as well confound Men, and Beasts, Wise Men and Mad Men,
Adult and Infants, as confound these three sorts, in reference to Religion.

I add this Note to prevent Objections, that tho meekness and gentleness
promote peace, yet to speak sharply and hatefully of hatred, un peaceableness
and cruelty, and all that tends to destroy Love, is an act of Love, and not of
an uncharitable, unpeaceable man.

VII. If you love the common good of England, do your best to keep up sound and
serious Religion in the public Parish Churches and be not guilty of any thing
that shall bring the chief interest of Religion, into private Assemblies of men
only tolerated, if you can avoid it.

Indeed in a time of Plagues Epidemical infection, tolerated Churches may be
the best preservatives of Religion, as it was in the first 300 years, and in
the Arrians Reign, and under Popery: But where sound and serious Religion is
owned by the Magistrate, tolerated Churches are but as Hospitals for the sick,
and must not be the receptacle of all the healthful. And doubtless, if the
Papists can but get the Protestant interest once into prohibited or tolerated
Conventicles (as they will call them) they have more than half overcome it, and
will not doubt to use it next as they do in France, and by one turn more to
cast it out. The countenance of Authority will go far with the Vulgar, against
all the scruples that men of Conscience stick at, and they will mostly go to
the allowed Churches, whoever is there. Let us therefore lose no possession
that we can justly get, nor be guilty of disgracing the honest Conformists, but
do all we can to keep up their Reputation, for the good of Souls: They see not
matters of difference through the same Glass that we do. They think us
unwarrantably scrupulous. We think the matter of their Sin to be very great:
But we know that before God the degree of guilt, is much according to the
degree of men's negligence or unwillingness to know the Truth, or to obey it:
And prejudice, education, and converse makes great difference on men's
apprehensions: Charity must not reconcile us to sin, but there is no end of
uncharitable censuring each other.

It has made me admire to hear some men's words against Comprehension, as they
call it, that they would not have Rulers, revoke that which they judge to be
heinous sin in their impositions, unless they will revoke all that they think
unlawful, lest it should strengthen the Parish Churches, and weaken the
tolerated or suffering part: I will not here open the sin of this policy as it
deserves; But I wish them to Read a small book called, The whole Duty of
Nations (said to be Mr. Thomas Beverleys.)

VIII. If you love the common good, take heed lest any injuries tempt you into
sedition or unlawful Wars; No man, that never tried them, can easily believe
what an Enemy Wars and Tumults are to Religion, and to common honesty and
sobriety. Men are there so serious about their Lives and Bodily safety that
they have no room or time for serious Worshipping of God; The Lords day is by
necessity made a common day; And all men's Goods are almost common to the will
of Soldiers; Either Power seems to authorize them, or necessity to allow them,
to use the Goods of others as their own; as if they were incapable of doing
wrong: It is their honor that can kill most: and how little place there is for
Love it is easy to conceive.

I doubt not but it is lawful to fight for our King or Country in a good Cause.
As Nature gives all private men a right of private self-defence (and no more),
so the same Law of Nature, which is Gods Law, gives all Nations a Right of
public self-defence, against its public enemies; that is, against any that by
his Religion, or his own profession binds himself to destroy that Nation if
he can, or by open arms, seeks no less than their destruction: But as few
calamities are worse to a Land than War, so much is to be endured to prevent
it. It is like a red hot Iron, which Fools lay hold on, thinking it is cold,
till it fetch off skin and flesh to the bones, and perhaps set the house on
fire. If your Cause be bad, God will not be for you: and he that so takes the
Sword shall perish with the Sword; and if you bite and devour one another, you
shall be devoured one of another. And alas thousands of the innocent usually
perish or are ruined in the flames, which furious men do kindle: No doubt as
suffering a Prison, so venturing in War is a duty when God calls you to it; But
in its self a Prison is a far more desirable sort of suffering than a War.
Therefore between the danger of the miseries of an unlawful War, and the danger
of betraying our King or Kingdom, for want of necessary defense, how cautelous
should all sober Christians be?

IX. If you would promote the common good, do your best to procure wise and
faithful Rulers.

Quest. What can private men do in this?

Ans. 1. In Cases where they have choosing Voices, they ought to prefer the
best with greatest resolution, and not for slothfulness to omit their part, nor
for worldly interest or the fear of men betray their Country, as ever they
would escape the punishment of the perfidious. Woe to that Judas that sells his
Country and Conscience for any bribe, or by self-saving fear.

2. In other Cases where you have no Choosing Vote with men, you have a praying
Voice with God: Pray for Kings and all in Authority, that we may live a quiet
and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. God has commanded no duty in
vain: Do it earnestly and constantly, and hope for a good issue from God: Do it
not selfishly that you may have prosperity or preferment by them, but sincerely
for their own and the Common good: God is the Fountain of power, the absolute
Sovereign of all the world. Men are but his Provincial officers, none claims
an universal Government of the world, but one that pretends to be Christ's
Vicar General, and none believe his claim but blinded men. There is no power
but of and under God, who has made Rulers his Ministers for our good, to be a
praise to them that do well, and a terror to evil doers; that they that will
not be moved with the hopes of Gods future rewards, and the fears of his
punishments, may be moved by that which is near them within the reach of sense.
And all men regard their bodies, tho only believers are ruled by the
everlasting interest of their Souls.

Therefore pray hard for Kings and Magistrates. For if they be good they are
exceeding great blessings to the world. They will remember that their power is
for God and the Common Good, and that to God they must give a strict account:
They will take Gods Law for the only Universal Law to the world, and conform
their own as Bylaws to it. They will take their own interest to consist in
pleasing God and promoting the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ; and the piety and
saving of Men's Souls. They will be Examples of serious Godliness, of Justice
and sobriety, trustiness and temperance and Chastity to their subjects; in
their eyes a vile person will be contemned, but they will honor those that
fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4. They will Love those most that Love Christ best,
and most deligently obey him, and tenderly fear to sin against him: Those
please them best that please God best, and are most useful to the common good:
They will set their hearts on the peoples welfare, and are watching for all,
while all securely live under their vigilance. They will cherish all that
Christ cherishes, and specially the faithful Pastors of the Churches, that
seek not the world, but the welfare of the flocks: When some are saying, In
this Mountain we must worship God, and some at Jerusalem, they will teach them
all to worship God in Spirit and truth: When Pastors and people grow pievish
and quarrelsome for their several interests, opinions and wills, a Constantine
will cast all their Libels into the fire, and rebuke the unpeaceable, and
restreine the violent, and teach them to forgive and love each other, and will
be the great Justice of Peace to all the Churches in the Land, and pare their
nails that would tear and scratch their Brethren: He will Countenance the
sound and peaceable, and tolerate all the tolerable; but will tie the hands of
strikers, and the tongues of revilers: He will contrive the healing of
exasperated minds, and take away the occasions of division, and rebuke them
that call for fire from Heaven, or for the Sword to do that which belongs to
the word, or to execute their pride and wrath: Godliness will have all the
encouragement they can giveit, and innocence a full defense: Malignity and
Persecution and Perjury, and unpeaceable revenge, will be hateful where they
rule; and they had rather men feared sin too much than too little; and would
have all men prefer the Law and honor of God to theirs; where the Righteous
bear rule, the people rejoice. The wisdom, piety, and impartiality of their
Governors suppresseth profaneness, oppression, and contention, and keeps
men in the way of love and peace; and as the welfare of all is the care of such
a Ruler above his own pleasure, wealth, or will, so he will have the hearts,
and hands, and wealth of all with readiness to serve him: No wonder if such are
called Nursing Fathers, and the light of our eyes, and the breath of our
Nostrils, and the shadow of a rock in a weary Land. As they bear the Image of
Gods Supereminency, and doubly honor him, they are doubly honored by him; so
that the names of pious Princes show not only the sense of Mankind, but the
special providence of God in making the memory of the Just to be blessed: And
as they could not endure to see in their days, ungodliness triumph, or serious
godliness made a scorn, or Conscience and fear of sinning made a disgrace, or
the Gospel hindered and faithful Ministers forbid to preach it; so God will not
suffer their Consciences to want the sense of his Love, nor their departing
Souls to fail of their everlasting hopes, nor their memories to be clouded by
obscurity or reproach. Even among Heathens; What a name have those Emperors
left behind them, who lived in justice, charity, and all virtue, and wholly
studied the good of all? What a wonder is it that M. Antonine should be so
extolled by so many Writers, and not one of them all, that I remember, speak
one word of evil of him; save that a small and short persecution of the
Christians was made by some in his time, till he restrained it? And all the
people almost deified him, and would have perpetuated his Line and Name in the
Throne, but that the horrid wickedness of his Posterity forced them to a
change. What a name has excellent Alexander Severus left behind him? And what
a blessing have wise and godly and peacemaking Christian Princes been in diverse
ages to the world?

And both the inferior Magistrates and the Clergy usually much conform
themselves, at least in outward behavior to their example: For they will
choose men of wisdom, Conscience and Justice under them, to judge and govern.
The Bishops and Pastors which they choose, will be able, Godly, laborious men;
not seekers of worldly wealth and Honor; not envious silencers of faithful
Preachers, nor jealous hinderers of Religious duties, nor flattering
man-pleasers, nor such as Lord it over Gods heritage; but such as rule not by
constraint, but willingly, as Examples of Love and piety to the flock. Pray
hard therefore for Kings, and all in Authority, and honor all such, as
unspeakable blessings for the good of all.

But on the contrary, wicked Rulers will be Satan's Captains against Jesus
Christ, and Men's Sanctification and Salvation. They will be Wolves in the place
of Shepherds, and will study to destroy the best of the people, and to root out
all serious Godliness, and Justice: Conscience and fearing sin will be to them
a suspected, yea a hated thing: If any abuse it, it serves them for a pretense
against it. They take the peoples welfare and their own interest to be enemies,
and presently look on these whom they should rule and cherish, as the
adversaries whom they must tread down: They will purposely make Edicts and Laws
that are contrary to Gods Law, that they may have advantage to persecute the
faithful, and to destroy them as disobedient: They will study to conquer
Conscience and obedience to God, lest his Authority should be regarded above
theirs; and Christ is used by them as if he were a Usurper, and not their
Sovereign, but were again to be taken for an enemy to Caesar; and their hatred
to true Ministers will be such as Paul's accusers intimate, who said, he
Preached another King, one Jesus: Wicked Rulers will be the Capital Enemies to
all that will be enemies to wickedness, and resolved to please God and save
their Souls: They will not be obeyed under God, but before him; nor served by
the faithful Servants of Christ; nor pleased, but at the rate of men's damnation
by displeasing God. All men love their like. The worst men, if flatterers, will
seem the best to them, and the best the worst and most intolerable. And Church
and State is like to be Written by their Copy. O what dreadful Plagues, have
wicked Rulers been to the world, and what a dismal case do they continue the
Earth in to this day! Not but that People, and especially Priests, do
contribute hereto: But the chief Authors are men in greatest power. Five parts
of six of the World at this day are Heathens and Infidels: And what is the
Cause? Rulers will not suffer the Gospel to be Preached to them. The Eastern
Christians were all torn in pieces by the wickedness and contention of the
Governors of the State and Church; banishing and murdering one another; so
that when the Turks invaded them, the promise of Liberty to exercise their
Religion tempted them to make the less resistance, thinking they could not be
much worse than before: But the Vulgar are so apt to follow the Rulers, that
ever since, the most of the Easterns are apostatized from Christ, and turned to
Mahometanism; And tho in those Countries where the Turk allows the Christian
people to have Governors of their own, Religion somewhat prospers, yet where
that privilege is denied them, and Turks only are their Rulers, it withers
away and comes to almost nothing.

And what keeps out Reformation that is, the Primitive simple Christianity,
from the Popish Countries that have Religion corrupted by humane superfluities,
but the seduction of Priests and the Tyranny of Rulers, that will not endure
the Preaching of the Gospel, and the opening of the Scriptures to the people in
a known Tongue? How much holy blood have Roman and Spanish Inquisitors, and
French and Irish Murderers, and most other Popish Rulers to Answer for? Even
Walsh the Papist in his Irish History tells us all, out of Ketin and others,
how commonly in Ages they lived there in the Sin of bloody Wars and Murders,
yea, even when they professed greatest holiness. Wicked Rulers are as the Pikes
in the Pond, which live by devouring all about them. It is Satan's main design
in the world to corrupt Gods two great Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry,
and turn them both against Christ's Kingdom, and to destroy Christians in
Christ's Name; Oh therefore! pray hard that all Christian Nations may have good
Rulers, and be very thankful to God for such.

X. And if you would be instruments of public Good, know what are public sins
and dangers, that you may do your part against them; and join not with any that
will promise never to endeavor any reforming alteration, The chiefest are
Ignorance, Pride, and Self-willedness in Teachers and People, malignant enmity
to goodness, impatience with the infirmities of good men; judging of persons
and things by self-interest, covetousness, sensuality, and taking Christianity
but as the Religion of the Land, without diligent Study to be rooted in the
Truth. And the scandals of Hypocrites and tempted Christians, hardening the
enemies, especially by divisions and public temerities and miscarriages, is
not the least.

XI. I would also in order to public good, persuade serious Christians to be
more zealous in Communication with their Neighbors, and live not
over-strangely to others, and say not as Cain, Am I my Brothers keeper? Be kind
and loving to all about you, and live not as unknown men to them; nor alienate
them by sourness, contempt or needless singularity; But become all things
lawful to all men to save some; Lend them good books, and draw them to hear
Gods faithful Ministers: Persuade them to pray in their Families, even with a
Form or Book, till they need it not.

XII. Lastly, if you would do good, be such as you would have others be, and
teach them by Examples, of Piety, Charity, Patience, Self-denial, Forbearing
and Forgiving; And not by mere words contradicted by your lives. These are the
materials by which you must do good to all.

VI. What now remains, but that we all set our selves to such a fruitful
Course of life? I greatly rejoice in the Grace of God, which I daily see in
many such of my familiar acquaintance: who study to do good to all, and to live
in Love and Peace, and Holiness, by example and by self-denial and constant
Charity, using Christ's Talents to their Masters ends, for the temporal and
eternal good of many. But alas! too many live as if it were enough to do no
harm, and say as the slothful Servant, here is thy Talent which I hid.

And some there be that in a blind jealousy of the Doctrine of Justication
(not understanding what the Word Justification signifies) Cry down even the
words of James, as if they were unreconcileable with Paul's, and can scarce bear
him that says as Christ, Mat. 12. By thy words thou shall be Justified, and by
thy words thou shall be Condemned; As if they had never read, well done good
and faithful Servant, etc. for I was an hungry and ye fed me, etc. Nor Heb. 5.
9. He is the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him; or Heb. 13.
With such Sacrifice God is well pleased, or he that does righteosness is
righteous, or that we shall be judged according to our works, or Rev. 22. 14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments that they may have right to the tree
of Life, and may enter in by the Gates into the City: Or Gal. 6. What a man
sows that shall he reap: He that sows to the Spirit, of the Spirit shall
reap Everlasting Life: With many such.

No man well in his Wits can think that any thing we do can merits of God in
commutative justice, as if he received any thing from us: This were even to
deny God to be God. But are we not undera law of Grace, and does not that Law
command us obedience and the improvement of our Talents in doing good? And
shall we not be judged by that Law? And what is Judging but Justifying or
Condemning? No works of ours can stand the trial, by the Law of Innocence or
Works, but only the perfect righteousness of Christ: But he that is accused of
final impenitency, Infidelity, Hypocrisy or unholyness, if truly accused,
shall never be justified; and if falsely, must be justified against that charge
by somewhat besides what is done out of him by Jesus Christ.

It is an easier thing to be zealous for an opinion (which is sound or supposed
such) about works and grace, than to be zealous of good works, or zealously
desirous of grace. How sad use did Satan make of men's zeal for Orthodox words,
when the Nestorian, Eutychian and Monothelite Controversies were in agitation?
He went for a hollow hearted Neuter, that did not hereticate one side or other:
And I would that factious ignorant zeal were not still alive in the Churches.
How many have we heard on one side, reviling Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians,
Episcopal, Presbyterians, Independents, etc. To render them odious that never
understand the true state of the difference? And how fiercely do some Papists
and others cry down Solifidians, and persuade men that we are Enemies to good
works, or think that they are not necessary to Salvation (because some rashly
maintained, that in a faction against George Major long ago) or at least that
they are no further necessary; but as signs to prove that which God knows
without them? And on the other side how many make themselves and others believe
that the true expositors of Saint James's words are almost Papists, and teach
men dangerously to trust to works for their Justification, while they
understand not what either of the Apostles mean by Justification, Faith or
Works. Many so carefully avoid trusting to good works, that they have none or
few to trust to. No doubt, nothing of man must be trusted to for the least part
that belongs to Christ: But all duty and means must be both used and trusted
for its own part.

Consider well these following motives, and you will see why all Christians
must be zealous of doing all the good they can.

1. It renders a man likest to God, to be good, and to do good: On which
account Christ requires it even toward our enemies, Mat. 5. That we may be
perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect, who does good even to the unjust:
And he that is likest God is the best man, most holy and most happy, and shall
have most Communion with God.

2. And when Christ came down in flesh to call man home by making God better
known to the world, he reveals him in his attractive goodness, and that was
by his own beneficence to Man: He came to do the greatest good; to be the
Savior of the world, and to reconcile revolted man to God, and all his life,
yea his death and his Heavenly intercession, is doing good to those that were
Gods Enemies. And to learn of Christ, and imitate his example, is to be his
true Disciples. And what else do his Laws Command us? They are all holy, just
and good; and our goodness is to love them and obey them. By keeping these we
must show that we are his Disciples. When he tells you who you must do good to
in the instance of the Samaritan, he adds, go thou and do likewise, Joh. 15.
He largely tells us of what importance it is for every branch that is planted
into him, to bring forth fruit.

3. It is much of the end of all the Sanctifying operations of theholy Spirit.
Grace is given us to use. Even natural powers are given us for action. What the
better were man for a Tongue, or hands or feet, if he should never use them?
Life is a principle of action. It were as good have no Life, as not to use it:
And why does God make men good, but that they may do good, even in their duty
to God, themselves, and one another?

4. It is Gods great mercy to mankind that he will use us all in doing good to
one another; And its a great part of his wise Government of the world, that in
societies men should be tied to it, by the sense of every particular man's
necessity; And it is a great honor to those that he makes his Almoners, or
Servants to convey his gifts to others; God bids you give nothing but what is
his, and no otherwise your own than as his Stewards. Its his bounty and your
service or Stewardship which is to be exercised. He could have done good to all
men by himself alone, without you or any other, if he would: But he will honor
his Servants to be the Messengers of his bounty. You best please him when you
readily receive his gifts your selves, and most fully Communicate them to
others: To do good is to receive good: And yet he will reward such for doing
and receiv.

5. Self-love therefore should persuade men to do good to all. You are not the
least gainers by it your selves. If you can trust Christ, sure you will think
this profitable Usury: Is not a Cup of cold Water well paid for, when Christ
performs his promise? And is it not a gainful loss, which is rewarded in this
Life an hundred fold, and in the world to Come with Life Eternal?

Those that live in the fullest exercise of Love, and doing good, are usually
most loved, and many are ready to do good to them. And this Exercise increases
all fruitful Graces. And there is a present delight in doing good, which is it
self a great reward. The Love of others makes it delightful to us: And the
pleasing of God, and the imitation of Christ, and the Testimony of Conscience
make it delightful. An honest Physician is far gladder to save men's lives or
health, than to get their Money. And an honest Soldier is gladder to save his
Country than to get his pay. Every honest Minister of Christ, is far gladder to
win Souls than to get Money or Preferment. The believing giver has more
pleasure than the receiver; And this without any conceit of commutative
meriting of God, or any false trust to works for Justification.

6. Stewards must give account of all: What would you wish were the matter of
your true account, if death or judgment were to morrow? Would you not wish you
had done all the good you could? Do you believe that all shall be Judged
according to their Works? Did you ever well study that great prediction of
Christ? Matthew. 25.

And it is some part of a reward on Earth that men that do much good,
especially that to whole Nations, are usualy honored by Posterity, however
they be rewarded by the present Age.

7. Every true Christian is absolutely devoted to do good. What else is it to
be devoted to God our Creator and Redeemer? Wha^ live we for, or what should we
desire to live for, but to do good?

II. But this Exhortation is especially applicable to them that have special
opportunity.

1. Magistrates are the Capitals in the Societies and Public Affairs of
mankind. They are placed highest that they may have an universal influence. Tho
it be too high a word to call them Gods, or Gods Vicegerents (unless secundum
quid) yet they are his Officers and Regent Ministers; but it is for the common
good. In them God shows what Order can do in the Government of the World: As
the placing of the same figure before many, does accordingly advance its value
in signification, so it is a wonder to Note, what the Place of one man
fignifieth at the Head of an Army, of a City, of a Kingdom. They are appointed
by God to govern men in a just subordination to Gods Government, and no
otherwise. To promote obedience to Gods Laws by theirs, and by their Judgment
and Execution to give men a foretaste, what they may at last expect from God.
And by their Rewards and Punishments to foretell men whom God will Reward and
Punish: And by their own Examples to show the Subjects, how temperately, and
soberly, and godly, God would have them live. Atheists can see and fear a
Magistrate, that fear not God, because they know him not.

They that prefer those as the most worthy of honor, whom God abhors for
their wickedness, and hate and oppress those whom God will honor, do show
themselves Enemies to him that gives them all their power: And they that by
countenance or practice do teach men to despise the fear of God, and to make
light of Drunkenness, Whoredom, Lying, Perjury and such like odious Crimes, do
in a sort blaspheme God himself, as if he who exalted them were a lover of Sin,
and a hater of his own Laws and Service. There are few Rulers that are
unwilling of Power, or to be accounted Great: And do they not know that its a
Power to do Good, that God has given them? And that Obligation to do it, is as
essential to their Office as Authority? And that they who govern as the
Officers of God, and pretend to be liker him in Greatness, than their Subjects,
must also be liker to him in Wisdom and Goodness?

Woe to that man who abuses and oppresses the Just and Faithful in the Name of
God, and by pretense of Authority from him to do it. Woe to him that in Gods
Name, and as by his Authority countenanceth the wicked whom God abhors, and
under Christ's banner fights against him. As Christ says of the Offensive: It
were good for that man, that he had never been born, Prove. 24. 24. He that
says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people Curse; Nations
shall abhor him, Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord.

God looks for great service from great men: Great Trust and Talents must
have great account: A Prince, a Lord, a Ruler, must do much more good, in
promoting Piety, Conscience, Virtue, than the best inferiors; To whom men give
much, from them they expect the more. It greatly concerns such men seriously
to ask their Conscience, can I do no more to encourage Godliness, Conscience
and Justice, and to disgrace Malignity, brutish sensuality, and fleshly lusts,
than I have done? O when they must hear, give account of thy Stewardship, thou
shall be no longer Steward, little think many Rulers what an account it is that
will be required of them! O what a deal of good may the Rulers of the earth, do
if instead of overminding their partial Interests, and serving the desires of
the flesh, they did but set themselves with study and resolution to promote the
common good, by disgraceing sin, and encouraging Wisdom, Piety and Peace! And
where this is not sincerely done, as surely as there is a righteous God and a
future Judgment, they shall pay for their omissive treachery. And if Satan do
prevail to set his own Captains over the Armies of the Lord, to betray them to
perdition, they shall be deepest in misery as they were in guilt. One would
think the great delight that is to be found in doing good to all, should much
more draw men to desire Authority and greatness, than either riches, or
voluptuousness, or a dominering desire that all men should fulfill their Wills.

II. The Ministers of Christ also have the next opportunity to do good to many:
And it is a debt which by many and great obligations they owe to Christ and
men. But it will not be done without labor and condescension and unwearied
patience. It is undertaken by all that are ordained to this office, but O that
it were performed faithfully by all! What a doleful life would the persidious
Soul-betrayers live, if they knew what a guilt they have to answer for? Even
the contempt of the peoples Souls, and of the blood of Christ that purchased
them? O hear that vehement adjuration, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his
appearing and Kingdom, Preach the word: Be instant, in season and out of
season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and Doctrine. Speak
with holy studied skill; speak with Love and melting Pity: Speak with
importunity: Take no denial: Speak as Saint Paul, Act. 20. Publicly and from
house to house: Speak before you are silenced in the dust: Speak before death
have taken away your hearers. It is for Souls, it is for Christ, it is for your
Selves too: While you have opportunity, do good to all. But of this, I have
formerly said more in my Reformed Pastor.

III. And let all men take their common and special opportunities to do good:
Time will not stay; your Selves, your Wives, your Children, your Servants, your
Neighbors are posting to another world: Speak now what you would have them
hear: Do them now all the good you can. It must be now or never. There is no
returning from the dead to warn them: O Live not as those Infidels, who think
it enough to do no harm, and to serve their carnal minds with pleasure, as born
for nothing, but a decent and delightful Life on Earth. You are all in the
Vineyard or Harvest of the Lord: work while it is day: the night is at hand
when none can work: Woe to the slothful treacherous Hypocrite when the Judgment
comes.

Stay not till you are entreated to do good: Study it, and seek it. Give while
there are men that need, and while you have it, especially to the Household of
Faith. Fire and Thieves may deprive you of it. At the furthest death will
quickly do it. Happy are they that know their day, and trusting in Christ do
study to serve him in doing good to all.

And the Doctrine in hand does further teach us some consectaries which all do
not well consider.

I. That living chiefly to the flesh in worldly prosperity, and dropping now
and then some small good on the by, to quiet Conscience, is the property of an
Hypocrite. But to sound Christians, fruitfulness in doing good is the very
trade of their lives, of which they are zealous, and which they daily study.

II. That all Christians should be very careful to avoid the doing public
hurt: It wounds Conscience to be guilty of wronging of any one man: We find
it in dying men, that cannot die in peace till they have confessed wrongs and
made satisfaction, and ask forgiveness. And who knows, but the many
Apparitions that have certainly been on such occasions, may be done by
miserable Souls, to seek some ease of the torment of their own Consciences? But
to hurt many, even whole Parishes, Cities, Churches, Kingdoms, how much more
grievous will it prove? And yet alas! how quickly may it be done, and how
ordinarily is it done? What grievous mischief may even well meaning men do, by
one mistaken practice or rash act? by the fierce promoting of one error? By
letting loose one passion, or carnal affection? By venturing once on secret
sin: Yea, by one rash sinful word? How much more if they are drawn and set in
an unlawful interest and way? And little know we when a spark is kindled how it
will end? Or how many ways Satan has to improve it? And one hurtful action,
or unwarrantable way, may blast abundance of excellent endowments, and make
such a grievous damage to the Church, who else might have been an eminent
blessing. And if good men may do so much hurt, what have the Enemies of
godliness to answer for, who by wordliness and malignity, are Corrupters,
dividers and destroyers?

III. The Text plainly intimates that it is a great Crime in them, that
instead of doing good while they have opportunity, think it enough to leave it
by Will to their Executors to do it. When they have lived to the flesh, and
cannot take it with them, they think it enough to leave others to do that good,
which they had not a heart to do themselves: But a treasure must be laid up in
heaven beforehand, and not be left to be sent after, Matthew. 6. 20, 21. And he
that will make friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, must now be rich
toward God, Luke 12. 21. Its no Victory over the World, to leave it when you
cannot keep it: Nor will any Legacy purchase Heaven for an unholy worldly soul.

IV. Yet they that will do good neither Living nor Dying are worst of all.
Surely the last Acts of our Lives, if possible, should be the best; And as we
must live in health, so also in sickness, and to the last in doing all the good
we can; and therefore it must needs be a great sin, to leave our Estates to
those that are like to do hurt with them, or to do no good, so far as we are
the free disposers of them.

The Case, I confess is not without considerable difficulties, how much a man
is bound to leave to his Children, or his nearest Kindred, when some of them
are disposed to live unprofitably, and some to live ungodlily and hurtfully.
Some think men are bound to leave them nothing, some think they ought to leave
them almost all: And some think that they should leave them only so much as may
find them tolerable food and raiment. I shall do my best to decide the case in
several propositions.

1. The Case is not with us as it was with the Israelites, who might not
alienate their Inheritances from the Tribes. Yet even they had power to prefer
a younger Son, that was more deserving, before an Elder that was worse.

2. Where either Law or Contract have disabled a man to alienate his Estate
from an ungodly Heir, there is no room for a doubt what he must do.

3. Nature teaches all men to prefer a Child that is pious and hopeful, in his
provisions and Legacies before a stranger that is somewhat better, and not to
alienate his Estate for want of a higher degree of goodness.

4. When there is a just cause to disinherit an elder Son, a younger is to be
preferred before a Stranger; or a Kinsman if there be no tolerable Son.

5. And a Son that ought not to be trusted with Riches or a great Estate, yet
ought to have Food and Raiment; (unless he come to that State of obstinate
rebellion in sin, for which Gods Law commanded the Israelites to bring forth
their Sons to be put to death: In such Cases the house of Correction is fittest
for them.) Yet should he have such food as may humble him, and not to gratify
his lust.

6. If a man that has the full power to dispose of his Estate, real or
personal, have Sons and Kindred that according to the judgment of sound reason,
are like, if they had his Estate, to do mischief with it, or maintain them in a
wicked life, or in a mere unprofitable Life of idleness, living only to
themselves and fleshly ease and pleasure, That man ought to give his Estate
from such to some that are liker to do good with it, and to use it for God, and
the public benefit.

This is much contrary to the common course of most, that think no Estate too
great for their Heirs, nor any Portion too great for their Daughters, be they
what they will, or what use soever they are like to make of it: But these
following reasons prove it to be true.

1. Every man has his Estate from God, and for God, and is bound as his
Steward accordingly to use it. This is past doubt: And how does that man use it
for God, who leaves it to one that is liker to use it for the Devil in a
fleshly unprofitable Life? What account can such a Steward give? Did God give
it you to maintain idleness and sin?

Obj. O but it is a Son whom I am bound to provide for. Ans. Are you more bound
to your Son than to your Self? God does not allow you to spend it on your self,
to maintain Idleness and Vice, Romans 13. 13, 14. Make no provision for the flesh
to satisfy the lust (or will) thereof. And may you leave it for such a use as
is forbidden both your Son and You? It is God that is the owner of it, and it
is to him that you must both use and leave it: Whether you Eat or Drink or
whatever you do, do all to the Glory of God. And will you leave it to be the
fuel of lust, and sin?

Obj. I leave it not for sin: but if he misuse it, I cannot help it. Ans. Would
that excuse you if you put a Sword into a mad man's hand, to say, I cannot help
it if he use it ill? You might have helped it: Its supposed that you fore-knew
how he was like to use it.

Obj. But he may prove better hereafter, as some do. Ans. It is not bare
possibilities, that must guide a wise man's Actions when probability is against
them. Would you commit your Children to the care of a Mad man or a Knave,
because he may possibly come to his Wits, or become honest? Have you not long
tried him, and have you not endeavored to cure him of his Idleness, wickedness
or lust? If it be not done, what ground have you to presume it will be done
when you are dead? You may have so much hope as not utterly to despair of him:
But that will not allow you to trust him with that which God made you Steward
of, for his use and service.

But if such hopes may be gratified, give your estate in trust to some
Conscionable friend, with secret order to give it your Son or Kinsman, if he
become hereafter fit to use it, according to the ends for which God gives it.

Reas. 2. The Obligation in my Text of doing good to all, extends to the end
of our lives: And therefore to our last Will and Testament. Therefore you must
make your Wills so as may do good to all, and not to cherish sin and idleness.

Reas. 3. You are bound to your best to destroy sin and idleness, and therefore
not to feed and cherish it.

Reas. 4. Doing good is the very thing which you are Created, Redeemed and
Sanctified for; and therefore you must extend your endeavors to the uttermost
and to the last, that as much as may be, may be done when you are dead. If
Magistrates and Ministers took care for no longer than their own lives, what
would become of the State or Church?

Reas. 5. The Common good is better than the plenty of a sinful Child: Yea it
is to be preferred before the best Child, and before our selves. And therefore
much more before the worst.

Reas. 6. Its a dreadful thing to be guilty of all the fleshly sins, which your
ungodly Sons will commit with your estate; when they shall by it maintain the
sins of Sodom, Pride, Fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness: If not to
strengthen their hands for oppression or Persecution. To think that they will
spend their days in voluptuousness, because you gave them provision for the
flesh.

Reas. 7. It is cruelty to them that are already so bad, to make their
temptations to sin much stronger, and their place in Hell the worse, and to
make the way to Heaven as hard to them as for a Camel to go through the eye of
a needle: To prepare them to want a drop of water in Hell, who were clothed
richly and fared sumptuously on Earth. To entice them to say, Soul take thine
ease thou have enough laid up for many years, till they hear, Thou fool this
night shall they require thy Soul; to cherish that love of the world, which is
enmity to God, by feeding that lust of the flesh, and lust of the eyes, and
Pride of life, which are not of the Father but of the world.

Reas. 8. When this preferring unprofitable and ungodly Children before God and
the Common good, is so common and Reigning a sin in the world, it is a great
fault for Religious Men to encourage them in it, by their example, and to do as
they.

Reas. 9. It is a sin to cast away any of Gods gifts. When Christ had fed men
by a Miracle, he says, gather up the fragments that nothing be lost: If you
should cast your money into the Sea, it were a crime: But to leave it to such as
you foresee are most likely to use it sinfully, is more than casting it away.

If you saw men offer Sacrifice to Bacchus or Venus, you would abhor it. Do not
that which is so like it, as to leave bad men fuel for fleshly lust.

Reas. 10. It is the more dreadful, because it is dying in studied sin without
repentance. To put so much sin into ones Will, shows a full consent and leaves
no room and time to repent of it.

On all these accounts I advise all the Stewards of God, as they love him and
the public good and their own Souls, while they have opportunity, even to the
last breath, to do good to all, and to provide more for the common good than
for superfluities to any, and than for the maintaining ungodly Children in sin,
to the increase of their guilt and misery.

Indeed in the choice of a Calling, employment and condition of life, and place
for their Children, doing good should be preferred before their rising in the
world: And they that justly endeavor to raise their Families in wealth, honor
or power, should do it only; that they might do the more good. But it is Satan's
design to turn all Gods mercies to the cherishing of wickedness, and even the
Love of Parents to their Children to the poisoning of their Souls, the
strengthening of their snares, and the hinderance of their own and other men's
Salvation. But its shame and pity, that they who in Baptism devoted their
Children to God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, renounceing the world the
flesh and the Devil, as under the banner of the Cross, should labor all their
life, that impenitently at death they may leave all that they can get to such
as in all probability will use it in pride, fullness and idleness, for the
flesh, the world and the Devil, against him and his interest from whom they
received it, and to whom both they and all they had were once devoted.

When men are loath that their estates should remove from the Name and Family
(for which there may be just cause) I take it for the safest way, (as
aforesaid) to trust some (as men do their Children with Guardians) by the advice of Lawyers, to secure all from their unworthy heirs, for the next or
some other of the name and lineage that proves worthy.

There are many other good works by which some rich men may be very profitable
to the Commonwealth, such as setting all the poor on work, and building
Hospitals for the Impotent, etc. But these this City is happily acquainted with
already, and tho still there be much wanting, yet there is much done.

V. But one more I will presume to name only to you that are Merchants, (For I
am not one who have the ear of Princes who are more able), might not somewhat
more be done than yet is, to further the Gospel in your Factories, and in our
Plantations? Old Mr. Eliots with his helpers in New England have showed that
somewhat may be done, if others were as Charitable and zealous as they. The
Jesuits and Friars showed us in Congo, Japan, China and other Countries that
much might be done with care and diligence. Tho the Papal interest was a
corrupt end, and all the means that they used was not justifiable, when I read
of their hazards, unwearied labors, and success, I am none of those that would
deprive them of their deserved honor, but rather wish that we that have better
ends and principles might do better than they, and not come so far behind them
as we do (if half be true that Pet. Massoeus, and the Jesuits Epistles and
many other writers tell us of them.) I know that they had the advantage of
greater helps, from Kings and Pope and Prelates, and Colleges endued with
trained men and copious maintenance: But might not somewhat more be done by us,
than is yet done?

1. Is it not possible to send some able zealous Chaplains to those Factories
which are in the Countries of Infidels and Heathens? Such as thirst for the
Conversion of sinners, and the enlargment of the Church of Christ, and would
labor skilfully and diligently therein? Is it not possible to get some short
Christian books, which are fitted for that use, to be translated in such
languages that Infidels can read, and to distribute them among them? If it be
not possible also to send thither Religious Conscionable Factors, who would
further the work, the case of London is very sad.

II. Is it not possible, at least to help the poor ignorant Armenians, Greeks,
Moscovites, and other Christians, who have no Printing among them, nor much
Preaching or knowledge; and for want of Printing have very few Bibles, even for
their Churches or Ministers? Could nothing be done to get some Bibles,
Catechisms, and practical books printed in their own tongues and given among
them? I know there is difficulty in the way: But money and willingness and
diligence might do something.

III. Might not something be done in other Plantations as well as in
New England, toward the Conversion of the Natives there? Might not some
skilful zealous Preachers be sent thither, who would both promote serious piety
among those of the English that have too little of it, and might invite the
Americans to learn the Gospel, and teach our Planters how to behave themselves
Christianly toward them, to win them to Christ?

IV. Is it not possible to do more than has been done, to Convert the Blacks
that are our own slaves or servants to the Christian faith? Has not Mr.
Goodwin justly reprehended and lamented the neglect, yea and resistance of this
work in Barbados? and the like elsewhere? 1. Might not better Teachers be sent
thither for that use? 2. Is it not an odious crime of Christians to hinder the
Conversion of these Infidels, lest they lose their service by it, and to prefer
their gain before men's Souls? Is not this to sell Souls for a little money, as
Judas did his Lord? And whereas the Law manumits them from servitude when they
turn Christians, that it may invite them to Conversion, and this occasioneth
wicked Christians to hinder them from knowledge, were it not better move the
Government therefore to change that Law, so far as to allow these Covetous
Masters their service for a certain time, useing them as free Servants? 3. And
whereas they are allowed only the Lords day for their own labor, and some
honest Christians would willingly allow them some other time instead of it,
that they might spend the Lords day in Learning to know Christ and worship God,
but they dare not do it, lest their wicked Neighbors rise against them, for
giving their Slaves such an Example, might not the Governors be procured to
force the whole Plantation to it by a Law, even to allow their Infidel Servants
so much time on another day, and cause some to congregate them for instruction
on the Lords days? Why should those men be called Christians, or have any
Christian reputation, or privileges themselves, who think both Christianity
and Souls to be no more worth, than to be thus basely sold for the gain of men's
servilest labors? And what, tho the poor Infidels desire not their own
Conversion; Their need is the greater, and not the less.

VI. I conclude with this moveing inference: The great opposition that is made
against doing good by the Devil and his whole Army through all the world, and
their lamentable success, does call aloud to all true Christians to overdo
them. O what a Kingdom of Malignants has Satan doing mischief to men's Souls
and bodies through the Earth! Hating the Godly, oppressing the just, corrupting
doctrine, introducing Lies, turning Christ's laborers out of his Vineyard,
forbidding them to Preach in his name the saving word of life; hiding or
despising the Laws of Christ; and setting up their own Wills and Devises in
their stead; making dividing distracting Engines on pretense of Order,
Government and Unity: Murdering men's bodies, and ruining their Estates, and
slandering their names, on pretense of love to the Church and Souls;
encouraging Profaneness, Blasphemy, Perjury, Whoredom, and Scorning Conscience
and fear of sinning: What diligence does Satan use through the very Christian
Nations, to turn Christ's Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry against himself,
and to make his own Officers the most mischievous Enemies to his Truth and
Kingdom, and saving work? to tread down his Family and Spiritual worship, as if
it were by his own Authority and Commission? To Preach down Truth, and
Conscience, and real Godliness, as in Christ's own name, and fight against him
with his own word, and to teach the people to hate his servants, as if this
pleased the God of Love?

And alas! how dismal is their success? In the East the Church is hereby
destroyed by barbarous Mahometans; the remnants by their Prelates continued in
Sects, in great ignorance, and dead formality, reproaching and anathematizing
one another, and little hope appearing of recovery. In the West a dead Image of
Religion, and Unity, and Order, dressed up with a multitude of gawds, and set up
against the Life and Soul of Religion, Unity, and Order, and a War hereupon
maintained for their destruction, with sad success: So that usually the more
Zealous men are for the Papal and formal humane Image, the more zealously they
study the extirpation of Worshipping God in Spirit and Truth, and thirst after
the blood of the most serious Worshippers; and cry down them as intolerable
Enemies, who take their Baptism for an obliging Vow, and seriously endeavor to
perform it, and live in good earnest as Christianity binds them; and they
take it for an unsufferable Crime, to prefer Gods Authority before man's, and to
plead his Law against any thing that men command them. In a word, he is
unworthy to be accounted a Christian with them, who will be a Christian indeed,
and not despise the Laws of Christ; and unworthy to have the liberty and usage
of a man, that will not sin and damn his Soul: So much more cruel are they than
the Turkish Tyrants, who if they send to a man for his head, must be obeyed.

And is the Devil a better Master than Christ? and shall his work be done with
greater zeal and resolution? Will he give his Servants a better reward? Should
not all this awaken us to do Good with greater diligence than they do evil? and
to promote Love and Piety more earnestly than they do malignity and iniquity?
Is not saving Church, and State, Souls and Bodies, better worth resolution and
labor, than destroying them?

And the prognostics are encouraging: Certainly Christ and his Kingdom will
prevail: At last all his Enemies shall be made his footstool; yea, shall from
him receive their doom, to the everlasting punishment which rebels against
omnipotency, goodness and mercy do deserve. If God be not God, if Christ will
not conquer, if there be no life to come, let them boast of their success. But
when they are rottenness and dust, and their souls with Devils, and their names
are a reproach, Christ will be Christ, his promises and threatenings all made
good, 2 These. 1. 6. etc. He will judge it righteous to recompense tribulation to
your troublers, when he comes with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, to take
vengeance on rebels, and to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all true
Believers. And when that solemn Judgment shall pass on them that did Good, and
that did Evil, described Matthew. 25. with a [Come ye blessed inherit the
Kingdom] and [go ye Cursed into everlasting fire] doing Good and not doing it
(much more doing mischief) will be better distinguished than now they are, when
they are rendered as the reason of those different dooms.

FINIS.

