THE CURE OF Church-divisions: OR, Directions for weak Christians, to keep them
from being Dividers, or Troublers of the Church.

With some Directions to the Pastors, how to deal with such Christians.

By Richard Baxter.

Joh. 17. 21. That they all may be one, as thou, Father art in me and I in
thee: that they also may be one in us, that the World may believe that thou
have sent me. 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that
they may be One, even as we are One. 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be made Perfect in One; and that the world may know that thou have sent me,
and have Loved them, as thou have loved me.

1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment.

1 Cor. 3. 3. For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying and
strife and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?

London, Printed for Nevil Symmons at the three Crowns over against
Holborn-Conduit, 1670.

The Authors I. Purpose, II. Reasons and III. Prognostics of this Book.
I. IT is none of the business of this Book to single out any one Party in the
world, and to tell you by Application how far they are under the guilt of
Schism: I meddle with the Cause, and leave each person to make application to
himself. It is SIMPLE CATHOLIC CHRISTIANITY which I plead for, and the Love
and Unity and Concord which are its Ligaments and Essential parts. And it is a
SECT as a SECT, and a FACTION as a faction, and not this or that Sect or
Faction, which I detect and blame. Yet I doubt not but as in the same City
there are the wise and the foolish, the sound and the sick, and in the same
Army there are valiant men, and Cowards, so in the same Churches there are
Christians of various degrees of Wisdom, Integrity and strength: And all men
should earnestly desire to be of the wisest, the Holiest and the most fruitful
sort, and not of the more erroneous, impure, or scandalous and unprofitable.
And if the sick will make themselves a Party, and call the sound, the A^verse
Party, I will endeavor to be one of a Party in that sense; and to obey God as
exactly as I am able, and to worship him as spiritually and holily as I can,
and to Love him with all my Mind, and Heart, and Strength, and lament that I
can reach no higher, and do no more: And if any will call this by the name of
Heresy or Schism, they shall see that I can avoid Heresy and Schism at as
dear a rate, as enduring the Name and Imputation of that which I avoid. It is
not the Name of a Schismatic that I am writing against, but the Thing, by
whatever Name it is called. It is UNITY, LOVE and PEACE which I am pleading
for: And it is DIVISIONS, HATRED and CONTENTION which I plead against: And it
is the Hypocrisy of men which I detect, who betray Love, Unity and Peace by a
Judas kiss; and will nor, or dare not openly renounce them, and defy them, but
kill them with dissembling kindness: who cry them up, while they tread them
down and follow peace with all men, that are not of their party, as the Dog
follows the Hare, to tear it in pieces and destroy it: Who fight for LOVE by
making others seem odious and unlovely; By evil surmisings, proud under valuing
the worth of others, busy and groundless censuring of men, whose case they
know not; aggravating frailties; stigmatizing the persons, the actions, the
worship and religious performances of dissenters, with such odious terrible
names, and Characters, as their pride and faction do suggest; And all this to
strengthen the interest of their side and party, and to make themselves and
their consenters to seem Wise and Good, by making others seem foolish and bad:
Though they thereby proclaim themselves to be so much the worst, by how much
they are most void of Love. They are all for Concord, but it is only on their
narrow factions terms; They are for Peace; but it is not of the whole street,
but of their house alone; or not of the whole City, but of their street alone;
or not of the whole Kingdom, but of their City alone. O what a blessed thing
were peace, if all would derive it from their Wills, and terminate it in their
interest; and they might be the Center of Unity to the world! that is, that
they might be Gods or Christ's! such excellent Architects are they that they can
build Christ's house by pulling it in pieces; and such excellent Surgeons,
that they will heal Christ's body by separating the members, and can make as
many Bodies as there are separated parts.

2. Nor is it any or much of the business of this book, to speak to those that
I think are deepliest guilty of the Schisms of the Christian world: For they
are out of hearing, and will not read or regard my writings. It is the Roman
Head and Center of Unity which has done most to divide the Church. And it is
the contending of Rome and Constantinople for the Supremacy which has made the
greatest Schisms that the Christian world has known: And the Regiment of such
Lords must be answerable to their Power, and Greatness; and the simple terms of
Christian Unity left us by Christ and his Apostles, must be turned into a
Religion large as the Decrees of all the Councels, and (say half of them) and
the Popes Decretals also. And that there may be no way out of this wilderness,
but the Confessors present will, you must not in all these so much as
distinguish fundamentals from the rest; but so much material belief is
necessary to Salvation, as each man's opportunities and helps obliged him to
receive; that is; The faith which is necessary to Salvation (materially or
objectively) is as various as the number of persons in the world; To one more
is necessary, to another less, to some none at all of the Christian faith). And
you must suppose that the Priest is well acquainted with the internal capacity
of every man's Soul, and with all the instructions, opportunities, and
suggestions of his whole life, and can tell what measure of belief he has, and
whether it be proportionable to his helps; and so can tell him whether he be
capable of Salvation, though neither Pope nor Council have given any Standard
by which to judge. And though no man can be assured of his own Salvation; and
though another man could not be saved by the faith that saves him. So much are
we mistaken to think that it is the Pope that has the Keys of Heaven, when it
is every Priest, who is the only judge of the measures of the persons faith.
These new made multiplied Articles of Religion, these Additions to
Christianity, this proud Church-tyranny, I doubt not is the great cause of
Schism in the world: And when I have had opportunity to write against it, I
have born my testimony against it, as is yet legible. But it is not that sort
of men that I am here most to speak to: but to them that profess to be more
teachable and willing to know the truth.

3. And yet I add though this Book be written principally to save the darker
sort of honest Christians, from the sin and misery of Church divisions, I write
it not principally for them to read; For I know their prejudice, weakness and
incapacity, aftermentioned: But I write it to remember the Teachers of the
Churches, what principles they have to Preach and strengthen, and what
principles to confute and to destroy, if ever they mean to save the people from
this state of sin, and the Churches from the sad effects. And if Ministers
neglect the faithful discharge of so great and necessary a duty, let them
remember that they were warned, if they find themselves overwhelmed in the
ruins.

II. The Reasons moving me to this work are these.

First, It is my calling to help to save people from their sins; and Church
division is a heap of sins.

2. The more I love them that I hope are tender Conscienced, and dare not sin,
when they are convinced of it, the more I am bound to endeavor their
conviction, remembering who has said, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy
heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him. Lev. 19. 17.

3. LOVE is not an appurtenance of my Religion, but my Religion it self. God is
Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him: (who can
speak a higher word of any thing in all the world?) Love is the end of faith,
and faith is but the Bellows to kindle Love: Love is the fulfilling of all the
Law; the end of the Gospel; the nature and mark of Christ's Disciples; the
divine nature; the sum of holiness to the Lord; the proper note by which to
know, what is the man, and what his state, and how far any of his other acts
are acceptable unto God: without which if we had all knowledge and belief, all
gifts of utterance and highest profession, we were but as sounding Brass, and
as a tinkling Cymbal. And if all our goods were given to the poor, and our
bodies to the fire, it would profit nothing. Love is our foretast of Heaven,
and the perfection of it is Heaven it self, even the state and work of Angels
and of Saints in glory. And he that is angry with me, for calling men to Love,
is angry for calling them to Holiness to God and Heaven. Holiness which is
against Love is a contradiction: It is a deceitful Name, which Satan puts
upon unholiness. All Church principles which are against Universal Love, are
against God, and Holiness, and the Churches life. And he that says, he loves
God, and hates his Brother is a Liar. To be holy without Love, is to see
without light, to live without life. He that said, The wisdom from above is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, etc. did no more dream of separating them,
then of dividing the head of a man from his heart, to save his life: Iam. 3.
17. Nor no more than he that said, Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness:
Heb. 1^. 14. No necessity can justify such a division: Holiness and Love to
God, are but two names for one thing. Love to God and to man, are like Soul and
Body, that are separated no way but by death. Love and Peaceableness, differ
but as Reason and Reasoning: Love may be without Passive Peace (from others to
us,) but never without Active Peace (from us to others.)

4. I have had so great opportunity in my time, to see the working of the
mystery of iniquity, against Christian Love, and to see in what manner Christ's
House and Kingdom is edified by divisions, that if I be ignorant after such
sad experience, I must be utterly unexcusable, and of a seared Conscience, and
a heart that seems hardened to perdition. God knows how hardly sin is known
in its secret root, till men have tasted the bitterness of the fruit: Therefore
he has permitted the two Extremes to show themselves openly to the world in
the effects: And one must be noted and hated and avoided, as well as the other.
I thought once that all that talk against Schism and Sects, did but vent their
malice against the best Christians, under those names: But since then I have
seen what Love-killing principles have done! I have long stood by while
Churches have been divided, and sub-divided; one Congregation of the division
laboring to make the other contemptible and odious; and this called, the
Preaching of truth, and the purer worshipping of God: I have seen this grow up
to the height of Ranters in horrid Blasphemies, and then of Quakers, in
disdainful pride and surliness; and into the way of Seekers, that were to seek
for a Ministry, a Church, a Scripture, and consequently a Christ. I have many a
time heard it break out into more horrid revilings of the best Ministry and
Godliest people, than ever I heard from the most malignant Drunkard: I have
lived to see it put to the Question in that which they called, the little
Parliament, whether all the Ministers of the Parishes of England should be put
down at once. When Love was first killed in their own breasts, by these same
principles, which I here detect, I have seen how confidently the killing of the
King, the Rebellious demolishing of the Government of the Land, the killing of
many Thousands of their Brethren, the turnings and overturnings of all kinds of
Rule, even that which they themselves set up, have been committed, and
justified, and profanely fathered upon God. These with much more such fruits
of Love-killing principles, and divisions I have seen. And I have seen what
fierce, censorious, proud, unchristian tempers they have caused or signified;
In a word, I have long seen that envious wisdom (whatever it pretend) is not
from above, but is earthly sensual and devilish; and that where envy and strife
is upon pretense of Religious precedence of wisdom there is confusion and every
evil work, Jam. 3. 15, 16. And if after so long, so sad, so notorious
experience, you would have me still to be tender of the brood of Hell, I mean
these Love^destroying ways, and to show any countenance to that which really
has done all this, you would have me as blind as the Sod^mites, and as
obdurate as Pharaoh and his Egyptians, and utterly resolved never to learn the
will of God, or to regard either good or evil in the world.

5. The same sins are continued in without repentance. The same pride and
ignorance is still keeping open our divisions: And if after such warnings, as
the world scarce ever had the like, we shall be still impenitent; if we shall
sin our selves into suffering, and sin in our suffering as we did before, even
the very same sin of Divisions which brought us to it; how heinous is our
Crime, and how dreadful the Prognostic of our greater ruin; And how guilty
are those Ministers of the blood of Souls, that will not tell men of the sin
and danger.

6. I know that Dividing Principles and Dispositions, do tend directly to the
ruin and damnation of those in whom they do prevail. That which kills Love,
kills all grace and holiness, and kills Souls: That which quenches Love,
quenches the Spirit (a thousand fold more then the restraining of our gifts of
utterance does:) That which banisheth Love, banisheth God. That which is
against Love is against the design of Christ in our Redemption, and therefore
may well be called Antichristian: And if the Roman Kingdom (for so it is rather
to be called than a Church) had not such Moral marks of Antichristianity,
(which Dr. More has notably opened in his Mystery of iniquity;) If they were
not the Engineers for the Division of the Christian world; by a false Center,
and by impossible terms of Unity, and by the engine of tearing dividing
impositions; If among them were not found the blood of the Saints and the
Martyrs of Jesus, I should in charity, fear to suspect them of
Antichristianity, notwithstanding all the Prophetical passages which seem
otherwise to point them out; because I should still suspect my understanding of
those Prophecies, when the Law of Loving my neighb^ur as my self, is plain to
all.

They are dangerously mistaken that think that Satan has but one way to men's
damnation. There are as many ways to Hell, as there be to the extinguishing of
Love. And all tends unto this, which tends to hide or deny the Loveliness,
that is, the Goodness, of them whom I must Love: much more that which
represents them as odious. And there are many pretenses and ways to make my
Neighbor seem unlovely to me: One does it as effectually by unjust or unproved
accusations of ungodliness, or saying, Their worship is Antichristian, formal,
ridiculous, vain; as another does by unjust and unproved accusations of Schism,
Disobedience or Sedition. And they that love Godliness, may be tempted to cast
off their love of their Neighbors, yea of the truly Godly, when they once
believe that they are ungodly. And the white Devil is a Love-killer as well as
the black. He is (...) mortal an enemy to Love, who back biteth another, and
says, he is Profane, or he is an empty formalist, or he is a lukewarm
temporizing complying manpleaser] as he that says [He is a pievish factious
Hypocrite.] I am sure he was no Malignant, nor intended to gird at Godliness,
nor to grieve good men, who told us that it is Satan's way to transform himself
into an Angel of Light (that is, one that pretends to make higher motions for
Light and for Religious strictness, than Christ himself does;) and that his
Ministers are sent forth by him as Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 14,
15, 16. who will seem more Righteous, than the Preachers of truth. Satan will
pretend to any sort of strictness, by which he can but mortify Love. If you
can devise any such strictness of opinions, or exactness in Church orders, or
strictness in worship, as will but help to kill men's love, and set the Churches
in divisions, Satan will be your helper, and will be the strictest and exactest
of you all: He will reprove Christ as a Sabbath breaker, and as a gluttonous
person, and a Wine-bibber, and a friend (or Companion) of Publicans and
Sinners, and as an enemy to Caesar too. We are not altogether ignorant of his
wiles, as young unexperienced Christians are. You think when a w^athful envious
heat is kindled in you against men for their faul^^, that it is certainly a
zeal of Gods exciting: But mark whether it have not more wrath^ than Love in
it: and whether it tend not more to disgrace your brother than to (...) him, or
to make parties and divisions, than to heal them: If it be so, if St. James be
not deceived, you are deceived as to the author of your zeal, Iam. 3. 15. 16.
and it has a worse Original than you suspect. It is one of the greatest
reasons which makes me hate Romish Church tyranny, and Religious cruelties
against dissenters, because as they come from want of Love, so I am sure that
they ^end to destroy the Love of those on whom they are inflicted, and to do
more hurt to their Souls than to their Bodies. The Devil is not so silly an
Angler as to fish with the bare Hook; nor such a Fool as when he would damn
men, to entreat them openly to be damned; nor when he would kill men's Love, to
entreat them plainly, not to Love but hate their neighbors: But he does it by
making you believe that there is just and necessary cause for it; and that it
is your duty, and that you should be lukewarm in the cause of God, of truth, of
Godliness, if you did not do it: that so you may go on without scruple, and do
so again, and not repent. Even they that killed Christ's Apostles, did it as a
duty, and a part of the service of God, Ioh. 16. 2. And Paul himself did once
think verily that he ought to do many things which he did, against the Name and
Cause and Servants of Jesus, Act. 26. 9. And as he did, so he was done by; and
as he measured to others, it was measured to him again; For they that bound
themselves in an Oath to kill him did deeply interesse God and Conscience in
the cruelty. But believe it, it is Apostasy to fall from Love: your souls dye,
when Love dies. The opinions, the Church Principles, the sideings, the
Practices, which destroy your love, destroy your graces and your souls. You dye
while you have a name to live, and think that you grow apace in Religion.
Therefore better understand the Tempter, and when backbiters are deriding or
vilifying your neighbors, take it to signify in plain English [I pray you
love not these men, but hate them.] And I have told you in this Treatise, that
when one says unjustly [Kill them, banish them] and another says [Have no
Communion with them] it is too often the same inward affection which both
express, but in various ways: They are agreed in the assumption, that their
neighbor is unlovely.

And when Love is dead, and yet Religion seems to survive and to be increased
by it, it is lamentable to think what a degenerate, scandalous, hypocritical
Religion that will be, and how odious and dishonorable to God. To preach
without Love, and to hear without Love, and to pray without Love, and to
communicate without Love, to any that differ from your Sect, O what a loathsome
Sacrifice is it, to the God of Love? If we must leave our gift at the Altar,
till we are reconciled to one offended brother, what a gift is theirs, who are
unreconciled to almost all the Churches of Christ? or to multitudes of their
Brethren, because they are not of their way? yea, that make their Communion,
the very badge and means of their uncharitableness and divisions? Sirs, these
are not matters of indifferency, nor to be indulged by any faithful Pastor of
the Church.

7. And I know that these principles are as mortal to the Churches, as they are
to Souls. And that if ever the Churches have peace, prosperity or healing, it
must be by the means of Love and Concord, and by destroying the principles
which would destory them. One thinks that it must be by a Spanish
Inquisition, and by forcing or killing the dissenters; And another thinks it
must be by Excommunicating them all, and making them odious, and making their
own party seem thereby to be better than theirs. But I know that it must be by
revived Love, or it will never be. I know it, and whoever is angry with me for
it, I cannot choose but know it. When the Papists had murdered so many hundred
thousands of the Albigenses and Waldenses, who would have thought, but they had
done their work? When the French Massacre had murdered 30000 or 40000, and
dispatched the Leaders of the Protestant party, who would have thought that they
had but strengthened them? When the Duke D' Alva had done so much to drwon the
Belgic Protestants in blood, he little thought that he was but fortifying
them. Queen Mary's Bishops little thought that their English Bonfires were but
to light men to see the mischief of their cause; and like the firing of a
Beacon to call all the Land to take them for the Enemies of mankind; and that
the case would have been so quickly altered. When the Irish had murdered two
hundred thousand, they little thought that they had but excited the Survivers
to a terrible revenge. I will come no nearer, but you may easily do it your
selves. If we bite and devour one another, we shall be devoured one of another,
Gal. 5. 15. The question is, but who shall be devoured first, and who reserved
for the second course. If any man have an ear to hear let him hear: He that
leads into captivity shall go into captivity: He that kills with the Sword,
must be killed with the Sword: Here is the Patience and Faith of the Saints.
Rev. 13. 9. 10. God Rules the world still when he works not miracles! Have
we not seen a proud Victorious Army dissolved without a drop of blood? and have
we not seen that God approves not of proud self-exaltation, and violating the
Sacred power of our Governors, and usurping their places of Authority: Has
not the drunken world had yet experience enough to teach them, that the Church
of God is not to be built up or repaired, by their tumultuous quarrellings and
frayes.

How long Lord, must thy Church and Cause, be in the hands of unexperienced
furious fools, who know not what Holiness or Healing is, but think that victory
over men's Bodies, must be the cure of their Souls, and that hurting them is the
way to win their Love! or that a Church is constituted of Bodies alone while
Souls are absent, or no parts! who will make themselves the Rulers of thy Flock
in despite of thee and of thy Cause and Servants, without thy call or
approbation, and think that the work of a Soldier, is the work of a Father and
a Physician! whose cures are all by amputation; and whose piety consists in
flying from each other, and esteeming and using their Brethren as their foes;
who scatter thy flocks on all the mountains, when Christ has prayed that they
may all be one!

Perhaps, Reader, thou art one of them that thinks, that the settlement and
happiness of the Church, must be won like a game at football; and therefore
scruplest not to toss it in the dirt, and tumultuously to strive with and
strike up the heels of all that are against thee, (so that peaceable passengers
cannot safely come near your game or pass the streets.) But when you have got
the Ball, have you done the work? Are you still so ignorant as not to know, how
uncertain still you are to keep it, and that one spurn can take it from you?
And suppose you could secure all your conquests, are the Churches healed ever
the more? Men's hearts must be conquered before this healing work is done. And
therefore the Apostle says that we are more than Conquerours, when we are
killed all the day long and accountea as Sheep to the slaughter, Romans 8. 34,
35. that is, it is more gain and honor to our selves, to suffer in faith and
patience by our enemies, than to conquer them in the field; And it is more
profitable also unto them, and tends to a more desirable conquest of them:
Because when Conquerors do but exasperate them; and if we hurt their bodies, we
harden them the more against our cause, and against the means of their own
Salvation, our patient Martyrdom and suffering by them, may ^end at last to
open their eyes, and turn their hearts, and save their souls, by showing them
the Truth, the Goodness and the Power of Christ, and of his Word and Spirit.
This is the meaning of being more than Conquerours. The Irish are conquered by
us, but not converted: The Scots and English were conquered by Cromwell, but
their hearts were not conquered, nor their Religion changed by him. They that
think that if they could get and keep the upper ground, and have Dissenters
bodies and estates at their will, they could soon settle the Church in Unity
and Concord, do tell all the world, how ignorant they are of the nature of
Christianity, and of the fear of God, and of the means of the peace and Concord
of the Church: Either you would give up your own judgments and Consciences, or
practice your selves to the will of men, if you were in their power, or not. If
you would not, why should you think that others will? If you would, you do but
tell the world, that you are Atheists, and have neither a God, nor Conscience,
nor Religion. But it is not evidence enough of your folly, to say in your
hearts there is no God, and to fear them that can but kill the body, more than
Him that can punish both body and soul in hell; but you must also show that you
know neither God nor Man, by thinking that all others are Atheists also, and
judging of them by your selves; as if they set their Souls and their
everlasting hopes, at as base a price as you do yours. I tell you again that a
Battle or a Foot^ball skuffle will not settle, the discomposed and divided
Churches; unless you think that a heap of Carcasses slain in the field, possess
the quietness, and concord which you desire: The Soul is the man, and Love is
the Christian Life, and the true Cement of the Churches unity; And Love must
cause Love, as fire causes fire; And hurtful wrath does most powerfully quench
it, and has these fifteen hundred years, (but especially these thirteen
hundred) been the wolvish Scatterer of the flocks of Christ: And must that be
now the way to build it, which has so long been the way to pull it down. It is
Love that must be our Union, and Love that must cause it, or we shall never
have the Union of a Christian Church. By this shall all men know that you are
Christ's Disciples, if you have Love one to another. If you believe not this,
pretend not to believe in Jesus Christ, who does affirm it.

I confess I am so far guilty of superstition my self, that if I had been one
of the Changers of our ancient Government, I should have been somewhat the more
backward for his Name sake to the beheading of Christopher Love, lest it should
be an ill Omen both to Church and State, but especially to the Actors of it.

8. Another of the Motives of this Discourse is, because I know that times of
most temptation, are times of greatest danger, and commonly of greatest sin.
And all faithful Pastors must know what are the special Temptations of the Time
and Place which they live in. When had we ever greater Temptations to
Love-killing principles and practices than now, except in the times of the
miserable Wars? I need not name them to you. The harder it is for men to Love
them that hate them, that censure them unjustly, that revile them, and reproach
them, and make them odious, or that hurt them, the more cause have Ministers
and all Christians to set a double watch upon their Love; Lest before they are
aware, a flaming and consuming zeal, do tell others that they know not what
manner of Spirit they are of, Luke 9. 55.

9. Yea it is not only a time of great Temptation to this sin, but of common
guilt: They are multitudes that are overtaken already with this sin. Is not the
Land in a continual heart war? Are there not parties against parties, and cause
against cause, and heart-risings, and passions, and censurings of Dissenters,
to say no worse? And is it not time to bring water when we see the flames?

10. And I perceive few know so heinous a sin to be any sin at all; But all
factions and parties are still justifying their Love-killing ways, and
reproaching those whom they have wronged; As if when they have sinfully
withdrawn their Love from them, it were no crime to take away next, their good
names, and all that they have but power to take away. And when they have cast
their brethren out of their estimation and affection, they think it a piece of
commendable zeal or justice, to cast them ou^ of Christian communion, and if
they could out of the Land and of the world. And shall Ministers stand by, and
see men take such sin for duty, and serve God by abusing his Servants, and look
for a reward for dividing and pulling down his Church, and never tell them what
they are doing.

11. And the old Non-conformists who wrote so much against separation, were
neither blind nor temporizers. They saw the danger on that side. Even Brightman
on Rev. that writes against the Prelacy and Ceremonies, severely reprehendeth
the separatists. Read but the writings of Mr. John Paget, Mr. John Ball, Mr.
Hildersham, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Baine, Mr. Rathband, and many such others against
the separatists of those times, and you may learn that our Light is not
greater, but less than theirs, and that we see not further into that cause than
they did; and that change of times does not change the truth; nor will warrant
us to change our Religion, unless we will make our Religion subject, to the
wills and interests of men, and change it as often as the times shall change.

12. Lastly, if your friends tell you not of your faults and errors in Love,
those whom you account your enemies will do it in wrath. And though all sober
Christians should learn by the keenest rebukes of their Adversaries, yet
passion and prejudice makes it so difficult, that it usually hardens men
more in their sin: And this is another thing, which causes me the more to
abhor division, and to long for the reconciling of the minds of all dissenting
Christians; Because while they take each other for adversaries, nothing that is
written or said by any is like to do the Adversaries any good. Nay I must
confess when I see an adversary tell men of their sin, especially with furious
spleen and wrath, mixing together words and swords, I am greatly afraid, lest
by that temptation, Satan will draw the reproved to impenitency, and greatly
harden them in their sin, and make them glory in that as a virtue, which such a
person does so reprove.

But if you will neither hear of your sin nor duty by adversaries nor friends,
by fair speeches nor by foul, you fasten the guilt upon your selves. Remember I
pray you, that I am not kindling fires, nor drawing Swords against you, nor
stirring up any to do you hurt, but only persuading all dissenters to love one
another, and to forbear but all that is contrary to love. And if such an
exhortation and advice seem injurious or intolerable to you, the Lord have
mercy on your Souls.

III. And now without a spirit of Prophecy; I will foretell what entertainment
this Paper must expect.

1. Some on the one side will say, It is sharper and rounder dealing than all
this, that must cure the Schisms in the Church: And if you would heal our
Divisions, why do you not conform you self, but stand out as one of the party
that divides?

2. Some on the other side will say, that it is an unseasonable time, when so
much anger is breaking forth against those that we account Dividers, to mention
their faults, and so to stir up more. I will give these men no other answer,
than to bid them read the last part of this Book; or else do not talk till they
know of what.

3. And some will say that I am doing that which will prove a hurt to my self
and others. For if I should draw the People to Communion with the Conformists,
there would little compassion be showed to the Ministers that cannot conform.
But selfish wisdom must be shut out of the Council, when we are consulting
about the healing of the Churches, and the good of Souls. And indeed there is
little danger of this consequence, as long as the people are far more averse to
Communion or Concord with the Parish-Churches, than the Nonconforming Ministers
are. But suppose it prove true, should we not do good to Souls, and save men
from sin, and heal divisions, at the dearest rate? What though it cost us more
than is here mentioned; The reviving of decayed Love, and the closure of any of
the Churches wounds, is a recompense worth our liberties and lives.

4. And those that are most guilty of the Love-killing principles here
detected, and are most eminent in self-conceited ignorance, will do by me and
by this book, according to their Principles, and as they use to do by others.
Before they have soberly read it over, they will carry about the Sectarian
reports of it from hand to hand; And when one has said it, the rest will
affirm it, that [I have clawed with one party, and have girded at the other,
and have sought to make them odious by bringing them under the reproach of
Separation, and of censuring and avoiding the ungodly; and that being lukewarm
my self, and a complyer with sin, I would have all others do so too: And that
these Reconcilers are neither flesh nor fish, and attempt impossibilities, even
to reconcile Light and darkness, Christ and Belial; And that for the sake of
Peace we would ^ell the Truth, and would let in Church-corruptions out of an
over-eager desire of Agreement: And when they have all done, neither party will
regard them, but they shall fare worse than any others; and will lose both
sides, whilst they are for neither.] I know it is the nature of the disease
which I am curing, to send forth such breath and scents as these; And I intend
not to bestow a word to answer them.

5. And some of the wise and sober Ministers, who mark more the inconveniences
of one side, than of the other, and look more to outward occurrences, than to
the Rule, and to the inward state of Souls; especially such as have not seen,
the times and things that I have seen, will think that though all this be true,
it is unseasonable, and may give advantage to such as love not Reformation. And
to them I shall return this answer. 1. That if we stay seven years more for a
seasonable time, to oppose the radical sin of uncharitableness, we may be in
our graves, and the sinners in their graves, and the sin may be multiplied and
rooted past all hope of remedy. And why may you not as well stay seven years
more, for a seasonable time, to Preach down all other sins as well as this? Is
this the least malignant, or least dangerous sin? 2. There was never a more
seasonable time to tell men of their sin, than when the temptation to it is the
greatest; when it is most growing and multiplying among us; When God has been
so heinously dishonored by it; when the world does ring of it; when many
Volumes reproach them for it; And when the sensual and ungodly are hardened by
it in their scorn of godliness, to the apparent peril of their damnation: yea
more, to turn our complaints from our Lawgivers upon our selves. It is want of
Love, and it is Dividing principles and practices, that have silenced so many
Ministers, and brought us into all the confusions and calamities which we see
and undergo.

6. But there are many sincere and considerate Ministers, who knowing this
which I say to be true, will be the more excited by it to lead the younger and
passionate sort of Religious people, into the ways of Love and peace, and to
save them from the dangers here detected, and persuade them to the practice of
these Directions. And for the use of these I write this Book.

And yet, to end as I began, I must add these notices, for your right
understanding of it.

1. That this is not my first attempt upon this work; but the progress of what
I have been upon these three and twenty years. About fifteen or sixteen years
ago, I preached on the third Chapter of Saint James, in a larger and a closer
manner on this Subject, than here I write: because the times then called me to
it.

2. I persuade no Christian to justify or own the sins or the least defects of
any Church, Minister or People, in their Worship or in their lives, though I
persuade you to Communion with the Churches, persons and worship-actions, which
have many faults: (For on Earth there is no person, Church, or Worship
faultless, and without corruption.) I justify not the faults of my own daily
Prayers, and yet I never pray without them.

3. I am not persuading Ministers to any unwise and unseasonable Preaching,
against the dividing Principles of the weak, when the necessities of the
Auditory more require other Doctrine; (Much less to exasperating railings and
invectives; And least of all to wrathful violence). But only with prudence, in
season and with Love and gentleness, to lead men into the truth: If even with
Infidels and Heretics, the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle
to all men; apt to teach; patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if God, peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging
of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. How much more must the Children of Gods family
be used with Love and tenderness. But if the fierceness of any contradict what
I say, I only add, that it is not an unexperienced person that speaks it, but
one who through the mercy of God, has long kept a numerous flock in Love and
unity and peace by such like means; and has seen the lamentable effects of the
contrary way.

4. While I say so much in this Treatise against the rash censuring of others,
I give you not the rule for men's censuring of themselves: They know more by
themselves: They may search into the depth of their hearts and intentions,
which we cannot do. They are allowed to be more suspicious and censorious of
themselves, than of any others: It more concerns them: And they have more to
do with themselves; and may be bolder with themselves. We judge others in order
to visible Church Communion by visible and public evidence. But in order to
their preparation for the judgment of God, we must direct them to judge
themselves according to the truth in the inward parts.

5. While I draw you to peace and moderation toward others, I desire not to
quench the least degree of Christian zeal. Nay I endeavor to kill that which
would kill it. The purified peculiar people of the Redeemer ane zealous, but of
what? not to consume and destroy one another, nor to hate and fly from one
another; nor to vilify and backbite one another; but they are zealous of good
works: And Paul will tell you what are good works, Gal. 5. 22, 23. Love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: Be
zealous in Loving all Christians as Christians, and all men as men: Be zealous
for Peace: If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all
men, Romans 12. 18. Be zealously patient, gentle, good, meek, temperate. And the
works of the flesh are hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, sedition,
heresies: A zeal for these is earthly sensual and devilish, as James tells
you. And remember that the word which is translated there [Envy] is [Zeal] in
the Original: But our translators were afraid, lest the profane would have
mistaken it, if they had translated it [Zeal] ver. 16. where zeal and strife is
(that is, a striving contentious zeal) there is confusion and every evil work.]
If you believe this, how dare you blame me for writing to save you from
confusion and every evil work?

6. I will conclude with the repetition of one thing delivered in this
Treatise; that among all the rest, two separating dividing principles will
never give peace to the Church where they prevail* The one is; the confounding
men's Title to visible Church Membership and Communion, with their Title to
Justification and Salvation. The other is, the Imposing of new terms and titles
of Visible membership and Communion; and rejecting the sufficiency of the ^erms
and title of Christ's appointment. Christ has solemnly and purposely made the
Baptismal Covenanting with him, to be the terms and title to Church membership
and Communion; And the owning of this same Covenant is the sufficient Title of
the adult. And the Imposers that come after, and require another kind of
evidence of Conversion, or Sanctification than this, do confound the Church,
and inflame the people, and leave no certain way of trial, but make as various
terms and titles* as there are various degrees of wisdom and Charity, and
various opinions, in the Pastors (yea in all the people to whom they allow the
judgment of such Causes) in the several Churches. In this point, the sober
Anabaptists seem to come nearer the truth than they.

I add no more, but Christ's conclusion, that a house or Kingdom divided against
it self cannot stand; The Book it self was written near two years ago; but this
Preface, Feb. 2. 1669.

AN ABSTRACT OF THE DIRECTIONS.
1. FOrget not the difference between the younger sort of Christians, and the
Elder. The peril of the Church from young Christians.

2. Observe the secret workings of spiritual pride, and how deep rooted and
odious a sin it is, and what special temptations to it, the younger and emptier
sort of Christians have.

3. Overvalue not the Common gift of utterance, nor a high profession, as if
grace were appropriated to such alone, who are to be called Professors.

4. Affect not to be made en^lnent and conspicuous in holiness, by standing at
a further distance from common Christians, than God would have you.

5. Understand the true difference between the Church as Visible and as
Regenerate or mystical; and the several qualifications of the Members. What
Scandals were in the primitive Churches, in Scripture times.

6. Understand well the different Conditions and terms of Communion with the
Church as mystical and as visible, and the different privileges of the
members: that you may not presume to impose any Conditions which God has not
imposed, nor unjustly grudge at (...) essence of those that are not sincere.

7. Get time and sleep apprehensions of the necessity and reasons of Christian
Unity and Concord; and of the sin and misery of divisions and discord: what
Scripture says herein.

8. When any thing needs amendment in the Church, the best Christians must be
the forwardest to Reform, and the backwardest to divide on that pretense.

9. Forget (...) the great difference between the Churches (...) the (...) and
the Godlyes separating from the Church it self, because the wicked are not cast
out. The first is a great duty: the second usually a great sin. Luthers case.

10. Expect* not that any one lawfully received into the Church by Baptism,
should be cast out of it, or denied the privileges of the Church, but
according to the rules of Christian discipline, by the power of the Keys; that
is, for o^stinate impenitency in a gross on scandalous sin, upon proof, and
after sufficient private and public admonition.

11. Understand what the Power of the Keys is, and what the Pastors office is;
as they are the Governors of the Church, entrusted by Christ with the power of
admission and rejection: that so you may know how far you are to rest in the
Pastors judgment, and may not usurp any part of their office to your selves.

12. Study well Christ's gracious nature and office; and his great readiness to
receive the weakest that come to him; that so you may desire a Church
discipline agreeable to the Gospel.

13. Yet lest you run into the worse extreme, remember still that the
destroying of sin, and the sanctifying of man to God, was the work of our
Redeemer: And that Holiness and Peace must go together: And that our own
Church Order and discipline, must be subservient to the inward spirituality and
prosperity of the Church-regenerate; And no such favor must be showed to
sinners as favors sin, and hinders Holiness.

14. Though your Governors are the Judges, what persons shall be of your
publick-Church-Communion; yet it is you that must judge who are fit or unfit
for your private familiarity.

15. Understand how much it has pleased God to lay all men's happiness or
misery upon their own choice: And seek not to alter this order of God.

16. Though the profession of Christianity which entitleth men to
Church Communion, must be credible; yet remember that there are various degrees
of Credibility: And that every Profession which is not proved false, is
credible in such a degree as must be accepted by the Church.

17. Know how far it is that either Grace or Gifts are necessary to a Minister,
that you may give to both their due.

18. Understand well the necessity of your Communion with all the Universal
Church, and wherein it consists; and how far it is to be preferred before
your Communion with any particular Church.

19. Engage not your selves too far in any divided Sect, and espouse not the
interest of any party of Christians, to the neglect or injury of the universal
Church, and the Christian Cause.

20. Be very suspicious of your Religious passions, and carefully distinguish
between a sound and sinful zeal; least you father your sin on the Spirit of
God, and think you please him more when you most offend him.

21. Lend not a patient ear to backbiters; nor hastily believe the most
religious people, when they speak ill of others.

22. Make not your selves judges of other men's actions; much less of their
state, before you have a Call; or before you have sufficient knowledge of the
person and of the Case.

23. Mistake not the nature of the sin of Scandal, as if it were the bare
displeasing of another: when it is the laying of a stumbling block or occasion
of sinning before another.

24. Make Conscience of Scandalizing one party as well as another: and those
most, who are most in danger by your offense.

25. Be not over tender of your reputation with any sort of men on earth: nor
too impatient of their displeasure, censures or contempt. But live above them.

26. Use not your selves (needlessly) to the familiar company of that sort of
Christians, who use to censure them that are more sober, Catholic and
charitable than themselves: Unless you be as much or more, with the soberer
sort, who will show you the sin and mischief of Love-killing principles and
divisions.

27. Take heed of misjudging of the answers of your prayers, and of taking
those things to be from God, which are but the effects of your prejudice,
passion or weakness of understanding.

28. Do not too much reverence the revelations, impulses or most confident
opinions of any others upon the account of their sincerity or holiness* but try
all judiciously and soberly by the word of God.

29. Take heed least the trouble of your own disquieted doubting minds, do
become a snare, to draw you to some un^outh way of Cure; and so make the fancy
of some new opinion, sect or practice, to seem your remedy, and give you ease;
and soperswade you that it is the certain truth.

30 Keep in the rank of a humble disciple or Learner in Christ's Church, till
you are fit and called to be Teachers your selves,

31. Grow up in the great substantial practical truths and duties; and grow
downwards in the roots of a clearer belief of the Word of God, and the life to
come: And neither begin too soon with doubtful opinions, nor ever lay too much
upon them.

32. Lay not a greater stress upon your different words and manner of prayer,
than God has laid: And take heed of scorning, reproaching or slighting, the
words and manner of other men's worship, when it is such as God accepts from
the sincere. Where the Case about forms of prayer is handled.

33. When you are sure that other men's way of worship is sinful; yet make it
not any other, or greater sin, than indeed it is; and speak not evil of so much
in it as is good: And slander not God as a hater or rejecter of all men's
Services which are mixed with infirmities; or as a partial hater of the
infirmities of others, and not yours.

34. Think not that all is unlawfully obeyed which is unlawfully commanded.

35. Think not that you are guilty of all the faults of other men's worship with
whom you join; no not of the Ministers or Congregations: Nor that you are bound
to separate from all the worship which is faultily performed; For then there
must be no Church Communion upon Earth. Where is more about extemporary prayer
and imposed forms.

36. Yet know what Pastors and Church Communion you may join with, and what
not: And think not that I am persuading you to make no difference.

37. In your judging of Discipline, reformation, and any means of the Churches
good; be sure your eye be upon the true End; and upon the particular Rule; and
not on either of them alone. Take not that for a means which is either contrary
to the Word of God; or is in ^ts nature destructive of the end.

38. Neglect not any truth of God; much less renounce it, or deny it. But yet
do not take it for your duty to publish all, which you judge to be truth; nor a
sin to silence many lesser truths, when the Churches peace and welfare does
require it.

39. Know which are the Great duties of a Christian life, and wherein the
nature of true Religion does consist: And then pretend not any lesser duty,
against these greater; though the least when it is indeed a duty, is not to be
denied or neglected.

40. Labor for a sound judgment to know good from evil, least you trouble
your selves and others by mistakes: Forsake not the guidance of a judicious
Teacher, nor the Company of the agreeing generality of the Godly.

41. Let not the bare fervor of a Preacher, or the loudness of his voice, or
affectionate utterance, draw you too far to admire or follow him, without a
proportion of solid understanding and judiciousness.

43. Your belief of the necessary Articles of faith, must be made your own, and
not taken merely on the Authority of any. And in all points of belief or
practice, which are necessary to Salvation, you must ever keep company with the
Universal Church: For it were not the Church; if it erred in those. And in
matters of Peace and Concord the major vote must be your guide. In matters of
humane obedience your Governors must be your guides. And in matters of high
and difficult speculation, the judgment of one man of extraordinary
understanding, is to be preferred before the Rulers, and the major Vote.

43. Reject not a good cause, because it is owned by some bad men: And own not
a bad cause for the goodness of the Patrons of it. Judge not of the Cause by
the persons, when you should judge of the persons by the Cause.

44. Yea, take the bad examples of religious men, to be one of your most
perilous temptations. And therefore labor to discover what are the special
sins of professors in the age you live in, that you may be specially fortified
against them.

45. Desire the highest degree of holiness, and to be free from the Corruptions
of the times: But affect not to be odd and singular from ordinary Christians in
lawful things.

46. When you have to do only with stigmatized scandalous ones, to vindicate
the honor of Christianity from their Scandal, go as far from them as lawfully
you can: But with the Common sort of Sinners, whose Conversion you are bound to
seek, go not as far from them as you can; but purposely study to come as near
them as lawfully you may, that you may have the better advantage to win them to
the truth.

47. Whenever you are avoiding any error forget not that there is a contrary
extreme to be avoided, of which you are not our of danger.

48. Think more; and talk more, of your faults and failings against others;
especially against Princes, Magistrates and Pastors, than of their faults and
failings against you.

49. Take notice of all the good in others which appears; and talk rather of
that behind their backs, than of their faults.

50. Study the duty of instructing and exhorting, more than of reproof and
finding fault.

51. The more you suffer by Rulers or any m^n, the more be watchful, lest you
be tempted to dishonor them; or to withdraw or abate the Love which is their
due.

52. Make Conscience of heart-revenge, and tongue-revenge, as well as of
hand-revenge.

53. When you are exasperated by the hurt which you feel from Magistrates,
remember also the Good which the Church receives by them.

54. Learn to suffer by good people, and by Ministers; and not only by ungodly
people, or by Magistrates.

55. When you complain of violence and persecution in others; take heed lest
the same inward vice work in you, by Church cruelties, and dimning censures,
against them or others. Persecution and separation often have the same Cause.

56. Keep still in your eye, the State of all Christ's Churches upon earth; that
you may know what a people they are through the world, whom Christ has
Communion with: and may not ignorantly separate from almost all the Church of
Christ, while you think that you separate but from those about you. Queres
about separation.

57. Yet ler not any here cheat you by the bare namees and titles of Unity, to
the papal usurping head of the Church: nor must you dream of any Head and
Center of Unity to the universal Church, but Christ himself.

58. Take heed of superstition, indiser^^t ^^al ^^th been the usual beginner of
superstition: M^lignity in that age the sharpest opposer, for the A^thor^s
sake: Formality in the next age has made a Religion of it: And then the
zealous, who first invented it, have turned most against it, for the sake of
the last owners; And thus the world has turned round. Instances laid down of
the superstition of Religions people in this age.

59. If through the fault of either side, or both, you cannot meet together in
the same assemblies; yet keep that Unity in faith, love and practice, which all
neighbor Churches should maintain; And use not your different assemblies to
rev^ling, and destroying Love and Peace.

60. When the Love-killing spirit, either cruel or dividing, is abroad among
Christians; be not idle, nor discouraged Spectators; nor betray the Churches
peace by lazy wishes, But make it a great part of your labor and Religion, to
revive Love and Peace, and to destroy their contraries. And let no censures or
contempt of any party take you off: But account it as comfortable to be a
Martyr for Love and Peace by blind Zealots or proud Usurpers, as for the says
by Infidels or Heathens: And take the pleasing of God (whoever is displeased)
for your full reward.

The Additional Directions to the Pastors.
1. Let it be our first care to know and do our own duty: And when we see the
peoples weakness and divisions, let us first examine and judge our selves, and
lament and reform our own neglects. Ministers are the Cause of most divisions.

2. It is needful to the peoples Edification and Concord, that their Pastors
much excel them, in knowledge and utterance, and also in prudence, holiness,
and heavenly mindedness: that the reverence of their callings and persons may
be preserved; and the people taught by their Examples.

3. Inculcate still the necessary conjunction of Holiness and Peace; and of the
Love of God and Man: And that Love is their Holiness it self, and the sum of
their Religion; the End of faith, and the fulfilling of the Law. And that as
Love to God uniteth us to Him; so Love to man must unite us to each other. And
that all doctrine and practices which are against Love and Unity, are against
God, against Christ, against the Spirit, against the Church, and against
Mankind.

4. If others show their weakness by unwarrantable singularities or divisions,
show not your greater weakness, by impatience, and uncharitable censures or
usage of them: especially when self-interest provokes you.

5. Distinguish between them that separate from the Universal Church, or from
all the Orthodox and Reformed parts of it; and those who only turn from the
Ministry of some one person or sort of persons, without refusing Communion
with the rest.

6. Distinguish between them who deny the Being of the Ministry and Church from
which they separate: and those who remove only for their own Edification, as
from a worse or weaker Ministry, and a Church less pure.

7. Distinguish between those who hold it simply unlawful to have Communion
with you: and those who only hold it unlawful to prefer your assemblies before
such as they think to be more pure.

8. Remember Christ's interest in the weakest of his Servants; and do nothing
against them which Christ will not take well.

9. Distinguish between weakness of Gifts and of Graces: and remember that many
who are weaker in the understanding of Church-orders, may yet be stronger in
grace than you.

10. Think on the Common Calamity of mankind: what strange disparity there is
in men's understandings, and will be: And how the Church here is a Hospital of
diseased souls; of whom none are perfectly healed in this life.

11. Distinguish still between those truths and duties, which are or are not of
necessity: and between the tolerable and the intolerable errors. And never
think of a Common Unity and Concord, but upon the terms of necessary points;
and of the primitive simplicity; and the forbearance of dissenters in tolerable
differences.

12. Remember that the Pestoral Government is a work of Light and Love: And
what these cannot do, we cannot do. Our great study therefore must be first to
know more and to Love more than the people; and then to convince them by cogent
evidence of truth; and to cause the warmth of our Love to be felt by them, in
all the parts of our ministration and converse: As the warmth of the Mothers
milk is needful to the good nutrition of the Child. The History of Martin.

13. When you see many evils which Love and evidence will leave uncured; yet do
not reject this way, till you have found one that will better do the work, and
with fewer inconveniences.

14. When you reprove those weak Christians, who are subject to errors,
disorders and divisions; reflect no^ any disgrace upon piety it self: but be
the more careful to proclaim the honor of Godliness, and true Conscientious
strictness, lest the ungodly take occasion to despise it, by hearing of the
faults of such as are accounted the zealousest professors of it.

15. Discourage not the people from so much of Religions exercises, in their
families, and with one another, as is meet for them in their private st^tions.

16. Be not wanting in abilities, watchfulness and diligence, to resist
Seducers by the evidence of truth; that there may be no need of other weapons:
And quench the sparks among the people, before they break out into flames.

17. Be not strange to the poet ones of your flocks; but impartial to all; and
the servants of all: Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate.

18. Spend and be spent for your peoples good, Do all the good that you are
able for their bodies, as well as for their souls. And think nothing that you
have too dear to win them, that they may see that you are truly fathers to
them; and that their welfare is your chiefest care.

19. Keep up the reverence of the ancient and experienced sort of Christians;
and teach the younger what honor they owe to them that are their Elders in age
and grace: For whilst the Elder who are usually sober and peaceable, are duly
reverenced, the heat of rash and giddy youth, will be the better kept in order.

20. Neither neglect your interest in the Religious persons of your charge,
lest you lose your power to do them good; Nor yet be so tender of it, as to
depart from sober principles or ways to please them: Make them not your
Rulers; nor follow them into any exorbitancies, to get their love, or to escape
any of their censures.

21. Let not the Pastors contend among themselves: especially through envy
against any whom the people most esteem. A reproof of ignorant, pievish,
backbiting, quarrelsome Ministers.

22. Study our great pattern of Love and tenderness, meekness and patience: and
all those texts which commend these virtues; till they are digested into a
nature in you, that healing virtue may go from you, as wasting fire proceeds
from the incendiaries. The Texts recited.

DIRECTIONS FOR VVeak Christians, How they may escape the troubling, dividing
and endangering of the Church by their Errors in Doctrine, Worship, and
Church Communion.
IF we had never been warned by the History of the Sacred Scripture, or of the
former Ages of the Church, yet our experience in this present Age is enough to
tell both us and our Posterity, how great perturbations, and calamites may come
to the Church of Christ, by the miscarriages of the more zealous Professors of
Religion! and how great a hinderance such may prove to the prosperity of the
Gospel; to the Love and Unity of Christians; to the Reformation, and holy order
of the Congregations, and to all those good ends which are desired by
themselves. How great a dishonor they may prove to the Christian name, and
what occasions of hardening the wicked in their contempt of Godliness, to their
everlasting ruin, and the sufferings of Believers.

Therefore seeing the peace and welfare of the Church, is much more valuable,
than the peace and welfare of an individual soul, as I have Directed you how to
escape your own disturbance and undoing, so I think it as necessary to direct
you, how to escape being the Plagues and disturbers of the Church, and the
instruments of Satan in resisting the Gospel, and destroying others. And you
should be the more willing to hear me in this also, because by hurting others
you hurt your selves, and by wronging the Church of God, you cross your own
desires and ends (if you are Christians indeed;) and by doing good to others,
and furthering the cause of Godliness and Christianity, you do good to your
selves and further your own Cosolation and Salvation.

DIRECT. I.
FIrst, observe this General direction; see that you forget not the great
difference between Novices and experienced Christians; between the babes and
those at full age; between the weak and the strong in grace: Level them not in
your estimation. It is not for nothing that the Spirit of God in Scripture
makes so great a difference between them, as you may read in Heb. 5. 11, 12,
13, 14, and 6. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 3. 6. 1 John 2. 12, 13, 14. There are babes, strong
men, and fathers among Christians. There are some that are dull of hearing, and
have need of milk, and are unskilful in the word of righteousness, and must be
taught the principles; and there are others who can digest strong meat, who by
reason of Use, have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.
Novices must not be made Pastors of the Church. It is not for nothing that the
Younger are so often commanded reverence and submission to the Elder; and that
the Pastors and Governors of the Church, are usually called by the name of
Elders; because it was supposed that the elder sort were the most experienced
and wise, and therefore Pastors and Rulers were to be chosen out of them. And
why is it that children must so much honor their fathers and mothers, and must
be governed by them? It is not merely because generation gives the Parents a
propriety in their children: For God would not have folly to be the governor
of wisdom, upon pretense of such propriety: But it is also because that it must
ordinarily be supposed that Infants are ignorant, and Parents have
understanding, and are fit to be their Teachers, as having had longer time and
helps to learn, and more experience to make their knowledge clear and firm. If
the young and unexperienced were ordinarily as wise as the aged or mature, why
are not children made governors of their Parents, or at least commanded to
instruct and teach them, as ordinarily as Parents must do their children? The
Lord Jesus himself would be subject to his mother and reputed father in his
Childhood. Luke 2. 51. Can there be a livelier conviction of the arrogance of
those novices, who proudly slight the judgments of their elders, as presuming
groundlesly that they are wiser than they? Yea Christ would not enter upon his
public Ministry or Office, till he was about thirty years of age. Luke 3. 23.
He is blind that perceives not in this example, a most notorious Condemnation
of the pride of those that run with the shell on their head into the Ministry,
or that hasten to be Teachers of others, before they have had time or means to
learn; and that deride or vilisie the judgments of the aged, who differ from
their conceits, before they understand the things in which they are so
confident. It was thought a good answer, in John 9. 21. [He is of age, ask
him:] But they that are under age now think their words to be the wisest,
because they are the boldest and the fiercest. The old were wont to bless the
young, and now the young deride the old. It is the character of a truculent
people Deuteronomy. 28. 50. that they regard not the person of the old: that is, They
reverence not their age. How many vehement commands are there in Solomon's
Proverbs to the younger sort, to hearken to the counsel of their Parents? The
contrary was the ruin of Eli's sons; and the shame of Samuels, 1 Samuel 8. 1, 5.
Was Rehoboam unwise in forsaking the counsel of the aged, and harkning to the
young and rash? And are those people wise that in the Mysteries of Salvation,
will prefer the vehement passions of a novice, before the well-setled judgment
of the experienced aged Ministers? I know that the old are too often ignorant,
and that wisdom does not always increase with age: But I know withal, that
Children are never fit to be the Teachers of the Church; And that old men may
be foolish, but too young men are never wise enough for so high a work. We are
not now considering, what may fall out rarely as a wonder, but what is
ordinarily to be expected.

Most of the Churches confusions and divi^^ons, have been caused by the younger
sort of Christians: Who are in the heat of their zeal, and the infancy of
understanding: Who have affection enough to make them drive on, but have not
judgment enough to know the way. None are so fierce and rash in condemning the
things and persons which they understand not, and in raising clamours against
all that are wiser and soberer than they. If they once take a thing to be a sin
which is no sin, or a duty which is no duty, there is no person, no Minister,
no Magistrate, who has age, or wisdom or piety enough, to save them from the
injuries of juvenile temerity, if they do not think and speak and do according
to their green and raw conceits.

Remember therefore to be always sensible of the great disadvantages of youth,
and to preserve that reverence for experienced age, which God in nature as well
as in Scripture has made their due. If time and labor were not necessary to
maturity of knowledge, why do you not trust another with your health, as well
as a studied experienced Physician, and with your Estates, as well as a studied
Lawyer? And why do no Seamen trust any other, to govern the ship, as well as
an experienced Pilot? Do you not see that all men ordinarily are best, at that
which by long study they have made their profession.

I know those that I have now to do with will say, that Divinity is not learnt
by labor and men's teaching, as other Sciences and Arts are; but by the
teaching of the spirit of God: and therefore the youngest may have as much of
it as the eldest.

Answ. There is some truth and some falsehood, and much confusion, in this
objection. It is true that the saving knowledge of Divinity, must be taught by
the Spirit of God: But it is false that labor and humane teaching are not the
means which must be used by them, who will have the teaching of the spirit. And
the objection confounds, 1. The spirits teaching us by inditing the
Scripture, with the spirits teaching us the meaning of the Scripture. 2 And it
confounds the common knowledge of Divinity, with the saving knowledge of it.
No man comes to a common knowledge, fit for a Teacher of others, without the
spirits teaching us by the Scripture: For that was the first part of the
spirits teaching us, to inspire the Prophets and Apostles to deliver a
teaching, Word to the Church, by which we might all be taught of God through
all generations. But many men have excellent common knowledge, by this word,
and by the common help of the spirit, without that special help which begets
saving knowledge. Many prophesied and workt miracles in Christ's name, who had
no saving knowledge of him, Mat. 7. 22, 23. And Paul rejoiced that Christ was
preached, even by them that did it of strife and envy, to add affliction to his
bonds: Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. saving knowledge must have a special help of
grace; And they which had but Solomon's knowledge, may by the spirit have saving
knowledge in a little time, by bringing it to the heart, and making it clear,
and lively and effectual. But that may be a means of saving others, which
saves not the man that has it. And all knowledge requires time and labor,
to obtain it, though the Spirit gives it, and though it may be sanctified to
us in a little time.

1. Consider I pray you, why else it is, that God has so multiplied commands,
to dig for it as for Silver, and search for it as a hidden treasure: to cry for
Knowledge and lift up our voice for understanding: to wait at the posts of
wisdoms doors: to search the Scriptures and meditate in them day and night: Is
not this such study and labor as men use, to get understanding in other kind
of professions? Are not these the plain commands of God? and are they not their
deceivers who contradict them.

2. Is it not a blaspheming of Gods spirit, to make it the Patron of men's sloth
and idleness, under pretense of magnifying grace? When so many Texts command us
diligence, and slothfulness is so great a sin? And none are so forward to
preach as these same men that cry down men's teaching.

3. Why has God settled a Teaching Office in his Church, and commands all to
attend and hear and learn; if we are taught by the Spirit without man's help?
Why were the Apostles sent out into all the world? And why are they commanded
to teach all Nations, and to teach the Church all that Christ commanded them?
and why does he promise to be with them to the end of the world? but that this
is the way of the Spirits teaching, to teach those first who are our outward
teachers, and then to help us to understand them? And those are taught of God,
who are taught by those who are sent of God to be their teachers, and have the
inward concurrence of his grace.

4. Advise with the experience of all the world who was the man that ever you
knew able to expound one Chapter in the Bible, by the inward teaching of the
Spirit alone without any labor of his own, or help from others, by voice or
writing? Where dwells that man who by mere inspiration, can turn one Chapter
out of Hebrew or Greek into the vulgar tongue? The first part of our preaching
or publishing the Scriptures is by Translating them into a language which is
understood. When Ezra in his Pulpit of wood, did read the Law and give the
sense, the meaning is, that he read it in the ancient Hebrew tongue in which it
was written, and turned it into the language which the Jews then used (who were
grown much strangers to their ancient speech.) Where is the man that can
solidly unfold any Doctrine of Divinity, which he never read or heard of, or
can teach that truth, and defend that Religion, which he was never taught by
man? He is a stranger in the world who sees not, that as in Law and Physic
and other professions, though some are ignorant even when they are old, yet
commonly all men are wisest and ablest in their own profession, and those know
most, who having natural capacities have had best help, and longest time, and
hardest studies, the Spirit assisting them by his common help to make it
Knowledge, and by his special grace to make it a sanctifying knowledge.
Therefore remember to give due respect to them that have been longer in Christ
than you, and to them that have longer studied the Scriptures, and to them that
have had greater helps and experience: And do not too easily imagine, that
those who are below them in all these advantages, are yet above them in sound
understanding: Though such a wonder may sometime come to pass.

DIRECT. II.
Observe well the secret and subtle workings of spiritual pride, and how
deep-rooted and dangerous a sin it is, and what special temptations to this
odious sin, the younger and empty^headed Christians have; that the resistance
of them may be your daily care.
PRide is the self-idolizing sin: the great rebel against God: the chief part
of the Devils image: that one sin which breaks every commandment: the Heart
of the old man: the root and Parent and summary of all other sin: the
Antichristian vice, which is most directly contrary to the life of Christ: the
principal object of Gods hatred and disdain, and the mark of those whom he
delights to tread down; and the certain Prognostic of dejection and
abasement, either by humbling repentance, or damnation.

It is called [Spiritual Pride] from the Object, when men are proud of
spiritual excellencies, real or supposed. And this is so much worse than Pride
of Beauty, apparel, riches, high places, or high birth, as the abuse of great
and excellent things, is worse than the abuse of vanities and tri^les: and as
things spiritual are in themselves more contrary to the nature of pride, and
therefore the sin has the greater enormity.

The common exercise of this Religious or spiritual Pride is first about our
Knowledge, and secondly about our Godliness or Goodness.

1 Pride of our understandings, works thus: First, a man that was formerly in
darkness, is much affected with the new-come light, and perceives that he
knows much more than he did before: And then he grows to a carnal and
corrupt estimation of it, valuing it more as Nature is pleased with it, than as
it is sanctified by it: Delighting in knowledge for it self, more than for the
purity, Love and heavenliness which it should effect. Then he looks about him
on the ignorant sort of people, who know not what he knows, and sees how far
they are below him: And he thinks with himself, what a difference has God
made between Me and Them: And because Thankfulness is a duty, he observes not
how Pride does twist it self with it, and creep in under the protection of its
name: And how Thankfulness and Pride have the same expressions, and both of
them say, I thank thee O Father that thou have hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and have revealed them to babes: I thank thee O God that I am not
as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican,
Luke 18. 11. And then he is so taken up with the things which he knows, that
he perceives not what knowledge yet he wants. And the deep affection which
his knowledge works in him, or the tickling pleasure which he has in
knowing, joined with this ignorance of his ignorance in other things, does make
him over-confident of all his apprehensions, as if every thing which he
imagines were an absolute certainty: And so he wants that humble suspicion
of his own understanding, which a true acquaintance with his ignorance would
have caused in him: And thus he grows to overvalue all his own conceivings;
and to under-value all the opinions and reasonings of others, which are
contrary to his own: And thence he proceeds to corrupt his Religion with such
mis-apprehensions; and his rash unsuspected understanding entertains one error
first, and then that lets in many more; till he have espoused a self-chosen
frame of doctrine, instead of the sacred truths of God, and method of the
Gospel: And from hence he proceeds to choose his Religious exercises also,
according to these mis-apprehensions: These make him Duties which are no
Duties, and sins which are no sins: And thus he calls evil, good, and good,
evil; and puts darkness for light, and light for darkness; bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter. And having made him a Religion of his own, he confidently
thinks that it is of God: And next he valueth all men that he has to do with
according as they are nearer or farther off, from this which he accounts the
way of God: He chooses his Church or party whom he will join with, by the test
of this Religion which his pride has chosen: He zealously declaimeth against
the opposers of his way, as against the adversaries of truth and Godliness, and
consequently of God himself. He prays up his opinions, and preaches them up,
and contendeth for them; and prays and preaches and disp^teth down all that
^s against them. He labors to strengthen the party that is for them, and to
weaken that which is against them: And thus he divides the kingdom and family
of Christ; He destroys first, the Love of his brother and neighbor in
himself, and then labors to destroy it in all others, by speaking against
those that are not of his way, with contempt and obloquy to represent them as
an ^^lovely sort of men: And if the interest of his cause and party do require
it, perhaps he will next destroy their persons: And yet all this is done in
zeal of God, and as an acceptable service to him: And they think all are
Ne^ters and Lukewarm, who prosecute not the Schism as fervently as they, and
fight not against Love with as much vehemence: Yea and in all this, they are
still con^ident, that they L^ve the Brethren with a special Love, and make it
the mark that they are Christ's disciples, and that they are passed from death
to life, because they love the party and persons, who are of their own opinion
and way. And thus PRIDE insensibly, while they perceive it not at all, does
choke their Opinions, their Religions, their Parties, and make their Duties and
their sins, and rule their judgments, affections and their actions; which is
all but the same thing, which the Scripture in one word calls HERESY. And all
that I have said, you may find said in other words in the third Chapter of
James.

And there are two things which greatly promote this sin: The one is a conceit
that all their apprehensions are the Spirits dictat^s, or the effect of its
illumination. And the works and teachings of the spirit, are not to be
contradicted, or suspected, but to be honored. Therefore they think that it is
a resisting of the spirit, to resist their judgment: And they are persuaded
that their apprehensions are caused by the spirit, partly because they had no
such thing whilst they lived in wickedness, but it came in either with their
change or shortly after: And therefore they think that the same light which
showed them their sinful state, does show them also all these principles: And
partly because they find themselves as deeply ^ffected with these
misapprehensions, as with other which are sound and right; therefore they are
confident that they come from the same spirit: And specially when these
thoughts come in upon the reading of the Scripture, or in meditation, or after
earnest prayer to God, to teach them by his spirit and lead them into the
truth, and not to suffer them to err; and when they find that they have good
ends and meanings, and a desire to know the truth; all th^s persuades them
that it is the spirit from whom their thoughts proceed; when yet it may be no
such thing.

And another much greater and commoner cause of this self-conceitedness is
this: All men's understandings are naturally imperfect: Our knowledge about
Natural things is small and dark, much more about things supernatural: The
wisest must say, We know but in part: And the variety of men's degrees of
knowledge, joined with the difference of their educations, and advantages and
foregoing thoughts, does make as great a diversity of understandings as of
complexions: And yet it is very hard to any man, to have a sufficient
diffidence and suspicion of his mistaking mind. For what a man knows, he
knows that he knows. But no man that erreth does know that he erreth: For
that is a contradiction. If I knew that I erred in judgment, I must know that
the thing is otherwise than I judged it to be: which is impossible to the same
understanding at the same time: For then judging were no judging as being
contrary to knowledge: When I see such a difficulty about a point, as to pass
no judgment at all, but remain in mere suspense, then I can easily perceive
that I am ignorant of it: But when I pass any judgment, I cannot perceive that
my judgment is false, except it be in the cure of it, and by the same light
which changes it: when I err, I can never know that I err, but in sensu
diviso, when I cease my error: when I know that I erred, I so err no longer.
And because every thing which appears to us, does appear in some kind of
light or other, and appears in some form, and as clothed with some qualities,
the understanding therefore presently has some thought or other of it: If we
take any notice of it, we shall have some kind of conception and opinion of it:
And few things in the world do appear to us in such equal diverse shapes, as to
leave the understanding wholly dubious, whether it be this or that. Though of
that which has no appearance at all, I am wholly ignorant, and have no
conception. And when one part of a thing is seen, and many other parts of it
are unseen, we are all apt to conceive of the whole according to the part which
we see, and not allow a just suspension or suspicion for all the parts which
are unseen. That which I see, affects me as a thing seen: But that which I
see not, is nothing to me, and therefore affects me not at all. That part
which I know, I know that it is, and so far, what it is: It is in my mind and
memory: But that part which I know not, I know not that it is, or know not what
it is: so that seeing one part of things, and not seeing another, (yea perhaps
many others,) does not only cause our error in judging of them, but also makes
it very hard, to question or distrust our judgments: For we must not be
Scepticks and doubt of all things: Nor must we deny belief to so much as is
revealed to us: And therefore however at the present we apprehend things, just
such we are usually confident that they are. And in this difficulty all error
and the lamentable consequences of it do come in.

But what shall a man do in so hard a straight? Why this every humble man must
do. He must tread safely, and proceed warily, and try the spirits, and try the
doctrines offered him thoroughly, and this by all the means which God has
appointed him for that use. He must not strive against the light; but he must
take heed of taking darkness for light, or hearkening to the deceiver, when he
transformeth himself into an angel of light: (which is not unusual) what comes
with evidence of truth must be received as truth, and held fast, and not again
let go; however sometimes it may have a second and third trial. And when you
see any truth, remember that it is still with a defective sight, and that you
see but in part: And therefore allow a freedom in your understandings, to
receive the rest. You are certain that you see not all that is to be seen, of
any Doctrine or Science, any more than of any creature: And you are uncertain
what influence the unknown parts, would have upon that part which you know, or
what alteration it would make upon your apprehension, if you saw them
altogether in their connection. Therefore be sure that in your most confident
apprehensions, you never forget that there is still much more unknown to you
than you yet know. And this will preserve a humility and modesty in your
understandings and a capacity and fitness to receive more knowledge: When the
forgetting of this, will make you proud and arrogant and presumptuous, and like
the fool that rages and is confident, even in your ignorance and shame; and
will shut up your minds against that knowledge which you want.

But especially if you know that your advantages for knowledge have been less
than other men's: that you are young, or that it is but a few years since you
entered upon the study of the Scriptures, or that you have not any stronger
natural parts than other men; or that you have not had that measure of Learning
which might further your knowledge of the holy Scriptures; but that others that
differ from you have had much more of all these helps and means than you;
common reason here commands you to be modest, and not over-confident in your
own opinion, nor too much to slight the judgments of such others.

Especially if those that differ from you, be not only more Learned, but as
truly conscionable as you, and as like to be unfeigned lovers of truth, and
have prayed more, and meditated more, and have had more religious experiences
than your selves: And yet more, if they are the greater number of the godly
that differ from you, and you are singular in your conceits; in this case rash
confidence in your own opinions, is too palpable a sign of a religious pride.

Obj. But the Learned men are not always the wisest, in the matters of
Religion. Answ. Many men are Learned in the Languages and Sciences, who are not
Learned in the Scriptures; because they applied not their stud^es that way. And
many men are Learned in the Scriptures, and the Sacred tongues, who yet live in
sin, though they are able to teach the truth for others. But those that well
understand the Scriptures, without Learning the Languages which they are
written in, and the Customs of those times and Countries, or without much
reading and long study both of the Scriptures themselves, and the writings of
them that better understand them, are so few, so very few, if any at all, that
if you will pretend to be one of them, you had need of some miracle or
something like a miracle, to make your selves or others bebelieve that you are
not deceived. See what I have said of this at large, in my Unreasonableness of
Infidelity.

Obj. The greater number are not always in the right; therefore why should my
singularity discourage me? Answ. The greater number through the world are not
in the right about Christiany, for they are not Christians. And the greater
number of vulgar Christians be not in the right perhaps in many points of
Learning, and Scholastic controversies, because they are not Learned in such
controversies. But all Godly men and Christians are in the right in all points
essential to Godliness and Christianity: And therefore they are in the certain
way of life. And if in any integral or accidental point, you think that you are
wiser than the greater part, of men as Learned and as Godly as your self, you
must give very good proof of it to your self and others, before it is to be
believed. I know that in all ages, God gives some few men more excellent
natural parts, than others: and he engages some in deeper and more laborious
studies than others: and he blesses some men's studies more than others: and
therefore there are still some few who know more, than the rest of the Country
or of mankind: and it were well for the rest if they knew these and would learn
of them: But these are such as come to their knowledge by hard and laborious
studies and meditation, though also by the spirit blessing their endeavors:
And they are such as give proof of the knowledge which they pretend to: And
they are such as employ their knowledge to preserve the peace and concord of
believers, and do not proudly make a stir with it, to set up their own names,
though thereby they set the world on fire.

Make therefore no more of these vain defenses of your Pride: Let no man think
of himself and his own understanding above what is meet. I persuade you not to
deny any truth which indeed you know, nor to doubt of any thing which is made
truly certain to you. But value not your understandings above their worth, and
fix not too rashly upon your first apprehensions; and go not away with a
passionate confidence, in your poor, raw, untryed and defective conceptions.
But remember that you know but little, and must have time and labor to grow up
to the rest. Be not wise in your own conceits. Romans 12. 16. and 11. 25. Prove.
26. 5. and 28. 11. And this is commonly the sin of the slothful, that never
were at that pains for knowledge, by which it must be attained. The sluggard is
wiser in his own conceit, than seven men that can render a reason, Prove. 26.
16. You little think when you are conceited of your knowledge, that you are
further from wisdom than a fool. Prove. 26. 12. See thou a man wise in his own
conceit? There is more hope of a fool, than of him. Be not wise in thy own
eyes, Prove. 3. 3. Woe to them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight. Isa. 5. 21. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self
over-wise: why should thou destroy thy self? The self-conceited must become
fools in their own esteem, if ever they will be wise, as the worldly wise must
own that which is folly in the judgment of the world, if ever they will be
wise: 1 Cor. 3. 18.

2. And there is a Religious Pride of Goodness, as well as of Knowledge, which
must yet more carefully be avoided, as being yet worse than the former, as the
thing abused is much better. And this works as subtly and secretly as the
former. It may not only consist with many complaints and confessions of
sinfulness, weakness and unworthyness, but even with doubts of sincerity and so
much dejectedness as seems to draw near to desparation. It is an ordinary
thing to hear the same persons talk in a complaining, doubting and almost
despairing manner of speech, and yet to have high expectations of respect from
others, and to be most proudly impatient of the least undervaluing or neglect.
Yea Pride will make an advantage to it self, of all these humble confessions
and complaints: And it is an old observation, that many are proud of their
humility: For though it be true that Austin says, that Grace is a thing which
no man can use amiss; the meaning is only, that Grace efficiently can do
nothing ami^s: (For if it do amiss so far it is not grace:) Yet objectively all
Grace may be abused, that is, a man may make it the object of his Pride, and
the occasion of many other sins.

And this Religious Pride of Goodness, does ordinarily work under the pretext
of Thankfullness to God for his grace, and Zeal for Holiness: But it may be
known by this, that it always tends to lift us up, and to the diminishing of
Love to oothers, and to the contempt of the weak, and the censuring of our
brethren, and the division and disturbance of the Church of God. They are
lamentable effects which this Pride produces, in the Church and all Societies
where it comes. It makes all men's Goodness seem little, except our own: It
causes the people to undervalue their Pastors, and turns compassion of men's
weaknesses into a sour contempt: It sets a man in his own conceit, so near
to God, that he looks down on other men, as earthly animals in comparison of
himself. It makes new terms of Church Communion, and teaches men to make
narrower the door of the Church, than God has made it: It causes men to deny
and v^li^ie Gods grace, in those that answer not their expectations: And to
think that the Church is not worthy of their Communion: And to think that none
are so fit as they, to be the Reformers of the Church and of the world.

I entreat those who are in danger of this pernicious sin, to think with
themselves. 1. What a heinous crime and folly it is for one that but lately was
a child of the Devil, and a sink of sin, to be proud so quickly of their
goodness: And for one that so lately was groaning and weeping with a broken
heart for a sinful life, to be already puffed up with the conceits of
godlyness. And for one who daily makes confession to God, of a sinful heart,
and a faulty life, and of great unworthyness, to contradict all this by an
over-valuing of his own piety; And how incongruous it is for one, who
professes to hope for justification by free grace and mercy only, and to have
nothing of his own but what is defiled, and who abhors the Doctrine of merit,
and talks so much of our emptyness and insufficiency, to be yet puffed up
with the conceit of his spirituality and worth. And what an odious
self-con^radiction it is, to make your self like the Devil in pride, because
you think you are like God in holiness.

2. And consider, that the more you are proud of your Goodness, the less you
have to be proud of: If this sin be predominant, it is certain that you have no
saving grace at all: And what an odious thing and miserable case is it, to be
proud of Holiness, when you are unholy; and to be damned both for want of it,
and for being proud of it: That a man should be proud of that, for want of
which he must suffer the fire of Hell! But if your pride be not predominant,
yet it is certain that in what measure soever you have that vice, in that
measure you are destitute of grace: For true grace and pride are as contrary as
life and death.

3. And study well the meaning of all these Scriptures (For you shall not say
that I mis-interpret them to you.) Why was it that Christ mentions the
Parable of the Pha^^see, and the Publican? one thanking God that he was not so
bad as others, and the other thinking himself unworthy to look up to heaven.
Luke 18. 10, 11. etc. Why did he give us the parable of the prodigal who
confesses that he was unworthy to be called a Son; and of his elder brother
who swelled with envy at his entertainment? Why was it that Christ seemed not
strict enough to the Pharisees, in keeping the Sabbath, nor in his Diet, nor in
his Company, but they called him a gluttonous person and a wine-bibber, and a
friend of Publicans and sinners? Was it not because their Pride and
superstition made them think too highly of their own religiousness? and to make
sins and duties which God never made, and then to condemn the innocent for want
of this humane religiousness? What was the sin condemned in Isa. 65. 5. [Which
say, stand by thy self; come not near to me; for I am holier than thou.] What
means that command in Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife or vain
glory; but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better than themselves]
Read this verse over upon your knees, and beg of God ^o write it on your
hearts: And I would wish all Assemblies of dividers and unwarrantable
Separatists, to write it over the doors of their meeting places. And join with
it Romans 12. 10. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in
honor preferring one another (that is, before your selves.) But specially read
and study, Iam. 3.

In a word, if God would cure the Church of Religious pride, the pride of
wisdom, and the pride of Piety and Goodness, the Church would have fewer
Heresies and contentions, and have much more peace, and much more true wisdom
and Goodness it self.

DIRECT. III.
Overvalue not the common gift of utterance, nor a high Profession, as if the
presence or absence of either of them, did prove the presence or absence of
true saving grace.
YET I shall anon tell you, that neither of these must be undervalued, nor
accounted needless useless things. But the overvaluing them, has caused great
distempers in the minds and affections, and communion and practice, of many
very well meaning Christians. When God had first brought me from among the more
ignorant sort of people, and when I first heard religious persons pray without
forms, and speak affectionately and seriously of spiritual and heavenly things,
I thought verily that they were all undoubted Saints; and the sudden
apprehension of the difference of their gifts and speech from others, made me
think confidently that the one sort had the mark of God upon them, and the
other had nothing almost of God at all: Till ere long of those whom I so much
honored, one fell off to sensuality and to persecuting formality, and another
fell to the foulest heresy; and another to disturb the Churches peace by
turbulent animosities and divisions. But the experience of this Kingdom these
twenty six years, has done so much to convince the world what crimes may
stand with high professions, that I know not that I ever met with the man, that
would deny it: seeing every sect casts it upon all the rest, however some of
them would justify themselves. But I greatly fear lest the generation which is
now springing up and knew not those men, nor their miscarriages, will lose the
benefit of these dreadful warnings, and scarce believe what high professors
did turn the proudest overturners of all Government; and resisters and
despisers of ministry and holy order in the Churches and the most railing
Quakers, and the most filthy and blaspheming Ranters; to warn all the world to
take heed of being Proud of superficial gifts and high professions* and that
he that stanndeth in his own conceit^ should take heed lest he fall.

When gifts* (...) utterance in prayer or talking are thus overvalued and high
professions are taken to have more in them th^n they have, men presently moddle
their ^ffections, and then the Church according to these mis-conceivings: And ^
talkative person who by company and use has got more of these gifts, than
better Christians, shall be extolled and admired, when many a humble upright
soul, that wants such utterance, shall be said to be no professor, and so to
be unworthy of the Communion of Saints.

Mistake me not: I know that though profession may be without sincerity, yet
sincerity cannot be without some profession, when there is opportunity to make
it: And I know that Grace is a vital principle, and like fire which will work
and seek a vent if you would restrain it: And that Gifts of utterance are great
mercies of God for the Edification of the Church. But here lies your unhappy
error in this case. 1. You take the common profession of Christianity to be no
profession at all, because there is wanting a profession of greater zeal and
forwardness. When as the common sort of people in this Land, do profess to
stand to their baptismal Covenant, in which they own the essential parts of
Godliness and Christianity, and all that is of absolute necessity to Salvation.
He that truly understands the baptismal Covenant, and Consents to it, does
perform all which is necessary to a state of grace: If he profess this, he
professes, both true faith and repentance, and sanctification and
mortification, and all that is necessary to make a man a Christian. How then
can you say that these are no Professors? I tell you (except a few Apostates)
the common sort of people in this Land are Professors of true faith and
godliness! Whether they are true Professors without dissembling is another
question; but they are professors of the truth.

If you say, that Their ignorance and ungodly lives does show that they either
understand not the baptismal Covenant, or Consent not to it. I answer, Mark
well what you say your selves: For this does but show that they are Hypocrites:
You cannot say then that they are no Professors, but that they are di^sembling
professors. They profess the truth, they do not truly and uprightly profess it.
I tell you, all the common sort of the people in England, are either Saints or
Hypocrites: see how I have moved this to them in my Treatise called The formal
Hypocrite. They all profess enough to save them if they sincerely professed it.
He that is baptized and professes himself a Christian, and yet is a drunkard,
a swearer, a fornicator, or such like, is certainly an Hypocrite as going
against his own profession: The very Creed, Lords Prayer and Ten Commandments
have enough to condemn him as an hypocrite. And will you now come in, and
justify these men from their hypocrisy, by saying that they are no
Professors? If they were no Professors, they could be no Hypocrites, but mere
Atheists or Infidels. I know that those are the highest sort of Hypocrites, who
counterfeit the highest zeal and piety, by the highest profession: But this is
but a difference in degree. Who ever professes to be a Christian, professes
true Repentance, faith and holiness, and is an Hypocrite if he be not a Saint.

And then Consider, that if you would exclude any of these from the Communion
of the Church, it must not be because they are no professors, but because they
are hypocrites, ignorant or scandalous? And if so, then no man must be shut
out, but upon sufficient proof: An unproved hypocrite or sinner, is no
hypocrite or sinner in the judgment of the Church: and therefore Hypocrites are
always a great part of the visible Church. Otherwise Church Communion would be
founded on mere injustice and tyranny, if men shall be called Ignorant,
Scandalous and Hypocrites without proof. And therefore to exclude baptized
professors, by whole Parishes or Multitudes, without bringing proof against
each person one by one, is quite to over-turn Christ's rules and order, and
Church Constitutions and all Church justice. I confess it is the thing which I
have long lamented (and often written of especially in my Treatise of
Confirmation) that those who are baptized in Infancy, are not called to a more
explicit understanding profession of the Covenant then made, and have not a
more solemn transition into the number of adult Communicants: And we are not
out of hope that this may at last be brought to pass. But in the mean time, the
same persons though less regularly do make profession of the same thing both at
the Lords Table, and in their public worship, and in their common claim to the
faith and honor of Christianity, so that all such must be rejected as
hypocrites upon acc^sation and proof of Impenitency in some gross sin, and not
in the lamp as if they were no professors. For professors certainly they are.

And though I abhor their malignity who would vilisie Religion, by overhasty
accusing of higher Professors; and would flatter the wicked and ignorant, by
making an indifferency and tepidity seem sufficient in the things of God; yet
God would have me bear witness to this truth to cure some men's contrary
extreme: that as this age as is said, does need no proof, how heinously high
professors may miscarry; so in the place where I exercised my Ministry, I found
some give me a satisfying evidence in their last sickness, that they had long
lived a truly godly life, who were never noted by their Neighbors, for any
extraordinary zeal at all. If you ask me, How can it stand with grace to be so
much hid? I answer, They made the common profession of Christianity: they
usually attended the public worship: they lived blamelesly in their places:
but they were of silent retired dispositions, and were inferiors who by their
superiors were restrained from private meetings and some converse with more
zealous persons which they desired. And for ought you know there may be very
many such; who must not be rejected as no professors, nor without a particular
accusation and proof: unless you would be used in the like kind your selves.

DIRECT. IV.
Affect not to be made eminent and Conspicuous in Holiness, by standing at a
further distance from these lower Professors, than God would have you.
IT is the loathsome scab of the Romish Church that they who will be taken for
Religious, must go into a Monastery of Friars and Nans, and separate themselves
from the rest of Christians, as worldly secular people: that so their Religion
may be a noted thing, and they may be set up in their singularity, as public
spectacles, for the world to admire: Though perhaps they come thither but under
the gripes of Conscience, to expiate the guilt of whoredom, murder, or some
notorious sins, which the contemned seculars never committed. And it is
somewhat easy to proud corrupted nature to enter into a life of greater
self-denial, than most Monasticks are put upon, when by it they shall be thus
separated from the rest of mankind, as a people of more admired holiness. To
set our selves up in a separated society, as persons whom the world must
account more Religious than the common sort of Christians, has so much
oftentation in it, as is a great allurement to Pride. For many a one who
perceives how childish a thing it is, to set out ones self to be observed for
fine clothes, or for bodily comeliness, or for high entertainments,
curiosities, houses, lands or such vanities, does yet think that it is an
excellent thing, to be honored by men, especially by the wisest and the best,
as a person of Wisdom, and Piety, and Goodness. And indeed it is the truest
and the highest Honor to be Wise and Good: And it is exceeding natural to man
to desire honor: And it is lawful to have a due and moderate sense and regard
to our honor: And all this being so, how easy is it for Pride to take this
advantage, and to go a little farther, while we think that we go but this far,
and keep within our bounds.

And the root of the error lies in Atheism, Self-fishness, and Carnality. By
the first, we neglect the Honoring of God, which should be our utmost aim, and
to which all our own Honor should be purely referred, as a means: By the
second, we Idolize our selves, and are sunk into, and centered in our selves,
and seek that honor to our selves, which we should wholly refer to God alone.
And by the third, we overvalue Man and his esteem, and live upon the thoughts
and breath of mortals, and seek the honor which is given by one to another
more than the honor which is of God: Whereas we should make it our grand care
and study, to be pleasing to our Maker, which is the highest honor, and lawful
and necessary to be sought; and should be more indifferent as to the esteem and
thoughts of man, as being no further regardable, than it conduces to our
divine and ultimate end.

And when Pride has thus turned the eye of the soul, from God, to our selves,
and to the Creature, it is a working sin, and will be always seeking to fetch
in fuel for its self to feed on, and to find out ways to make our selves
conspicuous and observed in the world: And to separate our selves into distinct
societies, that the world may see we are above Communion with the colder duller
sort of Christians, is one of the most notable means to this self-exalting end.

And many Christians that are more humble do yet so much mis-understand the
Scripture principles of Communion, that they think they should corrupt the
Church, and sin against God, if they stood not in a separated state from those
of the colder sort. And this is caused much, by taking those Scriptutes to
speak of all cold and carnal Christians, which speak only of the Heathen and
Infidel world. And this comes to pass by the happiness of their birth and
breeding: because they are born and bred where there are almost none, but
professed Christians, and they see not the swarms of Heathens that worship
idols and creatures, or of the Infidels who scorn and persecute the Christian
name, therefore they live as if there were no such persons. They know that the
world and the Church comprehend all mankind; and that the Church is gathered
out of the World: And because they see the Church, but see not the world, out
of which it is gathered; therefore they are looking for the world in the
Church, and think that the commoner sort of Christians are the World; and the
better and more zealous sort only are the Church, which therefore must be
gathered out of the World: And so they gather the Church out of the Church,
while they think that they gather it out of the World. And all this is because
they know no more than they see, or at least are affected with no more; but
live as if England or Europe were all the world. One years abode in Asia or
Africa might cure this error.

In 2 Cor. 6. 12, 13, etc. the Apostle forbids the Christians to marry with
Infidels; because light has no communion with darkness, nor righteousness with
unrighteousness, nor Christ with Belial. And therefore infers, that he that
believes has no part with an Infidel, nor the Temple of God any any agreement
with Idols. And for this he cites the words of the Prophet, Come out from
among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing. All these
words which the Apostle so plainly speaks only against marrying with Infidels
and Idolaters, and having communion with them, either intimately or in their
sin, are by abundance of ignorant Professors abused, as if they had commanded
us to separate from the colder and common sort of Christians, and to come out
of the Church whereof they are members. What profaning of Gods word is this?
and how gross and palpable a contradicting of its plain expressions? It was a
Church of such mixed Christians as our Churches do consist of, to which the
Apostle wrote those words; And because he commands them to separate from
intimacy with Heathens and Infidels (yet so as when they are once married to
them, to continue in it); therefore these men say, that one part of the Church
is called to come forth and separate from the rest.

And with the like abuse they apply the command [Come out of Babylon] to them
that have no communion with Babylon; And when ignorance, uncharitableness, and
passion, have taught them to call Christ's Churches Babylon, they add sin to
sin, the sin of separation to the sin of slander and reproach; and abuse the
Text according to their false exposition of it.

DIRECT. V.
Understand rightly the true difference between the Mystical and the Visible
Church, and the qualification of their Members; and do not confound them, as if
it were the same persons only, that must be Members of both.
THE Mystical Church indeed has none but true Saints. But the Visible Church
contains multitudes of Hypocrites; who profess themselves to be what they are
not: They profess to believe in God, while they neglect him; and to be ruled by
God, while they disobey him, and are ruled by their lusts: They profess to Love
God and forsake the world, whilst they love the world, and God is not in all
their thoughts: They profess to love the holy Scriptures, whilst they neglect
them and love not the holiness of their precepts. They profess to believe in
Jesus Christ, whilst their hearts neglect his grace and government. They
profess to believe in the holy Spirit, and to hold the Communion of Saints in
the Catholic Church; whilst they resist the Spirit, and love not Saints. All
this shows that they are Hypocrites. But abundance of Hypocrites are in the
Visible Church. Nay, God would have no Hypocrites cast out, but those who
bewray their hypocrisy by impenitency in proved Heresy or gross sin.

We must not model the Church of Christ according to our private fancies: We
are not the Lords of it, nor are we sit or worthy to dispose of it Look into
the Scripture, and take it for the Rule, and see there of what manner of
persons the Visible Church has been constituted in all ages of the world till
now. In the first Church in Adams family, a Cain, was the first born member,
and so continued, till he was excommunicated for the murder of his brother. In
a Church of eight persons who were saved out of all the world, the Father and
Pastor was overtaken with gross drunkenness, and one of his sons was a cursed
Cham. In a Church of six persons saved from the wickedness of Sodom, two of
them (Lot's sons in law) perished in the flames among the unbelievers: a third
was turned into a pillar of salt: the Father and Pastor was drunk two nights
together, after the sight of such a terrible miracle, and after so strange a
deliverance to himself: and committed incest twice in his drunkenness: The two
that remained (his daughters) caused his drunkenness purposely and committed
incest with him. In the Church in Abraham's family, there was an Ishmael: And in
the Church in Isaacs family there was an Esau: and even Rebeka and Jacob guilty
of deceitful equivocation: And Abraham and Isaac denied their wives to save
themselves in their unbelief. In Jacob's family was a Simeon and Levi, who
murdered multitudes under a pretense of Religion, and under the cover of false
deceit: And almost all his sons moved with envy, sold their brother Joseph for
a slave; and some were hardly kept from murdering him: And his daughter Dinah
was defiled by desiring to see the company and fashions of the world. In the
Church of the Israelites in the Wilderness, after all the miracles which they
had seen, and the mercies they had received, so great were their sins of
unbelief and murmuring, and lust, and whoredoms, and idolatry, and
disobedience, that but two of them that came out of Egypt, were permitted to
enter the promised land: In the times of the Judges they so often renewed their
idolatry, besides all their other sins, that they spent a great part of all
those ages in captivity for it. And when the villainies of Gibeah had imitated
the Sodomites, and ravished a woman to death, the Tribe of the Benjamites
defended it by a war, and that in three battles, till forty thousand of the
innocent Israelites were slain, and twenty five thousand of the Benjamites.
Look through all the Books of Samuel, the Kings, and Chronicles, and the
Prophets; from the sad story of the sons of Eli and of Samuel, to all the
wicked Kings that followed, who kept up odious Idolatry (even Solomon himself)
and scarce two or three of the best did put down the high places: And when
Hezekiah was zealous to reform, the hearts of the subjects were not prepared,
but derided or abused the Messengers whom he sent about, to call the people
home to God: Manasseh's wickedness is scarcely to be paralleled: And when God
sent his Prophets to call them to repentance, they mocked his Messengers, and
despised and abused his Prophets, till the wrath of the Lord arose, and there
was no remedy: 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. Read over the Prophets, and see there what
a people this Church of God was. The ten Tribes were drawn by Ier^boam to sin,
by setting up Calves at Dan and Beth-el, and making Priests of the vilest of
the people, and forsaking the Temple and the true worship of God, and the
lawful Priests. And these lawful Priests at Jerusalem, were ravening Wolves,
and greedy Dogs, and careless and cruel Shepherds: The false Prophets who
deceived the people were most accepted: The people are accused of cruelty,
oppression, whoredom, drunkenness, Idolatry, and hatred of those that would
reform them. They were grievous persecutors: Which of the Prophets did not your
fathers kill and persecute? says Christ, Matthew. 23. Yet this was the Church of
God, and many think his only visible Church: And all these twelve Tribes were
not so big as England, and were to the bigness of all the Earth, no more than
one tree to a large Wood or Forest.

But doubtless the Gospel Church was both more large and pure. Let us therefore
take a view of it: And I beseech you remember, that what I say is not to make
sin less odious, nor the Church or Godly less esteemed: but to show you the
frame of the visible Church in all Generations, and how it differs from the
invisible; lest you should take on you to be wiser than God, and to build his
house after a better rule than his Gospel, and the primitive pattern, and mar
all by being wise in your own conceits, and by being righteous overmuch.
Eccles. 7. And I pray you forget not, that the Primitive Church was the most
pure, and the pattern of those following; and had inspired Apostles to be its
Guides, and inspired Prophets to be its Helpers, and abundance of Miracles and
extraordinary gifts, to gather and edify it; to silence its enemies, and to
terrify and restrain offenders, and to bring up the Church to the highest
degree of holiness that could be well expected. And withal, the Members were
not driven in by force by Magistrates, nor allured by any worldly commodities,
but were a few Volunteers, who in a time of persecution, professed Christ, to
their hazard or suffering in the world. Yet see what they were.

The faultiness of the Teachers.

The Apostles before the death of Christ, though they had so long heard his
doctrine, and seen his miracles, understood not that he must die for our sins,
and be buried, and rise again, and ascend into Heaven, and there intercede for
us, and rule the Church. Ioh. 12. 16. and 10. 6. Luke 18. 34. and 9. 45. and
24. 43, 44, 45. Peter so much persuaded Christ from that suffering by which the
world was to be redeemed, that Christ speaks to him as he did to the Devil.
Matthew. 4. Get thee behind me Satan; for thou savourest not the things that be
of God, but those that be of men. Matthew. 16. 22, 23. James and his beloved
disciple John (called sons of thunder, perhaps for this or such like zeal)
would have called for fire from heaven to destroy the unbelieving adversaries
of the Gospel, and knew not of what spirit they were. Judas was one that was
sent out to preach the Gospel by Christ himself, (who knew his heart.) Many
that preached and prophesied and cast out Devils in his name, were workers of
iniquity, whom he never knew with special approbation. Matthew. 7. 22, 23. When
he came to his sufferings, they all slept when they should have watched and
prayed with him one hour in his agony; and this after his admonition. When they
should have confessed him in suffering they all forsook him and fled, Matthew.
26. 56. And Peter that seemed to stick closer to him, did with forswearing
thrice deny him, after he had promised to die with him, and not to forsake him,
though all forsook him* And when he was dead they said, Luke 24. We trusted
this was he that should have delivered Israel, as if their faith had been
extinct. And when he rose and appeared to them they hardly believed what they
saw: and Thomas, one of them, resolved that he would not believe, unless he
might put his fingers into his side. And when they spoke with him before his
Asce^sion, they dreamed still of an earthly grandeur, and asked him, Whether now
he would restore the Kingdom unto Israel? Act. 1. And they understood not the
descent of the Holy Ghost.

And when the Holy Ghost was come upon them, one of their first Deacons
Nicholas was the original of a Sect whose doctrine Christ did have. Paul and
Barnabas contended even to parting. Peter dissembled by a sinful separation,
walking not uprightly, and drew away Barn^bas into the dissimulation^ Gal. 2.
Phil. 1. 15, 16. [Som^ preach Christ even of envy, and strif^, and some of good
will. The one preach, Christ of contentions not sincerely, supposing to add
affliction to my bonds.] Many were made like the heads. of Sects, and some were
of Paul, and some of Apollo's, and some of Cephas (as the Papists be now.) And
some built hay and stubble, which must be consumed. 1 Cor. 3. 12, Of Timothy
and the rest Paul says* [I have no man like minded; for all seek their own,
and not the things which are Jesus Christ^. 3 Jo^. 9. 10. Diorrephes who loves
to have the (...) among them receives (...) not, prating, against us with
malicious words: and not content therewith, neither does he himself receive the
Brethren, and forbids them that would, and casts them out of the Church.]
As the Apostles themselves before Christ's death, were striving which of them
should be the greatest; so this vice still followed many of the Pastors; so
that Peter is fain to exhort them, not to Lord it over Gods heritage, nor to
rule them by constraint, but willingly. 1. Pet. 5. And what abundance of
Sect-masters did arise from among the Ministers of the Gospel in the Apostles
own times? Insomuch as Paul forewarneth the famous Church of Ephesus, not only
that grievous Wolves (that is, Heretics) should e^ter* that spared not the
flocks, but also that, of their own selves men should arise, speaking perverse
things to draw away disciples after them. Act. 20. 30. And in the Apostles
days, while one had a Prophecy and another a Psalm, etc. they brought
confusion into the Church-worship, even by abuse of extraordinary gifts: And
they so abused the Lovefeasts at the Lords Supper, that Paul was fain to
persuade them rather to eat at home. 1 Cor. 14. and 1 Cor. 11. so much of the
true state of the Primitive Teachers and Pastors of the Church.

The faults of the Church of Rome.
What Heretical Judaizers were among them, is intimated in c 1. and 3. to the
Romans. And how little they understood the doctrine of Justification is
intimated in cap. 3; and 4, and 5, and 6, and 7, and 8. What dissentions there
were about meats, and drinks, and days, the weak judging the strong, and the
strong despising the weak, appears, cap. 14, and 15. And some caused
divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which they had learned, serving
not the Lord Jesus but their own bellies, and by good words and fair speeches
deceiving the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 16, 17.

The faults of the Church of Corinth.
1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. [There are contentions among you -- Everyone of you says, I
am of Paul; and I of Apollo's, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Mark the
extent of the sin (every one of you) that is, very many among you, 1 Cor. 3.
13. I could not speak to you as spiritual, but as carnal -- For ye are yet
carnal -- v. 12. If any build on this foundation, wood, hay, stubble, -- v. 15.
he shall suffer loss. chap. 4. 18. 21. Some are puffed up -- Shall I come to
you with a rod or in love? -- chap. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. I speak to your shame, Is
there not a wise man among you? Because ye go to Law one with another (before
Heathens,) Nay you do wrong and defraud, and that your brethren. Know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? -- chap. 11. 17, 18,
19, 20, 21. I praise you not that you come together, not for the better but for
the worse. For first of all, when you come together in the Church. I hear that
that there be divisions among you -- For there must be also Heresies among you,
that they which are approved may be made manifest among you -- When you come
together into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper: For in eating
every one takes before other, his own supper, and one is hungry, and another
is drunken. Verse. 23. 30. He that eats and drinks unworth^ly, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body -- For this cause
many are weak and sick among you* and many sleep. Chap. 14. Reproves their
abuse of unknown tongues, and their disorder in Gods public worship -- Chap.
15. 12, 13, 14, 15. [If Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say
some among you, that there is no resurrection. But if there be no resurrection
of the dead, then Christ is not risen; And if Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is vain; yea and we are found false witnesses of
God -- v. 17. and ye are yet in your sins. 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. I fear lest when
I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found to you
such as ye would not. Lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes,
back-bitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults; and lest my God will humble me
among you, and that I shall bewail many that have sinned already, and have not
repented of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have
committed.] Besides that Paul and his Ministry was slandered and much slighted
among them, as by his large and vehement apologies and expostulations does
appear; These were the faults of the Church of the Corinthians.

The corruptions of the Churches of Galatia.
Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. I marvel that you are so soon removed, from him that
called you, to the grace of Christ, to another Gospel; which is not another;
but there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ:
But though ^e or an Augel from heaven, preach any other Gospel to you, than
that which we have preached to you, let him be accursed -- Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3. O
foolish Galathians! Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth?
before whose eyes -- Are ye so foolish? Having begun in the spirit, are ye now
made perfect by the flesh? Have ye suffered so many things in vain -- chap. 4.
9. How turn y^ again to weak and beggarly elements, whereto ye desire again to
be in bondage. verse. 10. 11. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and
years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed on you labor in v^in -- v. 16.
Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth? Tell me, ye that
desire to be under the Law -- v. 29. As then, he that was born after the flesh
persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even so it is now (The Legalists
persecuting the Apostles) Chap. 5. 2. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing. V. 3, 4. For I testify again to
every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law: Christ
is become of no effect to you. Who ever of you are justified by the Law, ye are
fallen from grace: v. 9. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 12. I would
they were even cut off which trouble you. Chap. 6. 12. As many as desire to
make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised.

The corruptions of the Church of Colosse.
Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world, why as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances? Touch
not, taste not, handle not (which all are to perish with the using) after the
Commandments and Doctrines of men? Which things have indeed a show of wisdom
in will worship.

The corruptions of the Church of Ephesus.
Rev. 2. 4, 5. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy first love -- Remember from whence thou art fallen, and do thy first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remo^e thy Candlestick.
Act. 20. 30. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, etc.
as aforesaid.

The corruptions of the Church of Pergamus.
Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16. I have a few things against thee, because thou have there
the^ that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling
block before the children of Israel; to eat things sacrificed to Idols; and to
commit fornication: so have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate -- Repent, or else I will --

The faults of the Church of Thyatira.
Rev. 2. 20, 21, 22, I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer
the woman Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to sed^ce
my s^rvants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols.

The faults of the Church of Sardis.
Rev. 3. 1. Thou have a name that thou live and art dead -- I have not found
thy works perfect before God. 4 Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which
have not defiled their garments.

The faults of the Church of Laodicea.
Rev. 3. 15, 16, 17. Thou art neither cold nor hot -- I will spue thee out of
my mouth -- and know not that thou art wretched and miserable and poor and
blind and naked.

I have been thus large in citing the words of the Text, to make it plain to
you, of what kind of Members the Visible Churches were then made up: And to
affect their hearts with the sense of their partiality, who can plead for many
things as duties, and plead against many things as sin, without one plain word
of Scripture on their side; and yet can read all these without either sense or
notice.

Yet mark, I pray you, that I am far from saying that God allows any of these
sins, or that any should make light of them: For all must abhor them: Nor do I
say, that none of the Churches ought to have excommunicated any of these
offenders for these sins. Some of them I doubt not, should have been cast out.
But these are the uses which I desire you to make of all these Texts.

First, before you judge any Church to be (...) Church, be able to prove it
has worse crimes to nullisie it than any of these had. For none of these were
for these faults pronounced no Churches of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, observe that no one Member, is in all these Scriptures, or any
other, commanded (...) come out and separate from any one of all these
Churches, as if their communion in worship were unlawful. And therefore before
you separate from any as judging communion with them unlawful, be sure that you
bring greater reasons for it, than any of these recited were.

DIRECT. VI.
Understand well the different conditions and terms of Communion with the
Church as invisible and as visible; and the different privileges of the
Members; that so you may not presume to impose any conditions which God has
not imposed; nor yet to grudge at the reception of those that are not
sanctified and sincere.
ALL Christians are agreed that it belongs to God only to make the conditions
of Church Communion; and therefore it belongs not to us to invent them, nor
to our wit to censure what God has done, but to search the Scripture till we
find it out, and then obey it. This is the great controversy which has
troubled the Church: When men know not who should be Members of the Church and
who not, and when they have no certain rule or character to know whom they must
receive, it is no wonder if confusion and contention be the complexion and
practice of such Churches. And here the Pastors have torn the Church, by
running into contrary extremes. Some have thought that the Visible Church must
be constituted only of such persons as satisfy the Pastors and the people of
the truth of their sanctification, by some special account of their conversion
or the work of grace upon their hearts, in a distincter manner than the ancient
Church required of the baptized: Wherein being agreed of no certain terms, to
know another sanctification by, their Churches are diversified according to
the measure of the strictness or largeness, censoriousness or charity of the
Pastors and the people; while one thinks that person to have true grace, whom
another thinks to have done. And so they that will be most uncharitable, do
pretend to the reputation of being the most pure; because they are most strict:
And multitudes are shut out whom Christ would have to be received, and his
children are numbered with the dogs.

On the other side there is one or two of late among us, who think that the
Church is but Christ's School, where he teaches the way to true Regeneration;
and not a Society of professed Regenerate ones or Saints: And that all who own
Christ as the Teacher of the Church, and submit to the Government of the
Pastors, and are willing to learn how to be regenerate, should be baptized,
though they profess not any special saving faith or repentance. And their
reasons are, because first, else all that doubt of their sincerity must lie, or
be kept out. Secondly, because that in the Church of the Jews, the multitude
were such as were openly ungodly. And some of the Papists talk also at this
rate, though indeed they are themselves yet ^tterly unresolved in this point.

What Church soever is constituted according to either of these two opinions,
will not be constituted according to the mind of Christ: But yet with this
difference: The first Opinion introduces Church- tyranny, and injustice, and
is founded in the want of Christian charity, and* knowledge, and tends to
endless separations and confusions. But the second opinion infers all these
greater mischiefs.

First, it confounds the Catechumens with the Christians, and makes all
Christians who are but willing to learn to be Christians. Secondly, it makes
the Christian Church to consist of such as are no Christians: As that person
certainly is not, who consents not that Christ be his Teacher, Priest and
King: For to such a one, he is no Christ; seeing these are the essential parts
of his Mediatory office. And the new device of distinguishing Christ's
Apostolic and Mediatory offices, and so the Church congregate and the Church
regenerate accordingly, will not seem to difend this conceit. For as Christ is
not divided, so his office for which he is called Christ is but One, which
entirely is called the office of a Savior, or Redeemer, or Mediator, which are
all one: And the essential parts of it are, first his Priestly, second Teaching
and Ruling offices or works: And this which is called his Apostleship, is but
the same which is called his Teaching or Prophetical Office, and is a part of
his Mediatory or saving Office. And he is no Christian, nor is that any
Congregated Christian Church, which professes not to take Christ for his
Mediator his Priest and King, as well as for an Apostle a Prophet or Teacher.
Thirdly, they therefore who hold the aforesaid doctrine, do introduce a new
sort of Christianity. Fourthly, and a new sort of Baptism, which the Church of
Christ never knew to this day. And therefore they do ingenuously profess their
dissent from our form or words in Baptism, because we put the baptized to
renounce the flesh the world and the devil, and to use such covenanting words
as must signify special grace. But through the great mercy of God, Baptism is
still the same thing in all the Christian Churches in the world, the Reformed,
the Roman, the Greek, the Armenian, yea and the Ethiopian too, for all their
seeming reiteration of it. And Baptism among them all, is the same now as it
has been in all Generations, from Christ's institution of it. So that we fully
maintain as well as the Romans, that Christianity has by this sacred Tradition
been safely delivered down to us to this day. What a Christian is, and what
Christianity is, may be most certainly known, by this which is commonly called
our Christening; In which the profession and covenant which makes men
Christians is so express and unchanged from age to age. Therefore these men who
would have our Baptism changed, do speak plainly, but impudently; as if they
were raised in the end of the world, to reform the Baptism and Christianity of
all ages, and were not only wiser than the universal Church from Christ till
now, but also at last must make the Church another thing. I entreat the Reader
who would know the judgment of all antiquity about Baptism, as supposing
saving grace, to read those numerous citations of Mr. Gataker in the Margin of
his book against Davenant, of Baptism. Fifthly, and by this new doctrine they
destroy all that special Love which Church Members or visible Christians as
such, should bear to one another. For if no faith or consent must necessarily
be professed at Baptism, but that which is common to the ungodly and children
of the devil, then all Church Members as only such, must be taken to be but
ungodly, and no man must love a Churchmember as such, with a special love, as
a visible Saint; but only as one of the hopefuller sort of the ungodly.
Sixthly, and hence it will follow, that either none must make any profession of
saving Faith and Repentance (and so all appearance of holiness must be driven
out of the world) or else the Church must be constituted of two sorts of
professions and professors, tota specie distinct from one another; yea more
distinct than Infidels are from their new sort of Christians. And consequently
it must needs be indeed two Churches and not one, viz. One Church of those who
take Christ for their Teacher only, and another of those that take him entirely
as Christ. Seventhly, and by this rule the Socinians and Mahometans, who
confess Christ to be a great Teacher, but deny him to be the Priest and
sacrifice for sin, may be baptized, and taken for Christians. These and many
more absurdities follow upon this new conceit. But I must desire the Reader who
would see more of it, to peruse my Disputations about Right to Sacraments,
where it is handled at large.

As to their Objections I answer. First, no man is called to lie, nor yet are
they fearful to be shut out: For as no man is perfectly acquainted with his own
heart, so no man is to profess a perfect knowledge of it: But if a man speak as
he thinks upon faithful endeavors to avoid self-deceit, no more can be
expected of him. He that can say [Though I am not certain that there is no
secret fraud in my heart, yet as far as I can discern it, I am willing to be a
Christian upon the terms of Gods Covenant, and to take Christ for my Teacher,
Priest and King] must offer himself, and must be received into the Church.

Secondly, and as to the Jews case, I have proved in the forementioned
Disputations, First, that it was no less than a profession of saving faith,
which was made in the Covenant of Circumcision. Secondly, that men were then to
be put to death, for almost all those enormous crimes which we now
excommunicate men for: And the dead are not members of the Church on earth.
Thirdly, that all that in matter of fact was found among them contrary to this,
was contrary to Gods Law: And to argue against the Law from man's breach of the
Law, a facto contra jus, is very bad arguing. Fourthly, that it is far surer
and clearer reasoning about the Evangelical state and order of the Church, from
the Gospel, than from the Law of Moses, much more than from the violations of
that law. Fifthly, but yet all the corruptions of the Churches, as I have cited
and proved them before, do show us the difference between the Church as visibly
Congregate, and as Regenerate; and show us that the presence of scandalous
sinners, will not warrant us to separate or to unchurch the Church. And this
may suffice against that error.

The true conditions of admittance into the Church and state of Christianity
are these.

First, A true belief in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and a Devoting of
our selves sincerely to Him, as our reconciled Father our Savior, and our
Sanctifier, in a resolved Covenant, or Consent, renouncing the Devil, the
world, and the flesh, (expressly or impliedly) is the whole and the only
condition of our Communion with the Church mystical or the living body of
Christ (which is called The Church, in the first and most famous sense.)

Obj. If this must be wrought in us before we are in the mystical Church, then
a state of holiness may be found in such, as are yet out of the body of Christ
in the world: But if this be after our entrance into the Church, than less may
sufficiently qualify us for admittance.

Answ. It is neither before not after: but it is our change and entrance it
self. To be a member of the Church mystical, and to be a Christian is all one:
And this is Christianity. If I should say that the making a man a Rational free
agent, is the making him a member of the Rational world; would you think that
this must be either antecedent or consequent to his change, which is nothing
else but the change it self?

Secondly, That which makes a man a member of the Universal Church as Visible,
is his Baptism. Which is, his profession of the same true Faith aforesaid, and
consent to the Covenant; or his visible dedication to God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, as his Reconciled Father, his Savior and Sanctifier, by a Vow and
Covenant in Baptism.

Where note that Baptism has two parts: The Covenant there made and openly
declared between God and Man: And the Sacramental, obsigning and investing
sign; which is the washing in water. The Profession it self, or open
covenanting with God, is the thing statedly necessary to the being of Visible
Christianity: And the washing with water, is necessary as a duty where it may
be had, and as a means to the orderly and regular entrance; by which the Church
is commonly to judge who are its admitted members and who not. As inward
consent and outward profession of consent, and public solemnization, are the
necessaries to a state of marriage; the first being as the soul, the second as
the body, and the third as the wedding garments; so is it in this case. So that
in short, if you take Baptism aright for the Covenant and the Sign, there is no
other entrance into the Visible Church, nor any other condition necessary to a
title to its communion. But if you take Baptism improperly, for the was^ing
alone, there is no title to such washing necessary but Professed faith and
Covenanting. So that if you require more, or invent and impose any further
conditions, and deny baptized professors of Christianity to be visible members
of the Church, you are superstitious devisers of a way of your own, and makers
of will worship, and not obedient submitters to the way of God.

Profession then of Belief and consent to the Covenant, is our title-condition
to communion with the Universal Visible Church. This profession must be solemn,
and solemnized under the hand of a Minister of Christ, who has the Keys of
the Church, or Kingdom of heaven; that it may be satisfactory to the Church,
and valid at its bar. Those that are baptized at age, have present Right to
communion with the adult. Those that are baptized in Infancy (upon good right)
are admitted to such Infant-communion as they are capable of. And at years of
discretion, they themselves must own the Covenant, which their Parents entered
them into. The more solemnly this is done (as it was in baptism) the better it
is: But if it be done but by a professing themselves to be Christians, and
attending Christ's ordinances with his Church, it is valid; unless they forfeit
the credit of their profession, by proved Heresies or crimes in which they live
impenitently.

But then it must be here observed, what a Profession of Christianity is, which
intitleth to Baptism and Church Communion. And objectively, it must be the
whole Baptismal Covenant that must be professed: No less is to be taken as a
profession of Christianity: And as to the Act, it must be first, A
signification of the mind, by word or writing, or some intelligible sign.
Secondly, it must seem to be understood: For no man consents to that which he
understands not. But herein any intelligible sign of a tolerable
understanding must be accepted, though we find that the persons conceptions are
raw and not so distinct and clear as they ought, nor the expressions ready,
orderly or count. Thirdly, it must seem to be serious: For that which is
apparently dissembled or Iudicrous is null: Fourthly, It must be de presenti, a
present giving up our selves to Christ, and not only a promise de futuro, that
we will hereafter take him for our Savior and Lord, and not at present.
Fifthly, it must seem to be voluntary, and not constrained: for then it is not
serious. Sixthly, it must seem to be deliberate, and resolute, and settled, and
not only the effect of a mutable passion. This goes to make it a real
Profession in the common sense of all mankind.

Obj. But how few among us do so much as seem! be understanding, serious, and
resolved in covenanting with Christ?

Answ. In the Degree of these we all fall short of that which is our duty: But
if you accuse any of the want of so much as is necessary to an acceptable
Profession; First, you must be sure that you speak not by uncharitable surmise
and hearsay, but upon certain proof or knowledge. Secondly, and that therefore
you speak it not at a venture of whole Parishes or families, but only of those
persons by name, whom you know to be guilty. Thirdly, and that you remember
that it is the Pastors office to judge, and that you expect not that every one
must give an account of their knowledge to you: And if there be a mis-judging,
it is the fault of the Pastor, and not yours (of which more anon.) Fourthly,
that persons Baptized are already admitted into the Church, and therefore if
they make profession of Christianity, they must not be put to bring any other
proof of their title; but it lies on you to disprove it, if you will have it
questioned. And to reject them from communion without a proved accusation, is
Tyranny and Lording it over the Church of God. These are Gods terms of
Church Communion; And if you will needs have stricter, you must have none of
his making but your own.

Obj. But all visible Christians and Churches, are visible Saints and
Regenerate; and so are not ours.

Answ. To be a Visible Saint, is to profess to be a Saint: And whosoever does
profess the Baptismal Covenant professes to be a Saint. Conversion,
Regeneration Faith and Repentance, are all contained, into taking God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for our Father, Savior, and Sanctifier.

Obj. But you may teach a Parrot to speak those words.

Answ. Its true: And perhaps to speak any words which you use your selves: But
if you will thence conclude that words must not be taken as a Profession, you
grossly err, or abusively wrangle; or if you infer thence that your neighbor
understands himself no more than a Parrot does, you must prove what you say
to the Pastor of the Church: For God has not allowed him to excommunicate
baptized persons, because you say that they are ignorant. And if they are
willing to learn it is fitter to teach them than to excommunicate them.

And here I must lament it, that I have met with many censorious Professors,
who would not communicate with the Parish Churches, because the people are
ignorant, who, when I have examined themselves, have proved ignorant of the
very substance of Christianity, so that I have been much in doubt whether I
ought to admit them to the Lords Table or not. They knew not whether Christ was
Eternal, or whether he was God when he was on earth, or whether he be Man now
he is in heaven; nor what Faith is, or what Justification or Sanctification is,
nor what the Covenant of grace is; nor what Baptism or the Lords Super are; nor
could prove the Scripture to be the word of God, or prove man's soul to be
immortal; but gave false or impertinent answers about all these: And yet could
not join with the ignorant Churches.

And next I desire you here to observe the different Privileges, as well as
the different Conditions, of Visible and Invisible Churchmembership.

The members of the Church mystical or Regenerate, have the pardon of all sin,
and acceptance with God, and communion with him and with his Church in the
spirit, and are the adopted children of God, and heirs of everlasting life, and
shall live in heaven with Christ for ever.

The mere Visible Members of the Church, that are not regenerate by the spirit
as well as sacramentally by water, have only an outward Communion with the
Saints, and have only the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, and only a name to
live when they are dead. And are these such great matters that we should envy
them to poor sinners that must have no more? Have we the Kernel, and do we envy
them the Shell? Have we the Spirit, and do we envy them the flesh, or outward
signs alone?

Yea consider farther, that it is more for the sake of the truly faithful, than
for their own, that all Hypocrites have their station and privileges in the
Church: God makes use of their Gifts and Profession for his elect; to many
great services of the Church: And is it not then a foolish ingratitude in us,
to murmur at their presence?

Understand well the conditions and Reasons of this visible state of
membership, and how far it is below the state of the Regenerate, and it will
turn your separating murmuring into a thankful acknowledgment of the wisdom of
God.

DIRECT. VII.
Get right and deep aprehensions of the Necessity and Reasons of Christian
Unity and Concord: and of the sin and misery of Divisions and Discord.
WHen we have but slight apprehensions of a duty we easily neglect it, and
scarce reprove our selves for it, or repent of our omission. And when we have
but slight apprehensions of the evil of any sin, a little temptation draws us
to it; and we are hardly brought to through-repentance for it: And there is in
many Christians, a strange inequality and partiality in their apprehensions of
good and evil. Some duties they dare not omit, and they judge all ungodly who
omit them: when some others as great are past by, as if they were no part of
religion. And some sins they fear with very great tenderness, when we can
scarce make their consciences take any notice, of others as great.

And usually they let out all their zeal on one s^de only, while they overlook
the other. The Papist seems so sensible of the good of Unity, and the evil of
Divisions, that he thinks usurpation of an Universal Church-Monarchy, and
Tyranny and horrid bloodshed, to be not only lawful, but necessary for the
prevention and the cure. But to make him as sensible of the wickedness of these
unlawful means, and of the good of a serious spiritual Religiousness, and of
Christian Love and tenderness and forbearance, here is the great difficulty.

And on the other side, many are very sensible of the need of spirituality and
seriousness in Religion, and of the evil of hypocritical formality and imagery,
and of usurpation of the prerogatives of Christ, and of the plague of
persecuting Pride and cruelty, who yet have little sense at all, of the good of
Unity, and of the mischiefs of divisions in the Church. Yea many are so careful
to be found exact in their obedience to God, that they build very much for
duties and against sins, upon dark and very far-fetcht consequences, and upon a
few obscure and doubtful passages in Scripture, when there is no express words,
or clear text at all, to bear them out: And doubtless the darkest intimations
of the will of God, must not be disregarded. But on the other side, we cannot
bring them to lay to heart, some duties and sins, which are over and over, an
hundred times, and that with vehemence, expressed and urged in the plainest words.

And because all Christians pretend to s^bmit to the word of God, I will try
whether it be not thus with you in the present case, and will cite many plain
expressions of Scripture, for Christian Unity and Concord, that you may either
better perceive you duty, or plainly show your great partiality.

Zech. 14. 9. In that day there shall be One Lord and his name One. Ezekiel. 34.
23. And I will set up One Shepherd over them. Ezekiel. 37. 22. I will make them
One Nation -- and One King shall be King to them all, and they shall be no more
two Nations, nor divided into two Kingdoms any more. 24. And David my servant
shall be King over them, and they shall have One shepherd. Jer. 32. 39. I will
give them one heart and one way. So Ezekiel. 11. 19. Joh. 21, 22. That they all
may be One; as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be One
in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me. And the glory which
thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one; I
in them, and Thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the
world may know that thou have sent me; and have loved them as thou have loved
me. Joh. 11. 52. That he should gather together in One, the children of God
that are scattered abroad. Act. 1. 14. These all continued with one accord, in
prayer and supplication. And chap. 2. 1. They were all with one accord in one
place. Act. 4. 24, 32. They lift up their voice to God with one accord, and
said, Lord, thou art God -- And the multitude of them that believed, were of
one heart, and of one soul. Act. 5. 12. They were all with one accord in
Solomon's Porch. Act. 15. 25. It seemed good to us, being assembled with one
accord -- 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one husband -- Ephesians. 4. 1, etc. I
the prisoner of the Lord beseech you that ye walk worthy of your vocation
wherewith ye are called with all lowliness and meekness; with long-suffering
forbearing one another in love: endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace. There is One body, and One Spirit, Even as ye are called in
One hope of your calling. One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. -- v. 12, 13. For
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. Till we all come in the Unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man: that we henceforth be no more
childr^n, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
the slight of men, and cun^ing craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive:
But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things who is the
Head, Christ: From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by
that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the body, to the edifying of it self
in love.

1 Cor. 12. 3, 12, 13. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost -- As the Body is One, and has many Members, and all the members of that
One body, being many are One ^ody, so also is Christ. For by one Spirit, we are
all baptized into One body. -- v. 22, 23. Nay much more those members of the
body, which seem to be more feeble are necessary: And those members of the body
which we think to be less honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant
honor, and our unc^mely parts have more abundant comeliness. For our comely
parts have no need; but God has tempered the body together, h^ving given more
abundant honor to that part that l^^ked: that there should be no Schism in
the body, (...) that the members should have the same care one for another. And
whether one member suffer, all suffer with it, and if one be honored, all
rejoice -- v. 15. If the foot say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the
b^dy, is it therefore not of the body -- (By all this you may see, that even
the lowest, dishonored, (...) an^ (...) mem^ers, must not be denied to be of
the Church or body of Christ.)

1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Charity suffers long, is not easily provoked, thinks no
evil -- The greatest is charity, v. 13.

1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment. v. 12, 13. Every one says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo -- Is
Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized into the name
of Paul. Chapter 3. 15. If any man's work be burnt, he shall s^ffer loss; yet he
himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. -- Chapter 3. 3, 4. For y^ are yet
carnal: For whereas there is among you envying and strife and divisions, are ye
not carnal, and walk as men? while one says, I am of Paul, etc.

Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtful
disputations. v. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and
let not him which eats not judge him which eats: for God has received him:
who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master he stands
or falls. One man esteems one day above another: Another esteems every
day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: He that regards
a day, regards it to the Lord! v. ^0. But why do thou judge thy brother? or
why d^st thou set at naught thy brother? we shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ. Let us not therefore judge one another any more. v.
13. 14. I know and am p^rswaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is
unclean, v. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness
and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost: For he that in these things serves Christ
is acceptable to God and approved of men: Let us therefore follow after the
things that make for peace. v. 22. Have thou faith? Have it to thy self before
God. Chapter 15. 1, 2. We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please our selves. Let us every one please his neighbor for
his good, to edification. For even Christ pleased not himself -- v. 5. 6. Now
the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one ^owards
another, according to Christ Jesus: that ye may with ONE MIND, and ONE MOuTH
glorify God. -- wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ received us, to
the glory of God.

Chapter 16. 17* 18. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions
and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them. For
they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

Act. 20. 30. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them.

Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have
love one to another.

1 Cor. 11. 17, 18. I hear there are divisions among you: For there must be
also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest.

Math. 13. 29, 30. Nay, lest while ye gather up the ^ares, ye root up also the
wheat with them: Let both grow together till the harvest -- 41. The Angels
shall gather out of his Kingdom, all things that offend, and them which do
iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire -- Then shall the
righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father.

V. 47. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a net, cast into the Sea; which gathered
of every kind: which when it was full, they drew to the shore; and sat down
and gathered the good into Vessels, and the bad they cast away: so shall it be
at the end of the world.

Math. 22. 9, 10. Go into the high ways, and as many as ye find, bid to the
marriage (or as Luke 14. Compel them to come in) so those servants went unto
the high ways, and gathered all as many as they found both bad and good, and
the wedding was furnished with guests. And the King saw there a man that had
not on a wedding garment, and said, Friend, How cam^st thou in hither, etc.
(Mark, thus he will condemn wicked hypocrites themselves, but blames not the
Ministers that compelled them, or that let them in.) Gal. 6. 1. If a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye that are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit
of meekness: Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Let every man prove his own
work.

Note, that Paul purified himself as having a Vow: He circumcised Timothy; He
became a Jew to the Jews, and all things to all men, that he might win some.

Phil. 1. 15, 16. Some preach Christ of envy, etc. as aforecited.

Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. If there be any consolation in in Christ, -- fulfill ye my
joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of
one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory; but in lowliness of
mind, let each esteem other better than themselves -- 14. Do all things without
murmurings and disputings --

Chapter 3. 15, 16. Let as many as are perfect be thus minded: and if in any thing
ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. But whereunto we
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule; let us mind the same
things.

1 These. 5. 12, 13. We beseech you brethren, to know them that labor among you
and are over you in the Lord, etc. and be at peace among your selves.

Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition
avoid. knowing that he that is such is subverted and sins, being condemned
of himself.

Jam. 3. 1, 2, 13, etc. My brethren be not many Masters, knowing that ye shall
receive the greater condemnation, For in many things we offend all -- who is a
wise man and endued with knowledge among you, Let him show out of a good
conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom: But if ye have bitter envying
and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth: This
wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual, devilish: For where
envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. The wisdom from
above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits; without partiality, without hypocrisy: and the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace.

Mat. 12. 25. Jesus said, every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation: and every City or house divided against it self, shall not stand.

I have cited so many Texts against division and for the Unity of the Church
and concord of Christians, as one would think by the very hearing of them,
without expositions or argumentation, should utterly mortify all inclination
to divisions and hard censures, in all true believers: yea so many Texts as I
am persuaded many that most need them, will think it tedious to read them over.
And yet I have cause to fear lest many such will feel as little of the sense
and authority of them, as if there were no such words in the Scripture, and
none of this had been set before them.

Out of all these you may gather, these reasons of the necessity of Unity, and
of the evil of schism or division.

First, It is One God, One Head, One Savior, and One Holy Spirit, into whose
name we are all baptized. Secondly, It is One Covenant which all in Baptism
make with this One God. Thirdly, It is One Spirit by which we are all
regenerated, and One new Nature which is in all the truly sanctified. Fourthly,
It is One Gospel or holy word of God, which is to us all, the seed of our new
birth, the rule of our faith and lives; and the foundation of our hope, and
must be our daily meditation and delight, and the food on which the children of
Gods family must all live. Fifthly, It is One Body of Christ, whereof we are
all members. As Christ is not divided, so his Body, that is his Church, both as
Mystical, and as Visible, is but One; however the Members and their Gifts and
degrees of grace are many. Sixthly, It is One way of Faith and Holiness which
all must walk in. Seventhly, And it is One end and happiness which we all
expect; and in One Heaven that we must meet and live for ever (so many as are
sincere in the faith which we profess): And in Heaven we shall have one Mind
and Heart, and One employment in the Love and praise of our Creator and
Redeemer, and one felicitating fruition of his Glory for evermore. Therefore he
that sees not the necessity of Unity, knows not the Nature of the Church, or
Faith, or true Religion.

The Honors and Benefits of Unity, and the shame and mischiefs of Divisions,
may appear to him, that further considers the instances which follow.

First, Our Union with the Church, is a sign of our proportionable union with
Christ: And our separation from the Church, does signify that we are separated
from Christ. He that is United but to the Visible Church, is but visibly (by
Baptism and Profession) united to Christ: such a union is spoken of in Ioh. 15.
2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away. He that is united
to the mystical Church, of the Regenerate and spiritual, is united to Christ by
faith and by the spirit: For his union to Christ is at the same instant of
time, with his union with the Church: but in order of nature goes before it.
He that is divided from this mystical Church, cannot possibly (at that time) be
a Member of Christ in the spiritual sense: As the member which is cut off from
the body, is also separated from the Head. And he that himself forsakes the
Visible Church as such, sorsaketh the mystical Church and Christ himself. For
to forsake the Visible Church as such, is to cease to be a Professor of
Christianity. One may be a Member of the Visible Church, and not of the
spiritual; but you cannot be a Member of the spiritual Church, if you forsake
and refuse the visible Church as such. For though a man may be regenerate by
the Spirit, before he make an open profession or be baptized (and without
baptism in some few cases) yet so he cannot be, if he refuse to be a Professor.
Its possible indeed to be a member of the Universal Church, both as Mystical,
and as Visible; as spiritual and as professing, while we have not opportunity
to join with any one particular Church, or to separate from some particular
Church, without separating from the Universal: But to separate from the
Universal Church, is to separate from Christ.

But then you must understand, that the Universal Visible Church is nothing
else, but all professing Christians in the world, as visibly subjected to
Christ as their Head: And that there is no such thing in being, as the Papists
call the Catholic or Universal Church; that is, the universality of Christians
subjected to one Vicar of Christ as their Head, either Constitutive or
Governing. Such a pretended Head is an Usurper and no true authorized Vicar of
Christ; And therefore such a Church as such, is nothing but a company of
seduced Christians, following such a traitorous Usurper. And to separate from
the Pope, is not to separate from Christ or from his Church.

Secondly, Consider also, that Union is not only an Accident of the Church, but
is part of its very essence, without which it can be no Church, and without
which we can be no members of it. It is no Kingdom, no City, no family, and so
no Church, which does not consist of United members: As it is no house which
consists not of united parts. And he is no Member which is not united to the
whole. It is the great course of men's boldness in dividing ways, that they take
union to be but some laudable accident, while it may be had; which yet in some
cases we may be without: and think that separations are tolerable faults, even
when they are forced to confess them faults: But they do not consider that
Unity is necessary to the being of the Church, and to the being of o^r own
Christianity. Read 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.

Thirdly, Remember also that our Union is necessary to our Communion, with
Christ and with his Church: and to all the blessings and benefits of such
communion. Ioh. 15. 4. Abide in me, and I in you: As the branch cannot bear
fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide
in me: for without me, ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in me, he is cast
forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the
fire, and they are burned. And Col. 2. 19. From the Head all the body by joints
and bonds having nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the
increase of God. The member that is cut off from the body, has no life or
nourishment from the head or from the body, but is dead: He that is out of the
Church is without the Teaching, the holy worship, the prayers, and the
discipline of the Church, and is out of the way where the spirit does come; and
out of the Society which Christ is specially related to: For he is the Savior
of his body; And if we leave his hospital, we cannot expect the presence and
help of the Physician: Nor will he be a Pilot to them who forsake his Ship: Nor
a Captain to them who separate from his Army: Out of this Ark, there is nothing
but a deluge; and no place of rest or safety for a soul.

Fourthly, The Unity of Christians is their secondary strength: Their primary
strength is Christ and the Spirit of grace which quickens them: And their
secondary strength is their Union among themselves: Separation from Christ
depriveth men of the first; and separation from one another depriveth them of
the second. An Army is stronger than a man: And a Kingdom than a single person:
A flame will burn more strongly than a spark: And the waves of the Ocean are
more forcible than a single drop. A threefold Cord is not easily broken.
Therefore it is that weak Commonwealths do seek to strengthen themselves by
confederacies with other States. The Church is likened to an Army with Banners;
both, for their Numbers, their Concord, and their Order. And therefore Christ
says that a Kingdom divided cannot stand. Union is the Churches strength: And
what good soever they may pretend, Dividers are certainly the weakeners and
destroyers of the Church: And as those means which best corroborate the body,
and fortify the spirits, do best cure many particular diseases, which no means
would c^re whilst nature is debilitated: So are the Churches diseases best
cured, by uniting fortifying remedies, which will be increased by a dividing
way of Reformation: Dividing is wounding, and uniting is the closing of the
wound.

There is no good work but Satan is a pretender to it, when he purposes to
destroy it: He resists Light as an Angel of Light; and his Ministers hinder
Righteousness, as pretended Ministers of Righteousness: And he will be a
zealous Reformer when he would hinder Reformation. And this is the mark of
Satan's way of Reformation: He does it by by dividing the Churches of Christ,
and teaching Christians to avoid each other: And to that end he zealously
aggravateth the faults of every party to the rest; that they may have odious
thoughts of one another; and Christian Love may be turned into aversation: As
in the Plague time every one is afraid of the breath and company of his
neighbor, and they that were wont to assemble and converse with peace and
pleasure, do timerously shun the presence of each other; because they know that
it is an infectious time, and they are uncertain who is free: even so does
Satan break the societies and converse of Christians, by making them believe
that every party has some dangerous infection, which as they love their souls,
they must avoid.

And he destroys your Love to one another, by pretending Love to your selves:
O how careful will he be for your souls! when the Devil would undo you, he will
do it as your Savior: And when his meaning is to save you from Heaven, and
from Christ, and from his saving grace, and from Union and Communion with his
Church, and from the impartial Love of one another, he takes on him that he is
saving you only from sin and from Church-corruptions: Or rather that it is
Christ and not he that gives you counsel: And he can do much in imitating
Christ, in the manner of his suggestions, to make you believe that it is Christ
indeed. Perhaps his counsel shall come in in the midst of a fervent prayer, or
presently after it, to make you believe that it is an undoubted answer of your
prayers: And often times his impulses are vehement and much affecting, to make
you think that it is something above nature: And the pio^s pretense will much
persuade you to think that sure this can never come from an evil spirit: But if
you had well studied 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Gal. 1. 8. Luke 9. 55. 1 Ioh. 4. 1,
2. 2 These. 2. 2. you might be wiser and be saved from this deceit. I will not
recite the words, because I would have you turn to them, and seriously study
them.

And in this dividing work, the Devil does as make-bates do, who first goes to
one man and tell him a tale what such a one said against him, and what a
dangerous person he is, and then go to the other and say as much of the first
to him: So the Devil says to the Presbyterian, O take heed of the
Independents! and to the Independents, Take heed of these Presbyterians; To the
Anabaptist he suggesteth, Avoid these Protestants: Take heed of them, for they
Baptize infants: And to the Protestants he says, Take heed of these
Anabaptists, for they are against baptizing any till they come to full age: To
one he says, Away from that Church, or think not those persons to be
religious; for they pray by the book: And to the other he says, Take heed of
those people, as whimsical and proud, and brainsick fanatics; for they pray
without-book by the Spirit. To one sort he says, Take heed of those people,
for they wear a Surplice, or Kneel at the Sacrament, or answer the Priests in
the Responses of the Common Prayer: To the other he says, Take heed of these
disobedient, stubborn, selfconceited people that will sit at the Sacrament, and
will not conform to the orders of the Church. I am not now minding whose
opinion is right or wrong, among all these parties, or any like them; But how
charitable to your souls the Devil is, when he would destroy your charity and
your souls; and how piously and kindly he would have you take heed when he
would lead you to perdition: and how great a Reformer he will be, if he may but
do it by Dividing.

It may be the young unexperienced Schismatic (of what sect soever) will
distaste these words, and think I speak like an adversary to Reformation: And so
the Devil would make him think, of all other Christians as well as of me,
except his party. But if one should give such counsel for the preservation of
his own health and bodily comfort, as the Dividing spirit gives him for the
Church and for his soul, he would quickly understand it, according to my
present sense. If one should come in kindness to him and bid him, [O take heed
of that mouth and belly; for it gets nothing, but devoureth all that the
hands do get by labor: Cut off that hand, for it has a crooked finger: Cut
off that gouty foot that it may not trouble the whole body: Rip up those guts
which have such filthy excrements, he would not swell against me if I advised
him to suspect such kindness.

Fifthly, Remember also, that the Unity of Christians is their peace and ease,
as well as their strength and safety. Psalm. 133. 1. Behold how good and how
pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity! As the amity and
converse with friends is pleasant, and the concord of families is their
quietness and ease; so is it as to the amity and concord which is the bond of
Church society. And the divisions and discord of Christians, is their mutual
pain and trouble. Do you not feel your minds disturbed by it: Do you not see
the Church discomposed by it? The itch of contention, does ordinarily make it
pleasant for the time, to every Sect to scratch by zealous wranglings and
disputes, for their several opinions, till the blood be ready to follow: But
the smart and scab does use to convince them of their folly. But if they will
go more than Skin-deep, they may need a Surgeon. Children will claw themselves;
but it is Madmen that will wound themselves. The hurt^ which we get in the
Christian warfare, by mortifying the flesh, or by the persecution of the
malignant enemy is tenderly healed by the hand of Christ, and usually
furthereth our inward peace. But if we will hurt and wound and divide our
selves, what pity or comfort can we expect.

Sixthly, Consider also that the Unity and Concord of Believers is their
Honor, and their Divisions and discord are their shame: And consequently the
honor or dishonor of Christ and the Gospel, and Religion is much concerned in
it. Agreement among Christians tells the world, that they have a certainty of
the faith which they profess, and that it is powerful and not ineffectual, and
that it is of a healing nature, and tends to the felicity of the world. But
Divisions and discords among Christians persuade unbelievers, that there is no
certainty in their belief: or that it is of a vexatious and destructive
tendency; or at best that all its power is too weak, to overcome the malignity
which it pretends to resist; where did you ever see Christians live in
undivided unity, undisturbed peace, and unfeigned Love, but the very infidels
and ungodly round about them, did reverence both them and their religion for
it. And where did you ever see Christians divided, unpeaceable and bitter
against each other, but it made them and their profession a scorn to the
unbelieving and ungodly world? and whilst they despise and vilify one another,
they teach the wicked to despise and vilify them all?

Seventhly, I may therefore add, that the Unity of Believers, is one of Gods
appointed means for the conversion and salvation of unbelievers: And their
Divisions and discord are an ordinary means of hardening men in infidelity and
wickedness, and hindering their love and obedience to the truth. As a well
ordered Army, or a City of uniform comely building, is a pleasing and inviting
sight to the beholders; when a confused rout, or a r^inous heap, does breed
abhorrence: even so the very sight of the concordant societies of Christians,
is amiable and alluring to those without; when their disagreements and
separations make them seem odious and vile. As a musical instrument in tune, or
a set of music, delight the hearer by the pleasing harmony; when one or more
instruments out of tune, or used by a rude unskilful hand, will weary out the
patience of the hearer; so is it in this case; and the difference is much
greater, between concordant and disconcordant Christians. Who loves to thrust
himself into a fray? And what wise man had not rather partake of the friendly
converse, than join with drunken men that are fighting in the streets? Peace
and Concord are amiable even to nature; And you can scarce take a more
effectual means, to win the world to the Love of Holiness, than by showing them
that Holiness does make you unfeigned and fervent in the Love of one another. 1
Pet. 1. 22. Nor can you devise how to drive men more effectually from Christ,
and to damn their souls, than to represent Christians to them like a company of
mad men, that are tearing out the throats of one another? How can you think
that the unbelievers and ungodly should think well of them, that all speak so
ill of one another? When the Lutheran flies from the Calvinist, and the
Episcopal from the Puritan, and the Protestant from the Anabaptist, and the
Presbyterian from the Independent, and all the other side implacably fly from
them, Can you wonder if the Infidel and the Idolater fly further from you all?
Mark well the words of Christ in his prayer, Ioh. 17. 20, 21, 22, 23. For them
which shall believe on me by their word, that they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that the
world may believe that thou have sent me: And the glory which thou gave me, I
have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou
in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that
thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me.

All these observations are obvious in these words. 1. That the unity of
Christians must be universal, even of all that believe the Gospel of Christ. 2.
That this Union should have some low resemblance to the Union of the Father and
the Son. 3. That it is Christ's great desire and intercession for his Followers,
that they may be one. 4. That their glory is for their Unity. 5. That their
Unity is their perfection. 6. That the Father and Son are the Head or Center of
the Unity. 7. That this Unity is the great means of converting the world to the
Christian faith, and convincing Infidels of the truth of Christ, as sent by
God. Open but your eyes and you may see all these great doctrines in this
Prayer of Christ's for his people Unity: O that all the Christian Churches would
try this means for the worlds Conversion! (Not on the impossible terms of
Popery, but on the necessary terms proposed by Christ.)

8. External Unity and peaceable Church Communion does greatly cherish our
Internal unity of Love: And Church-divisions do cherish wrath and malice and
all the works of the flesh described by Paul, Gal. 5. 21, 22, 23. I pray you
consider how he describes the fleshly and the spiritual man: v. 14, 15. For
all the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye
be not consumed one of another. I say then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. For the flesh lusts against the spirit,
etc. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, adultery -- enmities or hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, (or as it may be read Divisions
or factions) heresies, envyings, murders, etc. But the fruit of the spirit is
Love, joy, peace, l^ng-suffering, gentlenss, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance: Against such there is no law. And they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. If we live in the spirit,
let us also walk in the spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking
one another, envying one another.

Obj. O but those that I separate from are guilty of this and that and the
other fault.

Answ. Chap 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one, in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self
lest thou also be tempted: Instead of censorious disdain and separation, bear
ye one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ: which you think you
fulfill by your unwarrantable separations, while you are but fulfilling your
fleshly passions.

When once parties are engaged by their opinions in Anti-churches and fierce
disputings, the flesh and satan will be working in them against all that is
holy, sweet and safe. When united Christians are provoking one another to Love
and to good works, and minding each other of their heavenly cohabitation, and
harmonious praise and are delighting God and man by the melody of their
concord; The contentious zealots in their separate Anti-churches, are preaching
down Love and preaching up hatred, and making those that differ from them seem
an odious people not to be communicated with, by aggravating their different
opinions or modes of worship, till they seem to be no less than Heresy or
Idolatry. If many thousands yet living in England or Ireland, had not heard
this with their ears, yet James may be believed, Chap. 3. 1, etc. My Brethren,
be not many Teaching-Masters (for that is the word) knowing that we shall
receive the greater condemnation: For in many things we offend all (which he
adds because the arrogance of Sectaries was caused by the aggravating of
other men's offenses.) If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man
(that is, If you will show that you are perfecter and better your selves than
those whom you account so bad, see that your foul backbiting, reviling,
censorious contentious tongues, do not prove the contrary) 13. who is a wise
man and endued with knowledge among you, Let him show out of a good
conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom: (that is, Let him that would
be thought more knowing and religious than his neighbors, be so much more
blameless and meek to all men, and excel them in good works) v. 14. But if ye
have a bitter zeal: (for so is the Greek word) and strife in your hearts, glory
not, (in such a zeal, or in your greater knowledge) and lie not against the
truth. 15. This wisdom descends not from above (as you imagine who father it
on Gods word and spirit) but is earthly, sensual (or natural) and devilish. (O
doleful mistake, that the world, the flesh, and the Devil, should prove the
cause of that conceited spiritual knowledge and excellency, which they thought
had been the inspiration of the spirit) v. 16. For where zeal and strife (...)
(that is, a striving contentious zeal against brethren) there is confusion (or
tumult and unquietness) and every evil work, O lamentable reformers, that set
up every evil work, while they seemed zealous against evil!) v. 17. But the
wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to
be entreated; full of mercy and good fruits; without partiality (or wrangling)
and without Hypocrisy. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of
them that make peace: when peace-breakers that sow in divisions and contention,
shall reap the fruit of unrighteousness, though they call their way by the most
religious names.

Thus I have briefly showed you what V^nity and Division are, that wrong
apprehensions draw you not to sin.

DIRECT. VIII.
When any thing needs amendment in the Church, remember that the best
Christian, must be the forwardest to reformation, and ^he backwardest to
Division: and must search and try all means of Reforming, which make not
against the concord of the Church.
I Do not here determine in what cases you may or may not separate, from any
company of faulty Christians. I only say that you must never separate what God
has conjoined; the Holiness and the Unity of believers: If corruptions blemish
and dishonor the Congregation; Do not say [Let sin alone; I must not oppose it
for fear of division] But be the forwardest to reduce all to the will of God.
And yet if you cannot prevail as you desire, be the backwardest to divide and
separate; and do it not without a certain warrant, and extreme necessity.
Resolve with Austin, I will not be the chaff, and yet I will not go out of the
floor, though the chaff be there. Never give over your just desire and
endeavor of Reformation: And yet as long as possibly you can avoid it, forsake
not the Church which you desire to reform. As Paul said to them that were ready
to forsake a sea-wrackt vessel, If these abide not in the ship, ye cannot be
saved: Many a one by unlawful flying and shifting for his own greater peace and
safety, does much more hazard his own and others.

DIRECT. IX.
Forget not the great difference between casting out the wicked and impenitent
from the Church by discipline; and the godlies separating from the Church it
self, because the wicked are not cast out. The first is a great duty: The
second is ordinarily a great sin.
THe question is not, Whether the impenitent should be put away from
Church Communion? That's not denied. But whether you should separate from the
Church because they are permitted: This is it which we call you to beware: Not
but that in some cases, a Christian may lawfully remove from one Church to
another that has more light and purity, for the edification of his soul. But
before you separate from a faulty Church, as such as may not lawfully be
communicated with, you must look well about you, and be able to prove that
thing which you affirm.

Many weak Christians marking those Texts which bid us avoid a man that is an
Heretic, and to have no company with disorderly walkers, and not to eat with
flagitious persons, do not sufficiently mark their sense, but take them as if
they called us to separate from the Church with which these persons do
communicate. Whereas if you mark all the Texts in the Gospel, you shall find,
that all the separation which is commanded in such cases (besides our
separation from the Infidels or Idolatrous world, or Antichristian and
Heretical confederacies, and no-Churches) is but one of these two sorts. First,
either that the Church cast out the impenitent sinner by the power of the
Keys. Secondly, or that private men avoid all private familiarity with them.
And both these we would promote, and no way hinder. Thirdly, but that the
private members should separate from the Church, because such persons are not
cast out of it, show me one Text to prove it if you can.

Let us here peruse the Texts that speak of our withdrawing from the wicked. 1
Cor. 5. Is expressly written to the whole Church, as obliged to put away the
incestuous person from among them, and so not to eat with such offenders. So is
that in 2 These. 3. and that in Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an Heretic after the
first and second admonition avoid: Unless it be a Heretic that has already
separated himself from our communion; And then it can be put private
familiarity which we are further to avoid. In brief, there is no other place of
Scripture, that I know of, which commands any more. I have before showed that
abundance of Church corruptions, or of scandalous members, were then among
them, and yet the Apostle never spoke a syllable to any one Christian, to
separate from any one of all those Churches: Which we cannot imagine that the
Holy Ghost would have wholly omitted, if indeed it had been the will of God.

Obj. But then why did Luther and the first Pretestants, separate from the
Church of Rome; and how will you justify them from Schism?

Ans. Its pity that sloth and sortishness, should keep any Protestant (or
Papist either) in such ignorance, as to need any help to answer so easy a
question at this day! Let not equivocal names deceive us, and the case is
easy. By the word Church the Scripture still means; first, either the
Universal Church which is the body or Kingdom of Christ alone: Secondly, or
particular Congregations associated for personal communion in Gods worship: But
the Pope has feigned another kind of thing, and called it The Church: That is,
The Universality of Christians as headed by himself, as the constitutive and
governing head. Whereas, first, God never instituted or allowed such a Church,
Secondly, nor did ever the Universality of Christians, acknowledge this
usurping Head. Show me in Scripture, or in Church History, that either there
ever was de facto, or ought to be de jure, such a thing in the world as they
call the Church, and I profess I will immediately turn Papist. But if you ask
why we separated from the Papal Church? I answer, Because, first, it was no
Church of Christ (as such.) And secondly, It was a Church of traitorous
combination, against the prerogative of Christ, and therefore by the
Protestants called the Antichristian Church. We separated not from Rome either
as the Universal Church (for that it was not) nor as part of the Universal
Church; (for so we hold communion with those that are Christians in it still)
Nor as a true worshipping Congregation (for they consist of many thousand
congregations which we had never local communion with: And as true worshipping
congregations in specie, we still hold communion with them in mind, so far as
they are such indeed: But in two senses we separate from them: First, as a
Papal Catholic Church; because in that sense they are no Church of Christ, but
a pack of rebels: Secondly, as particular Congregations in specie which have
mixed Gods worship with false doctrine and Idolatrous bread-worship and other
unlawful things, which by oaths and practice they would force those to be
guilty of, who will communicate with them. And thus we disown them only as
neighbor Churches, that never were their lawful subjects, but bear our
testimony against their sin. And our forefathers who were members of their
Churches, departed to save themselves from their iniquity, and because they
were refused by themselves, unless they would lie and forswear and be
idolaters, and communicate with them in their sin. Nor would they then, nor
will they to this day admit any into communion of their particular Churches, as
such, who will not first come in to their pretended Universal Church, which is
no Church, and worse than none. If this answer seem not plain and full to you,
it is because you understand not Christian sense and reason.

DIRECT. X.
Expect not that any one lawfully received by Baptism into the Christian
Church, should be cast out of it, or denied the privilege of members, but
according to the rules of Christian discipline, by the power of the Keys, that
is; for obstinate impenitency in a gross or scandalous sin, which the person is
proved to be guilty of: and this after private and public admonition, and
tender patient exhortation to Repentance.
HEre are two things which I desire you to observe. First, what is Christ's
appointed way, for removing members from the Communion of the Church. Secondly,
how great a sin it is to remove them by a contrary and arbitrary way of our own
presumptuous invention.

First, It is here supposed that the person is not a professed Apostate: For
there needs no casting out of such. He that turns Turk or Heathen, or
openly renounceth Christianity, or cease the Profession of it, does go out of
the Church himself, and needs not to be cast out. Unless it be any Tyrant who
will come to the Communion in scorn, while he professes but to show his
lawless will. He that seeks the Communion of the Church in sobriety, thereby
professes himself a Christian. and for such as being Baptized continue this
profession, Christ's way of rejecting them is plainly described in the Gospel.
Mat. 18. 15, 16. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him
his fault between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou have gained
thy brother: But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more;
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established: And
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church: But if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen man, or a Publican.

Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition
reject.

1 Cor. 5. Ye are puffed up and have not rather mourned, that he that has done
this deed, might be taken away from among you: For I verily as absent in body,
but present in spirit, have j^dged already as though I were present, concerning
him, that has so done this deed; in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye
are gathered together and my spirit; with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ to
deliver such a one to Satan. -- V. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven -- v.
11, 12, 13. With such a one no not to eat -- Do not ye judge them that are
within? -- Therefore p^^ away from among your selves that wicked person.

By all this it is plain that the Church must exercise a regular course of
justice, with every person that it shall reject: He must first be told
pr^vately of his fault, and then before two or three; (unless, at least, the
open notoriety make the private admonition needless) And then it must be told
the Church: And the Church must with compassion, tenderness and patience, and
yet with the authority of the Lord Jesus and the powerful evidence of truth,
convince him and persuade him to repent: And he must not be rejected, till
after all this, he obstinately refuse to hear the Church, that is, to Repent,
as they exhort him.

Note here, that no sin will warrant you to cast out the sinner, unless it be
seconded with Impenitency: It is not simply as a drunkard, or a fornicator or
swearer, that any one is to be rejected: but as an impenitent drunkard, or
fornicator, or swearer, etc.

Also that it is not all impenitency that will warrant their rejection: But
only impenitency after the Churches admonition.

Note also, that no private person may expect, that any offender be cast out,
either because his sin is known to him, or because he is commonly famed to be
guilty, till the thing be proved by sufficient witness.

Yea that the admonition given him must be proved, as well as the fault which
he committed.

Yea if all the town do know him to be guilty, and witness prove that he has
been privately admonished, he may not be rejected till he be heard speak for
himself, and till he refuse also the public admonition.

This is Christ's order, whose wisdom, and mercy and authority are such, as may
well cause us to take his way as best. And yet the ignorance or rashness of
many professors is such, that they would have all this order of Christ
overturned: And some of them must have such a drunkard and such a swearer kept
away and rejected, before ever they admonished them or exhorted them to
Repentance, or prove that any one else has done it; much more before they have
told the Church, or proved that he has neglected the Churches admonition. And
some go so much further, that they must have all the Churches taken for no
Churches, till they have gathered them a new: and must have all the Parish at
once rejected (till they have gathered out some few again) without any such
order of proceeding with them, as Christ appoints: It may be a thousand shall
be cast out at once, when never a one of them was thus admonished.

Obj. They were never members of a true Church; and therefore need no casting
out.

Ans. Were they never baptized? or is not baptism Christ^ appointed means of
admission into his Church.

Obj. They were baptized in their Infancy, and afterward bred up in ignorance
and profaneness, and know not what their baptism is, nor ever soberly^wned it.

Answ. Either they still profess themselves Christians, and attend Gods
ordinances with the Church or not: If not, then they are Apostates; If they do,
then they do own their Baptismal Covenant by a continued profession: If you
accuse them of not understanding this profession, or of living contrary to it,
you must proceed against them one by one as Christ appoints; and first
admonish them, and then tell the Church; and not say they are ignorant and
profane, and expect upon your saying so, they should all be unchurched. Ye^ if
you prove them ignorant, if they be willing to learn, it is fitter presently to
instruct them than to excommunicate them: nor do you read of any
excommunicated for mere ignorance. But we confess that in gross ignorance, they
may show themselves incapable of sacramental Communion, and may be denied it
while they are learning to know what they do. But the mercy of God has made
points absolutely necessary so few, that this may be done in a short time, if
the Persons be willing, and the Teachers diligent, and sufficiently numerous
for that work. And though it is to be lamented, that in many great
City-Parishes, the Ministers are not enough to catechize the twentieth part of
the people, yet for the generality of Parishes through the Land, if Catechizing
were used as it might be, there would not any great numbers be long kept away
for mere ignorance. And he that is the cause of his Parishes ignorance by
neglecting Catechizing and personal conference, and then unchurcheth them, for
the ignorance which he is guilty of, does take but a preposterous course, for
his own account and comfort, or for the people^ good.

Obj* But they refuse to learn or be instructed.

Ans. If that and their gross ignorance be proved together, as you may delay
them for the later, so you may reject them for the former; because it shows
their impenitence: But this must be proved of them, and not affirmed without
proof.

Obj. But their Baptism made them members only of the Universal Church, and
not of any particular Church: And therefore will not prove them such.

Answ. True: But he that is a member of the Universal Church, is fit to be
received into a particular Church; And there wants no more but mutual
consent: And if he have statedly joined with a particular Church in ordinary
communion, Consent has bin manifested, and he is a member of that particular
Church, and must not be rejected by it, but in Christ's way. And this is the
common case in England. The persons who were baptized in Infancy, were at once
received into the Universal Church, and into some particular Church, and have
held communion at age with both; and have right to that communion till they are
publicly proved to have lost their right.

And if we had no Churches, but particular Churches were to be gathered anew,
yet he that is a baptized member of the Universal Church, and consents to
communion with that particular Church in all the ordinances of Christ's
appointment, does lay a sufficient claim to his admission, and cannot lawfully
be refused, unless he stand justly censured by a Church which formerly he was
in. Yet this we confess, that he can be no member of that particular Church,
who subjecteth not himself to the particular Pastors of it, and to the
necessary acts or parts of their Office and Ministration: Because he denies
his own consent.

11. The sinfulness of unchurching Persons or Parishes, without Christ's way of
regular process, consists in all these following parts. 1. It is a casting
off the Laws of the great Lawgiver of the Church, and so a contempt of his
authority, wisdom and goodness; and a making of our selves greater, or wiser,
or hol^er than he. 2. It is gross injustice, to deprive men of so great
Privileges without any sufficient proof of their forfeiture* It is worse than
to turn whole Parishes out of their Houses and Possessions, without any lawful
process or proof; upon rumors or private affirmations that they are
Delinquents. It is not doing as we would be done by, what if any should say of
you, that you are Heretical and deny Fundamental Truths? Or what if they should
say of a separated Church, that they are generally Heretics or of wicked lives
(as the Heathens did of the ancient Christians) and therefore that they are no
Church, nor to be communicated with; would you not think that they should every
one personally be accused, and proof brought against them, and that they should
speak for themselves, before they were thus condemned? 3. And it is an
aggravated Crime in them, that so much cry down Church-tyranny in others, to be
thus notoriously guilty of it themselves? what greater injustice and tyranny
can there be, than that all men's Christi^nity and Church-rights, shall be
judged N^ll, upon the censures and rumors of suspicious men, without any just
proof or lawful trial? That it shall be in the power of every one, who has but
uncharitableness enough to think evil of his neighbors, or to believe reports
against their innocence to cast them out of the Family of God, and to
unchristen and unchurch men arbitrarily at their pleasure? That any man that is
but unconscionable enough to say [They are all ignorant and prophane] shall
expect to have his neighbors excommunicated. 4. It makes all Churches to be
lubricous and uncertain shadows: when a censorious person may unchurch them at
his pleasure. What you say of others, another may say of you; and as justly
expect to be believed. 5. It unavoidably brings in uncurable divisions: For
there is no certain rule of justice with such persons: and therefore they know
not who are to be received to their Communion, and who not: And the same man
that one thinks is to be rejected and kept out, another will think is to be
received: And who knows which of them is to be obeyed. If one say that a
Parish is a Church, and another say that they are to be unchurched, who knows
which of them to believe. 6. It is a reproach to the Church and Christian
religion, when we tell the world that, that we have not so much justice and
equity among us, as Heathens have in their worldly societies. 7. It depriveth
the Church of the solace of her Communion, when the best man is not sure, but a
censorious person may at his pleasure turn him out as unworthy. 8. It greatly
wrongeth Jesus Christ, who so dearly loves the weakest of his flock; and has
purchased their privileges at so dear a rate: and whose body is maimed, when
any of his members are cut off: and who takes the wrong that is done them as
done unto himself. These are the great virtues of that censorious zeal, which
unchurches Persons or Parishes without just trial and proof, upon rumors of
fame, or their own surmises.

DIRECT. XI.
Understand well what is the power of the Keys, and what the Pastoral offiae
is, as they are the Governors of the Church entrusted by Christ with the power
of admission and rejection; that so you may know how far you are to rest in the
judgment of the Pastors, and may not attempt to take any part of their office
to your selves.
THe power of the Keys, is the power of taking into the Church, and of
Governing it, and of casting out: Both in respect to present Order, and in
respect to future happiness, by a Ministerial declaration of the sense of the
Gospel, concerning the state of such as they.

The power of Baptizing, is the power of the Keys for reception into the
Church. The private members have not the power of baptizing, nor were the
Pastors ever appointed to do it, by their advise, consent or vote. Therefore
the private members have not the power of the Keys for admission, And it is
most apparent in the Gospel, that the Keys for admission and for exclusion are
given into the same hands, and not one to the Ministers and another to the
Flock: Therefore the people that have not the first, have not the later.

For full proof of this observe the meaning of these Texts. Isa. 22. 22. And
the Key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open
and none shall shut: and he shall shut and none shall open. Isa. 9. 6. The
Government shall be upon his shoulder. Mat. 16. 19. I will give thee the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven, etc. Mat. 18. 18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on
earth shall be bound, etc. Joh. 20. 23. Whose soever sins ye do remit, they are
remitted to them; and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained. Math. 28.
19. Go and teach all Nations baptizing them, etc. Joh. 20. 21. As my Father
has sent me, even so send I you. Acts 1. 16, 17. Judas was numbered with us,
and had obtained part of this Ministry. Acts 20. 28. Take heed to your selves
and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed
the Church of God -- Romans 1. 1. Paul a Minister of Jesus Christ, called an
Apostle, separated to the Gospel of God. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so esteem of us
as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. Acts 14.
23. They ordained them Elders in every Church. Tit. 1. 3. Ordain Elders in
every City, as I appointed thee. V. 7. A Bishop must be blameless as the
Steward of God. 1 Timothy 3. 5. For if a man know not how to rule his own house,
how shall he take care of the Church of God? 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that
rule well be counted worthy of double honor -- 1 Pet. 5. 2. Feed the flock of
God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof -- Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24.
Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of
God -- Obey them that have the rule over you and submit your selves; for they
watch for your souls -- salute them that have the rule over you -- 1 These. 5.
12, 13. We beseech you brethren to know them (that is, acknowledge their power
and labors) that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you, and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and to be at
peace among your selves.

Read these with judgment, and then believe if you can, that the power of the
Keys or Government is in the People. Show us what text does give them that
power? and where the Scripture calls them to exercise it by Votes? Or where
God requires ability in them for Church Government? or where he calls them
to leave their Callings and attend this work? When those that must perform it,
he separateth to it as by office, and calls them to give themselves wholly
thereunto. 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16. Tell us when the people were authorized to
baptize? or to rule the Church, that is, themselves.

Obj. Mat. 18. 15. Tell the Church: if he hear not the Church, etc. Answ. Many
Expositors think that by the Church there is meant the Ministers only, by this
reason: The Church that m^st teach m^st be heard: the Church that must be heard
must be told: But that is only the Pastors and not the People: Ergo -- But I
easily grant you, that the word [Church] there signifies the whole
Congregation (as Dr. Tailor in his Second Disswasive has well showed) But it
is as an Organized body only. And so the Office is to be performed only by the
Organical part; and not by any of the rest. When I say to a man [Hear me] I do
not mean that he should hear me with his eyes, but only with his ears: And when
I bid him See or Read. I bid him not do it with his ears but with his eyes. Nor
do the eyes receive this power from the feet or hands, but immediately from the
Head: Though if they were separated from the body they could not retain it. So
if another Kingdom send to England, to desire an Army of Men to help them,
they mean the King only as the Commander of them, and the people as the
executors of his Command. So when you are bid to tell the Church, it is
qu^t^nus aurita, that it must be told; And when you are bid to hear it, it is
as Teaching that it must be heard. So that this talks not of any Government
in the people, either to use or to give.

Obj. 1 Cor. 5. Paul bids all the Church to put from among them that wicked
person.

Answ. Note; that Paul passes the sentence first himself [I have judged as if
I were present (not that you deliver, but) to deliver such an one to Satan: And
therefore he does this in himself [in the name of the Lord Iesus] and supposes
himself among them in spirit and power when they do it [and my spirit with the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ.] 2. And I have said, He speaks to an
organized Church, which had two parts, and accordingly two works to do: The
Ruling part was to put away the Offender by Judgment, or Sentence; And the
people were all to put him away, by actual shunning his Communion, which is but
the obeying of that sentence. If the King send to a Corporation to execute any
Law, he means not that all persons must do it in the like manner; but the
Magistrates by Command, and the people by obeying them, and executing their
Commands. If I desire a man to transcribe me a Book and bring it me; I mean not
that every part of him shall herein have the same office; But that he read it
only with his eyes, and understand it with his reason, and transcribe it with
his hand, and travel with his feet. The Pastors only excommunicate by Judgment
or Sentence; and the people by obedient execution of it.

Obj. Who then shall cast out an Heretic or pernicious Pastor, if he himself
must be rejected?

Answ. 1. The Neighbor Pastors shall renounce Communion with him, and reject
him from their neighbor Communion. And they shall warn that people to avoid
him (by virtue of the common relation which they have to the universal Church
of Christ.) 2. The people (as Cyprian determines) are bound to forsake him:
not by an act of Government over him or themselves; but by an act of obedience
to God, and of self-preservation; As Soldiers must forsake a traiterous
General, or Seamen a perfidious or desperately unskilful Pilot that would cast
them all away. As the people did always choose their Pastors to Govern them, so
may they in such a case refuse them, without usurping any Government themselves.

Well! Now let us see what influence this truth should have upon your
Church Communion.

Do you say that your neighbors are not to be accounted members of the Church,
nor to be communicated with? Who took them into the Church by Baptism? Was it
not a Minister of Christ? If you say no, you must prove your accusation. If you
grant it, was it not his Office so to do? Has not God made his Ministers
Judges whom they are to baptize? And afterward also whom to catechize and
instruct and admit to the communion of the Church? There is no doubt of it. If
then they are admitted by an entrusted Officer, will you venture to usurp the
place, yea and to do them the wrong to say that they are no members? Is it any
of your trust or work? I pray you mark what a mercy it is to you, that the
Officers and not the private members are entrusted with this work. First, if it
were your work, you must study and be able to perform it. Secondly, you must
watch for it, and constantly attend it. If a Heretic pervert the Text of
Scripture, you must convince him by your skill in the Originals or in the sense.
How many hundred or thousand persons are there in a Parish to be tried? The
worst of them must have a hearing and just trial at least, before you can
refuse him lawfully: And how accurately must this difficult work be done, that
the weakest be not denied his right, nor the unfit admitted? How long must a
sinner be admonished and exhorted to repentance? And are you able and willing
to leave all your callings, to do all this?

If the Minister that does it, must lay by the business of the world, how think
you that you can do the same without laying by your worldly business? If he
must have so many years learning and preparation, can you do it without?
Mistake not, it is not for Sermons only that Ministers need all their learning
and labor; but also for the discipline and guidance of the flocks. Thirdly,
and if it be your work, you must be accountable for it before God. And do you
not fear such a reckoning? And if these busy people had their wish, would they
not be in a worse case than the most dumb and lazy Minister?

Consider it well, and you will find that you are not at all bound to know what
the spiritual state of any man is, as he is to join in Church Communion with
you, but upon your Pastors trust and word. Whether their understanding be
sufficient at their admittance, you are not any where called to try: but the
Pastor is: And if he have admitted them, you are to rest in his judgment
(unless you would undertake the office your selves) whether their profession of
faith and repentance be serious and credible, you are not called to try and
judge: But if your Pastor have admitted them, he has numbered them with the
visible Christians: And it is the credibility of the Pastor that you have to
consider; and by him you must judge of the credibility of the professor, and
not immediately by your own trial. Who are the persons that you shall meet at a
Sacrament or in public Communion, you are not at all required to try; And if
you never saw them before or heard them speak, you may perform your duty
nevertheless: Indeed if as a neighbor you are called to instruct or counsel or
comfort them; you must do it: But there may be five thousand in one Church with
you, whose names or faces you are not bound to know; but to rest in the
knowledge of them to whom the keys are committed, who according to their
office take them in.

Obj. But what if they are notoriously wicked? Must I be blind?

Answ. No* you must do your best by neighbo^rly watchfulness and help (though
not by Pastoral Government) to reform all about you whom you are able to do
good to. And if you know them to be so bad, you must privately admonish them,
as is proved; and then if they hear not, tell the Church: But if you see a man
in the Church at the Sacrament, or a thousand men, who are unreformed, and you
know it not, you have no reason to avoid the communion of such: And if there be
a thousand in the Church whose case you are strangers to, th^s may be no sin of
yours, and should be no impediment of your communion.

Obj. But what if c^rn^l neglig^nt Ministers will let in (...) into the Church
by Baptism and give them the Lords Supper? Shall it be thus in their power to
corrupt the Church: And must we join with them and take no care of it?

Answ. There is no person in any office or trust, but may too easily abuse it:
And the more noble the work and trust is, the greater is the si^ and calamity
of such abuse. And no doubt but a bad unfaithful Minister is one of the
greatest sin^ers on earth, and one of the most pernicious plag^es to the
Church. Which could not be, unless it were in his power to do very much hurt.
But it will not follow that therefore you must take his place, and become the
Church Governors, or try all the peoples fitness your selves. If a Judge be
bad, you may say what an intolerable thing is it, that one man shall have
power to give away men's estates, and take away the liv^s of the innocent, and
to acquit the guilty.] But for all that you must not mend it, by stepping up
into the judgment seat your self, and saying, that you or the rest of the
people will do it better. Some body must be trusted with it. If you are
fittest, offer your self to the office. The thing that you must do is, to do
your best to deliver the Church from so bad a Pastor: Use all your wisdom and
diligence to amend him: And if you cannot do that, use all your interest to get
him out, and get a better: And if you cannot do that, deliver your own soul
from him, by removing to a better, if you are free; But if as servants or
children or wives you are under another Government which restrains you, be
patient, and use such means as God provideth for you. This is the true way of
your Church-duty, and not to think that you must have a knowledge of the
Godliness of all that you communicate with; or that you must refuse communion
if the P^stor he remiss and negligent.

Obj. But will it not be my sin if I communicate with such as I know to be
notoriously wicked? when a little leaven, leaveneth the lump.

Answ. It will be your sin if you obey not Christ, Mat. 18. 15. in admonishing
them; and so if it be long of you, that they are not removed: or if you do not
your duty to reform the Pastor or remove him: But otherwise if they be there
without your fault, it is no more your sin to communicate with such men, than
it is to live and converse with fellow servants that are wicked; when it is not
you, but your Master that has the choice of them.

And the leavening of the lump which the Text speaks of, is the tempting of
others to the like sin; and not that the innocent shall be held guilty of it:
nor were the words spoken to the people to persuade them to do the Pastors
work, or to separate from the Church; but to the Pastors to persuade them to
cast out the sinner; and to the people to persuade them to execute their
Sentence, (and the Apostles in particular.)

It would rule and quiet people, if they knew the trust and work of the
Pastors, from their own.

DIRECT. XII.
Well study the gracious Nature and Office of Jesus Christ, and his great
readiness to receive those that come to him, though weak in faith; and his
backwardness to refuse such Comers; that so you may desire a Church Discipline
that is suitable to the Nature and Office of Christ, and to the design and
tenor of the Gospel.
Christ's outward Discipline is agreeable to his inward. As those that come to
him by faith, he will in no wise cast out or reject; so those that come to him
by profession of faith, he would not have his Ministers in any wise reject. And
coming to Christ when he was personally on earth, did signify the following of
him in present, as well as believing in him: Just so far as men will come, so
far they shall be received by Christ? If they will come but toward him, he
will not put them back. If they will come but to his visible Church, by a dead
profession, he would not have his Ministers repulse them. The outward
privileges of the visible Church which they come to, they shall possess. If
they will come over to the Church of the regenerate, they shall be saved. But
where ever they stop it shall be their own doing. Many came to Christ when he
was on earth, whom he never repulsed, though he was marvelled at and grudged at
for entertaining them. Some came so far as to own his Name, and did Miracles by
it, that yet did not follow him: whom the Apostles would have hindered, but
Christ reproved them, Mar. 9. 38. Luke 9. 49. Some came only to receive a Cure
of their Diseases from him, whom his Disciples sometimes repulsed, but so did
not he: when little children were brought to him, his Disciples rebuked those
that brought them, as thinking them unfit for his reception: but Christ rebuked
them for their forbidding of such guests. When he eat and drank with publicans
and sinsinners, and when he received the kindness of a woman that had bin a
great sinner, the Pharisees, censured him therefore as ungodly: But yet he
would not abate his clemency. Many at this day can scarce digest it, that he
sent forth a Judas to preach the Gospel, when he knew that he was a thief and
an hypocrite, and fore^new that he was a Son of perdition, and would betray
him, and that the Devil would enter into him; yea, knew that he was a Devil.
Ioh. 6. 70. and 13. 2. ye^, that this Judas should be one of the twelve select
Apostles, and one of the Family of Christ. Yet Christ repulsed him not; And if
he did not partake of the Sacrament at his last Supper, it was not because
Christ did turn him, out, but because he went away himself. And accordingly the
Apostles received 3000 at once into the Church, upon their sudden profession of
repentance, even of such as had killed the Lord of life. And though Simon Magus
would not come out of the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, yet was he
not kept out of the visible Church, when he professed to believe and desired
baptism.

Indeed if men will not come so far as to the profession of true faith and
repentance, they are not to be received into the Church; Because the Church is
a Society of such Professors: And if they will not come, they cannot be
received. The Church and Sacrament must not be altered, and made another thing
than Christ made it, for the receiving of another sort of men. We must not do
as some that would have no profession of saving faith and repentance, but only
a consent to learn, required of them that are baptized; and so baptism changed
into another sort, which Christ never instituted and the Church never used to
this day. But if Christians had well studied the compassions of a Savior, and
the tenor of his Gospel, and his practice upon earth, and instead of a surly
flying from their neighbors, and groundless censuring them, were possessed
themselves, with that love and tenderness which is the Evangelical temper* and
the image of their Lord; it would put in end to many of our divisions, and
bring us nearer the truth and one another.

DIRECT. XIII.
Yet, left you run into the worse extreme, remember still that the destroying
of sin, and the sanctifying of man's nature and life by recovering us to the
obedience and Love of God, was the design and work of the Redeemer: And that
Holiness and Peace must go together: And that the outward order and discipline
of the visible Church, must be subservient to the inward spirituality and
prosperity of the regenerate Church: And no such favor must be showed to
sinners, as favors and strengthens their sin, and hinders the increase of
holiness.
IT is woeful work which ungodly Pastors make in the visible Church, under the
name and pretense of Unity, Concord, Peace and Order; when an enemy to true
holiness; has the managing of these, you may easily imagine how they will be
used: But sad experience has told the Christian world, these 1300 years more
doleful things th^n could otherwise have bin imagined. The compassion which
Christ showed to sinners was to convert and save them from their sin: But the
compassion which ca^nal Pastors show them, is to harden them in their sin, and
make them believe that repentance and holiness are but hypocrisy or needless
things. The Unity and Concord which Christ intended, was a Unity in himself and
^ Concord in holy Obedience to his Laws: But it is a Unity in the will of man
and a Concord in obeying the Dictates of the proud, which Treacherous Pastors
do require. It is a Peaceable progress of the Gospel, and unanimous endeavor to
convert and sanctify and save the world, which Christ requires us to promote:
But it is a Peaceable enjoyment of their own prosperity, wealth and honor, and
a peaceable forbearance of a holy life, which Wolvish Pastors do desire. It is
an Orderly management of holy doctrine, worship and conversation, for the
edification of the flock, and the increase of godliness, which Christ
commands. But it is an absolute obedience to their wills, and an exact
observance of their new-made Religions, and needless scandalous inventions, and
an adoring of their titles and robes of honor, covering their ignorance, pride
and sensuality, which Church-yrants call the Order of the Church. All Christ^
indulgent tenderness and Discipline, are but to further his Holy design, of
killing sin and sanctifying souls. But the Images of Piety, Government, Unity,
Peace and Order, which Hypocrites and Pharisees set up, are devised engines to
destroy the Life and serious practice of the things themselves, and are set up
in enmity against spirituality and holiness, that there might be no other
Piety, Government; Unity* Peace or Order in the Church, but these lifeless
Images.

It is far from the mind of Christ, that no difference should be made between
the Holy and the profans, the precious and the vile: O^ that serious piety
should be suppressed or discouraged; or faithful preachers hindered from
promoting it, on ignorant graceless Ministers countenanced, under pretense of
Peace or Order. The design of Christ was not like Mahomet's, to get himself an
earthly Kingdom, and numerous followers merely to cry up his name: And
therefore he will not indulge men in their sin^, nor abate o^ alter the
conditions of his Covenant, to win disciples: He will have his Ministers deal
plainly with all to whom they preach, and let them know that without
self-denial and forsaking all (in estimation and resolution) and a willing
exchange of earth for heaven, they cannot be his true Disciples: Nor without a
Professed consent to thus much, they cannot be his visible professed Disciples* But
all that will not repent must perish. And therefore in their Baptism they must
profess a renunciation of all competitors. His Ministers also must impartially
exercise the Keys which he has committed to their trust, and must not fear
the faces of men, who at most are able but to kill the body. Luke 12. 4. They
must discern between the righteous and the wicked; and draw all scandalous
sinners to repentance, or else exclude them from the communion of Saints, that
the world may see that Christ is no friend to profane persons, or sensual
^leshly bruits. As Chrysostom commands the Presbyters not to give the body
and blood of Christ to the unworthy, though he were the greatest Commander or
wore a Diadem, and professes that he would suffer his own blood to be shed,
before he would give the blood of Christ to the unworthy: And as blessed Paul
would become all things to all men to win them, and commands us not to please
our selves, but to please our neighbors for their good to edification: And yet
when it came to the flattering of men in their sins, he says that if he should
so please men, he should be no longer the servant of Christ. And as to his own
interest in man's esteem, he says, With me it is a small thing to be judged of
you, or of man's judgment. Romans 15. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 10. 33. Gal. 1. 10. 2 Timothy
2. 4. 1 Cor. 4. 3. Take heed therefore of pretending Unity, order, peace, or
charity, against the strictest obedience of God^laws, or against the faithful
preaching of the Gospel, and exercise of true Church Discipline, or against the
necessity of the ancient profession of saving faith and true-repentance in all
that will be admitted to the communion of the Church: It is not an ungodly
unity, peace or order that we plead for.

DIRECT. XIV.
Though your Governors and not you, must judge what persons shall be of your
public Church Communion, yet it is you that must judge who are fit or unfit
for your private company and familiarity. Here therefore exercise your
strictness in your own part.
AS it is not you, but the King that must judge, who shall be of the same
Kingdom with you: nor the servant but the Master, that must choose who shall be
in the family with him: Nor the scholar but the Schoolmaster that must choose
who shall be of the same School with him: So it is not you, but your Pastor that
must judge who shall be of the same Church with you. As to the Universal visible
Church, this is confessed by all: And there is no reason why it should be denied
of particular Churches, as is proved. But who shall be your Pastors or your
Masters, your husbands or your wives, if you are yet free, you your selves must
be the choosers: And who shall be your intimate companions, or your bosom
friends: Here therefore make as strict a choice as you can. If you meet a
profane person at the Lords Table, it is his own fault or the Pastors: But if
you keep company needlessly with such, or marry such, it is your own fault. If
the Pastor do not excommunicate them, you may choose not to be familiar with
them: Though you must meet them at the Church and pray with them; you need not
meet them at the Alehouse and drink with them. Though you may not with a few
of the most godly separate from the public communion of all the rest; yet may
you keep a more intimate familiarity with those few than with all the rest. And
if you will consider, this is all that is necessary to your own duty, and that
which is best for your own edification. Keep thus to a strictness within the
bounds of your own place and calling, and God will bless you in such a
strictness.

DIRECT. XV.
Understand well how much it has pleased God, to lay all men's good or evil,
happiness or misery, upon their own choice: And observe the reasons of it, that
you may not oppose this order of God.
THough God by his grace must change the perverse disposition of men's wills,
before they will make a gracious choice; yet it is most certain, that the
teachings, commands, exhortations and reproofs of God, are directed to the Will
of man: And that the promises and threatenings, mercies and judgments, are used
to move and change the will: And that in the tenor of his Laws and Covenants
Christ has set Life and Death before men, and put their Happiness in their own
choice; and that no man shall have better or worse than he made choice of: that
is, none shall be either happy or miserable, but as they did choose or refuse,
the causes of happiness or misery. And the reason of this is, because
Natural-free-will, was part of the Natural-image of God on Adam; and it is as
natural to a man to be a free-agent, as to be Reasonable. And God will govern
Man as Man, agreeably to his nature.

Therefore do not wonder if Church privileges are principally left to men's own
wills or choice, when their salvation is left to it.

Indeed God would not have any man admitted into the Church and to its
communion, in his own way, and on his own terms: The way and terms are of
Christ's appointment: That they must Profess Faith and Repentance is his
appointed condition: that the Minister must be the public judge of this
profession; and accordingly receive them ^olemnly by Baptism, and that they
must enter under the hand of the Key-bearers of the Church; All this is of
Christ's institution. But whether they will make this profession or not? and
whether they will make it in truth or in falsehood; and whether they will live
according to it, or play the hypocrites and live contrary to it; These are at
their own choice. And good reason; for the gain or less must be their own. If
any be in the Communion of the Church, who either never made profession of
Christianity, or who is proved before them to have apostatized from that
profession, or to live impenitently in any gross sin, after the Churches
admonition, it is the Pastors fault; and yours if it be by the neglect of your
duty. But if any other be there it is their own fault, and the loss and hurt
must be their own. If any one that professes Christianity ignorantly,
unbelievingly, and hypocritically be there: or if they come to the Sacrament
whilst they live in secret or open sin, before they have been openly
admonished by the Church, it is their own sin; and not you but they shall bear
the blame. God leaves such matters to their own choice: and as they choose
they speed. And for us to grudge at this order of God, is but to quarrel at
wisdom and goodness, and to correct Gods order by our disorder. The man that
came in without a wedding garment, is blamed, and bound hand and foot, and
punished: But the Minister that called him in and admitted him, is not blamed;
because he did as he was bidden: He went to the highways and hedges and
compelled them (by importunity) to come in, that the House might be filled: Nor
are any that came in with him blamed, for having communion with such: For they
were in their places, and did as they were exhorted to do. And s^^will it be in
the case that is before us.

DIRECT. XVI.
Though the profession of Christianity which entituleth men to
Church Communion, must be credible: yet remember that there are diverse Degrees
of credibility; and that every Profession which is not proved false is credible
in such a degree as must be accepted by the Church.
PRofession of Christianity is every man's Church-title. No man is to prove the
sincerity of his own profession; nor may the Church require such proof at his
hands; For how can a man prove to another the sincerity of his own heart? But
the fuller testimony he gives of it, the better it is: And therefore none
should refuse to make his own profession, as fully credible to the Church as he
is able, no^ is the Church to be blamed for enquiring after the fullest
credibility, so be it they do it but ad melius esse, and not ad esse; not
laying his title upon it, nor refusing him for want of it. But every profession
as such is credible in some degree, which is not disproved. Because men are
under God, the only competent judges of their own hearts: And the belief of one
another is the ground of humane converse: And it is an injury to any man to
account him a liar, without sufficient proof. He that will disprove a man's
profession, must prove first, that he does not tolerably understand what he
says; secondly, or that he speaks not seriously, but in jest; or not
voluntarily, but in hypocrisy by constraint, or for some by end: Thirdly, or
that he contradicts his own words by some more credible words or deeds. And
if you never yet thus disproved men's profession of Christianity before the
Pastors of the Church and yet cry out against the Pastors for admitting them,
you are not true Reformers, but disorderly Mutineers, and peevish censurers in
the Church of Christ. Christ's orders, and men's right, and all Church-justice,
must not be trodden down and sacrificed to your humor, and arbitrary way.

DIRECT. XVII.
Know how far either Grace or Gifts are necessary to a Minister; that you may
give both Grace and Gifts their due.
THere have been two great questions which long have troubled the Church,
whether we may take him for a true Minister of Christ, that is ungodly? And
what measure of Gifts is necessary to the being of the Ministry? I have
carefully answered them both in my Disputation of Ordination long ago, and
shall now only say in brief. First, that no ungodly man is so called to the
Ministry, as to excuse himself before God for his usurpation and hypocritical
administrations. Secondly, But many an ungodly man is so far called to the
Ministry as that his admin^st at ons are all valid to the Church, and the
innocent people shall not have the loss. Thirdly, no people should choose and
prefer such an ungodly Minister before a better. Fourthly, but they should
rather submit to such than have none, when a better cannot (by them) be had.
Judas had a place in the Ministry with the Apostles, Act. 1. 17. And his
ministration might be valid to others, though his hypocrisy might turn it into
sin to himself. And his ministry might have been accepted of the people, though
they had known his hypocrisy as Christ did: But a sincere Apostle was to be
preferred before him.

And for Gifts, First the greatest degree is best; and secondly, God makes so
great use of them, that many an hypocrite wi^h excellent gifts, does edify the
Church more than many good men that are ungifted. Thirdly, but that measure of
Gifts only is necessary to the Being of a Minister without which the essential
parts of his office cannot be performed.

Learn therefore to prefer them that have most grace and gifts; but not to
take them for no Ministers that want Grace totally, or want only a greater
degree of Gifts. And marvel not that Gifts are more necessary to the validity
of ministration than Grace is. He may perform the office of a Minister to the
benefit of the Church, that has no saving grace at all: so did Judas: so did
those in Math. 7. 21. that prophesied and cast out devils in Christ's name, to
whom he will yet say, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not:
For Grace is to save him that possesses it: But Gifts are to teach and profit
others. Yet Grace is an exceeding furtherance of the right and successful use
of gifts: For ordinarily he that speaks from the heart speaks to the heart;
when an unexperienced hypocrite speaks without life. But sometimes a dullness
and want of utterance in the sincere, and a natural and affected servency in
the hypocrite, with a voluble tongue, do obscure this difference; and make the
hypocrite the more profitable to the Church.

DIRECT. XVIII.
Understand well the necessity of your Communion with all the Universal Church,
and wherein it consists, and how far to be preferred before your Communion
with any particular Church.
WIth the Universal Church mystical, you must have communion by the same
spirit, the same regeneration, the same Faith and Love, and the same Laws of
God; and obedience thereto.

With the Universal Church visible, you must have communion, in the same
Profession of faith and repentance, and the same baptism, and the same sort of
ministry and public worship, so far as they are universally determined of by
Christ. And though you are absent in body, you must be as present in spirit by
consent, with all the Churches of Christ on earth. You must have spiritual
communion with the whole spiritual Church, and visible communion in kind (in
the same Rule of faith, and kind of workship) with all the visible Church; and
L^cal-presential communion with that particular Church where you are present,
and with any other where your presence afterward may be needful; unless they
hinder you by unlawful terms.

So that it is not the same kind nor measure of Communion which you are obliged
to hold with all; But you must have Communion with all men as a man; and with
neighbors as a neighbor, and with relations according to the relations civil
or domestical; and with all true Christians, as a true Christian; and with all
professed Christians, as a professed Christian; and with the particular Church
of which you are a part, as a part of that Church. And with your bosom Friends
and intimate Companions, as a Friend and Companion.

And yet in all this, you must communicate with no Church or person in their
sin it self: and yet not refuse their Communion in good, though mixed with sin.
You must own all the prayers of all the Churches in the world, so far as they
are good, and join in spirit by consent, as if you concurred with them in
presence, and made all their prayers to be your own (As you do by the prayers
of the Church where you are present.) If there be disorders or imperfections or
sinful blemishes in their prayers, you must disown all those faults, but not
therefore disown any part of all their prayers which are good, but desire to
have a part in them and desire the pardon of their failings.

And here you may perceive what a mischief pievish separation is on both sides.
It hinders you from pr^ying aright for others, as the members should do for
all the body; And it hinders you from partaking in the benefit of the prayers
of most of the Church of God on earth. Indeed God may hear those prayers for
you which you your selves disown: But whether this may be expected, according
to the ordinary course of his dealing, is much to be doubted: seeing he has
made every man's will or choice the ordinary condition of his participation of
such benefits, it is hard to conceive, that he that abhors the prayers of
other men, or takes them for such as God abhors, or will not accept, and in
his mind disowneth all participation, and communion in them, should yet have a
part against his will. But of this more anon.

As your Baptism makes you Members of the Universal Church, in order of nature
before you are members of a particular Church; so your relation to the
Universal Church is more noble, more necessary, and more durable, than your
relation to any particular Church: It is more noble, because the Society is
more noble.

The whole is more excellent than a little part: It is more necssary; because
you cannot be saved and be Christians without being members of the Universal
Church: But you may be Christians and be saved, without being a member of any
stated particular Church. It is more durable, because you can never separate
from the Unive^sal Church, or cease to be a member of it, without being
separated from Christ: But diverse occasions may warrant your removeall from a
particular Church. Live not therefore in those narrow and dangerous principles,
as if your Congregation or your party were all the Church of Christ; or as if
you had no Christian relation to any other Ministers or People, nor owed any
duty to them as Members of the same Body. But remember that all Christians,
Persons and Congregations, are but the Members of the Kingdom of Christ.

DIRECT. XIX.
Take heed of engaging your selves too far in any divided Sect, or of espousing
the interest of any party of Christians, to the neglect or injury of the common
interest of the Universal Church, or cause of Christianity.
I Doubt not but among several ranks of Christians, the soundest and most
upright are to be best esteemed, and (caeteris paribus) their Communion to be
preferred, before theirs that are more unsound and scandalous. But its one
thing to prefer the eye or hand, before the foot; a noble member before a more
ignoble; and another thing to own a Sect as such, or a party as they either
divide from others, or take up a dividing opposite interest. You are sure that
the Universal Church of Christ can never err against the essentials of
Christianity, nor against any truth or duty necessary to their salvation. For
then the Church were no Church, and then Christ were not its Head. And then the
body of Christ might perish: And then Christ were not the Savior of his body.
But you cannot say of any one part, that you are sure that part shall never
fall away and perish. There may fall out a necessity which may warrant the Body
to cut off a hand or leg, to save the rest: But no corporal necessity can
warrant you to destroy the whole; nor any one member to forsake the Body,
before it is forcibly cut off.

He that sees not how the espousing of parties and divided interests, does
corrupt most Christians in the world, and lacerate and deface the Church of
Christ, does not understand or not observe the condition of mankind. It is
somewhat rare to meet with any serious Christians, who are not so deeply
engaged into some Sect or Side or party, as to darken their judgments, and
pervert their affections as to all the rest, and to corrupt their converse in
the world: How blindly do such look on all that is good in those that differ
from them? How partially do they judge of the judgments and practices of
others? How small a thing will serve the turn, to excuse the faults of any of
their party? And how small and common a good seems excellent in them? And how
perversely do they aggravate the faults of all that are against their way? As if
every infirmity were a crime, and had no excuse? yea, they are often glad to hear
of some miscarriage in them, for which they may speak against them. And very
readily take up such reports, and are the willing-tongues of slanderous fame:
And in all this their faction makes them impenitent: For they think it tends
to the disgrace of the other Party, and so of their Cause, which they account
an error; and consequently that God has use for their malicious Calumnies to
his glory.

What company can you come into of forward Christians, but they are talking
against those of other parties? (except a few true entire Christians, who are
thoroughly possessed with the loving compassionate spirit of their Lord, and
have received the true impression of the Gospel.) And if you mark the cause you
will find it as a sectarian spirit, that prevails against the Catholic
spirit of Christianity. And in no sect more, than in those that pretend to be
the only Catholics, and to do all this against the Sectaries as such! What
bitter lies do the Popish sects under the name of Catholics daily vent not
only against Luther, Calvin, and other Reformers, but any that stand against
the peculiar interest of their party. And they that can get the upper hand-and
by worldly advantages become the domineering sect, do think that thereby, they
are exempted from the name and number of sectaries; and that all are sectaries
that question their authority, and do not absolutely obey them.

In all their discourse the stigmatizing of dissenters is an ordinary part! One
side reproacheth the other as Heretics and Schismatics; And the other
reproacheth them as hypocrites, formalists, and pharisaical persecutors: And
every party think that all this is a part of Christian zeal; and if they did it
not they should be guilty of lukewarmness and neutrality, and consenting to the
sins of others. And thus the Church of Christ is engaged in a war against it
self: And when all men should know them to be Christ's disciples by loving one
another; most men may perceive that they have too much contrariety to the
Christian nature, by their endeavoring to make each other odious. And all
because instead of distinguishing the members of the same Body by their several
offices and degrees, we are grown to make several Bodies of them, and to set
one part against another. How many a Kingdoms conversion from Infidelity has
been hindered? and how many a faithful Minister silenced or reproached? and how
many excellent Christians slandered and vilified? and how many blamless
customs, forms, and practices accused? and how many infirmities aggravated as
mortal crimes, by a siding factious disposition, and to promote the cause and
interest of a Sect. Therefore as you love your integrity and peace, keep up an
impartial universal love and honor to all Christians as such, and take heed of
a dividing spirit.

DIRECT. XX.
Be very suspicious of your Religious passions; and carefully distinguish
between a sound and a sinful zeal; lest you should father your sin on the
spirit of holiness, and think that you are most pleasing God, when you offend
him.
WE are seldom more mistaken in justifying our selves than in our Passions:
And when our Passions are Religious the mistake is both most easy and most
perilous: Easy, because we are apt to be most confident, and not suspect
them, the matter seeming so great and good, about which they are exercised. And
Perilous, because the greatness and goodness of the matter, does make the
error the greater and the worse. I have showed before how easy it is, to
think that our Religious passions, are all the works of the spirit of God; For
we are apt to estimate them, by the depth and earnestness which we feel. But
excellent persons have been here mistaken, as James and John were. And not only
so, but when the passion is up, the judgment it self is seldom to be far
trusted; For it inclines us to err in all things that concern the present
business. Therefore still remember the difference between true zeal and false:
And know that he that is upright in the main, and whose zeal for Christianity
is sound, may yet have much zeal that is unsound with it.

First, It is an ill sign when your zeal is raised about some singular opinion
which you have owned, and not for the common salvation and substance of the
Christian faith or practice. Or at least, when your odd opinion has a greater
proportion of your zeal, than many more plain and necessary truths.

Secondly, when your zeal is moved by any personal interest of your own: By
honor or dishonor; By any wrong that is done you, or any reputation of
wisdom or goodness, which lies on the cause. Or at least when your own
interest has too large a proportion in your zeal.

Thirdly, when your zeal is more for the interest of your party, than for the
Universal Church, and the common cause of Godliness, and Christianity; and can
be content that some detriment to the whole, may further the interest of the
party.

Fourthly, when your zeal tends to hurt and crueley, and would have God
rather to glorify his Justice by some present notable judgment; than his
Mercy by patience and forgiving: And when your secret desire of fire from
heaven, or some destruction of the adversaries is greater than your desire and
prayer for their conversion. The sure mark of true zeal is, that it is zealous
Love: It makes you love your neighbors and enemies more fervently than others
do: But false zeal: makes you more inclined to their suffering; and to
reproach and hurt them.

Fifthly, It is an ill sign when your zeal is beyond the proportion of your
understanding: And your prudence and experience is as much less than other
men's, as your zeal is greater. True zeal has some equality of Light and Heat.

Sixthly, It is an ill sign when it is a zeal which is easily kept alive, and
hardly restrained: For that shows the slesh and the Devil are too much its
friends. The true zeal of the spirit does need the fuel of all holy means, and
the bellows of meditation, and prayer to kindle it: and all is too little to
keep it up in the constancy that we desire. But carnal zeal will burn of it
self without such endeavors.

Seventhly, It is an ill sign when some sect or false-teacher was the kindler
of it; and not the sober preaching of the truth.

Eighthly, And it is an ill sign when it burns in the same soul where lust
and wrath and pride and malice burn; And when it prospers at the same time,
when the love of God, and a heavenly mind and life decay, The zeal of a
sensualist, of a proud man, of a covetous man, of a self-conceited empty
person, can hardly be thought a spiritual zeal.

9. And it is an ill sign when it carries you from the holy rule; and
pretends to come from a spirit which will not be tried by the Scripture: Or
when it drives you to use means which God forbids in his Word: and puts
you upon ways which the sealed Law and Testimony condemn: It cannot be of God,
which is against Gods Word.

10. Lastly, it is a suspicious sign, when it is contrary to the judgment,
experience and zeal of the generality of the most wise, experienced, tried,
sober, godly Christians; and so to the ordinary working of Gods Spirit in other
men, who are as good as you. For Gods Spirit is not contrary to it self.

By all these signs you may easily perceive, how the dividing zeal of a Sect as
a sect, does differ from the genuine Christian zeal. The one is a zeal for some
singular opinion: The other is a zeal for Godliness and Christianity. The one
is kindled by some interest of our own religious reputation: the other is
kindled by the interest of the will and glory of God. The one is for the
strengthening of a Party: The other is to increase the Church Universal, and
promote the common cause of Christianity: even when some particular truth or
duty is the Matter of it, yet the general cause of godliness is the end. The
one is a burning, hurting zeal, even the same which has made matter for so
many Martyrologies, and frightful Histories, by inquisitions, torments,
prisons, flames, massacre^ and bloody wars: And the same which has silenced so
many faithful Ministers, and disturbed so many States and Churches: The other
is a zeal of Love, which makes men fervent in doing good to others: The one
causes men to revile and despise and censure and backbite, and zealously to
make all dissenters seem odious, that the hearers may abate their love to them.
The other makes us value all that is good in others, and to hide their
nakedness, and to make them better, and to provoke the hearers to love and to
good works. The one tends to divisions and sidings and separations and
distances from our brethren; and to feed contentions: The other is a zeal for
unity, amity and peace. The one is the complexion of the weak, and childish,
the proud, and self-conceited, the peevish and surly sort of Professors: The
other is the zeal of solid knowledge, and of the prudent, humble, meek and well
grounded sort of Christians. The one is a zeal which flies most outward,
against the sins of other men, and can live with pride, and covetousness, and
selfishness, and sensuality at home: such serve not the Lord Jesus, but their
own bellies, Romans 16. 16, 17. The other begins at home, and consumes all
these vices in the heart; and as zeal increases humility, and meekness, and
love, and self-denial, and temperance, and heavenly mindedness increase. The
one is easily got and easily kept, and hardly kept under! O how easy is it to
get and keep a contemptuous, censorious, backbiting, dividing or persecuting
^eal! But the other is not so much befriended by Satan or the flesh, and
therefore must be preserved by prayer and meditation, and very great diligence.
How hard is it to keep up a zealous love of God and Man? and a fervor in all
our heavenly and spiritual desires? Abate but your diligence and this will
presently decay: when the fierce, contending, hurting, separating and
persecuting zeal does need no such fuel or labor to maintain it: The one is
kindled by the enflaming censures of some rash and passionate Preacher, that
knows better how to kill Love than to cause it; or by the singular conceits
of some Sectary or Divider; or by the backbitings of some Do^g, or malicious
Calumniator: The other is kindled by the humble, and heavenly preaching of the
Gospel, and by the meditations on Christ's example, and a study to imitate him
and his Saints in patience, forbearance, fo^giving others and doing good. The
one is a zeal which carries men from the Scripture, to pretenses of such
revelations, and inspirations, and impulses as have no proof, but the feeling
and fancy of the person: or at least, to abuse the Word of God, and plead it
for that which it condemns: It provokes men to some unlawful pract^se, under
pretense of misinterpreted texts, and of good ends and meanings. The other
still puts you upon good, and striveth against evil, and goes for trial of
every cause to the Law and to the testimony. Lastly, the one is a zeal which
pretends the spirit, and yet goes contrary to the common workings of the
spirit, in the most part of the best and wisest Christians. But the other is
the common vital heat, which animateth all the body of Christ, and actualeth
all his living members; and keeps up love and holiness in the Church; and is
the same in all humble heavenly Christians in the world. It will be of great
use to you, in order to your own and the Churches peace, to understand and
observe the difference between these contrary sorts of religious zeal.

DIRECT. XXI.
Lend not a patient ear to back-biters; much less must you hastily believe them
when they speak ill of others: But show your detestation of that sin, though
they should be most religious people that use it, and do it upon a religious
pretense.
I Do not say that it is always unlawful to speak that which is ill of another
behind his back. Sometime wicked men will take occasion to justify sin it
self, by the advantage of a sinners name: And sometime they will magnify the
virtues of some wicked man, or of some of their sect, on purpose to cast
reproach on godliness, or to make others odious by the comparison. Yet in such
cases we must repress their malignity more by a defensive than an offensive
opposition. But the usual course of backbiting in all sorts of men, is sinful.
The back-biter (how great or learned or religious soever) is but the devils
minister, to preach down the love of others, and to exhort you to hate your
brother, or to abate your charity to him. And he that patiently hearkeneth to
such, is a partaker of their sin. And he that believes them, has taken the
infection. Most of our odious thoughts of others, and our false and
uncharitable censures, do come in this way. For the most part, men censure and
separate and persecute most, where they are acquainted least, but go by
hearsay, and judge of men by back-biters mis-reports: And acquaintance and
familiarity usually reconcileth them, and shows them their error. You think
it is a fair excuse for you, when you either believe or report evil of another,
to say, that you heard it from very honest and religious, or reverend persons;
or you heard it from many, and confidently uttered. But God has not allowed
you to receive back-biters, because they are godly, or because they are many.
This very age and time does experimentally confute this excuse: In which it is
so common a thing, for false reports and news to be uttered with confidence,
and that by multitudes, and many of them religious, and yet neither truth nor
ground at all, for what is said. Back-biters, and haters of God are conjoined
Romans 1. 30. He that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his
neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor, is one that has the
mark of a Citizen of Zion. Psalm. 15. 3. An angry countenance must drive away a
backbiting tongue. Pro. 25. 23. Paul was afraid of that which we all now feel
the evil of, even this evil spirit which I am now detectcting. 2 Cor. 12. 20.
Lest there be debates, e^vyings, wraths, strifes, back-bitings, whisperings,
swellings, tumults, and so God would humble him among them. Rebuke back-bitings
and whisperings, or you will hardly avoid the rest of these iniquities. It may
be the report which you hear may be all false: Or it may be it is some little
matter made much greater than it is. Or it may be some part of the truth is
concealed and some circumstance which would make it better understood. However,
if it be true, when the reporter has no call to speak it, or when the accused
is not heard speak for himself, and you never heard what he has to say, there
is sin and injustice in the back-biter, the believer and reporter.

DIRECT. XXII.
Make not your selves judges of other men's actions, much less of their state,
before you have a call, and before you have sufficient acquaintance or proof,
of the person and of the case.
VEry common reports and very confident presumptions, may all prove injurious
and false. You may hear that such a family is profane, and that such a person
has no religion, that such a one is covetous, and such a one erroneous, etc.
and when it comes to the trial, it may all prove false. However it must be as
false to you, till you know, or prove it to be true: you may be ignorant of
another man's faults, without any faultiness of your own: But you cannot rashly
censure another without being your self faulty though the matter should prove
true. Justice must be observed as well in private as in public judging. As no
Judge in any Civil or Ecclesiastical Court, must condemn any man without
sufficient proof (which made Christ say Matthew. 18. 15, 16. Take one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
established) so no man in his own thoughts must condemn his brother, by any
rash or groundless sentence. It is safer for you to judge better of another
than he is, than it is to judge worse of him than he is. In many cases it may
be your duty to judge better of him than he is; because you must judge
according to proof; And if the evidence or proof deceive you, it is none of
your fault to be so deceived. And yet you are not hereby bound to believe a
falsehood: All that you are bound to believe is, that it is probable that such a
person is virtuous, innocent or sincere: And this is no falsehood: for that may
be probable or likely which is not true.

Few well consider of the meaning of Christ's words in Math. 7. 1, 2. Judge not
that ye be not judged: For with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged: and
with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again: I doubt not but
part of the sense may be, He that judges without mercy of another, shall have
judgment without mercy from God; as St. James expresses it. But that^ not
all; but the rest of the sense is [And he that j^dgeth cruelly rashly and
falsely of his brother, shall be so judged of by other men himself.] Not that
God will cause it, but he will permit it; and therefore can foretell it; and
make a righteous punishment, of the sin which he does but permit. Do you not
know that other men will censure and backbite you, as boldly and as busily as
you do censure and backbite others. Is it such a pleasure to you to imitate the
Devil, the great accuser, as that you will be as much accused your selves, and
as hardly thought of, rather than you will give it over.

And see here how sin does cross it self. Most of the censorious, are proud
persons, who think others much worse than themselves; and therefore speak worse
of their common and more ignorant neighbors, that they may be thought to be no
common nor ignorant persons themselves; and they are offended with the Pastor
of the Church, for admitting such persons into communion with such as they:
That so their piety may be more conspicuous than their neighbors: when all
this while they are but preparing for their own dishonor; And others will
judge as bad of them. When usually the meek and humble and merciful Christian
who judges hardly of himself and tenderly of all others; is tenderly and
lovingly judged of by all. The Prelatist says, [what obstinate persons are
these Non-conformists, They do all to keep the approbation of their party*] And
are they not requited by many of them whom they censure, who say [What
temporizing hypocrites are these Formalists and Latitudinarians! They would
turn Papists or any thing to save their skins, or get preferment. What perjury
or other heinous crime will they not number with things indifferent.] The
Papist thinks the Protestant a Heretic unworthy to live on earth and therefore
thirsts for his blood; And is he not requited by the censures of them that
think that he is but a blood thirsty limb of Antichrist himself? If he think
that the Protestant cannot be saved, because he is not a member of the Pope, or
Roman Church, the Protestant requiteth him often times with concluding, that a
Papist cannot go beyond a reprobate, nor a worshipper of the Beast be saved. If
the Independent censure the Presbyterian as a favourer of looseness and
formality, the Presbyterian can requite him, by censuring him to be an enemy to
order, government and peace, and a turbulent cause of all confusion. The same I
may say of all other sects: It is not now my purpose to take part with any of
them, nor to speak against any one of them more than the rest: But to them tell
all of their mistake in their censorious way, and how certainly they prepare
for the same measure and judgment which they give to others. Romans 14. 4. Who
art thou that judge another man's servant? To his own m^ster he stands or
falls: Yea he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand. -- But
why judge thou thy brother, or why do thou set at naught thy brother? We
shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ -- So then every one of us
shall give account of himself to God. It is strange that those men that can
understand a text against swearing and drunkenness, can see no light nor feel
no power in such words as these.

DIRECT. XXIII.
Mistake not the nature of the sin of scandal: Think not that it is the bare
displeasing or grieving of another; For it is the laying of a stumbling block,
that is, a temptation, or occasion of sinning before another.
INdeed the word [offend] has occasioned the mistake of many in this point, to
the great ensnaring of themselves and others. Offending sometime signifies
only Displeasing or grieving another: And this is not the scandal which the
Scripture speaks against. But it signifies also the laying of a stumbling
block before another, upon which he may be occasioned to fall into sin; And
this is the offense which is called scandal. Abundance of well meaning people,
have thought that they must not use any form or words or order or action
(especially if it be indifferent in it self) which others are displeased or
grieved at: Because they think that is scandal: Indeed there is a grieving
others which is scandal; that is, when by grieving them we occasion them to
sin. But consider I beseech you these two things.

First, what a wretched person that is. who will sin against God every time
that his brother does not humor him? Durst these persons profess this openly
with their tongues? Dare you say, Do not you use such a form of prayer or such
a ceremony for if you do, I will sin against God? What elfe do you mean, when
you blame men for scandalizing you? I hope you do not mean that no body must
displease you? If not, you must know that this only is true scandal, to
occasion you to sin? And is it not a shame that you will sin so easily?

2. And if bare displeasing had been scandal, then peevishness and ignorance
would have advanced all that had them to be the Governors of the world. For
what is it to govern, but to have all others obliged to fulfill your wills? And
if no man must displease you then all must fulfill your wills: And he is
scandalous that is not ruled by you. And if this were so, the most childish and
womanish sort of Christians, who have the weakest judgment and the strongest
wills, and passions, must rule all the world: For these are hardliest pleased,
and no man must displease them.

But I beseech you remember that scandal lies in Pleasing men as well as in
displeasing them, when it may harden them in an error, or tempt them to any
sin: I will instance to you but in two scandalous acts of Peter himself. The
first was to Christ in Math. 16. 22, 23. Where he thought to please Christ and
save him from suffering, and would have had him to spare or favor himself. And
Christ says, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me: the Greek
word is, A scandal: that is, Thou would do as satan did, even tempt me to
sin, and neglect the work which I came into the world about. The other was in
Gal. 2. 12, 13* Where Peter did scandalize the Jews by pleasing them! For fear
of offending the weak Juda^zing Christians, he separated from familiar
communion with the Gentiles. By which he laid a stumbling block or temptation
before them, to harden them in the sinful opinion of separation. If it had been
done in our days many would have been drawn away with Barnabas, and thought
that Peter had not given scandal to the Jewish Christians, but only separated
for fear of scandalizing them. Many a time I have the rather gone to the Common
prayers of the public assemblies, for fear of being a scandal to those same
men that called the going to them a scandal: that is, for fear of hardening
them in a sinful separation and error: because I knew that that was not
scandal which they called scandal, that is, displeasing them and crossing their
opinions: but hardening them in an error or other sin, is true scandalizing.
Understand this or you will displease God under pretense of avoiding scandal.

DIRECT. XXIV.
Make conscience of scandalizing one party as well as another: and those most
who are most in danger by your offense.
MAny persons pretend the avoiding of scandal, only to slatter one party and to
preserve their own reputation and interest with that side which they are
lothest to displease. And perhaps discern not the deceit of their own hearts in
all this; but think that it is indeed the sin of scandal which they avoid. But
why make you no conscience of scandalizing others, on the contrary side? Who
perhaps are more in number, and whose salvation should be as much desired by
you? The Papist perhaps will not deliver the Lords Supper in both kinds, nor
will forbear his Image Worship, lest he offend the Roman Catholics: But he
cares not much that by so doing he offends the Protestants and other
Churches; Nor that his Images are a scandal to all the Mahometans, and keep
them from the Christian faith. And thus every sect says; If you do this or
that, you will scandalize and offend many good people: Meaning their own side:
But they ^ever regard how many others they shall really scandalize by the
contrary: One says, It is scandalous to use extemporary prayers; And another
says, it is scandalous to pray by forms and books: And both sides usually mean
no more, but that their own party will be displeased and take it for a sin. But
as he is not scandalized by me, who only takes my action to be a sin; but he
that is ensnared by it in any sin himself; so whether it be displeasing or
tempting that you mean, you must regard one side as well as the other. The
heavenly wisdom is without partiality and without hypocrisy. Jam. 3. 17.

And usually they talk most against scandalizing those whom they account to be
the lest: And the best are least in danger of sinning. And so they accuse them
to be the worst, or else they know not what they say. For suppose a separatist
should say, If you hold communion with any Parish minister or Church in
England, it will be a scandal to many good people! I would ask such a one why
call you those good people that are easily drawn to sin against God? Nay that
will sin because I do my duty? He will say, No, they will not sin, but they
will take it to be your sin, and they will be troubled at it? I must answer
him, you talk of scandal, and know not what scandal is: scandal is not
troubling men, nor making them take me for a sinner; but occasioning them to
sin themselves by some unlawful or needless act of mine. Therefore if you know
what you say, you make the separatists almost the worst of men, that will sin
against God because another will not sin: yea if they would but sin, because
another sins it were bad enough. I would ask you therefore, whether you take
not the people of the Parish Churches to be more than you? and to be worse than
you? If you took them not for much worse than your selves, you would not
separate from them. And if you do think them worse, you must think that they
are more in danger of sinning, or being turned from the liking of godliness and
of the Gospel. And if so, then we are bound to be more afraid of giving scandal
to them than unto you. Are not men most afraid of overthrowing the children and
the weak, rather than those that are stronger than themselves? If you are apter
to sin and turn from Christ than the people of the Parish Churches, we should
rather separa^e from you than from them. If not, we must more take heed of
scandalizing them than you.

Obj. But Christ pronounces a ^o to them that offend his little ones.

Answ. If by [offending them] be meant only persecuting and hurting them as
many think, then it is nothing to the question in hand. For I hope
communicating with others is not a persecuting you* And bare [displeasing them]
it is certain that the text does not mean at all. But if by [offending them] be
meant scandalizing them, that is, laying snares before them, whether by fraud
or persecution, to turn them from Christ, and draw them to sins, then it
confirms all that I say: And the term [little ones] contains the reason of
the words: Because as little children are easily overthrown and easilier
deceived, so the young and weak believers of little faith, are most in danger
of being turned away from Christ, or ensnared in any sin or error. And
therefore if you think the Parish Churches to consist of weaker persons than
your selves, the woe is to you or us if we offend them.

The truth is, offending and giving scandal, is commonly taken in the Gospel,
for any action (which is not our necessary duty) by which either Heathens and
In^idels and enemies to Christ, are like to be drawn to harder thoughts of the
Christian faith; or any wicked man is like to be kept from a godly life; or
else by which the young ungrounded and unsettled sort of Christians, may be
tempted to turn back and forsake the faith which they have professed, or fall
into any dangerous sin. And therefore seeing the separatists profess to be
settled in the faith already, and many in the Parish Churches are weak, and many
averse to some duties of Religion, and more in danger of being turned away, we
are bound to be much more afraid of giving scandal to the Parishes, than to the
separatists.

Obj. But Christ cared not for offending such perverse ones as Herod or the
Pharisees?

Answ. Christ feared not to displease the greatest, when it would be done by
doing good: No more must you or they be pleased by our neglect of any duty. But
Christ was against laying any trap before either Herod or the Pharisees, to
make them sin.

And it is not your censure of others that will warrant us to use them as
Reprobates, forsaken of God. If every man that can be uncharitable enough, to
call his neighbors Pharisees or enemies of Christ, without proof, shall keep
us from communion with them, then the worse any man is, the more he shall be
Lord of all other men's consciences.

DIRECT. XXV.
Be not over-tender of your reputation with any sort of men on earth; nor too
impatient of their censures, displeasure, or contempt.
THe fangs of the censorious are a common scandal; and as strong a snare or
temptation to some men, as worldly preferments are to others: When we come
among men whom we take for the most Religious, and hear them keenly censure all
for hypocrites, or formalists, profane or schismatics, who are contrary to
them in opinion or practice; at the first we are in danger of being carried
away as Barnabas in dissimulation, and to say as they say, or at least comply
with them by our silence and practice, lest we should be censured by them as
others are. Especially Ministers are greatly in danger of this snare. For the
profane hate them for their doctrine and their holy lives; And it is the godly
that are the fruit of their labors, and the satisfaction which they have for
all their sufferings, and the comfort of their lives: And if these forsake them
and despise them, with whom shall they find any comfort in the world? Therefore
they are very much in danger of complying too far with their errors and
weaknesses, to keep their interest in them: And they think it is that they may
do them good. And perhaps this was the case of Peter and Barnabas, with the
weak Judaizing Christians. For Paul tells us Romans the 14. that it was the use
of the weak (who thought those things to be duties and sins which were not so)
to judge the strong, who knew their liberty: And it was the custom of the
strong to despise the weak: Just as at this day, the mistaken superstitious
Christian, says, They are profane that are not against all that he is
against: And those that see his error say, what giddy whimsical fanatics are
these? So was it then; and so it is like to be, till God give the world a
better mind. Many a faithful Minister I have known, who have freely confessed
to me, that the censures of peevish self-conceited Christians, inclined to
separation, was a far stronger temptation to them to forsake or overrun their
own understandings, than all the offers of honors, or riches could be on the
other side. It is a hard thing, when we have spent our labor and lives to
bring men to Christ, and have got them into a state of hope and forwardness, to
be shortly after cast off by them as formalists o^ temporizers or any thing
that their sick fancies will call us. But for all this, it is but one of those
trials which God will have his servants undergo: And both Ministers and private
persons must be above the praise and the dispraise even of self-conceited
Religious persons, before they can be sit to follow Christ, as tried and firmly
settled men. Stand your ground if you are in the right. Truth will bear all your
charges at the last, and will defend it self and you: If you please men
(whoever they be) contrary to God and conscience, you are servants of men, and
verily you have your reward. Math. 6. But you are no longer the servants of
Christ. Gal. 1. 10. And you will never be settled, but change as the Moon as the
parties or opinions of the censurers change. But if you stick to the words of
truth and soberness, at last the sober part of the Religious will be your
encouragers, and many of the giddy will come to you by Repentance, when
experience has showed them that which they would not learn of you. That which
is vertiginous will at last settle its rest on that which is permanent and
firm: As boys when they have made themselves wheel-sick with turning round,
will lay hold on the next post, to keep them from falling. Therefore bear the
censures of the ignorant. Please them in all things lawful for their good and
edification; and become all things to all men in a lawful way: But depart not
from the principles or practice of Christian-union, Communion, Charity, or
Sobriety, to please a dividing hot-brained party, nor to escape their sharpest
censures. He is unfit to be a Physician that cannot bear a mad m^ns railing^,
or the harsh expressions of his friends, when a frenzy or fever makes them
brainsick. When you have followed them in their violent hea^^ a while to avoid
their censure, either you must come back with sorrow, or run to the end with
them, as many in this age have done to their own, and to the Churches, and the
States confusion; or which is worst of all, God may ^^stly give you up, to be
of their minds, and to think that way right and necessary at last, which at
first you only yielded to, in compliance with the heats of other men. And when
you have sinned against God to avoid their censures, and keep an interest in
them, its two to one, but they will turn on still further and further, till you
are forced to let them go, and you shall in the end be more censured and
despired by them, than if you had never humoured them at all. These things are
written in an age of full experience, by one that has seen the proof in
multitudes.

For my part, I will be so ingenuous and thankful, to the dis^ngenuous and
unthankful world as to confess, that they have used me with unusual moderation
and civility; in that they have still mixed too high commendations with their
blind unreasonable Censures. But yet I must say that he is worse than a fool
who would not be taugh* by so much experience as I have had, of the vanity of
the judgings of the vertiginous world, to choose a more steadfast seat for his
rest, than a windmills-sails. The malicious censurers and railers on one side,
and the pe^vish censurer^ on the other side, have taught me to stand to the
judgment of God, and to pity the poor hypocrite, who has no better a reward,
than, the thoughts and praise of mortal men.

Do I speak according to the most common judgment of Divines* The Sectary
says, my light is divine: I speak but by rote, and not by true illumination.
Do I pretend to add any clearness to the methods or points received, or to
correct any error which has got the major Vote of the injudicious? Then I am
self conceited, and a novellist; and if not a heretic, its well I And the
honor of all the Divines which are of a contrary mind, must be engaged to
promote the Censure. And the fear that sober Christians have of novelty and
error, must be called up to make them abhor any truth which the grave and
ignorant censurer does not understand: And they that confess that they never
seriously read what I have written, on such or such a subject, yet have wisdom
and honesty little enough to say behind my back, O take heed of such a man's
Books, for they are tantum non heretical* Though in presence they are as gentle
as Lambs, or as quickly silenced (or worse) as the Owls at the approach of da^
light: If such a judicious Writer, as Camer, or Dav^nant, or Usher, or Gr^cius,
or Bengi^^, or Amyrald, or Placa^u^, or ^apellus, or Test^rdus, or Bl^ndel, or
D^ll^us, or (...) Blan^ (in his late excellent impartial judicious Theses) or
Iunius, or V^ssius, or Strangius, etc. do tell any of the unstudied or
injudicious sort of Divines, any more than they have received from that party
of Teachers, who are in greatest reputation with them; you shall have those
that never understood them, tell the ignorant (that cannot contradict them) how
erroneous they are, and how they contradict themselves: and what
inconsistencies and absurdities they speak: And it all goes down with deluded
auditors, as if the Speaker were an Oracle; or at least, knew what he said.

And to teach you to despair of the hypocrites reward, let me tell you; that
till God make the world another thing than now it is, there is no hope that
ever the honester sort of Christians or Teachers (much less the dishonester)
should ever come to so high seize, that the major part should be truly
judicious in judging of deep and difficult controversies! And that there is as
little hope, that either of them should know how little they know, till their
knowledge in the matter it self increase; or that ever the world (whether
Christians or Heathens, Pastors or People) should cease to overvalue their own
apprehensions; till greater Light and study bring them first to Doubting, and
lastly to separate the certainties from the uncertainties, and to fasten upon
one, and lay by the other. But I have been long upon this instance.

And it is so in almost all things else. Scarce a day or hour that I spend, but
I must sin or be censured for it. If I neglect my most public labors, my
conscience and those at a distance censure me. If I do not, those at hand who
expect all my time should be spent in private converse with them, censure me,
If my public duty command me away, yet he that expected that hour in
conference, thinks that I disdainfully neglect him; And if I should cast off
preaching and writing, it is almost all one: For that hour which I have been
spending with one, another has been that while expecting* and censuring me as
sharply for his frustration.

If I had a benefit to do or give, which I can give but to one, ten shall
censure me, because they have it not, when the one that had it is scarcely
thankful. If you would give all that you have to the poor, when all is given,
many that had nothing will censure you more then those that had it will be
grateful. Expectations with most men are high, and they understand not your
inability: And men's necessities are many and great; And every one will say, why
I look but for so much; when all set together is ten times more than you have
to give.

And as to the Manner of our duties, the censures will be as sure and many. If
I would cure any hearers of an error, instead of a cure, they make me know they
feel the smart; And that they came not to be taught, but to be pleased. (So
dangerous a thing is it for men to come into the School of Christ, as Judges
and not as Scholars, (or Disciples.) Its two to one but there are present many
persons of contrary opinions* what shall I do to please them all? shall I first
preach for Separation, Anabaptism, Antinomianism, P^pery, to please those on
those sides; and then preach against them all again to please those on the
other side? This would displease them all: (and God and Conscience who are more
than all.) If I speak on one side, I lose the other. If I meddle with no
Controversy* I must meddle with no truth: For one or other controverteth all
things; (the Immortality of the Soul, Christianity and the Deity, not excepted.)

If in prayer it self I let fall a confession of the controverted sin, which
any are guilty of who are present, they censure that Confession, and instead of
repentance, are ready to say they will join with such a one no more; And it is
the Confession which must be the sin.

But if once we have to do against the sin, of any that are Great or Godly,
that power or piety is made a patron of the error; then it may be a smarting
censure indeed, which we may expect: One cries out, He is a pestilent fellow,
and a mover of sedition, as they did of Paul, though I hate and preach-against
sedition. Another says, he is bitter and speaks against the Godly, when I
spend my self to preach up Godliness.

But if it be a party that is engaged in the error, you must expect the
censure of all the party. And what error is it that has not a party? or that
has neither Greatness nor Godliness for a refuge?

If in doctrinal or practical consultations of great moment you have to do with
injudicious unskilful men, if you contradict their way (be it never so
modestly) you are proud and self-opi^ionated, and must have your own way: If
you follow their mistakes, and contradict them not, you may wound the Church
and Cause of Christ, and be more generally censured at the last.

In a word, when such a multitude of things are matters of Controversy, as
many may be the matters of Censure. One will censure me for praying with a
form, or book, and another for praying without it. One for being too long, and
another for being too short: one for this gesture, and another for that: One
for preaching when I am silenced; another for not preaching more. One for being
too gentle to dissenters, and another* for being too severe: One for being too
narrow in my principles, and communion; and another, for being too large and
universal.

And if in the sense of the sin and misery of some Christians Love-killing
principles and practices, I have spent the best of twenty years, in writing,
preaching (while I had leave) conferring and praying for the Union of
Christians and the Churches peace; I have but made a wedge of my bare hand, by
putting it into the clift; and both sides have closed upon me to my pain. But I
have turned both parties in the fray, which I endeavored to part, against my
self; when each side had one adversary, I had two.

Nay this is not the worst to be expected: But moreover I must add, that I was
never more accused of any thing as a crime, than of that which I did most
against, And even for doing so. Never more suspected of Carnal compliance, than
when I exercised the greatest self-denial: Never more accused of
unpeaceableness, than for laboring for the Churches peace. Never was I more
accused of Schism, than for striving with all my power, to have united the
Ministers, and healed the Church, or at least prevented further divisions.
Never more accused of enmity against the true Discipline of the Church, than
when I have done most (and at the dearest rates) to stablish it, and to prevent
its fall.

In all this I meddle not with my Civil Superiors, as thinking it meeter
patiently to bear, than to aggravate their censures, though not all so
tolerable as private men's.

I might give you as many instances of the matters of common Converse: He that
has much to do in the world, shall hardly escape the censure of many. The
buyer will say he sells too dear: The seller will say, he would buy too cheap.
Every one that expects a commodity, will censure him that hinders it, and
steps in before him.

If I have a friend or kinsman unworthy of any office or preferment, he is
nevertheless peremptory in his desires and expectations, for being unworthy. If
I will not speak for him and further his suit, I am censured as unnatural and
unkind, and turn a friend into an enemy: If I do speak for him, I am false to
my conscience and the common good; and I must look to be censured accordingly
by many.

But I will add no more instances, lest what I intend for instruction, seem to
be but a complaint. But to what purpose is all this?

It is to let the Reader know, that man is not God, nor his judgment to be
rested in, nor his favor to be over-valued. To call to you, O cease from man
whose breath is in his nostrils; whose heart is deceitful and desperately
wicked! For wherein is he to be accounted of! Look up to God, and take him for
your God indeed: Rest in his Love, and be satisfied in his approbation* Despise
not man, nor lay any stumbling blocks before them; but as to your own interest
in their esteems (farther than Gods service and their benefit requires it)
account it but a shadow, and a thing of naught: And say of it as Paul, With me
it is a very small thing, to be judged of you or of man's day (or judgment) For
I have one that judges me even the Lord. 1 Cor. 4. 3.

It is GOD (Christians) it is GOD, it is only GOD, whose infallibility,
justification, and unspotted truth and goodness, you must make your rest. It is
Heaven, it is Heaven, it is only Heaven, where perfect truth, and impartial
righteousness, and the full vindication of all the just, and the fruition of
perfect Love and Concord, is to be expected: and where malice, and lies, and
discord, and the father of them, are totally and finally shut out.

As you would not be used as Hypocrites by God, and deprived of the true Reward
of faith, O seek not after the hepocrites reward! What is the applause of
mortal man! Can you not bear the censure of such a shadow? How then would you
suffer martyrdom for Christ? Overvalue not the esteem of High or Low, of the
Great or of the Godly, of the many or of the few. Gods approbation is
sufficient to be your reward. See that you be Godly, and then be more
indifferent though you are thought ungodly. See that you be loyal, and
peaceable, and then you may bear it, if you be called the contrary. Abhor all
unwarrantable divisions, and then you may bear to be reputed schismatics.
Study you to be good, and not to be accounted good.

And what if I should look further, to historical fame when I am dead! Away
with the overvaluing of that too, as part of the hypocrites reward! I confess
God usually blesses the memory of the just, and sets their names above the
power of the greatest tyrants, and causes the names of the wicked to rot: But
this is but a temporal and uncertain thing. If one write in my praise to the
highest, and another write a Volume of false reproaches, how shall posterity
know which is true, who knew neither party nor the cause?

But yet the nearer reason of all this admonition is, to let you know that as
contention comes by pride, so over-valuing the esteem and censures of men
(though Good or Great) is a dreadful snare, and cause of schisms: For then you
will be stretching your consciences, and using your wits to please the party
whose censures you must escape: And you will wound the truth* and be warping to
their errors and extremes: And though by this you may think, that some present
necessity may be satisfied, and some inconveniences avoided, yet at the long
running, the wound will be found to be increased; and the cure the harder
because of the delay. Converse with all men as those that must be finally
judged by God: and remember that the Judge is at the door.

DIRECT. XXVI.
Use not your selves needlessly to the familiar company of that sort of
Christians, who use to reproach and censure them, that are more sober,
Catholic and charitable than themselves: Unless you also be as much or more
with the soberer sort, who will show you the sin and mischiefs of
uncharitableness, censoriousness, and divisions.
NOthing is more experienced, than the power which the converse of chosen
familiars has upon the minds of the injudicious and unsettled. Which makes
education and the converse of our youth, to have so great a hand in choosing
men's opinions and Religion: And is the cause that Religion is as Languages are,
diversified by the territories or bounds of Countries. They that are bred among
such as use to speak of dissenters, as odious, as hypocrites, as heretics, as
schismatics, as ungodly, as proud fanatics, are very like to be possessed
themselves with the same spirit of malice and detraction. The words of those
whom you respect, especially when you hear them not confuted, will make you
believe that it is so indeed, and that the persons are as mad or as odious as
they make them. And thus, the Papists think odiously of the Protestants, and
the Lutherans of the Calvinists; and the Arminians and Anti-Arminians, the
Diocesans and the Presbyterians, the Paedobaptists and Anabaptists of one
another: because they converse only with such as paint them in an odious shape.
And thus if you use only or chiefly to converse with the censorious
Separatists, you shall hear so many invectives against them that are truly
Catholic, and sober, as will make you think that Love and Peace and Catholic
Communion, are some sinful and mischievous things. Sometimes they will deride
them as ridiculous; and sometimes they will call them temporizers, formalists,
or lukewarm hypocrites, who will do any thing in compliance with their own
commodities, and for the saving of their flesh. And sometimes they will thunder
out some terrible threatenings against them and their way, as heinously sinful.
And this language will form the belief and affections of ignorant Christians,
into its own uncharitable mold; as a necessary part of Christian zeal. As it
was the common way of the success of the Quakers, to come into Christian
assemblies, and in a prophetical strain, like men commissioned from heaven, in
the name of the most high God to denounce his judgments against the
faithfullest Pastors and their flocks, and pronounce them condemned enemies of
the light; and so by the very terror of their words, they frightened many
women and boys into their sect, before they understood at all what it was that
they were against or for: so do the Separatists declaim against the sinfulness
of Parish assemblies and communion, and of forms of prayer and such like, till
they have frightened the ignorant into their mistaken zea^^

Therefore, though I am not persuading you to separate from these feverish
persons, as they do from others, yet I would advise all the younger and
unsettled sort, that love themselves, not needlessly to choose the familiar
frequent company of such: Our private company is at our own choice.

And as the company of fierce self-conceited dividers, is so very dangerous, so
on the contrary, the company of grave, experienced, sober, charitable and
judicious Divines and other Christians, is exceeding helpful to settle the
minds of the younger and weaker sort: with them they shall hear the unity of
the Church, and the doctrine of Christian Love and Concord, humility, meekness
and moderation opened; and the sinfulness and lamentable consequents, of
schism, self-conceitedness, censoriousness and discord; which among others they
should never hear.

And let me leave this warning to the Church of God, that if ever it may be
hoped that Unity, Love and peace shall be recovered, it must be by the training
up of the younger Christians, under the precepts and examples of such grave,
judicious, experienced and peaceable guides, instead of educating them in the
smoaky schorching chimney, of young, unexperienced, self-conceited teachers,
who burn with the ambition of applause. And let the sober be-think them whether
our times and teachers are better and purer than theirs, to whom Paul said,
Act. 20. 30. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away disciples after them. And Ephesians. 4. 14. He gave the Church Pastors and
Teachers, for its Unity and per^ection [That we henceforth be no more children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
sleight of men and ^unning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.]

DIRECT. XXVII.
Take heed of mis-judging of the Answers of your prayers, and of taking those
things to be from God, which are but the effects of your prejudice, passion or
weakness of understanding.
THis is a sin, which I know not whether I may say is more common with many
godly persons, or more injurious to God, or more pitiful as to themselves.

It is so common, that it is hard to meet with many women and passionate
Christians, who are earnest in prayer, but sometimes they run into this
mistake, and judge ungroundedly of the answer of their prayers, by such
feelings and strong apprehensions of their own, as never came from the spirit
of God at all.

And it is a great wrong to God, to be made the author of man's infirmities and
errors, and of that which is contrary to his word.

And yet it is a very pitiful case as to the offenders; because it is usually
the sin of persons that are very upright and honest in the main, and that are
very serious in their prayers to God; and of such as have naturally such
weakness of reason and strength of affection, as that they are less blemeable,
though less curable than others are.

To understand this matter the better, I pray you consider, that Prayer is not
to change Gods mind; but to make us the meet receivers of his mercies: And this
it does by exciting and exercising those apprehensions and desires, which make
us fit by valuing them to improve them. Therefore such principles, dispositions
and desiers as are in us, Prayer does excite and exercise: And every man
prays according to his own judgment, disposition and affection. And that
apprehension and affection, which is most stirred up and exercised, is most
felt. And that which is most felt, does most take us up, and is most observed:
And so we think that it is the impulse of Gods spirit, and the answer of our
prayers, when it is but the operation of our own spirits, and the sensible
activity of our former principles.

There are very few that take their impulses and resolutions, for the spirits
answer of their prayers, but they had before an understanding most inclined to
that opinion, or else a byas upon their affections, bending them that way; or
something in themselves which occasioned the scales to turn that way.

Obj. But I did bring my mind to a pure impartiality, and prayed to God that he
would show me the truth, be it what it would be: and that if this were not
right, he would blast it and never suffer it to go on: And the more I prayed,
the more I was confirmed, that this is the right.

Answ. All this may be, without any of Gods approbation of the conclusion which
you think is his answer to your prayers. For whilst you prayed that God would
turn your mind from it, if it were not right; yet at that time your judgment
was inclined to it; or your affections at least: And it is an easier thing to
speak impartial words in prayer than to get an impartial unprejudiced mind. And
when you think that your mind is brought to an impartiality, alas, there may be
many deep roots of prejudice which you observe not: And there is scarce one of
a thousand who thinks that he prays with a pure impartiality, but his
opinion, disposition, inclination, interest, or secret affection, does byas and
ponderate his mind, more to one side than to the other.

But if you were never so willing to know the truth, yet there are passions in
you, and corruptions, and ignorance and former errors, which may all do much
to hinder you from knowing it, and may breed many false apprehensions in your
mind; and yet may cherish them with as dear an espousal and affection, as if
they were certainly from God.

And moreover, you have been gilty of former sins: And whether God for any of
them, may leave you to run into mistakes, you know not. Or whether any present
self-conceitedness may occasion him to leave you to mistakes.

But the principal part of my answer is this God has no where promised to
reveal all his truth to you, because you desire him so to do. It is not every
prayer of yours, which he has promised to hear and grant; but only those which
are agreeable to his will: His will is either his Decree, his Command, or his
Promise. Though the first be not it that is meant in the text, yet it is
certain that your prayers cannot change Gods decrees. The will of his command
does more concern the sense of the text; but it is only a negative which may
hence be gathered; that is, that if your prayers be contrary to Gods commands,
they are your sins and have no promise of his grant. But it will not follow
that God will grant all the prayers which are put up in obedience to his laws:
But only that you shall be no loosers by such obedience; but he will give you
that, or something which shall be as good for you. It may be Gods command that
godly children should pray for the lives of their sick parents; and that
parents pray for the conversion of their ungodly children, and that we pray for
all men: And yet it does not follow that we shall have the very thing which we
obediently pray for. But it is his Promising will which is the measure of our
hope, as his Commanding will is the rule of our obedience. Whatsoever he has
promised, he will certainly give us. Now God has no where promised in his
word, that he will reveal the true meaning of every text of scripture, to every
godly person that asks it. Praying is but one of the means which God has
appointed you to come to knowledge. Diligent reading, hearing, and meditation,
and counsel of the wisest is another means. Even to dig for it as for silver,
and to search for it, as for hidden treasure, and to continue so doing, and
wait at the posts of wisdoms doors, that knowledge may come into you by degrees
in time. God has not promised you true understanding, upon your prayers alone,
without all the rest of his appointed means: Nor that you shall attain it by
those means, as soon as you desire and seek it; For then prayer would be a
notable pretense for laziness, and they that would not be at the labor, of
study, meditation, or conference, might save all their pains, and go to God and
ask wisdom of him and he would give it them. Even as idle beggars think
without working, to get an alms to maintain them in their slothfulness. If
instead of all our reading, hearing, and meditation, we could but pray, and so
get all the knowledge which other men study, labor and wait for, it would be
too cheap a way to wisdom. Solomon that got it by prayer extraordinarily,
commands us very great diligence to get it.

It is very considerable, not only that Christ increased in wisdom in his
youth, but also that he would not enter upon his public Ministry (as is
aforesaid) till he was about thirty years of age. When it had been more easy
for Christ to have got all knowledge by two or three earnest prayers, than for
any of us.

Moreover you must pray according to Gods will of precept, not only in the
matter but in the manner of your prayers. And there may be more selfishness,
and many other corruptions in the manner of them than you discern.

And there are many things which submissively you may lawfully pray for, which
God has never promised you at all: You may pray for the life of the sick, and
for the conversion and salvation of all your relations, and of thousands of
others which God will not give you. Otherwise all the relations of every true
Christian should be saved, yea and all his enemies and all the world.

To apply all this, It may be you are in doubt whether this or the other be the
meaning of such a text of scripture? Or whether you should join with such a
Church, in the use of such preaching and prayers or not? And when you have
prayed earnestly, you are confirmed for one way and against the other. And
perhaps all this is but to be confirmed in your error: For first, you came
with a secret prejudice; secondly, or you came with distempered affections; or
with such a fear of going one way rather than the other, that the very fear
does much to cause your apprehensions. Thirdly, or you come with the gnilt of
former sin. Fo^rthly, or you have some partiality on your spirit, and a secret
inclination to one side more than to the other; or some overvaluing of your own
understandings, persons or prayers. Fifthly, Or you are lazy and presumptuous;
and think God must teach you that in one hour, and at a wish or prayer, which
others better than you must learn with prayer and twenty years study, diligence
and patience. Sixthly, or you think God must needs resolve you of that which he
never promised to resolve you in. Where has he promised upon all your prayers,
that ever he will teach you in this life the sense of every text of Scripture?
If ever he promised this he will perform it. And is it to One Christian, or to
every praying Christian that he has promised it? If to every one, why are we
not all of a mind? Why be not all as wise as you? What need we Commentaries
then? Or what need have others of your Revelations: If it be but to some, who
be those some? And how shall we know them? And how know you that you are one of
them? And why do not those some, condescend to write an infallible Commentary
upon all the Bible, when they themselves are taught it of God, that so we may
doubt and differ no more?

But if you say that it is not the meaning of every text that God has promised
to make known to you when you pray, but of some few, how will you know which
those few be? And where is the promise which makes this difference? Except
only that to all true Christians, he has promised to reveal so much as is
necessary to their salvation. But if you will pray for more, your belief of
your success must not go beyond the promise. If you will promise to your
selves, you must perform for your selves?

Obj. But has not God bid us believe that we shall receive what ever we ask,
and promised to believers that they shall receive it?

Answ. He has first made a Law to command you prayer, and then made a promise
to grant, what you pray for, according to his will, that is, according to his
command and promise, and has made your believing of this promise, one of the
conditions of his fulfilling it to you. So that if you believe not his power
and promise you shall not have right immediately to the thing promised. But if
you pray and believe and withal use those other means with diligence and
patience which God has appointed you, you shall know in that measure as is
suitable to your state (For God has not promised the same measure of knowledge
to all true believers.) So that this is all that the promise gives you, and
not that you shall know all that you pray to know, and that immediately.

Obj. But then you leave us at utter uncertainty, whether we have the answer of
our prayers or not?

Answ. Not so. But the answer of your prayers must not be tried by your
conceits but by Gods rule. If you p^ay for that which you have neither a
command nor promise for, your prayer is sin, and your answer can be nothing but
Gods rebuke, or your own delusion. But if you pray for that which you have a
command for, but no particular promise, then you have only the General promise
that your prayer shall not be lost, but shall bring down either the thing you
pray for, or something else which the wisdom of God sees to be best for you
and others; and to his ends. And this is all that you can warrantably believe.
But if you pray for that which has both a command and a particular promise (as
the pardon of sin, and necessary grace and life eternal to a believer) you may
be sure that this prayer shall be granted in kind. So that you are not to judge
of the answer of prayers, by your feelings and passions and impulses, but by
the promise of God, which you must believe will be fulfilled what ever you
feel: Faith and not feeling must tell you whether your prayer be accepted.

Nay if you should receive health or wealth or gifts for your selves or others,
when you have prayed for them; you cannot tell whether it be a merciful answer
to your prayer, or a judgment, unless you try it by faith according to the
promise. I have nothing now to say of the case of miracles, but this: If God
promise a miracle, you may believe it because it is promised: If he perform it
without a promise, then either you must not believe it till it is done, or else
your faith must be a miracle also; And then the faith it self is its own
justification. But miracles are now so rare, that all sober Christians will
take heed how they expect them, or over-hastily believe them; and especially
how they take their own belief for a miracle. All the talk that some men make
of a particular faith, may be tried by what I have here said.

To conclude, the warning which I give you in this case, is from long and sad
experience. I have known too many very honest hearted Christians, especially
melancholy persons and women, who have been in great doubt about the opinions
of the Millenaries, the Separatists, the Anabaptists, the Seekers, and such
like, and after earnest prayer to God, they have been strongly resolved for the
way of error, and confident by the strong impression, that it was the spirits
answer to their prayers, and thereupon they have set them into a course of sin.
If you say, How know you that they were mistaken? I will tell you how. First,
Because they have been resolved contrary to the word of God. And I know, that
Gods spirit did first make a standing Rule, to try all after-impulses by; And
what ever impulse is contrary to that Rule, is contrary to Gods spirit. The Law
and the testimony are now sealed, and all spirits to be tried by them. Isa. 8.
20. Secondly, Because I have found their impulses contrary to one another. One
has been resolved for Infant baptism, and another against it: One has had a
revealation for a prelacy, like the order of Aaron, and the Priests, and
another against all Prelacy.

One has been confident of an answer of prayers for Antinomianism, and another
against it for Arminianism: One for public Communion, and another to detest
it: And both came in, in the same way. And Gods spirit is not contrary to it
self. Thirdly, Because I have seen abundance of prophesies of things to come,
which people have this way received with the greatest confidence to prove all
false. Fourthly, Because I have staid till many of the persons have found by
experience that they were deceived, and have confessed it with lamentation. And
fifthly, because perhaps I know more of the nature of prejudice, affection,
melancholy, feminine weakness, and self-conceit, and of tempting God in the way
of prayer, and of satan's transforming himself into an Angel of light, than
every Reader will know till they have paid for their learning.

DIRECT. XXVIII.
Do not too much reverence the impulses or revelations or most confident
opinions of any others, upon the account of their sincerity or holiness: but
try all judiciously and soberly by the Word of God.
MAny that have no such impulses themselves, are yet so much taken with the
reverence of others, that they are very apt to be seduced by their confidence.
When so great a man as Tertullian was deceived by Montanus and his prophetess:
when such a one as Hacket could deceive not only Coppinger and Arthington, but
abundance more, some taking him for the Messiah, and some by his breathing on
them thinking that they received the Holy Ghost! When David George in Holland,
and John of Leyden in Munster, and Behmen Stiefelius and so many more pretended
Prophets in Germany could deceive so many persons as they did? When the
pretended revelations of the Ranters first, and the Quakers after could so
marvellously transport many thousand professors of religion in this land; I
think we have fair warning to take the counsel of St. John, Believe not every
spirit; but try the spirits whether they be of God. It is a pitiful instance of
the good old learned Commenius, who so easily believed the prophesies of
Daubritius and the rest which he has published: Yea when he saw the prophesies
fail, yet when he adjured the prophet to speak truth, and got him to swear as
before the Lord that it was truth; this seemed enough to confirm his belief of
him: whereas if he had been as well acquainted with the nature of Melancholy
and Historical passions as many others are, he would have known that as strange
things as that he records of the man or women, may be done without any Divine
inspirations: and that it is no wonder if that person swear that his words are
true, who is first deceived himself before he deceive others. For a cracked
brained person to believe his delusions to be real verities, is little wonder.

I have many a time my self conversed with persons of great honesty and piety
(though of no great judgment) who have some of them affirmed that they had
angelical revelations, and some of them thought that the Spirit of God did
bring this Scripture or that Scripture to their mind in answer to their
prayers; and were so very confident that what they affirmed was the certain
truth or voice of God, that I have been stricken with a reverence to their
professions, and with a fear lest I should resist God in resisting them. But
resolving to take none on earth for the master of my faith, but to try the
Spirits whether they be of God, by going to the Law and Testimony, I was
constrained to turn my reverence into pity. For I found that their seeming
revelations were some of them Scripture-doctrine, and some of them contrary to
the Scripture: As for that which is already in the Scripture, what need I
further revelation for it? Is it not there sufficiently revealed? Can their
words add any authority to the Word of God? And have I not Gods own Ministers
and means to help me to the knowledge of his word? And as for that which is
contrary to Scripture, I am sure that it is contrary to the will of God: And if
an Angel from Heaven should preach another Gospel to me, I must hold him
accursed: Gal. 1. 7, 8. so that if these persons should have the appearance and
voice of an Angel speaking to them. I would despise it as well as the words of
a mortal man, if they be against the recorded word of God.

But by what I have seen and heard, I know that it is a great temptation to
some weak Christians to hear one that is much in prayer, say, Take heed what
you do: Have no Communion with this sort of men, nor in this or that way of
worship; nor in this or that opinion; for I am sure it is against the mind of
God: I once thought as you do, but God has better made known his mind unto me.

But saving the due respect to the honesty of such persons, ask them, How shall
I know that you are in the right? If they say, I will not reason the case with
you, but I know it to be the mind of God; Tell them, that God has made you
reasonable creatures, and will accept no unreasonable service of you; and you
have but one Master of your Faith, even Christ: Therefore if they believe that
themselves, which they can give you no reason to believe, they must be content
to keep their belief to themselves, and not, for shame, persuade any other to
it, without proof! If they say that God has revealed it to them, Tell them,
that he has not revealed it to you, and therefore that's nothing to you, till
they prove their divine revelation: If God reveal it to them but for themselves
they must keep it to themselves. If he reveal to them for others, he will
enable them to make some proof of their revelations, that others may be sure
that they sin not in believing them. If they say, that the Scripture is their
ground, Tell them that the Scripture is already revealed to all; And if indeed
what they speak be there, you are ready to believe it. But if they pervert the
S^^pture by false interpretation, or abuse it and m^^apply it, none of this is
the work of the Spirit of God.

If they say that the spirit has told them the meaning of the Scripture, say
as before, that is not told for you, which is not proved to you? The Scripture
is written in such words as men use, of purpose that they might understand it;
and is to be understood by all men that hear it, though they have no
revelation: God has set Pastors in his Church to teach it; If therefore
revelations be still necessary to the understanding of the Scripture
revelations, then the Scriptures seem to be in vain; and these last revelations
must again have new revelations to the right understanding of them also.

The truth is, it is very ordinary with poor fanciful women and melancholy
persons, to take all their deep apprehensions for revelations. And if a text of
Scripture come into their minds, they say, This text was brought to my mind,
and that text was set upon my spirit; As if nothing could bring a text to their
thoughts, but some extraordinary motion of God? And as if this bringing it to
their mind, would warrant their false exposition of it.

To conclude, Decry not the necessity of the ordinary sanctifying work of the
spirit, to bless the Scripture to your true illumination and sanctification:
And if any pretend to any other revelations or inspirations, or expositions of
the Scripture which they cannot prove to you^ despise them not, but modestly
leave them to themselves: But take heed that the reverence of any ones
holiness, tempt you not to depart from the certain sufficien^ word of God and
draw you not into any (...) Heresy, or Separation, or Opinion contrary to Gods
standing Law.

DIRECT. XXIX.
Take heed lest the trouble of your own disquieted doubting minds do become a
snare, to draw you to some uncouth way of cure, and so make the fancy of some
new Opinion, Sect or Practice, to seem your Remedy, and give you ease, and
thereby persuade you that it is the certain truth.
THis is the pitiful Case of the ignorant, and ungrounded, and troubled sort of
religious persons; that they are looking every way for ease and comfort: And
having not wisdom enough to fetch true grounded satisfaction from the
Scriptures, and from the solid truth, in the use of Gods appointed means, they
hearken to any one that will promise them comfort and salvation, by what means
soever. Like ignorant people is their sickness; some of them know not an able
Physician, and some of them will not be at the cost; and some of them will not
take such unpleasing Medicines; and most of them have not patience to stay for
a Cure, unless the Medicine at twice or thrice taking do give them ease, they
will not believe that it will do them any good: And so in their foolish
ignorance, and the weariness of their pain, they will go to any ignorant woman
or unskilful fellow, who will take cheapest of them, and be boldest in his
undertakings: And those that die by it, are out of sight, and forgotten by the
living: And those that by the strength of nature do recover, do magnify their
ignorant Physician as if there were none such, and so entice others to their
Graves.

Thus many troubled unquiet souls, either know not ^ound Doctrine and Teachers
from deceit, or else will not be at the pains or patience, to wait on God in
the use of the right means; or most commonly spoil the Remedy offered them, by
their own misapplications; and then for ease they hearken to any ignorant
Sectary, that will fiercely cry out against ^ound Teachers, and revile all that
are wiser than himself, as if he knew more than all the Ministers in the
Country. O says the deceiving Papist, you will never have settled comfort while
you follow these Ministers, and till you come to us, who are the true Church --
Says the Anabaptist, you will never be well settled while you follow these
Preachers: They have not the Spirit, but speak only by the book: Come to us and
be baptized, and you will have peace. And thus says the Quaker, the Familist,
and other Sects.

I have known some that have lived long in doubts and fears of damnation, who
have turned Anabaptists, and suddenly had comfort: And yet in a short time they
forsook that Sect and turned to another. I have known those also that have
lived many years in timorous complaints, and fears of Hell; and they have
turned to the Antinomians, and suddenly been comforted: And others have turned
Arminians, which is clean contrary, and been comforted: And others have but
heard of the Doctrine of perfection in this life, and suddenly been past their
fears, as if hearing of perfection had made them perfect: And from thence they
have turned Familists, and at last showed their perfection by fornication and
licentiousness and mere Apostasy; who yet lived very conscionably and
blamelesly, as long as they lived in their fears and troubles.

The reason of all this is plain to any judicious Observer. 1. The persons are
ignorant and never had the right knowledge and skilful improvement, of the
sound doctrine which at first they seemed to embrace. And 2. the power of
conceit and fancy brought them comfort or quietness in their change. For they
thought before, that if they had not somewhat extraordinary they could have no
assurance of salvation: And while they held that sound Doctrine which all about
them held as well as they, and found no extraordinary power of it on their
hearts, they perceived no difference between themselves and others: But when
they had entertained new opinions, and entered into a new Sect, which
confidently told them, that they only were in the right, they had then
something extraordinary to trust their souls on. And the novelty of the matter,
and greatness of the change with the conceited excellency of the opinions and
party, did make them think that they were now grown very acceptable to God.

To this may be added, that as a life of holiness has far more opposition from
the Devil, the world and the flesh, than the changing of an opinion or joining
with a party has; so it must be harder to get and keep that comfort which is
got and kept by faith and holiness, than that which is got by such an easy
change.

We see among us what abundance of persons can live like beasts in most odious
whoredoms, drunkenness and rage; or like devils in bloody cruelty against the
good, and yet be comforted, because they are of the Church of Rome, which they
think is the true Church. As if God saved men for being of such a side or
party! And why may not Separatists, Anabaptists and others easily take such
kind of comfort?

O therefore labor for well-grounded faith and solid knowledge; that you may
attain the true Evangelical comforts, and your ignorance may not prepare you
for deceit? and you may not be like children tossed to and fro and carried up
and down with every wind of doctrine by deceived and deceitful men. Nor may not
have need to go to the devil to be your comforter, nor to steal a little
unlawful peace from parties and opinions, as if there were not enough to be had
in Christ and holiness and eternal life.

DIRECT. XXX.
Keep in the rank of a humble Disciple or learner in the Church of Christ, till
you are fit and called to be your self a Teacher.
CHrist owneth no Disciples which are not in one of these two ranks; either
Teachers by office upon a lawful call, or Learners who submit to be taught by
others. When his Ministers have made men his Disciples, they must afterward
Teach them to observe all things whatsoever he has commanded them. Matthew. 28.
19, 20. And a Learner must hear and read and discourse in a learning way, by
humble asking the resolution of his doubts, acknowledging the weakness of his
own understanding, and the superiority of his Teachers. This is the common
ruin of raw professors, that they presently grow proud of a poor ignorant
head, as if it were full of knowledge and spirituality: and while they continue
Hearers, they continue not Disciples or Learners, but come with a proud and
carping humor, to quarrel with their Teachers as poor ignorant men, in
comparison of them; And therefore choose them a heap of Teachers according to
their own opinions: And all this while they have such list to be some body and
to vent their seeming wisdom, that they can hardly stay from being Teachers
themselves, till they have any thing like a lawful call. Whereas if they would
have kept in the rank of humble Learners till they had grown wiser, they might
have preserved the Churches peace and their own.

DIRECT. XXXI.
Grow up in the great substantial practical truths and duties, and grow
downwards in the roots of a clearer belief of the word of God and the life to
come; And neither begin too soon with doubtful opinions, nor ever lay too much
upon them.
HE that takes this course will have all these advantages. First, He will be
himself a solid Christian, and will make sure of the man, which is his own
salvation. Secondly, He will have so fast hold of the necessary points, that no
controversies or opinions, will shake his faith or destroy his love to God or
man. Thirdly, He will honor God by upright practice, and show forth the power
and excellency of religion in the true success upon the heart and life: His
Religion which begins in solid faith, will grow up into sincere Love and good
works. Fourthly, He will be without partiality, a Lover of all the servants of
Christ, and therefore escape temptations to faction and division, because his
Religion consists in those common truths and duties, which all profess.
Fifthly, he will not only safely receive all further truths from these
principles, but all his knowledge and disputes will be sanctified, as being all
subservient to faith and love and holiness.

Whereas he that takes the contrary course, and presently falls to the study
of by-opinions, and lays too much upon them, will prove too like a
superficial hypocrite, and a deceiver of himself, by thinking that he is
something when he is nothing. Gal. 6. 5, 6. And he will make a pudder in the
world for nothing, as children do in the house about their babies and their
bawbles: He will make but an engine of his by-opinions, to destroy true Piety
and Christian Love in himself first, and then in all that will believe him. He
will first make himself, and then many others, believe that Religion is nothing
but proud self-conceit and faction; And he will be the shame of his profession,
and the hardener of the wicked in their sin and misery; by persuading them that
the Religious are bnt a few ignorant whimsical fanatics. These are too sad
experienced truths.

DIRECT. XXXII.
Lay not a greater stress upon your different words or manner of prayer, than
God has laid: And take heed either of scorning, reproaching or slighting, the
words and manner of other men's worship, when it is such as God accepts from
the sincere.
IT is an easy thing to turn the native heat of Religion, into a feverish
outside zeal about words, or circumstances or ceremonies, whether it be for
them or against them. O what a wonder is it, that by so palpable a trick as
th^s, the Devil should deceive so many, and make such a stir and disturbance in
the Church. I know that one party will cry up Order, and the other will cry up
Spirituality, and both will say that God makes not light of the smallest
matters in religion, nor no more must we: And in this general position there is
some truth. But if nothing could be said for both their errors, they would
then be no deceits, nor be capable of doing any mischief. Some things that you
contend about, God has left wholly undetermined and indifferent; And some
things in which your brother erreth, his error is so small a fault, as not at
all to hinder his acceptance with God, nor with any man that judges as God
does. Had you ever understood, Romans 14 and 15. you would have understood all
this.

It would make a knowing Christian weep between indignation and compassion, to
see in these times, what censures and worse are used on both sides, about the
wording of our prayers to God! How vile and unsufferable some account them,
that will pray in any words which are not written down for them? And how
unlawful others account it to pray in their imposed forms: some because they
are forms, and some because they are such forms; and some because that Papists
have used them, and some because they are imposed! when God has given them no
command, but to pray in faith and fervency, according to the state of
themselves, and others, and in such order as is agreeable to the matter, and in
such method as he has given them a Rule and Pattern of. But of all quarrels
about forms and words, he has never made any of their particular
determinations, no more than whether I shall preach by the help of Notes, or
study the words, or speak those which another studied for me.

It is a wonder how they that believe the Scriptures, came first to make
themselves believe, that God makes such a matter as they do, of their several
words and forms of prayer: That he loves only extemporary prayer as some
think, and hates all prescribed forms: Or that he loves only prescribed Forms
as others think, and hates all extemporary prayers by habit? Certainly in
Christ's time both Liturgies by forms, and also prayers by habit were used? And
yet Christ never interposed in the Controversy, so as to condemn the one or
the other. He condemns the Pharisees for making long prayers to cover their
devouring widows houses, and for their praying to be seen of men: But whether
their prayers were a Liturgy and set form, or whether they were extemporary,
he takes no notice, as telling us that he condemned neither! (And its like the
Pharisees long Liturgy, was in many things worse than ours, though the Psalms
were a great part of it: And yet Christ and his Apostles often joined with them,
and never condemned them.)

Nay as far as I can find, the Pharisees and other Jews were not in this so
blind and quarrelsome as we; nor never made a controversy of it, nor ever
presumed to condemn either Liturgies or Prayers by habit.

I shall now pass by their error who are utterly against public prayers from
a habit, as having spoken of it at large elsewhere when I had opportunity. I
shall now only answer the contrary extreme.

Obj. Where has God given any men power to prescribe and impose forms for
others? or commanded others to obey them?

Answ. First, where ever he has given any power to teach their inferiors to
pray, who cannot do it in a better way. He has given Parents this power where
he has bid them, Bring up their Children in the nurture, and admonition of the
Lord: Is it not by the Law of nature, the Parents duty to teach their children
to pray? And is not the learning of the words first, profitable to their
learning of the sense? May they not teach their Children the Lords Prayer or a
Psalm, though it be a Form? And why not then other words which are agreeable to
their State? And he that taught his own Disciples a Form and Rule of Prayer,
and tells us that so John taught his Disciples, and says to his Apostles, As
my Father sent me, so send I you; by making them Teachers to his Church, did
allow them to teach either by forms or without, as the cause required. All the
Scripture is now to Preachers, a form of Teaching: And when we read a Chapter,
we read a prescribed form of Doctrine: And it ha^h many forms of prayer and
praise, and forms of Baptizing and administering the Lords Supper.

If you say, that the Apostles had an infallible spirit, I answer, True: And
that proves that that their Doctrine was more infallible than other men's: but
not that they only and not other men may teach by the way of forms. All the
Books of Sermons now written are so many prescribed words or forms of teaching:
And if we may use forms of Teaching as well as the Apostles, why not also forms
of praying.

If you say that the Apostles prescribed the Church no Liturgy, I answer, That
only proves that no one is universally necessary, nor to be universally
imposed? but not that therefore no use of forms of prayer are lawful; May we
not now use the Lords Prayer, or pray in some other Scripture form?

Obj. But the Apostles compelled none to use them.

Answ. Christ and his Apostles assumed not the civil Sword, and therefore so
compelled men to nothing: But yet their authority bound the conscience; when
Christ said, when ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. he bound them in duty to do as
he bid them, though he forced them not.

But Secondly, tell me if you can where God forbids you to use good and
lawful words in prayer, merely because the Magistrate or Pastor bids you use
them. Is this the meaning of all the Precepts of honoring and obeying your
Superiors [Do nothing which they bid you do, though otherwise lawful.] O
strange exposition of the Fifth Commandment? If you command your Child to learn
a Catechism or Form of Prayer before his meat, or for other times, will you
teach him to say Father or Mother, it had been lawful for me to use this Form,
if neither you nor any body had bid me; But because you bid me, now it is
unlawful. O whither will not partiality lead men!

Obj. But though it be lawful to impose forms on children, yet not upon aged
Christians.

Answ. Aged persons have too many of them as much need of such forms as
children. Age makes not the difference: We are fain to teach many aged persons
forms of Catechism as well as children; Why not therefore forms of prayer?

Obj. But it is not lawful to impose forms publicly on whole Congregations of
Believers.

Answ. All sects in the world do it. I never heard any Separatist or Anabaptist
or any other public Minister, but he imposed a form of prayer upon all the
Congregation. He is void of common sense that thinks that his extemporary
prayer is not as truly a form to all the people, as if it had been written in a
book. The order and words are not of your own invention, but invented by
another to your hand; and imposed upon you to use: For I hope you come together
to pray, and not to hear a prayer only. But the difference is, First, that one
imposes every day a new form on you, and the other imposes every day the
same: Secondly, And that one tells you not what words you shall pray in,
before you hear them; and the other writes them down for you to know before
hand. For my part I wonder why written or unwritten, long-premeditated or
suddenly expressed prayers should be taken for unlawful. But however do not
think the difference to lie where it does not: For doubtless to the people,
they are both forms, and both imposed, though not imposed by the same persons
and authority.

Obj. But at least you have no proof for imposing forms ^n the Ministers
themselves.

Ans. First, I know no man that questioneth but some form of prayer and praise
were imposed by God himself, on the Jewish Ministers; And one was taught by
Christ to his Apostles: And a form of Profession of faith, and of Baptism and
the Lords supper is imposed on all the Ministers of the Church. And Joel 2. 17.
a form of prayer is taught the Priests: Secondly, But we are not now pleading
for the needless imposing of any forms, nor the causless restraint of
extemporarary prayers. I have fully born my testimony against that in due
season: But many things are lawfully and necessarily obeyed, which are not
lawfully commanded, as I shall show you more anon. I could heartily wish that
we could say that all Ministers (of any party) were such as were wholly above
the need of forms. Or at least such whose own composures were better for for
the Church, than any that could be offered them by others (If it were not a
contradiction)

But all that I now expect from the Objectors is, that they tell me or
themselves, what proof they have that it is a sin for a Minister only to use an
imposed form, when all the Congregation else may use it? Answer this well
before you go.

And I pray let all the people note here, that it is not, nor cannot be denied,
but that a form (even a new one every day) may be lawfully be imposed upon all
them; and that the question is only of the Ministers use of imposed forms.

Obj. But our Ministers do not impose their prayers by forc^.

Answ. Do you think that there is no imposition but by force? Your Pastor is
your guide in the worship of God; and God has imposed it on you to to follow
him, and join with him in lawful prayer. And what the words shall be, and what
the matter and order chosen for that time time the Speaker chooses for you!
And so he, binds you by his Ministerial authority (which is a true and lawful
imposing) though he compel you not by the sword or force.

Obj. But Christ has given gifts to all his Ministers and commanded them to
use them. And they use them not when they use imposed forms: Therefore we must
not obey men against Christ.

Answ. No doubt but all that are lawful Ministers, have such gifts as are
necessary to the essential works of their office. But the degrees of their
gifts have very great variety, as Paul fully shows in 1 Cor. 12. and often
elsewhere.

And the necessary gift for hearty acceptable prayer, is true Desire excited by
the spirit of supplication, which sometime venteth it self but by sighs and
groans, Romans 8. 16, 26.

But the Ministerial gift of prayer is Knowledge and Utterance; by which a
Minister may be able to express the desires and wants of the people unto God:
which includes memory in some degree. Even as Knowledge and Utterance are his
Gift of preaching.

And some have more Knowledge and worser Utterance; And some have better
Utterance and less Knowledge; And some through want of memory are defective in
both.

The lowest rank of lawful Ministers, may be so defective in their own gifts,
both of Knowledge, Memory and Utterance, as to have need of the help of the
gifts of others, who much excel them.

As a Minister who has tolerable Gifts for prea^hing, may yet need the
writings of other men before hand; and may bring both their Matter and Method
into the Pulpit, yea and often times their words; so that though he have Gifts,
yet being weak, he may use the gif^s of others. I have been counseled since I
was silenced, to compose Sermons my self, and give them in writing to some weak
Minister, that has an excellent Voice and utterance, and to let him preach
them. And really if I had not known that such have good books enough at hand
for such a use, I think I should have done it: And who can prove that this had
been his sin? And yet this was a using of another man's gifts instead of his
own. And I have heard men that are much against Parish Churches and Liturgies
wish that some unlearned men of good utterance, might read some excellent
Sermon^books to the people, in ignorant places that can get no better: And who
can prove the reading of a Homily unlawful.

Moreover, Christ has given to all his members such gifts as are suitable to
their places, as well as to Ministers such gifts as are suitable to theirs, And
the place of a Master of a family requires the gift of Catechizing and
instructing the family? And they are as truly obliged to use their gifts, as
Ministers are theirs. And yet who doubts but it is lawful for Parents to
teach and catechize their children, by such books and forms of Catechisms as
are composed by the gifts of abler men?

Moreover Prayer is the duty of every one, and specially of the heads of
families: And therefore every true Christian has gifts procured by Christ, for
so much as is his duty. And he is bound to use his gifts. And yet those gifts
are so low in many, that I fear not to call that man effectively an enemy to
families, souls and prayer, who forbids all such, to use such forms of
prayer as are composed by the gifts of others.

The famousest Divines in the Church of God, even Luther, Zwinglius,
Melancthon, Calvin, Perkins, Sibbs, and abundance of Nonconformists of greatest
name in England, did ordinarily use a form of prayer of their own, before their
Sermons in the Pulpit, and some of them in their families too. Now these men
did it not through idleness or through temporizing, but because some of them
found it best for the people, to have often the same words: and some of them
found such a weakness of memory, that they judged it the best improvement of
their own gifts. Now besides the first composure of these prayers, (which
perhaps was done 20 years before) none of these men did use their own gifts,
any mo^e than if they had used a form composed by another. For the memory and
utterance is the same of both.

These all were famous worthy men, whom no wise man judges to be insufficient
for the Ministry for want of gifts. But if such as these may so many years
forbear the exercise of their gift of extemporary prayer, much more may far
weaker Ministers do it. Abundance of young Ministers are trained up under aged
experienced Divines, what if one of these should sometimes make use of the same
words of prayer, which the aged Minister used the day before, as finding them
fitter than any that he could devise himself. Must he forbear to do better,
because he cannot do so well, by the use of his own gifts alone?

And in some Ordinances as Baptism and the Lords supper, etc. the same things
must be daily prayed for: And he that thinks he must not frequently speak the
same things, will quite corrupt the Ordinance of Christ. And he that will
im^gine that he must have always new words, will at last have new things, or
worse than nothing. If then it be meet to use often the same words, why may not
a weak Minister use the better words of others, when he has none merely of his
own that are so fit?

Nay is it not the Duty of such to do it? Every man is bound to do Gods service
in the best manner that he can: (Cursed be the deceiver that has a better in
his flock, and brings that which is corrupt) But to utter prayers and praise
to God, in a full, methodicall and congruous manner, and in words suitable to
the Majesty of the worship of God, is better (to the people and to the honor
of Religion) then to do it in a more confused, disorder^y, broken manner, with
barrenness and incongruity of speech. But this l^st is the best that many
honest Ministers can do by their own gi^ts, when they may do it in the former
better manner, by making use of the words and gifts of other^. Therefore it is
a duty for such men so far to use others gif^s of inventing words, before their
own.

And among us there is no man forbidden in the Pulptt to use his own gifts to
the utmost, and pray without any set form of his own or other men's.

And I would at last desire any of the Objectors but to name that text of
Scripture which directly or indirectly commands every Minister, to use his
gift of inventing words and method, or his gift of extemporary prayer, every
time that he prays to God: Or which forbids to use the gifts of others,
though better than his own.

Obj. But what if the forms imposed be worse than the exercise of our own gifts?

Answ. First, That may be below one man's own invention, which is
above-anothers. Secondly, And that may be more defective than your own
invention could reach to, which yet may be more desirable for other advantages.
As if all the Churches for some good ends, should agree to to use one mode or
method or form, (as now we do in singing Psalms) the benefit of that concord
might do more to the Churches service than my singular better form or words
could do. And if the lawful Rulers commanded me that which perhaps I could
somewhat exceed my self, I should do much in obedience to their command: Or if
the people had a greater averseness or unfitness for my more congruous words
than for others more fective, I should take that for the best food or physic,
which is most agreeable to the stomach and disease. But especially if I am
restrained from the public preaching of the Gospel, or exercise of any of my
Ministry, unless I will use a more disordered or defective form, I shall take
it for my duty then to use it. Because it is more to the Churches edification.

In a word, God has bound all his Ministers to use all their gifts to the
Churches greatest edification: But to use a more defective form, with liberty
to use my best gifts also, and to exercise my Ministry publicly to all, is
more to the Churches edification, than to use my own gifts only a few days in a
corner, and then to lie in prison and use them no more. Though no man must of
choice prefer the less congruous before the more congruous, when he is free;
(which I confess is a sin) yet it is a duty to prefer a less congruous order
before none, or before a better for a day, with a restraint of that and all our
Ministry hereafter.

For my part I have often truly professed, that I look at many Liturgies which
I have read as I do at the prayers of some honest men, who use little method,
nor very meet words and often toss Gods name through weakness; who put that
last which should be first, and that first which should be last, but yet the
matter is honest and good. I would not prefer such a man in a Congregation,
before an abler man, who will speak more composedly and agreeable to the
matter: But yet I would not be so peevish, as utterly to refuse to join with
such a one. But as God does not reject his prayers notwithstanding all his
weakness, no more would I. And I had rather have such prayers, than none at all.

O that men would discern what is the true worth of prayer? and how little God
is taken with the Oratory of them, in comparison of the faith and love and
desire which is the soul of prayer. And O that men would lay no greater stress
on their peculiar modes and words than God does; and condemn no men's prayers
further than they are condemned by God; nor separate from any further then God
rejects them or commands our separation.

I cannot forbear telling you the aggravation of this kind of sin. It seems
to me akind of blasphemy against God. As if you would make the world believe
that God is so much for your mod^ and words, that he overlooketh all the
desires of the Spirit; and all his promises, and all men's interest in Christ,
and forgets all his love to his people: so that Christ shall not intercede
for them, or shall not prevail, unless they pray to God in the words and mode
which you have fancied to be best, whether with a Book or without, in these
words or in those. Me thinks you are renewing the old controversy, whether in
this Mount or at Jerusalem men ought to worship? and knew not that the time is
come that God will neither accept men for worshipping at this Mount or at
Jerusalem, here or there, with a book or without book; but the true worshippers
whom he chooses, do worship him as a Spirit, in Spirit and in truth, as well
with Forms as without them.

And yet some are more wicked than barely to condemn their brethrens prayers,
because they be not clothed just as their own. They will also break jests and
scorns at them, and take this for the ingenuity of their piety. Like men of
several Countries who th^nk the fashions of all Countries save their own, to be
ridiculous, and laugh at strangers as if they were clothed in fools Coats. So
many do by the clothing of other men's devotions. Some scorn at extemporary
prayers, and some scorn at Forms and Liturgies: And the Litany they call
conjuring, and the Responses they take for a formal jocular playing with holy
things; when in all these, the humble heavenly Christian, is lifting up his
soul to God.

By this petulant carnal kind of zeal, I remember our divisions were here
raised at the first: To derid^ the Common prayer, and deride them that used it,
was too common with some kind of religious people: And they excused it by Elias
his example, As if Idolaters, and the true worshippers of God, that differ from
us in a Form, or Ceremony were all one.

I remember how some of the contrary mind were inflamed to indignation by such
scorns, when they were going into the Churches in London, and heard some
Separatists that looked in at the Church door, say, [The Devil choke thee, art
thou not out of thy pottage yet?] because the Common Prayer was not ended. So
little did men know what spirit they were of. But wise and holy Mr. Hildersham,
Mr. John ^all, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. John Paget, and other learned Non-conformists
of old, did foresee and greatly fear this Spirit.

It is a dangerous thing to scorn and jest at any thing that is done about Gods
worship, though it should be it self unwarrantable; while you scorn at one
another worship of God, you raise a bold unreverence and contempt of holy
things in the he^rer^, and perhaps before you are aware in your selves too. And
you will teach the Atheist to scorn you all; unless (...), where the very
object is to be derided, as being no God, you should be very suspicious of this
way. I am afraid of making a mock of the grossest erroneous worship of the true
God. It is fitter to confute it in a way that more expresses our reverence to
the Object, God himself, and our respect to that pious affection which may be
engaged in it. I have seldom seen the best tempered people inclined to this way
of jesting at other men's manner of worship? nor have I observed much good come
by it: But I have often seen that it is the way by which young pr^ud
self-conceited persons do kindle a carnal dividing zeal, and a contempt of
their brethren, and quench all holy sober zeal and love together.

DIRECT. XXXIII.
When you are sure that other men's way of worship is sinful, yet make it not
any other or greater sin, than indeed it is: and speak not evil of that much in
it, which is Good; And accuse not God to be a hater or rejecter of all men's
service which is mixed with infirmities.
AS St. James says, 3. 2. In many things we ^ffend all; but he that ^ffendeth
not with his tongue is the perfect man. So we may here say in the same sense,
In many particulars of our prayers and other worship we all offend God: But he
that bridleth not his tongue from the reproaching of his brothers different way
of worship, may prove the greatest Offender of all. It would move a charitable
understanding hearer to grief and pity, to read and hear one party call all
prayer by habit, no better than crudities, whinings, bold talking to God and
nonsense; and whatsoever bitter scorn can speak: And to read and hear many on
the other extreme, to call the Liturgy, no less than Idolatry! I desire the
Reader to peruse a judicious Treatise of Mr. Tombs in answer to one of this
language: As much as he and I have written against each others opinion about
Infant Baptism, our concenting admonition to you should so much the rather be
accepted in this.

And what pitiful arguments have they to prove this charge of Idolatry? False
worship of the true God is idolatry as well as worshipping a false God: But
such is the Liturgy: Ergo --

This is all that these rash preachers must trouble the Church, and seduce men
into a hating factious zeal with. But what mean these men by false worship? Do
they mean worship contrary to Gods word? That is, which is sinful? And do they
mean All such sinful worship or some only? If they mean all such sinful
worship, than these words of theirs are Idolatry; For they are part of their
preaching, which is part of Gods worship, in their own sense: And it is false
doctrine, and tends to men's perdition. And so they and all false Teachers
should be idolaters. By this they would turn all sins in worship into one: It
is all Idolatry. Is not every confused prayer sinful, which has unmeet
expressions and disordered, and has wandering thoughts and dull affections? Is
there any of these Love-killers that dare say they pray without sin? And must
we not separate from them then as Idolaters? Yea and every man from himself;
that is, He must give over praying because its all Idolatry?

But perhaps they will say; This sin is but in the manner and not in the matter.

Answ. Very good; It seems then that sin in the manner of worship is not
Idolatry. And how prove you that the faults of the Liturgy are not as far from
the Matter of the worship, as your own are? Will you find some words which you
can call false in the matter? Suppose it were so? When an Antinomian, an
Anabaptist, a Separatist, or any one that erreth does drop some of his errors
in his prayers, (as I think none will deny that they use to do) must we needs
believe that his prayer is Idolatry therefore, as being false worship? And is
it unlawful to join with such? Then we shall have more separation than you yet
plead for, or practice your selves. No two men in the world must join together
if all sinful worship, or worship false sometime in the very matter does
necessitate a separation: At least where no one knows before hand what
another will say with his tongue, when I know that every man has some false
opinion in his mind.

But where did these men learn to call their brethrens worship false any more
than their own, upon the account that God has not commanded the manner of it;
when he has neither commanded us to use a form, nor to forbear it; but by
general precepts of doing all to edification; If one man preach in one method
and another in another; One by written Notes to help his memory, and another
without, one by his own gifts only, and another by the help of others; which of
these is the false prophet, the false worshipper or Idolater? Has God said you
shall use Notes in preaching? No more has he said, you shall preach without
Notes: yet has he commanded both, to several persons where edification
variously requires it^ Is he an Idolater that uses Meeters, Tunes, Versions,
Translations, Directories, P^lpits, Cups, Table Clothes, Fonts, Basins, etc.
which God commands not. O Lord pity thy poor Church, whose Pastors themselves
are so peevish in their ignorance, and tempt other men by their follies, to
^^stifie all their severities against them and others.

But what Text of Scripture is it that ever told these men that all false
worship is Idolatry? what text do they name, but such as if they did it on
purpose, to show their boldness in adding to Gods Word? The second Commandment
is the chief which they insist on. But what ever Expositions they may forge,
there is no such word nor sense in the Commandment. We all hold that as the
gross direct Idolatry, is the worshipping of a false God, against the first
Commandment; so to make any such false representation of the true God, by words
or deeds, as makes him like an Idol, and contradicts his nature, and so to
worship him, this is also a secondary kind of Idolatry: Because God is none
such as they represent him, and therefore it is not God indeed, but an Idol
which they worship. And because God is not like to any thing corporeal in
heaven or earth; therefore he that makes an image of any thing in Heaven or
earth as like to God, or to represent him, he makes an idol of God by
blasphemy. To what will you liken me, that ^ should be like unto it, says the
Holy one? This is the idolatry forbidden in the Second Commandment: It is not
all false worship, but one sort of false worship, which is idolatry: what else
that Commandment forbids, is neither called Idolatry, nor can so be proved.

It is an odious sound, to hear an ignorant, rash, self-conceited person,
especially a Preacher, to cry out, Idolatry, Idolatry, against his brethrens
prayers to God, because they have something in them to be amended* while
perhaps his own prayers have so much false doctrine in them, or false fire of
carnal passions and uncharitableness, as makes it a much harder question,
whether it be lawful to join with such as he is, while he abhors so much to
join with others. All that know me know that it is not my own case and
interest, that I fit this reprehension to. It is twenty times harder to me to
remember a Form of words, than to express what is in my mind without them. But
we must not fit our opinions of all our brethrens prayers, to our own
temperament.

DIRECT. XXXIV.
Think not that all is unlawful to be obeyed, which is unlawfully commanded.
MAny a Ruler sins in his Commands, when it is no sin but a duty of the
inferior to obey them. He that has but a bad end, or bad circumstances may sin
in commanding: As if a Magistrate command Religious Duties in mere Policy for
his own Advantage, or if he enforce a lawful Command with unlawful Penalties:
And yet it will be the Subjects Duty to obey. Yea, as to the matter it self, it
may be unlawful for a Ruler to command a thing that will do no good, (because
it is a vain Command, and makes men spend that time in vain:) and yet it may
be the Subjects Duty to do it.

If the Magistrate choose an inconvenient place for public worship, or an
unfit hour, or if the Pastor choose a less fit translation, meeter or tune, or
other circumstances of worship, it may be their sin to do so, and yet the
peoples duty to obey them. If a Father bid his Child but carry a straw from one
place to another, it is his fault so to employ his time in vain; but the Child
is not faulty in obeying. Indeed if the thing commanded be such as is simply
evil, and forbidden us by God, in all cases whatsoever, than no ones commands
can make it lawful. But if it be a thing that is only inconvenient, or unlawful
by some lesser accident, then the command of authority may preponderate as a
more weighty accident. If it be lawful to give a Thief my purse, to save my
life, which is not lawful for him to demand or take; Then sure it is lawful to
obey a King, a Parent, a Master o^ a Pastor, in things not evil in themselves,
though they unlawfully command them. I say not that we must do so in all things
which are evil but by accident: For some accidents may make it so great an
evil, as no man's command can preponderate and make it lawful: But in some cases
it is so, though not in all.

Therefore remember that you do not prove it sinful in you to do such things,
by proving it a sin in the imposer, unless you have some better reason, and can
show a Law of God forbidding you.

DIRECT. XXXV.
Think not that you are guilty of all the Faults of other men's worship with
whom you join; no not of the Ministers or Congregations; Nor that you are bound
to separate from them in worship; because of all the faults in their
performance.
THis Error is a common cause of separations; but such as will suffer no two
men to join together, but will turn all Chur^^es into confusion, and crumble
them to dust, if it be fully practiced. For there is no man alive that
worshippeth God without some sin, as I said before. Do you ever pray your
selves in secret or in your families without sin? Must all separate from you
for this? Or may not you bear another failings as patiently as your own? Your
own you are still guilty of, because they are your own: but not of another man's
which you cannot help. If I believed that I were partaker of the guilt of all
the false doctrine, or faulty preaching, or prayer which was used in the Church
where I am, I would fly from all the Churches in the world: But whither to go
I could not tell.

Obj. But If I join with them that worship God amiss, do I not approve of their
sin or signify my consent to it?

Answ. Approving and consenting are acts of your own mind: and whether you do
so or not, is best known to your self: But it is a Profession of consent that
we have now to speak of. And I say that our presence at the prayers of the
Church, is n^ profession of consent to all that is faulty in those prayers. Why
do you not offer to prove it to be so, but barely affirm it without any proof?
I never heard a word of proof for this bare assertion to this day. But its
easily disproved.

First, no man can in reason and justice take that for my Profession, which I
never made by word nor deed, according to the common sense of words and
actions: But according to this common sense I never did by word or deed profess
that I consent to all which is uttered by the Pastor in the public prayers.

Secondly, When the profession which we make by our Church-commun^on is
publicly declared to be another thing, totally distinct from this, no man may
justly interpret it to be this which is quite different: But it is another
thing which we profess by our Church Communion; That is, I profess my self only
to be a Christian, in my Baptism when I enter into the Church, and in my daily
communion with it: And I profess to be a member of a Christian Society, and to
hold Communion with them in Faith and Love and in worshipping God according to
his word: And I pro^ess subjection to the particular Pastors of that Church, as
Christian Pastors, who are to teach the people that word of God, and guide them
in worship and discipline according to that word. This is every man's profession
in his Church Communion and no more; unless he make some some further
particular expression of more, as every sect uses to do, in professing the
opinions of their party. Why then should any liar charge me to make a
profession which I never made, when my profession in my Christian communion is
described by Christ himself who instituted it? And why should I turn liar
against my self, and say that my presence is a profession of that consent which
I never made the least profession of?

Thirdly, The wording of the public prayers, is the Pastors work and none of
mine: It is part of his office, as the wording and methodizing of his Sermons
is: And if he do it well the praise is not mine but his: And if he do it ill
the dispraise is not mine but his. Why should any hold me guilty of another
man's fault, which I neither can help, nor belongs to any office of mine to
help, any further than to admonish him.

Fourthly, I do not profess an approbation and consent to all the faults of my
own secret or family prayers: Much less to another man's, who is not in my
power. I have d^sorders, and defects and incongruities and other faults in all
my prayers; And if my very speaking and committing them signify not my
approbation of them, how much less is it signified where it is not I but
another man that speaks and commits them.

Fifthly, And as I have said, This opinion would make it unlawful to join with
any Pastor or Church on earth, because no sin must be approved of and consented
to: and every one mixeth sin with their prayers.

Obj. But (say those on the one extreme) if I join with one that is known to be
a Separatist, an Anabaptist, an Antinomian, an Arminian, etc. his own
profession does before hand bid me to expect not only that the manner but the
matter of his prayer be erroneous.

Answ. First, it is granted that no man may in his choice, prefer an erring
person or mode of worship before a better. Secondly, But when the question is
not, whom you should prefer but whom you may join with, it is not his errors
that are yours, nor his profession that is yours. I come to join with him as a
Christian Pastor whose office is to preach the Gospel: And while men are the
agents I know that all that they do will be imperfect and ^aulty: And it is not
my knowing their ^aults that makes them mine, but rather may preserve me from
them.

Obj. But for ought I know he may put heresy or blasphemy into his prayers,
when I know not what he will say, before I hear it.

Answ. For ought you know your Physician, or your Cook, may give you poison,
and your Nurse may poison your child: But though that should make you careful
whom you trust, yet somebody must be trusted for all that. You go not upon
certainty in any case where man is to be trusted, but upon probability. Men are
not to be distrusted in their own profession, if they be lawfully called to it,
by cautelous and able triers, till they have forfeited their trust: And as he
would not mend the matter who should make a Law, that no Physician shall give
any medicine but one and the same to all in such diseases, and that fetched from
the Kings Apothecary; And no Cook shall sell any meat but what is dressed by the
Kings Cooks; for fear lest they should poison men; so he that would say, No
Pastor shall preach or pray but in prescribed words, lest he should speak
heresy or blasphemy, would but destroy the Pastoral office, for fear lest it
should be abused.

But here you have no great temptation to this error; Because though a man may
poison your bodies against your wills, yet no one can poison your souls but by
your own consent. If he speak words of heresy or blasphemy, if you disown
them in your minds, and consent not to them, they are none of yours, nor can do
you hurt: They may be your temptation and your grief, but they are not your sin.

And yet I shall tell you in the next direction, how far they are to be avoided.

Obj. But (say those on the other extreme) When I know before hand by their
Common Prayer Book, what their error in worship is, and yet join in it, do I
not seem to approve it?

Answ. Do not barely affirm, but prove, that all fore-known^faults of the
Pastors words in prayer are mine, if I separate not: How does fore-knowing them
make them mine. Take heed that thus you make not God the greatest sinner and
the worst being in all the world.

For God fore-knoweth all men's sins; and God is present when they commit them;
and he gives them all that life and time and strength and breath, by which
they do them: and he has communion with all the prayers of the faithful in the
world, what faults soever be in the words or forms: he does not reject them for
any such failings. Will you say therefore that God approves or consents to
all these sins?

I know before hand (as is said before) that every man will sin that prays
(either by defect of desire, love, faith or fervency, or by wandering thoughts,
or disordered words, etc.) And I know that every erroneous person (commonly)
does use to put his errors into his prayers and preaching. But how does all
this make it mine? I am bound to hold communion with all Gods people on earth
as I have occasion; not as they are sinners, but as they are Saints: And I come
as to the Communion of Saints: And though both they and I do bring our sins to
that communion, and I foreknow them; yet I lament both theirs and mine; and so
far am I from consenting to them, that they are my grief, and I beg forgiveness
both for them and me.

Obj. But you said that it belonged to the Pastors office to word his own
Sermons and Prayers: Therefore prescribed forms destroy the Pastors office: And
I may not consent to such usurpations by tyrannical men.

Answ. First, the Pastor is the mouth of God to the people, and of the people
to God: And he does word his own Sermons and Prayers; or else his voice could
not conduct you. But if he that is conscious of his own infirmity, do take the
help of others in wording them, that does not destroy his office, but help him
in the exercise of it. If a weak Minister learn a prayer out of the writings of
some abler Divine and use it in the Pulpit, this is no destroying of his office.

Secondly, and if they that fear the effect of Ministers weakness shall force
them to use the words of others, the speaker still makes them his own words
before you join with him. And if it did hinder the free exercise of all his
office, it does not destroy it.

Obj. But he does it voluntarily, whereas the weakness of conceived prayer is
involuntary.

Answ. It is with more probability said, that a man is involuntary, in doing
that which another compels him to do, than that which no man but himself
only is the author of: It is said to him that reads the Liturgy [Do this, or
nothing] But no body says to an erring, weak, confused Minister, [Put in your
errors into your prayers, or pray disorderly or you shall be punished.] Every
Separatist, Anabaptist and Antinomian does too willingly put his errors into
his prayers.

Obj. But the Liturgy is imposed on the ablest as well as on the weakest
Ministers.

Answ. Whether it be well or ill imposed, is none of the question now in hand:
No nor whether it be lawfully used by the Speaker: But whether you may lawfully
join in it. And however it be imposed, till the Minister consent to use it, you
shall not be put to join with him in it. And when he does consent, he makes it
his own words, and (for reasons which seem good to him) he does choose those
expressions rather than others: (Even because he must use those or none) so
that he is still in the exercise of his office; And it is his personal fault,
if it be a fault, to use those words, and none of yours: Whether he do it
willingly as the best, or do it with a half will as of necessity, or whether
there be tyranny in the imposing them or not; you are not guilty of any of
this, by joining with a Christian Church that uses them.

DIRECT. XXXVI.
Yet know what Pastors you may own, and what not, and what Church Communion you
may remove from or forbear: And think not that I am persuading you to make no
difference.
THis is a point that I have more largely handled elsewhere, and can give you
now but these brief hints, lest I be too tedious.

First, He that is not at all able to do the essential works of the Ministry,
that is, to teach the people the Christian faith, and a holy life, and to pray
and praise God with them, and administer the Sacraments, and in some measure
oversee the manners of the flock, is no Minister, nor to be owned: For he
wants the essential qualifications: As an illiterate man can be no
Schoolmaster, nor he a Physician, a Pilot, an Architect, who is utterly
ignorant of their work.

Secondly, he that preaches Heresy, that is, denies any essential point of
Christianity or Godliness, after the first and second admonition is to be
avoided.

Thirdly, he that in his application, endeavors to disgrace a Godly life,
and to dissuade the people from it, on false pretenses, and encourage them to a
life of wickedness, is a traitor to Christ, and not to be owned in the
Ministry. In a word, Any one whose Ministry is such, as tends to
destruction more than to edification and to do more harm then good. But then
remember, that it is not partiality and passion that must here be judge: Nor is
every one an opposer of Godliness, who opposes the errors of a party, or the
faults or follies of godly men.

Fourthly, that Pastor or Church who will not let you have communion with them,
unless you will say or subscribe some falsehood, or commit any sin of wilful
choice, does drive you from their communion by their unlawful terms; and it is
not you that are the Separatists, but they.

Fifthly, When you are to choose what Minister or Church you will statedly have
your ordinary communion with, you should not prefer a less reformed Church or a
less worthy Pastor, or one that is erroneous, before a better, but choose that
which is most to your true edification.

Sixthly, If you live under a worse and unreformed Church, or unprofitable
Minister, if necessity hinder not, you may remove your dwelling to a better.

Seventhly, and where Churches are near and there is no great hurt or disorder
will follow it, you may join with another Church without removing your
dwelling: But this you may not do, when the hurt to the public is like to be
greater than the good to you.

Eighthly, and you must not conclude that the more faulty Church and Minister
may not lawfully be communicated with though for your benefit you choose a
better, for this is the true crime of sinful separation.

But surely a man's soul is so precious, that all men should prefer the greatest
helps for their salvation before the less; and think no just means too dear to
purchase them.

DIRECT. XXXVII.
In your judging of Discipline, Reformation, and any means of the Churches
good, be sure your Eye be both upon the true End, and upon the particular Rule,
and not on either of them alone: Take not that for a means, which is either
contrary to the word of God, or is in its nature destructive of the End.
THere are great miscarriages come for want of the true observation of this
rule. First, If a thing seem to you very needful to a good end, and yet the
word be against it, avoid it: For God knows better than we, what means is
fittest, and what he will bless. As for instance, some think, that many
self-devised ways of worship, contrary to Col. 2. 21, 23. would be very
profitable to the Church: And some think that striking with the sword as Peter
did, is the way to rescue Christ or the Gospel: But both are bad, because the
Scripture is against them.

Secondly, and if you think that the Scripture commands you this or that
positive means, if Nature and true Reason assure you that it is against the
End, and is like to do much more harm than good, be assured that you mistake
that Scripture. For first, God tells us in general that the means as such are
for the End, and therefore are no means when they are against it! The Ministry
is for edification and not for destruction. The Sabbath is for man and not man
for the Sabbath. Secondly, God has told us, that no positive duty is a duty at
all times. To pray when I should be saving my neighbors life, is a sin and not
a duty, though we are commanded to pray continually. So is it to be preaching;
or hearing on the Lords day, when I should be quenching a fire in the town, or
doing necessary works of mercy: Wherefore the Disciples Sabbath-breaking was
justified by Christ; and he gives us all a charge to learn what this means,
I will have mercy and not sacrifice; which must needs import, I prefer mercy
before sacrifice and would have no sacrifice which hinders mercy. Therefore
if a Sermon were to be preached so unseasonably or in such unsuitable
circumstances, as that according to Gods ordinary way of working, it were like
to do more hurt than good; it were no duty at that time. Discipline is an
Ordinance of Christ: But if sound reason tell me, that if I publicly call this
man to Repentance, or excommunicate him, it is like to do much hurt to the
Church and no good to him, it would be at that time no duty but a sin. As
Physic must be forborne where the Disease will but be exasperated by it.
Therefore Christ boundeth our very preaching and reproof, with a [Shake off the
dust off your feet as a testimony against them. And give not that which is holy
to dogs, etc. When treading under foot, and turning again and rending us, is
l^kest to be the success, the wisdom of Christ, and not that of the flesh
only, requires us to take it for no duty. This is to be observed by them that
think that Admonitions, and excommunications, and exclusion from the Sacrament,
must be used in all places and at all times alike, without respect to the End,
come of it what will: Or that will tempt God by presuming that he will
certainly either bless or at least justify, their unseasonable and imprudent
actions, as if they were a duty at all times. To be either against the
Scripture, or against the End, is a certain proof that an action is no duty,
because no means.

DIRECT. XXXVIII.
Neglect not any truth of God, much less renounce it or deny it: For lying and
contempt of Sacred truth is always sinful: But yet do not take it for your duty
to publish all which you judge to be truth, nor a sin to silence many lesser
truths, when the Churches peace and welfare does require it.
TO speak or subscribe against any truth, is not to be done on any pretense
whatsoever: For lying is a sin at all times. But it is the opinion of
injudicious furious spirits, that no truth is to be silenced for peace. Truth
is not to be sold for carnal prosperity, but it is to be forborne for spiritual
advantage, and true necessity.

First, if the publishing of all truths were at all times a duty, then all men
live every moment in ten thousand sins of omission, because there are more than
so many truths which I am not publishing: Nay which I never shall publish
whilst I live.

Secondly, Positives bind not always and to all times.

Thirdly, while you are preaching that opinion which your zeal is so much for,
you are omitting far greater and more necessary Truths. And is it not as great
a sin to omit them as the lesser.

Fourthly, Mercy is to be preferred before sacrifice: What if the present
uttering some truth would cost many thousand men's lives? Were not that an
untimely and unmerciful word? And is it not as bad if (but accidentally) it
tend to the ruin of the Church, and the hurt of souls? It were easy to
instance in unseasonable and imprudent words of truth spoken to Princes, which
have raised persecutions of long continuance, and ruined Churches, silenced
Ministers, and caused the death of multitudes of men.

Fifthly, And where is there any word of God which commands us to speak all
that we know, and which forbids us to forbear the utterance of any one truth.

Sixthly, And for the most part those men, who are most pregnant and impatient
of holding in their opinions on the pretense of the pretiousness of truth, do
but proudly esteem their own understandings precious, and do vend some raw
undigested notions, vain janglings or errors, under the name of that truth
which must by no means be concealed, though the vending of it tend to envy and
strife, and to confusion and every evil work. When those that have the Truth
indeed, have more wisdom and goodness to know how to use it.

It is not Truth but Goodness which is the ultimate object of the soul. And God
who is infinite Goodness it self, has revealed his Truths to the world to do
men Good, and not to hurt them. And the Devil, who is the Destroyer, so he may
but do men hurt, will be content to make use even of Truth to do it; Though
usually he only pretends Truth to cover his lies: And this angel of Light,
has his ministers of Light and Righteousness; who are known by their fruits;
whilst the pretenses of Light and Righteousness are used to Satan's ends and
not to Christ's, to hurt and destroy and to hinder Christ's Kingdom, and not to
save and to do good: As the Wolf is known by his bloody jaws, even in his
sheeps clothing.

DIRECT. XXXIX.
Know which are the great duties of a Christian life, and wherein the nature of
true Religion does consist; And then pretend not any lesser duty, against those
greater; though the least when it is indeed a duty, is not to be denied or
neglected.
HEaven-work and Heart-work, are the chiefest parts of Christian duty. Christ
often gives us his summaries of the Law, and inculeateth his great Command;
Job. 13. 35. Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39. Luke 10. 27. And so does the Apostle Romans
13. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 22. 1 John. 3. 11, 14, 23. and 4 7, 11, 12, 20. 2 Ioh. 5. And
the fruits of the spirit are manifest Gal. 5. 22, 23. James says, that pure
Religion and undefiled before God even the father is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted of the
world, Jam. 1. 27. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1. 5. The end of the Commandment is
Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience and of faith unfeigned:
And then adds, From which some having swarved, have turned aside to vain
janglings --

In a word [The effectual belief of pardon and eternal Glory given through
Christ, and the Love of God and man, with the denial of our selves, and fleshly
desires, and contempt of all things in the world, which are competitors with
God and our salvation, with a humble patient enduring of all which must be
suffered for these ends] is the nature and sum of the Christian Religion.

Do nothing therefore as a duty which is a hinderance to any of this.
Contentious preachings, and factious sidings which weaken Love, are not of God.
The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all men, 2 Timothy 2.
24. When you come into a family and find that their Religion consists in
promoting some odd opinion, and pleading for a party, and vilifying others, be
sure that this is a Religious way of serving the devil, being contrary to the
great and certain duties of a godly li^e. When you fall into company, which
sti^leth all talk of Heaven, and all Heart-searching and Heart-humbling
conference, by pleading (...) this or that opinion, be sure that it is but one
way of enmity to Holiness, though not so gross as scorning and persecuting it.
That which I said before of Truth, is applyable to this of Duty.

It is one of the most important things in the world, for the resolving of a
thousand cases of conscience, and the directing of a Christian life, to know
which Duties are the Greater and which are the lesser, and so which is to be
preferred in competition; For that which is a duty at another time, is a sin,
when it is done instead of a greater! as Christ has resolved in the case of
the Sabbath. If Good must be loved as Good, then the Greatest Good must be most
loved and sought. Sacrifice instead of mercy is a sin: Our gift must be left at
the altar, while we go to be reconciled to our brother. Math. ^. Never hearken
to those men who would set up their controverted duties, or any positives and
lesser things, against the duties of nature it self, or the great substantial
parts of godliness.

DIRECT. XL.
Labor for a sound judgment to know good from evil, left you trouble your
selves and others by mistakes: And till you gr^w so judicious, forsake not the
guidance of a judicious Teacher, nor the company of the agreeing generality of
the Godly.
ALmost all our contentions and divisions are caused by the ignorance and
injudiciousness of Christians; especially the most self-conceited. They are for
the most as children, that yet need to be taught the very principles of the
divine Oracles, and to be fed with milk, when they think themselves fit to be
teachers of others. Heb. 5. 11, 12. And therefore as children they are tossed
to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. And when
they have many years together been crying up an opinion, and vilifying
dissenters, at last they turn to some other opinion, and confess that they did
all this upon mistake. And was it not a pitiful life that they lived that
while? and a pitiful zeal which did set them on? and a pitiful kind of worship
which they thus offered to God? Alas to hear a man pray and preach up
Antinomianism one year, and Arminianism the next, and Socinianism the next! To
hear a man make Separation and Anabaptistry a great part of his business to men
in preaching and to God in prayer for seven and seven years together; and at
last confess that all this was his error and his sin: (Or if he confess it
not, it is so much the worse.) Is it not sad that ignorance and hasty rashness,
should so much injure the Church and men's souls that so many well meaning
people, should put evil for good and good for evil, darkness for light and
light for darkness, Isa. 5. 20.

But because there is no hope that most should be judicious, there is no other
remedy for such but this of Christ's prescript which I have here set down.

First, Happy is he that chooses a judicious faithful Guide and learneth of
him till his own understanding be better illuminated; And that escapes the
conduct of ignorant, erroneous, self-seeking, proud, dividing Teachers.

Secondly, Continue in the Communion of the generality of agreeing Christians:
The generality of the godly are more unlikely to be forsaken of Christ, than a
few odd self-conceited singular professors. This is the way of peace to your
selves and to the Church of Christ.

DIRECT. XLI.
Let not the bare Fervor of a Preacher, or the Lowdness of his voice, or
affectionate manner of utterance, draw you too far to admire or follow him;
without a proportionable degree of solid understanding and judiciousness.
IT is pity that any wise and judicious Minister should want that fervor and
seriousness of speech, which the weight of so great a business does require.
And it is greater pity, that any serious affectionate Minister, should be
ignorant and injudicious: And it is yet greater pity that in any good men, too
much of their fervor should be merely affected, and seem to be what it is not;
or at least be raised by a selfish desire to advance our selves in the hearers
thoughts, and to exercise our parts upon their affections. But it is most
pitiful that the Church has any hypocrites who have no other but such affected
dissembled fervency. And it is not the least pity that so many good people,
especially youths and women, should be so weak, as to value an affectionate
tone of speech, above a judicious opening of the Gospel. I confess there is
something in an affectionate expression, which will move the wisest: And as
light and judgment tend to generate judgment, so heat of affection tends to
beget affection. And I never loved a senseless delivery of matters of eternal
consequence; As if we were asleep our selves, or would make the hearers to be
so: Or would have them think by our cold expressions, that we believe not our
selves, when we set forth the great inestimable things of the life to come. But
yet it grieveth my very soul to think, what pitiful, raw, and ignorant kind of
preaching, is crowded most after in many places, for the mere affectionate
manner of expression, and lowdness of the Preachers voice! How often have I known
the ablest Preachers undervalued, and an ignorant man by crowds applauded, when
I that have been acquainted with the Preacher ab incunabulis, have known him to
be unable well to answer most questions in the common Catechism. And I durst
not tell them of his great insufficiency and ignorance, for fear of hindering
the success of his labors, and being thought envious at other men's acceptance.
I have known poor tradesmens boys have a great mind of the Ministry; and we
that were the Ministers of the Country, contributed to maintain them while
they got some learning and knowledge: But they had not patience to keep out of
the Pulpit till they competently understood their business there: And yet many
of the religious people valued these as the only men: And some of them shortly
after turned to some wh^msical Sect or other, and contemned the Ministers that
instructed and maintained them: And all this while, understood not half so much
as many of our sober Auditors understood. This prepares the poor people to be
hurried into any disorder or division, when they no better know how to choose
their Guides.

DIRECT. XLII.
Your belief of the necessary Articles of Faith, must be made your own, and not
taken merely upon the Authority of any: And in all points of Belief or Practice
which are of necessity to Salvation, you must ever keep company with the
Universal Church: for it were not the Church if it erred in these: And in
matters of peace and concord, the greater part must be your guide; In matters
of humane obedience, your Governors must be your Guides: And in matters of
high and difficult speculation, the judgment of one man of extraordinary
understanding and clearness is to be preferred before both the Rulers and the
major Vote.
IN several sorts of Controversies and Cases, you must prefer several sorts of
Guides or Judges: It is a grand pernicious Error to think that the same men's
judgments must be most followed in every Case. And it is of grand importance to
know how to value and vary our Guides, as the Cases vary. And for the most
part, every man is more to be regarded in his own way of study and profession,
than wiser men in other matters, of other studies and professions: As a Lawyer
is to be valued in the Law more than the ablest and most illuminated Divine:
And a Philosopher in Philosophy, and a Linguist in the Tongues, and a Physician
in Physic, etc. For instance,

First, Suppose it were a Controversy whether Christ be God, or whether there
be a life to come, or a resurrection, etc. Here no man must be Judge, because
if you are Christians indeed, it is past controversy with you: And you believe
this upon the evidences of truth, which have convinced you: And herein the
universal Church are your associates.

Secondly, Suppose it be made a Controversy whether you shall use this
Translation or version in public, or another, or whether you shall meet at
this hour or that; at this place or that; what words of prayer shall be used in
public; what persons you shall communicate with in public, and what not, etc.
In all such, your lawful Pastors and Rulers are the Judges, and their judgments
must be preferred before more learned men that are not related to you.

Thirdly, Suppose the question be among many associated Churches, whether this
Church or Pastor be to be disowned as Heretical, or owned by the rest as
orthodox Christians. Here the judgment of the Pastors of those associated
Churches in Councels, is to be preferred as of the proper Judges.

Fourthly, Suppose the question were among a free people, that want a Pastor,
whether this man or that or the other (being all sufficient) shall be the
Pastor of that Church: Here the major Vote of the people of that Church should
be preferred.

Fifthly, Suppose the question be, whether 1 John 5. 7. e. g. be Canonical
Scripture; or the Doxology after the the Lords Prayer, etc. here a few learned
Antiquaries, are to be believed before a major Vote or Council, unskilled in
those things, who contradict them.

Sixthly, Suppose the question were of the Object of predestination, of the
natur^^ of the wills liberty, of the concourse of God, and determining way of
grace, of the definition of justification, faith, etc. Here a few well studied
judicious Divines must be preferred before Authority and majority of Votes: As
one clear-sighted man sees further and better than a thousand that have darker
sight: So that you must in such vary your guides, according to their several
capacities and the Case. Obedience hearkneth most to Authority; Unity and
Concord must depend most on some majority of Votes: Hard questions must be
decided by the best studied Persons, and the quickest clearest sights, and not
by bare Commands or Votes.

DIRECT. XLIII.
Take heed lest you be tempted to reject a good Cause, because it is owned by
some bad persons; or to like a bad cause when it is owned by men that are
otherwise good: And that you judge not of the faith and cause by the persons,
when you should judge of the persons ^ather by the faith and cause.
I Confess when we have no other reason to incline us to one opinion or to
another, but only the reputation of them that hold it, caeteris paribus, in
matters of mere godliness, the judgment of godly men is much to be preferred
before theirs that are ungodly, and they are much liker to be in the right. But
when God has given us other means to know the truth, we must impartially make
use of them.

It too often falls out that honest people are like straying sheep: If one leap
over the hedge, the rest will crowd and strive to follow him: And therefore
errors are like Languages and Fashions, that follow the Country where they are
bred. The religious people in Sweden and Denmark have one sort of error; In
Holland and Helvetia perhaps they have another: In France, and Spain, and Italy
they have others: In Greece, and Armenia, and Ethiopia they have others. And it
is an easy matter before we are aware, to fall into the common epidemical
disease; and to think, This is best, because the best and strictest people are
of this mind. And indeed sin does seldom get so great an advantage in the
world, as when it has won the major vote among the most religious sort of
people: If but a Peter separate, Barnabas and many more will follow.

And on the other side, sometimes the worser sort of men may hold fast the
truth, and many ignorant persons are apt to reject it, because it is owned by
men so bad. But if Truth be the Religion of their King and Country, or of
their Ancestors in which they were brought up; or if their reputation or peace
of conscience lie upon it; or if the defense of it show their wit or learning;
or if they can take an advantage by it, against better men, who err in that
one point: It is no wonder in all these Cases, if the worser sort of men defend
the truth.

For instance; If any Sect should rise in England, who should deny Christ, or
the Scripture, or the Resurrection, or the Life to come, or the Lords day (for
all that they cannot keep it holy, yet) the worser sort of the people would all
rise up against such errors. Shall we therefore think that the people are in
the wrong? So if any better persons deny Infant Baptism, or the use of the
Lords Prayer, etc. the worser sort of people would be all against them; and yet
be in the right.

And yet how many do take a form of prayer or Liturgy to be unlawful, merely
because the most of the worser sort are for it! As a Pharisee can gratify his
hypocrisy by long Prayers, which yet are good in themselves; so can an ungodly
person gratify his hypocrisy and sloth by Forms and Liturgies: which yet does
not prove them to be unlawful.

DIRECT. XLIV.
Ye take the bad example of religious men, to be one of your most pe^ilous
temptations: And therefore labor to discover especially what are the sins of
Professors in the age that you live in, that you may especially watch and
sortifie your souls against them.
SOmetimes the strictest sort run in a gang after one opinion, and sometimes
after another: sometimes to overvalue free will with the Pelagians: sometimes
to abuse the name and notion of free grace: sometimes they are drawn with Peter
to lay about them with a private unwarranted Swor^; or by Politicians tempted
into unlawful tumults: sometimes they run together into unlawful Compliances
and Conformities to escape some censure or danger to the flesh: And most
commonly they are hurried by Passion to follow some erroneous Leader into
Schism and Divisions, which are contrary to Unity, Love, and Peace.

Study well what is the common error of the religious party in the times and
places where you live, that you may take a special care to escape them, (For
some such or others it is too probable they have.) Like not their fault for
their Religions sake: But specially take heed lest the Devil draw you, to
dislike their Religion for their faults. Join with them heartily in the one,
but not in the other.

DIRECT. XLV.
Desire the highest degree of Holiness, and to be free from the corruptions of
the times: But affect not to be odd and singular, from ordinary Christians in
lawful things.
AN affectation of singularity in indifferent things, does either come from
such ignonorance as those were guilty of in Romans 14. or most commonly from
Pride, though you perceive it not your selves. If it be to go in a meaner garb
than others, and as the Quakers, not to put off the hat; or with the Friars, to
go b^refoot, or in a distinguishing habit, that all men may see and say, This
is a singular person in Religion, it is easy to see how this gratifieth pride.
Humility desires not to be specially taken notice of: And therefore in all
things lawful, to do as others do, does gratify humility very much. It Is
strange to observe how much stress some persons lay upon their singular habits,
gestures, expressions and actions, when they have once taken them up? and how
sharp they are against all that are contrary? For as the Masters of every Sect
of Monks among the Papists had their several Rules of singularity in things
indifferent; and yet presently desired to get disciples to take their names,
and follow their rules; so is it with most that begin in singularity: They
would have all follow them, that it might grow common.

DIRECT. XLVI.
When you have to do only with stigmatized scandalous ones, to vindicate the
honor of of Christianity from their scandal, go as far from them as lawfully
you can: But with the common sort of sinners, whose conversion you are bound to
seek, go not as far from them as you can, but purposely study to come as near
them, as lawfully you may, that you may have the better advautage to win them
to the truth.
WHen it is our work to avoid persons that they may be ashamed, or that we may
show our detestation of their wickedness, then going from them is our duty, and
we must do it; (To the excommunicate in-publick, and to the notoriously wicked
and impenitent after admonition, in our private way of life.) But with most
men, our duty is to labor their conversion, and in hope to seek the saving of
their souls, till they prove as dogs and swine to their exhorters. It is a
common question whether we should go as far as we may from wicked-men, or come
as (...) them as we may. And it is very great ignorance to say either the one
of the other, without distinguishing of wicked men! Seeing our duty lies the
clean contrary way, toward one sort of them and toward another.

And there is much difference also to be made of the matter in which our
joining with them, or going from them does consist. For there are some things
which though they are no sin, yet are so like sin, that our doing them is most
like to be a snare, and to hinder men's repentance, and not to further it: And
in this we must not come too near them. But there are other things in which our
going too far from them is like to hinder their repentance.

The injudicious zeal of many young Christians, does often carry them into this
extreme. Any fashion of apparel which the common people use, they will avoid as
far as modesty will permit them. And any lawful recreation which they use,
they will fly the further from because they use it: And they think it a
scandal, to shoot or bowl or use any such game which bad men use. And any form
or manner of speech which is lawful in it self they think they must avoid
because such use it. But especially any way of worshipping God, or any
controvertible opinion in Religion, which is owned by bad men, they fly as far
from as they can; By which means all this evil is committed.

First, Their own faith and practice is corrupted: For many an error is taken
up, by going too far from other men's faults. Many a one turns Pelagian, by
flying indiscreetly from Antinomianism. And many a one turns Antinomian by
avoiding Pelagianism. Many a one turns Papist to show his detestation of
multitudes of sects: And many a one turns to the giddiest sects, to avoid the
things which are held and practiced by the Papists; and are so zealous in
avoiding the Papists ceremonies and forms and holidays too far, that at last
they renounce their Ordination and their Baptism, and some at last deny the
Scriptures, the Creed, and the Christ, which the Papists own. Many a one
turns Separatist and Anabaptist and Quaker, to get far enough from Bishops
and Liturgies: And many a one is ready to overrun his consideration, and abuse
his conscience in the extent of his compliance with all impositions, through
the indignation or contempt against the unreasonable humors of the Sectaries.
And thus men's own judgment and practice is depraved, while they think more
from whence to go, than whither.

Secondly, you lose your advantage of doing good to those you fly from: And
therein disobey the will of God, and have a hand in the loss of the souls of
men: Paul became a Jew to the Jews, and all things to all men to save some. 1
Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22. I pray you mark his words: It had been no strange
thing, if he had become wise to gain the foolish, and showed himself strong to
win the weak, etc. But to become a Jew (as when he circumcised Timothy, and
shaved his head because he had a vow, etc.) and to be as under the Law to them
that are under Law; and as without Law to them that are without Law; and to
become as weak to them that are weak, to gain the weak, and to be made all
things to all men, to save some, this is far from the religion of the
Separatists. What abundance of things do many now blame, and censure others for
as temporizers, which they have nothing against (that may be called Reason) but
only that their neighbors use them? If a man stand up at the profession of the
Belief; or if he stand up when the Psalms and Hymns of Praise to God are
uttered, they say, he con^ormeth to the gestures of the Congregation: and make
that his dispraise which is his praise. And what! Is not standing a fit gesture
to profess our Faith in? and a fit gesture to praise God in? Or is it
praiseworthy to be odd and singular in the Church? and not to do as the rest
of the Church does? Austin professed his resolution, in all such gestures and
lawful orders to do as the Church does where he is: And Paul would have us with
one mouth as well as with one mind to glorify God. I entreat these men to mark
whether it was Christ or the Pharisees that came nearest to their way, and whom
they now imitate? Was it for going too far from sinners that the Pharisees did
censure Christ? Or was it not for eating and drinking with Publicans and
sinners (though he did it not to harden them in their sin, but as a Physician
conversing with the sick to heal them) was it not for Sabbath-breaking and not
being strict enough in such mat^ers, that they were offended with Christ and
his disciples? The case is plain: But corrupted nature more favors the
separating zeal of the Pharisees, than the Loving winning zeal of Christ; And
will easilier suffer us to be imitators of the Pharisees than of Christ.

Thirdly, This going too far from those whom we should win, does not only lose
our advantage to do them good, but greatly tends to harden them in all their
prejudices against a religious life; and to hinder their conversion and to undo
their souls. When they hear and see us place any of our Religion, in avoiding a
lawful recreation, or a lawful use of words, or a lawful fashion of apparel, or
a lawful gesture or circumstance in Gods worship, they will judge of the rest
of our Religion by that part: And this is one thing that has hardened
thousands (especially of the rich who are inclined to excesses) in a scornful
contempt of strictness in Religion, under the name of Puritans and Bigots and
Precisians, and such like: They think they are but an ignorant humorous sort of
people, who are almost mad with a pride of their singularity in Religion; And
think that when you tell them of a Conversion, you would have them become such
whimsical fanatics: And that the difference between their Religion and yours
is but, whether such a form of prayer, or such a gesture, or such a fashion of
apparel, or such music or other recreation, be lawful, or unlawful; In which
they are confident that they are in the right? And what greater cruelty can you
show to souls, than thus to harden them in their sin and misery? Little do such
persons think, how many be in Hell, through these scandals and snares which
they have set before them? And yet they take on them, that is because they
would not encourage men in sin, that they thus fly from them. When they do
their worst to make all the world believe that strict religiousness, is but the
whimsie of a giddy sort of people, who are almost out of their wits with pride.
And what greater injury can men do to Christ and to Religion than this? To make
it the scorn and contempt of the world?

I know they will say that Religion was ever scorned by the wicked, and ever
will be? But if it be scorned for its genuine nature, its heavenly wisdom,
purity and goodness, this is the disgrace only of them that scorn it: Or if
they maliciously and causelessly call wisdom, folly, or call good, evil, this
will redound to the speakers shame, where true Reason has but leave to work.
But if you will therefore do as the Jews did, and cloth Christ in a fools
Coat, and put a Reed in his hand for a Scepter, to expose him to the laughter
and scorn of the beholders, it is you that will be found his deriders and
crucifiers! If you blindfold him, and others smite him, and say, Read who
smote thee; his buffetting will prove to be caused by you: If you will paint a
saint in the garb of a mad man, the countries hatred and abuse of saints will
be imputed unto you.

Fourthly, yea I may add, that you are the great cause of the persecutions of
the godly, and of the damnation of the persecutors. While godly people appear
in their own likeness, in wisdom and love and humility and meekness and
sobriety, the world does usually bear some reverence to them, though it hate
them. But when you have made men believe that those that call themselves Godly
people, are but a company of superstitious Pharisees, that cry, Touch not, taste
not, handle not; or a sort of melancholy humorists, who must sit because their
neighbors stand, or must go out of the way, because their neighbors go in it;
This makes them justify all their cruelties, to you and others, and think
persecution to be their duty: and to say that, the whip is for the fools back,
and wanton children must be made wise by the rod; and that it is no wrong to a
mad man to lie in Bedlam.

If you say, that Godliness has been always perse^uted, I answer, But if you
are the causers of it, though it must needs be that scandal or offense come,
yet woe to him by whom it comes. Math. 18. 7. Luke 17. 1, 2.

The way of heavenly wisdom is pure, but peaceable and gentle and easy to be
entreated: The way that Christ and his Apostles have led us, is to draw as near
to sinners as we can, by Love and all the offices of Love, neither following
them in any sin, nor flying from them in any thing that is lawful; that they
may be convinced that it is not humor and disdain and pride, but true
necessity and Gods command, which makes us differ from them as we do. And that
we may not be disabled by any contrary errors of our own from evincing and
oppugning theirs.

DIRECT. XLVII.
When ever you are avoiding any error or sin, forget not that there is a
contrary extreme to be avoided, of which you are in danger as well as of that
which you are opposing.
THe minds of most men are so narrow, that they cannot look many ways at once.
If they be intent on one thing, they forget another. But it is a narrow bridge
betwixt dangerous gulfs, which Christian faith and obedience must pass over:
And he that looks on the one side, with the greatest fear and caution, is
undone, if he look not also on the other.

The common way of avoiding any error o^ vice, is to run into the contrary.
And on those terms satan himself will be Orthodox, and a reformer, and an enemy
to vice. I gave you some instances even now. He is a rare person, that is so
wise and happy, as to fly from every error and sin, with an impartial
awakened fear of the contrary. And thence it is that the most judicious old
experienced Christians are usually in controversies for a middle way; and in
the crowd of contentious sects, they commonly are the reconcilers: Not only
because they are more calm and moderate, and peaceable than others; but
especially because they have seen the error on both extremes, when others see
only the error on one side. Only in our inclination to our ultimate end, that
is, in our Love to God, we never need to fear over-doing. But all the means may
be perverted and turned into sin by extremes.

Many that observe the pollution of the Church by the great neglect of holy
Discipline, avoid this error by turning to a sinful separation: And many that
are offended at separation avoid it; by a gross neglect of Christian
discipline, and taking it for a needless thing.

Many who observe how heartlesly and hypocritically prescribed forms of prayer
are used by too many, do avoid it by denying the lawfulness of all forms: And
many who see the error of this opinion, do escape it by turning to mere
formality, and deriding all prayer which is not written in a book, or
prescribed by another.

If any who see how those that were baptized in Infancy, are admitted to adult
Communion without ever understanding or seriously owning the Covenant into
which they were then entered; and seeing how the Church is corrupted hereby; do
avoid this error by denying the baptism of Infants. And many that see the
error of the Anabaptists, do avoid it by countenancing the aforesaid
Church-corruption: and if Infants be but baptized, they never care whether they
be called at years of discretion, to the solemn renewing and owning of their
Covenant.

And many that see both these extremes do plead for Confirmation, as the middle
way: But they turn it into a mere Ceremony, and defeat the ends of it, and
never bring the baptized to a solemn renewall of their holy Vow. And many who
see the Papists abuse of Confirmation, do wholly cast it off, and deny the
healing use aforesaid.

Many who see the effects of Papal tyranny, dislike all General Ministry,
which takes the care of many Churches. And many who see the incoherence of
Independent Churches, and the calamity of sects, do incline to Papal Usurpation.

Many who see the evils of Indepency in respect of Council and Concord, are
inclined to a Regimental dependency and subordination of one Church to another,
as of Divine appointment. And many who see that there is no proof that God ever
appointed such a Regimental dependency, do turn to Independency in point of
Council and Concord.

Many who observe the grossness of their error, who would have the people have
the power of the Keys, and govern* the Church by the major Vote, do deny the
people the liberty of choosing their Pastors, and being guided in spirituals as
Volunteers. And many who see this error of denying the people liberty, do give
them the foresaid power of the Keys, and make them Governors of themselves
by Vote.

Many who hear the Papists talk so much of merits and of good works, do deny
our own Faith, and Love, and Repentance, the place that God has assigned them
in order to pardon and salvation, in subordination to Christ: And many who hear
the presumptuous boast of being Righteous by Christ's imputed Righteousness,
without any fulfilling of the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace on their
parts, do make as a jest of imputed Righteousness* (as it is taken in a sound
and warrantable sense) and do ascribe too much to the works of man.

Many who hear the Socinians make faith and obedience to be all one, do deny
that the faith by which we are justified, is a giving up the soul in Covenant
to Christ entirely in all his office, even as our Redeemer and Lord, and so an
engagement to obedience by subjection. And many that hear men say, that faith
justifies us only as an instrument, apprehending Christ's satisfaction and
meritorious righteousness as their own, do confound our faith and obedience;
and forget that the faith by which we are justified, is [our becoming
Christians, or, Assent and Consent to the Covenant which we make in Baptism
(nothing more or less;) and not our living as Christians in after obedience,
which is the fruit or effect of faith.

And, even in civil things, many who observe how Turkish, Tartarian, Japonian,
China's, and other Heathenish and Infidel Tyranny, is the chief Resister of the
Gospel, and Suppresser of Christianity to the damnation of millions of souls;
And how Papal tyranny, and Muscovian, and Spanish cruelties, are the chief
Maintainers of ignorance and unreformedness in the Churches, are ready hereupon
to think dishonourably of Monarchy it self, and to murmr at the power of
Christian Princes, and to rush into seditions and rebellions. And many that see
the mischiefs of seditions, conspiracies^ and rebellions, are ready to forget
the grand and heinous sin of Tyranny, and the calamity of Souls, and Churches,
and Kingdoms thereby: (As Campanella says, The abuse of the Potestative
Primality, is Tyranny, the abuse of the Intellective Primality is Heresy, and
the abuse of the Volitive Primality is Hypocrisy: Though indeed he should have
mentioned both extremes).

In a word, woe be to the Reformer, who fears not running into the Extreme,
which is contrary to the Error and Sin which he would reform.

DIRECT. XLVIII.
Think more and talk more of your faults and failings against others;
especially against Princes, magistrates, and Ministers, than of their faults
and fail^ngs against you.
THe Reason of this Counsel is very obvious and past contradiction. Another
man's sin as such is not yours: No man's sin shall damn you* but your own; no nor
bring any proper penalty on you. Our suffering by other men's sin, is the common
way to Heaven, by which Christ and his Apostles went: But our own sin is that
which must have the blood and spirit of a Savior for its cure, or it will undo
us. He came to destroy the works of the Devil, and to save his people from
their sins: Math. 1. 21. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. But not to keep us from being persecuted
by sinners: Math. 5. 10, 11. without escaping persecution we may be saved, (for
every one that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy
3. 12.) But except we Repent of our own sin we shall perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. we
must mourn for the sins of others (Ezekiel. 9. 4.) but we properly Repent of none
but our own.

Should we not most fear that which we are most in danger of? And most lament
that, which we are most guilty of? And most talk against that which most
concerns us? And all this is not other men's faults, no not Magistrates or
Ministers (though much to be bewailed) but our own.

Every one will confess, that the true spirit of Christianity is agreeable to
what I say. And yet how contrary is the practice of no small number of the
Religious? In all companies how forward are they to talk of the sins of Princes
and Parliaments? of Courtiers and Nobility, and Gentry? especially of
Ministers; And not only of the scandalous that are guilty indeed, but of the
innocent that are not of their way; whose faults they rather make than find?
But how seldom do you hear them tell any how bad they are themselves? (unless
it be in formality to seem humble persons) yea, how impatient are they with any
other that find fault with them? It would be much more acceptable to God and
wise men, to hear you talk of your own infirmities, than of the Rulers or
Ministers, or Neighbors? The one is a work of Repentance; and the other of
detraction and backbiting. The one is a work which you are commanded by God (to
judge your selves, and confess your faults one to another:) But the other is a
work which you have seldomer a call from God to do. One rendeth to your pardon;
the other to your guilt: Therefore if you fall into the company of backbiters,
that are dishonouring their Rulers or their Pastors, or telling how bad their
neighbors are; labor to purify these stinking waters, or turn the stream:
say to them, [O friends how bad are we our selves! what pride is in our hearts!
what ignorance in our minds! so wanting are we even in the lowest grace,
Humility, that we have scarce enough to make us take patiently, such censures
as now we are giving out upon others? so selfish as dishonors our profession
with the brand of contractedness, and partiality; so weak that all our duties
are liable to greater censures than we can bear: And our inward graces weaker
than our outward duties. Of such ungoverned thoughts, that confusion and tumult
instead of order, and fruitful improvement, are the daily temper and employment
of our imaginations: so passionate, impatient, and corrupt, that we are a
trouble to our selves and others, and a dishonor to the Gospel, and a
hinderance to the conversion of those whom our holy exemplary lives should win
to God: so strange to Heaven, as if we had never well believed it: And to say
all in one, so empty of Love to our dear Redeemer and the God of Love, that our
Hearts lie vacant to entertain the love of worldly vanities; and draw back from
the serious thoughts of God, which should be our daily work and pleasure; and
fly from the face of Death, as if we should be worst, when we are nearest to
our God. And when we are our selves no better, should we not rather complain of
the sore that is so near us? and marvel that our neighbors vilify not us, and
that the Church does not judge us unworthy of its Communion! Nature teaches or
constrains all men, to be more sensible of their own diseases, than of their
neighbors; and to complain of them most as loving themselves best: Is it then
because you love your neighbors better than your selves, that you speak more
of their faults and infirmities than of your own? If not, take heed lest it
prove not to be the voice of love! and then I need not tell you how bad it
signifies! God is Love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God
in him. The Devil is the Love-killer: And what way can you imagine so powerful
to kill love to any others, as to make men think them to be very bad? Does any
man love evil that knows it to be evil? certainly therefore these speakings
evil of others, are love-killing words (though to his face to make him know
himself, they might be medicinal:) and therefore they are the service of the
love-killing spirit.]

DIRECT. XLIX.
Take notice of all the good in others which appears, and rather talk of that
behind their backs, than of their faults.
IF there were no Good in others, they were not to be loved: For it is contrary
to man's nature, to will or love any thing, but sub ratione boni, as supposed to
be good. The good of nature, is lovely in all men as men, even in the wicked
and our enemies (And therefore let them that think they can never speak bad
enough of nature take heed lest they run into excess:) And the capacity of the
good of holiness and happiness, is part of the good of nature. The good of
gifts and of a common Profession, with the possibility or probability of
sincerity, is lovely in all the visible members of the Church. And truly the
excellent gifts of Learning, judgment, utterance and memory, with the virtues
of meekness, humility, patience, contentedness, and a loving disposition
inclined to do good to all, are so amiable in some, who yet are too strange to
a heavenly life, that he must be worse than a man who will not love them.

To vilify all these gifts in others, savoureth of a malignant contempt of the
gifts of the Spirit of God. And so it does, to talk all of their faults, and
say little or nothing of their gifts and virtues: yea, some have so unloving
and unlovely a kind of Religiousness, that they backbite that man as a defender
of the profane, and a commender of the ungodly, who does but contradict or
reprehend their backbitings: And are ever gainsaying all the commendations
which they hear of any whom they think ill of.

But if you would when you talk of others (especially them who differ from you
in opinions) be more in commendation of all the good, which indeed is in them.
1. You would show your selves much liker to God who is Love, and unliker to
Satan the accuser. 2. You would show an honest impartial ingenuity, which
honors virtue where ever it is found. 3. You would show a humble sense of
your own frailty, who dare not proudly contemn your brethren. 4. You would show
more love to God himself, when you love all of God whenever you discern it;
and cannot abide to hear his gifts and mercies undervalued. 5. You would
increase the grace of love to others, in your selves, by the daily exercise of
it; when backbiting and detraction will increase the malignity from which they
spring. 6. You would increase Love also in the hearers; which is the fulfilling
of the Law; when detraction will breed or increase malice. 7. You will do much
to the winning and conversion of them whom you commend, if they be unconverted.
For when they are told that you speak lovingly of them behind their backs, it
will much reconcile them to your persons, and consequently prepare them to
hearken to the counsel which they need. But when they are told that you did
backbite them, it will fill them with hatred of you, and violent prejudice
against your counsel and profession.

Yet mistake me not: It is none of my meaning all this while, that you should
speak any falsehood in commendation of others; nor make people believe, that a
careless carnal sort of persons, are as good as those that are careful of their
souls, or that their way is sufficient for salvation; Nor to commend ungodly
men in such a manner, as tends to keep either them or their hearers from
repentance; Nor to call evil, good, or put darkness for light, nor honor the
works of the devil. But to show Love and impartiality to all; and to be much
more in speaking of all the good which is in them, than of the evil: Especially
if they be your enemies, or differ from you in opinions of Religion: Tit. 3. 1.
Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers; to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no
brawlers but gentle, showing all meekness to all men. For we our selves were
sometime foolish, etc. Grace is clean contrary to this detracting vice.

DIRECT. L
Study the Duty of instructing and exhorting, more than Reproof and finding
fault.
I Deny not but that it is duty to tell a brother of his fault, and to reprove
and that with plainness too. Math. 18. 15. Lev. 19. 17. And it is but few that
do this rightly, of many that will backbite and censure. But yet I have long
observed, that many Christians are enquiring, How they must manage the duty of
Reproof, who nenever enquire how to perform the duty of Christian exhortation
or instructing of the ignorant. When as this later is much more usually a duty
than the former; And you are bound to exhort a multitude whom you are not bound
to reprove. And exhortation to good is a duty which the hearer is usually less
offended at; It does not so much gall and exasperate his mind: It shameth him
not so much, and yet is the greater part of our duty to him; as the positives
of Religion are before the negatives. Exhortation (rightly used) is the plain
direct expression of Love, and an earnest desire of another good: When Reproof
does savor of a mixture of Love and displeasure; and the wrath does often
cloud the love.

And I must say, that I find many surly proud Professors, much proner to
Reproof, than to Exhortation: Their pride and self-conceitedness makes them too
forward to reprove their Governors, and the ignorant people are ready enough
to reprove their Teachers, and the servant to reprove the Master or the
Mistress; but not to be reproved by them. Ministers must be wise and cautelous
how they set such people on reproving and finding fault with others, when their
own pride and passion and fond self-opinion, is ready to put them on too far.

DIRECT. LI.
The more you suffer by your Rulers (or any men) the more be watchful lest your
sufferings tempt you to dishonor them. And the more you are wronged by your
equals, the more be afraid lest you should be tempted to withdraw the Love
which is their due.
THe Honoring of our superiors, is a Moral or Natural duty (of the fifth
Commandment) which sufferings will not excuse us from: And so is the Love of
all men, even of our enemies. And selfishness and Passion are things so
powerful, that it is wonderful hard to escape their deceit: They will blind the
mind, and change the judgment, and corrupt the affections, before you are
aware, or believe that you are at all perverted.

Every man must watch most where his temptation is strongest. Do you not think
that you have a far stronger temptation, to dishonor a persecuting Magistrate
than a good one? And to hate an enemy than a friend? Therefore arm your selves,
and one another against this snare. And when others are aggravating the fault
and injury, do you in company remember each other, in what danger you are now
of losing your innocence, and of doing your selves more hurt by that, than any
powers or enemies can do you. It is an easy thing to Love one that loves you,
and to honor a Magistrate that does good to you and all. But as the Apostle
says of servants, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20. (Be subject -- Not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward: For this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully: For what glory is it,
if when ye be buffeted for your faults you take it patiently? But if when ye do
well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.

DIRECT. LII.
Make conscience of heart-revenge, and tongue-revenge, as well as of
hand-revenge.
IT is so notorious that Revenge is a usurpation of Gods prerogative, and a
heinour sin, that Professors could not so frequently and easily commit it, if
they did not first deceive themselves, and take that to be no revenge which is.
To do any open hurt to another, they take notice of as sinful revenge. But is
there no secret wish in your heart, that some evil may befall another? Nor no
secret gladness that some evil has befaln him? You will say, It is not in
revenge, but in hope he may repent: But take heed what is in your heart. Its
one thing to Repent of his injury to you as such, and to make you amends and
repair your honor: And its another thing to repent of it as a sin against God,
to the saving of his own soul. Is it not the former that you more desire than
the later?

And are not your Tongues employed too often in revenge? What are all your
secret reflections, and endeavors to dishonor those that have wronged you,
but revengeful speeches? Railing, and backbiting, and nibling at another
honor and good name may be acts of revenge as truly as the actions of the hand.

DIRECT. LIII.
When you are exasperated at the hurt which you feel from Magistrates, remember
the good which the Church receives by them, as well as the hurt.
IF you look all at the evil in any man, and overlook the good, you cannot
choose but hate him: And if you think only of what you suffer by Magistrates,
you may easily know what the effect must be. And the sin is so great, that it
should not be made light of, by a tender conscience. The good of the Office and
of the person is of God; and the evil is of Satan: And should you so look at
Satan's part, as to pass by all Gods part? What ingratitude is it, to take
notice so deeply of your suffering, and to take no notice of your mercies.
There are few Heathen Magistrates, from whom those Christians who live under
them, receive not much more good than hurt. Much more Christian Magistrates are
a blessing to believers. For if they persecute some, yet they usually protect
more, from the fury of the vulgar rabble, who would quickly devour them, if
Rulers did not restrain them. And the countenancing of the Christian Religion
in the essentials, and defending Christian assemblies for Gods worship is an
unvaluable mercy. If Paul said to the Romans [Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to evil -- Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same: for he is the Minister of God to thee for good] Romans 13. 3, 4. How much
more may those say so who have Christian Magistrates! Or if some particular
persons do suffer more under some such, than Paul or the Christians did under
Heathens (Acts 28. last) yet every true Christian, must more regard the public
interest than his own: and must rejoice that the Gospel has any protection and
furtherance, and the souls of the people any benefit, whatever his personal
suffering be. Read Phil. 1. 12, to the 20.

DIRECT. LIVE.
Learn to suffer by Ministers and Good people, and not only by Magistrates, nor
only by the ungodly.
I Confess it is a thing most unnatural for one true Christian to afflict
another; and especially for a Minister, who is the father of the flock, to be a
hurter of them, and to do like an enemy; and to fleece them and devour them.
But yet it is a thing which sometimes must be born. I have observed that
Religious people when a Magistrate (though a usurper) persecuteth them, they
can in some sort undergo it, as no strange thing. And they are not so forward
to cast off the office and abhor the persons by whom they suffer. But if they
suffer never so little by a Minister, they fly away from him, and are
incapable of comfortable communion with him, and the breach is hardly ever made
up. I confess there is some more color for this impatiency; (to be mentioned
in another place.) But yet Gods servants have been tried by this kind of
suffering also, and therefore you must not be so tender of it, nor be driven by
it into sinful separations, or into a contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel,
as too many sects in these times have been. Read what at large is said of the
afflicting Shepherds, Ezekiel. 34. and Zech. 10. and 11. And you will see that it
is not a thing to be wondered at, to have Shepherds which fleece and destroy
the flocks, and tread down their pasture and muddy their waters, and feed
themselves and not the flocks, and gather not that which goes ^stray: Nay
their own Shepherds pitied them not. Zech. 11. 5, I know that it is the
Magistrates that are often meant by Shepherds in the Prophets: but the Priests
also are usually meant with them, and sometime distinctly by the same word. And
their falsehood and cruelty often expressed, as in Ier. 2. 8, 26. and 5. 31. and
26. 7, 8, 11. and 32. 32. Ezekiel. 22. 26. Hos. 6. 9. Mich. 3. 11. Zeph. 3. 4.
Mal. 1. 6, and 2. 1. etc. And remember that all the wickedness of these
Priests, and their abuse of the people, did not warrant the people to forsake
the Jewish Church: Though the Ark was taken by the Philistines for the
wickedness and violence of Eli's sons; and the people tempted to desire a King,
by the sins of the sons of Samuel, yet none of their mis-doings did warrant a
separation from that Church. Yea Christ who was persecuted by the Priests, did
yet bid the cleansed Lepe^ go show himself to the Priest, and offer according
to the Law.

Therefore a true Christian must learn (though not to favor any man's sin, nor
to be indifferent what Ministry he lives under, yet) patiently to suffer much
abuse and persecution, sometimes from Ministers themselves; and to see that it
drive them not in peevish impatiency into any extreme, or to any unlawful sect
or separation, nor to a disdain of the sacred office which they abuse, nor to
lose the benefit of it, or be unthankful for it.

And though it be sad that true Christians should abuse each other, yet this
also must be born. Many can bear^th: scorn and cruelties of the openly profane,
who can scarce bear to be neglected or set light by, much less to be hardly
censured by the Religious. But observe first, that your Pride may notably
appear in this: and it is no great sign of humility to suffer only from the
worst. For you look on them as persons of no honor, and the ^fore not capable
of dishonouring you: For a dog to bark at you, you take for no disgrace: Nay
you take it for your honor to suffer by such persons, as supposing it a mark
of Christ's disciples. But the Religious you more reverence, and think their
contempt is a great dishonor to you; and fore your pride will not suffer you
to bear it patiently.

Secondly, And remember that different opinions and interests may possibly so
far exasperate some that are otherwise religious, as to make them afflicters,
or more plainly, persec^tors of one another, though Godliness it self be
applauded by them all. The experience of England, Scotland and Ireland within
these 25 years does sadly tell us and the world, how far men can go in
persecuting each other for different interests and opinions, who all profess a
zeal for godliness.

And let it have your special remark, that one reason why all men as Christians
and Godly do more easily and commonly love one another, is because a^
Christians and Godly, they do not hurt or wrong each other: But as they are of
various sects they hate and envy one another, because as they are sectaries
they hurt and injure one another. For the spirit and zeal of a sect as such is
censorious, hurtful, unpeaceable and dividing: But the spirit and zeal of
Godliness and Christianity, is kind and gentle and inclines to do good to all.

Remember that you have never lear^n the Christian art of suffering aright,
till you can suffer not only by bad men, but by men that otherwise are good;
nor only by enemies but by friends, nor only by them that bear the sword, but
also by some who preach the word; and will not by oppression be made mad, nor
driven from your innocence.

DIRECT. LV.
When you complain of violence and persecution in others, take heed lest you
show the same inward sin, by Church-persecution and cruelty against them, or
any others.
BUt because I know that guilt causes impatience, and passion disposes men to
mistakes and false reports, before I proceed, I must here foretell you, 1. That
I mean not by Separatists all that are so called by interessed injudicious
persons: But those 1. that account true Churches of Christ to be no Churches,
2. or that account it unlawful to hold Communion with those Churches, whose
communion is not unlawful; because they are faulty, or because they differ from
them in some opinions or circumstances of worship: 3. especially if they
practice, and persuade others to practice according to these two opinions; of
which the first is the higher sort of separation, and the second the lover.

And secondly, That by Church-dividers, I mean both these and all such whose
principles and practices are against that love of a Christian as a Christian,
and that forbearance of dissenters, which should be exercised to all the
members of Christ; and who fly from the ancient simplicity and primitive terms
of Church Communion, and add (as the Papists do) their own little novelties as
necessary things.

And those that do causlesly separate from their own lawfully called Pastors;
For ubi Episcopus, ibi Ecclesia; where the true Pastor is, there the Church is
(what ever place it be that they assemble in) (as Cyprien once said.)

And lastly, those that are of uncharitable, humerous, peevish, contentious and
fiery spirits, and will stir up m^tinies and ^idings, and causeless divi^ions
in any Church where they come. And truly they that think of the present state
of Hartford and some other Churcheses in New England, (which I will not here
make a Narrative of) me thinks should fear Separations, Schisms or Divisions,
from o^ in the Churches called Independent, as much as those of a different
Discipline do as to theirs: (if not somewhat more, on several accounts.)

Thirdly, And remember that I am not here speaking of any men's former faults,
by way of uncharitable bitterness, insulting or reproach; but verily brethren,
if we are not impartially willing to know the truth of every side, and of our
own selves as well as othe^s, we choose deceit, and resist the light, and
provoke God to forsake our understandings. Do we not yet know where Judgment
has begun, after such plagues and flames, and Church convulsions? And do we
not yet know where Repentance must begin? Enquire for good news whence you
will, I will enquire whether we are awakened to a true Repentance; and by that
I will fetch my prognostics of our f^ture state? Not whether you cry out
against other men's sins, but against your own, and that particularly with all
their aggravations; and whether Professo^rs of Religiousness do as heartily
lament their own notorious public scandals, as they expect that drunkards and
fornicators, and the friends of looseness, should lament theirs! Till we see
this, what promise have we of the pardon of our dreadful temporal penalties?
(to say nothing of the greater.)

Woe to the Land and People that can multiply sin and cannot Repent! And woe to
them that pretend Repentance, and love to be flattered in their sin, and cannot
endure to be admonished, but take all the discoveries of their sin to be
injurious reproach? among the profane we take this to be a deadly sign of
impenitency? And is it so bad in them, and good in us? It is part of my office
to cry with holy Bradford, REPENT O ENGLAND; and to say after Christ, Except ye
Repent, ye shall all Perish, And can I call men to Repent, when I must not dare
to tell them of what? Nor to mention the sin which is most to be repented of? I
use all this preface because I know that Guilt and Impenitency are touchy and
tender, and galled, and querulous, and such will bestow the time in backbiting
their Monitor, which they should bestow in lamenting their sin. But shall I
therefore forbear, and betray their souls, and betray the Land through cowardly
silence? Must I show that I have Professors by not admonishing them, (Lev. 19.
17.) when I must show that I love the looser sort by my sharp reproofs? Must I
not fear them that can kill the body? and must I fear to displease a professed
Christian, by calling him to Repentance in a time of Judgments.

Lord, hide not my own miscarriages from my ^ight! and suffer me not to take
any sin that I have committed to have been my innocence or duty, lest I should
dare to father sin on God, and lest I should live and die without Repentance,
and lest I should be one that continues judgments and danger to the Land? stir
up some faithful friend to tell me, with convincing evidence, where it is that
I have miscarried, that Contrition may prepare me for the peace of remission? O
save me from the plague of an impenitent heart, that cannot endure to be told
of sin! and from that ungodly folly, which takes the shame that Repentance
casts upon sin, to be cast upon God and Religion, which bind us to Repentance
and Confession!

Nay in this place, I am not mentioning things past, so much to humble you, as
necessarily to inform you, of the groundlesness of your present arguings, that
you may see the truth.

Fourthly, Note also that I lay not any miscarriages on any whole parties,
(Anabaptists or others.) For I have found that all parties of Christians indeed
have some good, experienced, sober, charitable persons, and some self-conceited
and contentious novices, (1 Timothy 3. 6.) But I speak only of the persons that
were guilty and no more.

Fifthly, Lastly, remember that while I seem to compare the faults of one sort
of persons, with another, it is none of my intent to equal them; much less to
equal the state of the several sorts of Offenders as to the rest of their
lives: But only to mention so much of the similitude, as is nenessary to
represent things truly and impartially to your view.

Read on now with these Memento's in your eye: And if after so plain a
premonition you will venture to charge me with that which I disclaim, do it at
your own peril; I stand or fall to the judgment of God, and look for a better
reward than the hypocrites, which is to have the good opinion of men, be they
professors of piety, or profane. And with me, by Gods grace, it shall
hereafter be accounted a small thing (to the hindering of my fidelity to Christ
and men's souls) to be judged of men, 1 Cor. 4. 3.

And if there should be any Pastors of the Churches, who instead of concurring,
to heal the flocks of these dividing principles, shall rather join with
backbiters, and encourage them in their misreports and slanders, because it
tends to the supposed interest of their party or themselves. Let them prepare
to answer such unfaithfulness to their consciences which will shortly be
awakened, and to the great Shepherd of the Flock who is at the door, and who
told even the Devils agents, that a House or Kingdom divided against it self,
cannot stand, but is brought to naught! Math. 12. (If alas, alas, experience
has not yet, not yet, not yet, done enough to teach them this!)

For my part I have had humane applause enough: I Will value that Vanity as dying
men do. And temptations to man pleasing from covetousness I have none: For I
have nothing of worldly gain or expectations which I should fear to lose, to
tempt me to betray my conscience or the truth by silence.

But (mark and remember brethren, what I say to you,) whosoever is of your mind
at present, P^sterity will say as I have told you: And though wrong ways seem
fit or necessary for some present exigence, or j^bb, vet nothing but Truth, and
Integrity, and Charity (...) Concord, will do the main work, and hold (...) to
the last.

The ^oresight of impatient guilt, and censure having caused me here to give
you this premonition (besides what is in the Epistle) now Reader, go on.

O the deceitfulness of the heart of man! Little do many real Separatists, who
cry out against the spirit of persecution, suspect that the same spirit is in
them! whence is persecution, but from thinking ill of others, and abhorring
them, or not loving them? And do not you do so by those whom you causlesly
separate from? you will say, that though you think them not to be true
Christians, yet you love them as men, and wish their good: And so will those
say by you, whom you call your Persecutors: Though they think you to be proud
and humerous, and disobedient; yet they say they love you as men, and do but
correct you to cure your self-willedness and humor, and to do you good, and to
preserve the public peace. They think you to be bad, and therefore imprison
you: you think them to be bad, and therefore avoid Communion with them. They
think you so bad as to be unworthy of civil liberty, and privileges: you think
them so bad as to be unworthy of Church privileges and liberties. They think
you unworthy to be suffered in the land perhaps. And you think them unworthy to
be suffered in the Churches. They cry against you, Away with them they are
schismatical or heretical: you cry against them, Away with them, they are
profane!

Obj. But they who would not give us (...) lilerties, do more against us, than
we would do against them.

Answ. I pray you think on that again. First, Is not the privilege of the
Church, ^ette^ than the privileges of the Commonwealth? as the soul is better
than the body? Secondly, Is it not a deeper accusation to charge one to be
ungodly and profane, than to charge him only to be schismatical?

Obj. But charity must not be blind: They are profane: I charge them truly:
^ut I am not schismatical or heretical; but they accuse me falsely.

Answ. You say so, and they say the same of you. They say that you are
schismatical, but they are not proph^ne. Now how shall a stander by know which
of you is in the right? Doubtless by the witnesses and evidences: They try you
in some Court or before some Magistrate before they punish you. You never try
them, (...) hear them speak for themselves, nor examine (...) witness publicly
against them, ^or allow them any Church-justice, but avoid their Communion upon
reports or pretense of private kn^wledge. They judge you personally one by one:
You condemn whole P^rishes in the ^^mp, (...): They condemn you as for a (...)
cr^me: But you condemn them without charging any one crime upon them, because
they have not yet given you a satisfying proof of their godliness; They say, we
prove you guilty: You say, you have (...) proved your selves innocent. It a
(...) on the high way, and you and another were both charged with the robbery;
and to the other it is said, I prove by witness that thou did rob me; And to
you it is said, Do thou bring sufficient proof that thou did not rob me?
Would you not think that you had the more injustice?

Obj. But of all men living no man can think that a persecutor is godly and fit
for Church Communion.

Ansu. Either of these answers may stop your mouths, First, What is that to the
whole Parishes whose communion you avoid, who never persecuted you? Did all the
Ministers and common people persecute you?

Secondly, Was it no persecution when many Anabaptists and Separatists made
such work in England, Scotland and Ireland in Cromwels time and after as they
did? When so many were turned out of the Universities for not engaging? and so
many out of the Ministry? and so many out of the Magistracy and Corporation
privileges? And when an Ordinance was made to cast out all Ministers who would
not pray for the success of their Wars against Scotland, or that would not give
God thanks for their Victories. When I have heard them profess that they
believed that there were many thousand godly men, that were killed at Dunbar
(to instance in no other;) and yet we were all by their Ordinance to be cast
out, that would not give God thanks for this? And the execution of it was much
threatened, though they did it not. And what more harsh kind of persecution
could there be, than to force men to go hypocritically to God against their
consciences, and take on them to beg for the success of a war which they judged
unlawful, and to return him a public counterfeit thanks for bloodshed; yea
for the blood of thousands; and the blood of confessed godly men: When the
crime which they would have forced us to (had we been so ductile as to obey
them) was no less than public hypocrisy and owning such blood-gailtiness; and
the penalty no less than separation from our flocks and public maintenance
(though not silencing.)

I speak not any of this to trample upon those whom God in justice has cast
down. (A thing which I so abhorred that I have avoided it to the great
displeasure of others) But if you are of the mind, either that Gods justice
should not be observed or justified; or that you should not be called to
repentance; or that you should be suffered quietly to forget your sin, and die
impenitently; or that the nation should forget the effects of religious pride
and faction, and so lose the warning which they have had from God at so dear a
rate, and be tempted again into the same sin and calamity, for fear of
offending the ears of the guilty; I am in all this as far from your minds, as I
was in the acting of these crimes: And can no more consent to you, than I
should have done to have had all the Israelites murmurings, idolatry and
unbelief; and the sins of Noah, Lot, David, Solomon, Peter, etc. forgotten, and
the history of them never mentioned in the Bible.

But (I pray you mark it) the way of God is to shame the sinner, how good
soever in other respects that the sin may have the greater shame, and Religion
may not be shamed as if it allowed men to sin, nor God the Author of Religion
be dishonored; nor others be without the warning. But the way of the devil is,
To hide or justify the sin, as if it were for fear of disparaging the goodness
of the persons that committed it; that so be may thereby dishonor Religion and
Godliness it self, and make men believe that it is but a cover for any
wickedness, and as consistent with it as a looser life is; and that he may keep
the sinner from repenting, and blot out the memory of that warning which should
have preserved afterages from the like falls.

Scripture shameth the Professors (though a David, Solomon, Peter, Noah, or
Lot) that the Religion professed may not be shamed but vindicated. Satan would
preserve the honor of the Prof^ss^urs, that the Religion prosessed may bear
the shame; and so it may fall on God himself. When God turns Lots wife into a
Pillar of Salt, Satan is willing to seem so tender of the honor of the godly,
as to take it down, that it may be forgotten. God says to the Israelites, that
when those that pass by shall ask why has God done all this great ^vil against
this people, the posterity shall recount their ancestors sins, and say, Because
they sinned against the Lord their God, etc. But Satan could find in his heart
to pretend more tenderness of the names and honor of the Church, so he might
but undo the present age by impeni^ency, and after ages by taking Gods public
warnings from before their eyes. On these terms he will be all for the honor
of professors.

But God will make men more tender of his honor and less tender of our own,
and more willing openly to take shame to our selves to vindicate the honor of
Religion, before he will give us a (...) discharge.

It is the nature of true Repentance, to cry out as publicly as we can to all
the world, and be glad to leave it upon record [It was not God or Religion that
ever encouraged me to these sins; but it was my own doing: Religion is clear
but I am guilty.] Pardon this long excursion on this subject. And if you cannot
bear it, I cannot help that. I made not the sore, nor galled place which is so
tender. I only mind you, in answer to your objection, that Faction and opinions
will raise persecutions, and have done, even by such as you, yet do not
separate from. I know none of you that separate from the Anabaptists and
Separatists who were the authors of these aforesaid persecutions, nor do I urge
you to it. Therefore do but impartially judge of the sin.

Obj. But it is one thing to persecute for particular opinions and interests
(as almost all parties have sometimes done) and another thing to perse^nte for
Godliness it self.

Answ. I confess it is, and the difference between these two is very great. But
I pray you consider, first, that they are but few, perhaps not one, of all that
you separate from, that ever persecuted you any way at all: Nor can you prove
that ever they so much as allowed of it.

Secondly, That they whom you and I do suffer by, do not believe that they
persecute us for Godliness, but think that here the case is more defensible
than yours was. For you had no just authority over us: When the Anabapt^sts did
pull down the Ministers they pulled down the Magistrates too; And therefore it
was a perscution of equals, without authority; But those that we Ministers
suffer by now are our lawful Rulers, who have made Laws to require us to
subscribe, and say and swear and do the things which we do not? And therefore
they think that we suffer but for a different opinion joined with disobedience.
It is not all men whom they forbid to preach, but us who dissent and do not
obey them: It is not all men that are godly whom they imprison; but those that
meet to worship God in a place and manner differing from theirs, and forbidden
by them. So that how can you say that this is not for differing opinions.

Obj. But we forbid not them to hold their own Church Communion, though we
separate from them, we never denied them the liberty of their consciences.

Answ. Some of your judgment denied many of them much of that liberty which
consists in worshipping of God in their own way, when you were in power. But
suppose they had not, it is but another way of uncharitableness: The vice
expressed seems to be the same. For you condemn them as unfit for
Christian-Communion, and therefore you exclude them from yours: And you take
their Church Communion among themselves, to be but a profanation of holy
things: which makes them the more impious, and therefore the more odious: And
you tolerate it in them as you tolerate men's folly and madness, or leprosy or
plague, because you cannot cure it. And I pray you judge whether there be any
more Christian Love in this kind of dealing, than there is in that which you
call persecution? Or at least, whether it proceed not from the same
uncharitableness? I suppose you to be spiritual and not carnal persons, at
least in profession and therefore that you are not so tender of the flesh, as
to take its suffering to be any great matter to you, in comparison of any of
the sufferings of the soul. When you refuse Communion with men, as judging them
unfit for fellowship with the visible Churches of Christ, you judge them the
visible members of the devil, and condemn them to the loss of the greatest
privileges on earth, and to be left out with the dogs, with Publicans and
Heathens: Though you think that you have no more to do your selves in the
execution of this sentence, but to separate from them, yet you declare that you
think that all others should do the same: So that your tolerating their
Communion among themselves, is no great signification of your charity.

The sum of all that I say to you is this: It is but one and the same sin in
the Persecutor and the Divider or Separatist, which causes the one to smite
their brethren, and the other to excommunicate them: the one to cast them into
prisons as Schismatics, and the other to cast them out of the Church as
profane: the one to account them intolerable in the land, and the other to
account them intolerable in the Church: the one to say. Away with them they
are contumacious; and the other to say, Away with them they are ungodly. The
inward thoughts of both is the same, that those whom they smite or separate
from, are bad and unlovely and unfit for any better usage. When Love which
thinks no evil till it is necessitated, and believes all things which are at
all credible, and hops all things which are not desperate, and covers sins
instead of condemning without proof, would equally cure them both.

And let me yet conclude with this double protestation against the carping
slanderer who uses to falsify men's words. First, That I intend not in all
this any flattery of the ungodly, or making them better than they are, or
forbearing plain reproof or Church Discipline, nor any unlawful communion with
the wicked, nor countenancing them in any of their sins, nor neglecting to call
them to repentance.

Secondly, That while I here name persecution, my purpose is not to mark out
any persons or party above others, or determine who they be that are the
persecutors: But only to detect the deceitfulness of our hearts when we most
complain of it; and to show that wherever that sin is indeed, it comes but
from the same principle as sinful separation does: even from the death of Love
to others.

Thirdly, and I add, that though I here aggravate the persecution of unjust
excommunications or separations, as robbing men of the privilege of
Christians, yet leaving them the common liberties of men and subjects; it is
none of my purpose to equal this absolutely with that destroying cruelty, which
leaves them neither; and will not suffer them to enjoy so much liberty, as
Heathens and Infidels may enjoy, or as Paul had under such. Act. 28. ult.

DIRECT. LVI.
Keep still in your thoughts, the state of all Christ's Churches upon Earth:
that you may know what a people they are through the world, whom Christ has
communion with; and may not be deceived by ignorance, to separate from almost
all Christ's Churches, while you think that you separate from none, but the few
that are about you.
THousands of well meaning people live as if England were almost all the world.
And do boldly separate from their Neighbors here, which they durst not do, if
they soberly considered that almost all the Christian world are worse than
they. But narrow minds who can look but little further with their Reason than
with their eyesight, do keep out at once both Truth and Love. It is a point
that I have often had occasion to repeat, and yet will not forbear to repeat it
here again; It is but about one sixth part of the known world who make any
profession of Christianity and are baptized: (besides how much peopled the
unknown part of the world may be, we know not.) Of this sixth part the
Ethiopians, Egyptians, Syrians, Armenians, the Greek Churches, the Muscovites,
and all the Papists, are so great a body, that all the Protestants, or Reformed
Churches are little more than a sixth part of this sixth: (The Papists being
about a fourth or fifth part; and the other Christians making up the rest) And
of these Protestants, Sweden, Denmark, Saxony, and many other parts of Germany,
making up the greatest part, are such as are called Lutherans! And of the other
half, which are supposed to be more Reformed, there is scarce any of so
Reformed lives as these in England and Scotland: And among these, how great a
number are they that you separate from? If you look to the Papists, their
worship is by the Mass: If you look to the Muscovians, they have a Liturgy much
more blameable than ours, and have a few Homilies instead of preaching? If you
look to the Greek Church, to the Armenians, the Abassines, and all the Eastern
and the Southern Churches, in Asia and Africa, they also worship God by
Liturgies, much more liable to blame than ours, and have but little preaching
among them, besides Homilies; and the Members of their Churches are commonly
far more ignorant than the worst of ours, even than the rudest part of Wales.
If you look to the Lutherans, they have Liturgies, and Ceremonies, and Images
in their Churches, though not adored; and have far worse Preachers, and of
worse lives, and more unprofitable preaching than is usually found with us; and
the people more ignorant and vicious. If you look to the remnant, called the
more Reformed Churches, in Holland, France, Helvetia, Germany, though they have
much less of Liturgy, or Ceremonies, yet are their Church Members usually as
ignorant as ours, and more addicted to intemperance, and there is no less
scandal in their lives, than among ours. Now this being the true state of the
world, and though we daily pray that it may be better, yet it is no better, I
would only entreat you but to think of it as it is, and that to answer me
deliberately these few Questions.

Quest. 1. Do you believe that all baptized professed Christians. (not denying
any essential part of Christianity) are Christ's Universal Visible Church?

Qu. 2. Do you not believe that this Church is only One; and that every
particular Church, and every Christian is a part of it?

Qu. 3. Do you not believe that it is unlawful in any case whatsoever to
separate from it? And that to separate from the Universal Visible Church, is
visibly to separate from Christ?

Qu. 4. Do you not believe that to give a Bill of Divorce to the Universal
Church, or to many hundred parts of it, or to any one part, and to declare that
they are none of the Church of Christ, is not great arrogance, and injury to
men, and unto Christ himself?

Qu. 5. Dare you say before God, Let me have no part in any of the prayers of
all these Churches on earth who use a Liturgy as culpable as ours? because I
will have no Communion with them? Do you set so light by your part in their
prayers?

Q. 6. If you traveled or lived in Abassia, Armenia, Greece, or any Christian
Country, (where their worship is not Idolatry nor substantially wicked, nor
they force not the worshippers to any false Oaths, subscriptions or other
actual sin) would you refuse all communion with them, and all public
worshipping of God? Or would you not rather join with them, than with no Church
at all?

Q^. 7. When you remember on the Lords days, that now all the Christian world
are congregate, and are calling upon God and praising him, in the name of one
Christ, and in the profession of one Faith, dare you think of being a Body
separated from them all? And can you think that Christ disowneth them all, save
you?

Qu. 8. Can you think it agreeable to the gracious nature, design and office of
Jesus Christ, to cast off and condemn so many hundred parts of the
Church-universal, and to accept that one part only which you join with? Judge
by his actions and expressions in the Scriptures.

Qu. 9. If there were b^t ten persons of your mind in all the world, would you
believe that God would save none but those ten, or accept the worship of no
more, or that it were lawful to have communion with none but those ten? If not,
how can you think so in a case so near it?

Qu. 10. Can you prove that Christ does separate from all the Christians of the
world which you separate from? or that they have no visible Comm^nion with him?
or that he takes them for no Churches, and disowneth the administration of all
the Ministers in the world whom you disown? or yet that it is safe, to separate
where Christ does not separate, and to be gone from his Horse while he there
abides? and to condemn those whom he condemns not? nor yet commands you to
forsake or to condemn?

Obj. The Church of Christ is a little flock, and not to be estimated by
number: And if he confine his grace to never so few, I will confine my
Communion to as few.

Answ. First, Grace is not visible to you, but the Profession of it only:
Therefore your Communion must be extended according to men's profession, and not
according to sincerity which you know not? when the question is, who has
grace, and who has not, God has not made you a heart* searching Judge, but
has made profession the sign which you must judge by. And he that professes
Christianity, professes all that is of necessity to salvation.

Secondly, If Christ's flock was little when he spoke those words, it is much
greater now. And if it be little still (as it is in comparison of the world of
Heathens, Infidels, and Hypocrites) will he give them thanks that will make it
less, yea a thousand times less than it is indeed? Has he so few? and will you
take from him almost all those few? If you had but a hundred sheep when your
neighbor had a thousand, would you thank him that would rob you of all save
one?

Thirdly, So far as God has revealed the fewness of the saved, we reverence
his Counsels, and believe his word: But if you will make it so much less a
number, while you falsify Gods word, you will tempt your selves at last, not
to b^lieve it, because you have made it false and incredible by making it your
own. Brethren, I beseech you be not angry with us while we pity you, and would
save your souls from your own snares and del^sions. You know not how fast you
are hastening to infidelity, and to the renouncing of Christ himself? you
little suspect that your extraordinary strictness, for the purity of the Church
does tend to your turning heathens, and denying the whole Church? But remember,
that the nature of God is so infiaitly Good, as well as Just, and the Gospel is
such glad tidings to all the world, and Christ called, the Savior of the
world, and God is said so to love the world in giving him, Joh. 3. 16. that if
you should say God would save but one man in the world, or ten, or a thousand,
and damn all the rest, if you did in your bravad^ believe your selves this
year, by the next you might be like enough to believe that the Gospel is but a
fable. I have much ado to forbear naming some high Professors (known lately
at W^rcester, Exeter and other parts) who died Apostate-infidels, deriding
Christianity and the immortality of the soul, who once were Separatists. And I
must profess to you that for my own part, if I did believe that Christ's Church
were no more numerous than all the Separatists on earth, it would make the work
of faith more difficult: For as he is no King that has no Kingdom; so he is
next to no King, whose Kingdom is next to none: He that would prove that our
King is only King of ^slington, or Hackney and no more, would by deriding him
to day, prepare for the deposing him to morrow. They are glorious things that
are spoken of the Kingdom of Christ; even that the Kingdoms of the world are
become his Kingdoms. And if you will take from him all save two or three
Cottages, I mean the separated Churches only, it is but a little addition to
your treason to take the rest, and to Crucify Christ afresh and write over him
in der^sion, the title of a King. You do not discern the design of Satan. He
that cannot entice an Apple from a Child, if he can get him to let him eat all
the rest till it come to a little of the Core, will then easily get him to
throw away that worthless relict. If to day you will needs believe that Christ
will reject all the world, and all the Churches, save only a few persons who
have pride enough to condemn all the rest, by to morrow or e^e long you are
like* enough to add one other degree to your derision, and to deny him to be
Christ.

Obj. But we are more than were in the Ark of Noah.

Answ. First, You never yet proved that all that were out of the Ark were
damned, and no more saved from Hell, than were saved^ from the Deluge.
Secondly, If you had; yet th^^ Scripture speaks such great things of the
Universal Gospel Church, as that which makes up (...) former diminutions and
losses, and helps (...) against such difficulties.

DIRECT. LVII.
Yet let not any here cheat you by overdoing, nor mere names and titles of
Unity deceive you instead of the thing it self: Nor must you ever dream of any
Head and Center of the Unity of the Catholic Church, but Christ himself.
THere is no part of Religion which Satan does not endeavor to destroy, under
pretense of promoting it: And his way is to overgo Christ and his Apostles, and
to seem more zealou^ than ever they were, and to mend their work by doing it
better or doing more. Christ was not strict enough for the Pharisees, in
keeping the (...), nor in his company, nor in his diet. Sata^^ has always two
ways to destroy both truth and duty; The first is by direct opposing it; But
(...) that will not do, the next is by overdoing and pretending to defend it.
If he cannot destroy zeal, by scorning it, and quenching it; he will try to do
it by overheating and distempering it. If he cannot destroy knowledge, by the
way of gross ignorance, he will try to spin it out into the finer threads of
vain and innumerable questions and speculations, and to crumble it into such
invisible atoms, that it shall be reduced to scepticisme or nothing. If he
cannot destroy faith by open infidelity, he will try to make men believe too
much, by making the objects of their own belief* and calling that a particular
faith, and altering God word, and casting away the Reasons and evidences of
faith, to show the strength and nobleness of their faith, which needs no such
helps as these; till by over-doing they have raised their edifice in the air,
and rejected their foundations, and put out their eyes in honor of the sun, and
of their Physician, lest either of them should be accused as insufficient.

Even so when Satan finds that he cannot directly destroy the Unity of the
Church, and bring division into credit, he will be more zealous for unity than
Christ himself: He will then endure no disagreement among Christians, no not in
an opinion, nor a form, or ceremony; not in meats or drinks or keeping of days,
or in judging of things lawful or unlawful, which are not of necessity to the
Churches concord. He is either for Tolerating all pr^pagation of Heresy and
practice of wickedness, or else he is so much for Unity, that no difference
almost is to be tolerated. For he well knows that while men are imperfect
such differences will still be: And then if he can but persuade the world, that
for Concord sake they must not be endured, what follows but that the
dissenters must be fined, imprisoned or banished to bring them (or the rest) to
unity. And so he will se^ all the world together by the ears, in cruelties and
bloodshed, and in hating one another, and all under pretense of making them
one. You may think that till mankind be all turned Bedlams, they can never be
so cheated by such a gross deceit, nor ever guilty of so mad a work. But what
will you say if this be the common case, of the far greatest part of the
Christian world? And what will you say further, if after above a thousand years
universal experience of the unhappy success, they continue it still as the only
way to unity and peace? Look but about you with opened eyes, and see whether it
be not so.

Were not he a gracious promoter of Unity in the world, that would say [Unity
is so excellent a thing, that it is meet we should be all of one complexion, or
at least that the world should speak but one language; and therefore no other
but one should be tolerated] And here how easy is it to dilate of the great
inconveniences of many languages: I could write a Volume in folio of it my
self; and all true and evident. Methinks I see hereupon how these Books are
scattered and read, and how those called Learned men and politicians applaud
them, and shake their heads and gnash their teeth at those that would have so
great a mischief tolerated: And hereupon they set about the business, and
desire a Law that upon pain of imprisonment and banishment (I know not whither)
no one in the world shall speak any other language but one. And now I hope
Unity will be promoted indeed; when all the world is thus engaged in a war to
perfect nature and make men one.

But me thinks I hear one man that is awake thus bespeak the promoters of this
Concord [Unity and Concord in those points where God has made them necessary,
cannot be over-valued: But yet it is visible that there is a mavelous
dive^sity which nature is delighted in: when of all faces and of all voices,
and of all the sorts of animals and plants; there is so discernable a
difference: yea of all the millions of stones in the field, no two is perfectly
like each other. And where greater Unity is most desirable, it must first be
considered how much of it is possible, or to be hoped for, and next, what are
the proper means to attain it. For first, the medicining of all incurable
disease, especially with violent Physic, is not the way to make it better, but
to exasperate it and hasten death, when a palliate and patience might do
better. It is very desirable, that all the Kings subjects were strong, and
beautiful and ingenuous and Learned; but it is not to be hoped: But that they
may be all Loyal, and honest in their dealing with others, may be well
endeavored. And secondly, a wrong kind of medicine will much more hasten and
ascertain death, than to let the disease alone to nature: It is desirbale that
all the Kings subjects be as is said, both wise and Learned, yea and perfect in
honesty and piety without fault: But if you make a Law that for the honor of
Unity, all that are not Learned and perfect in virtue shall be fined,
imprisoned or banished, the King nor his subjects will be but little beholden
to you for their Unity. So one Language is very desirable to the world: But
first it is not attainable, and secondly a Law to punish all that speak another
Language is not the way to procure it; but to set them together by the ears:
You must appoint Parents and Schoolmasters to teach them all one language by
degrees, and keep them to their duties, and remove impediments, and thus stay
the time; and what cannot this way be attained must not be expected in this
world.]

The speech being ended the hearers derided it, and made a Law for Unity to
destroy it, and set every man on hating and fighting against his neighbor, to
make all one.

It is very desirable that all Christians were perfect in knowledge, gifts and
graces, and consequently that there were no different opinions, nor no
different forms or modes of worship; but that all were equal to the wisest, and
to the most sober, pious, zealous and sincere. But if a Law be made that none
shall be endured in any Kingdom^, that are not of this temperament and stature,
the subjects of all Princes may soon be numbered. Set `Parents, Schoolmasters
and Ministers at work, to make men wiser, and drive them on to diligence in
their duty, and restrain men from hindering them, and from intolerable
wickedness and sin, and patiently expect the success of this: And what this
will not do expect not.

And I entreat the Separatists who will think this doctrine of forbearance
gratifieth them, to observe that I speak all this to them as well as to
Magistrates. I told you that there is a Church-persecution and a
Church-forbearance, as well as a Civil. If Christ will have Magistrates frobear
the weak, he will have you forbear them* and not say, We will have no Communion
with those that pray by such F^rms and L^tt^rgies, or that use such a Ceremony,
or are not of our own opinions: Read Romans 14. and 15. and you will see that it
was a Church-forbearance toward one another, and a Receiving dissenters to
Christian communion (even as Christ receives us for all our weaknesses) which
Paul there pleads for, and not only a forbearance of smiting them with the
sword. What a wonder and what a lamentation is it, that those men that cry out
so much for forbearance to the Magistrate, should themselves be as rigid and
more by Church-severities, and less forbear dissenters, even in a form or
ceremony, as to communion, and yet never see the same sin in themselves, which
they so much complain of.

And here my principal business is to warn you of the Papal way of Unity: They
are so great enemies to divisions and sects, that they must have all the
Christian world, united not only in one Christ, by one profession and baptism,
but also in one mortal Monarch as his Vicar, that men may know at the Antipodes
when they understand not the Scripture, or differ in opinions, who to step to
for the ending of their controversies, and to give them an infallible
commentary on the Bible, and to tell them with whom they must hold communion.
And all their differences may thus have a speedy dispatch: If it be doubted
whether one in Abassia or much further off, be a Heretic, or an impenitent
sinner and to be excommunicated or not; and the Church where he lives is
divided about it, if the matter be but referred to the Pope, as the supreme
Judge, it is but going to Rome, and sending thither all the parties and
witnesses on both sides, and the Pope can decide it much more judiciously than
those that are on the place and know the persons and all the circumstances. And
all this may be done in three years time or less, if wind and weather and all
things serve: And if all the persons die by the way, the controversy is ended:
If one part only die, let the longer liver have the better, and be justified.
Or if the Pope will rather send Governors to the place to decide the
controversy, whether the next Lords day you shall hold communion with such a
man, or not, and so forward, its like in a few years time some of them may live
to come thither. And if you must still appeal to the Pope himself for fear lest
a Priest be not the infallible or final Judge (and can do no better than other
folks Priests,) you may after all, have the liberty of the voyage: And if you
cannot in that age get the case dispatched, yet you must believe that you have
appeared to the only center of Unity.

This cheating noise and name of Unity, has been the great divider of the
Christian world. And under pretense of suppressing Heresy and Schism, and
bringing a blessed peace and harmony amongst all Christians, the Churches have
been set all together by the ears, condemning and unchurching one another, and
millions have been murdered in the flames, inquisition and other kinds of
death, and those are Martyrs with the one part, who are burnt as Heretics by
the other: And more millions have been murdered by wars. And hatred and
confusion is become the mark and temperament of those, who have most lo^dly
cried up Unity, and Concord, Order and Peace.

It is a common way to set up a sect or faction, by crying down schism, sects
and factions. And a common way to destroy both Unity and Peace, by cry^ng up
Unity and Peace. Therefore let not bare N^mes dec^ive you.

Remember that one of the old sects or factions of carnal Christians, cried up
Cephas, that is, Peter, and said we are of Cephas; which I know not how they
could be blamed for, if he was the Churches Constitutive or Governing Head. 1
Cor. 1. 12. and 3. 22. And remember that the Church is not the body of any
Apostle, but of Christ, and that all the Apostles are but the nobler sort of
members, and none of them the Head. 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28. Now ye are the body of
Christ, and members in particular: and God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. But Bellarmine (aware of
this) has devised this shift, that the Pope succeeds Peter, in more than his
Apostle-ship, even his Head-ship: But when he has proved Peter more than an
Apostle, and the Pope his successor, he will do the business: Till then we must
say, that if the Pope were but a good Priest or Bishop, below an Apostle, we
should give him more honor, than his treasonable usurpation of Christ's
prerogatives is like to procure him. For he that will needs have all, shall
have none, and he that exalts himself, shall be brought low; and he that will
be more than a man shall be less than a man.

DIRECT. LVIII.
Take heed of Superstition, and observe well the circular course of zealous
superstition, malignity, formality, and peevish singularity and schism, that
you may not be misled by respect of persons. I mean, that First, Indiscreet
zeal and devotion has been the usual beginner of Superstition; Secondly,
Malignity in that age has opposed it for the Authors sake; Thirdly, In the
next age the same kind of men have adored the Authors and made themselves a
Religion, of the formal part of that superstition, and persecuted those that
would not own it. Fourthly, And then the same kind of men that first made it,
do oppose it in enmity to those who impose and own it, and suffer and divide
the Church in dislike of that which was their own invention.
IT is mavelous to observe this partial dance: But Church History may
convince the understanding Reader, that so it has been, and so it is; First,
the zeal of some holy persons does at first break forth in some lawful, and in
some indiscreet and unwarrantable expressions. Secondly, the malignant enemies
of Godliness, hate and oppose these expressions, for the sake of the persons
and the zeal expressed. 3. When they are dead, God performing his promise, that
the memory of the just shall be blessed, Prove. 10. 7. The carnal party of that
age as wel^ as others, do honor those whom their forefathers hated and
murdered. Math. 23. 29, 30. Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites:
because ye build the tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the sepul^hres of the
righteous, and say, If we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets: Wherefore ye be
witnesses to your selves, that ye are the children of them which killed the
Prophets: Fill you up then the measure of your fathers. The wicked of one
generation kill Gods servants, and the wicked of the next Generation do honor
their names, and celebrate their memorial: The reason is because, it is the
Life of Godliness, which the sinner is troubled with and hates: And therefore
it is the living saint whom he abhors. But the name and form of Godliness is
less troublesome to him, yea and may be useful to make him a Religion of, to
quiet his conscience in his sin: And therefore the name of dead saints he can
honor, and the form of their worship, and corpse of piety he can own. And
having become so Religious, both his former enmity to living holiness; and his
carnal zeal for his Image of Religion, engage him to make a stir for it; and
persecute those that are not of his way. And when the zealous and devout people
of that age see this; they loath that carcass or Image which the formalist
contendeth for, and many ^lye from it with too great abhorrence for the persons
sake who now esteems it; forgetting its original, and that it was such as they,
that set it up, and were the first inventers.

For instance: The most of the persons whom the Papists now keep holy days
for, were very religious godly people: And the zealous Religious people of that
age, did think that the honoring of the memories of the Martyrs, was a great
means to invite the infidels to Christianity, and to encourage the weak to
stick to Christ: And therefore they kept the days of their martyrdom, in
thanksgiving to God, and in honor of them. The wicked of that age hated and
persecuted both the Martyrs and them that honored them. In the next age
Religion being uppermost in the world, the wicked did turn Hypocrites, and keep
Holy days for the honor of their names whom their forefathers murdered. At
last when it was observed that the Papists who burned the living Saints, were
the greatest honourers of the dead, the most religious people turned quite to
dislike and reject those very days, which their predecessors had set up in
thanksgiving to God, for the doctrine, example and constancy of the Martyrs.

The same all along I may say about the Relicts of Martyrs, and pilgrimages to
their shrines, which the Religious sort begun at first, and loathe at last.

So also those forms of Liturgy which now are most distasted, were brought in
by the most zealous religious people at the first: The many short invocations,
versicles and responses which the people use, were brought in when the souls of
the faithful did abound with zeal, and in holy servours break out into such
expressions, and could not well endure to be bare auditors, and not vocally to
bear their part in the praises of God, and prayers of the Church. And in time
those very words which signified their raptures, were used by formal hypocrites
without their zeal who first expressed them; and so being mortified, and made
dead Images and used but by rote, in a senseless canting among the Papists, and
also forced upon others; it is now become a point of zeal to avoid them, and
take them as unlawful, and it is a great reason, because they are in the
Mass Book: when the Mass Book received them from the predecessors of many of
those men that now refuse them: But though indeed the highest expressions of
zeal and rapture, are most loathsome when they are counterfeited and turned into
a mere lifeless form: Yet it is the privation of life which is the fault of the
Image, and not the thing as in it self. Restore the same spirit to those words,
and they will be as good as they were at the beginning.

I might instance in most of the Popish superstitions, and show you, that for
the most part, it was the godliest sort of people of that age, who at first did
either set them up, or that which did occasion them; and that the hypocrite
after made them his Religion, taking up the form without the life, and that
upon this the godly of after ages did abhor them.

But what is my inference from all this? Why first, I would advise you, to look
more to the nature of the things themselves, and less to the persons; and
regard the honor of humanity, if you regard not the honor of Religion; and
make not the Infidel world deride you, while they see you alter your opinions
and practice in mere opposition to one another; and to take up and lay down as
the two ends of the balance move, which must be contrary to each other.
Secondly, that you truly understand what interest such zealous persons as your
selves had in those opinions, forms and practices at the first, that if you
will avoid them for some men's sake, you may think the better of them for other
men's: so far as to bring you to some impartiality. Thirdly that you suspect
that zeal in your selves, which you think so much miscarried in your ancestors.

I do not take all that I have mentioned for superstition, but I show you the
circulation which zeal, and formality and maligni^y make, both in things
warrantable and unwarrantable.

But especially take heed of that which is true superstition indeed: By which
here I mean, the making of any new parts of Religion to our selves, and
fathering them upon God, who never made them. Of this there are two sorts,
Positive and Negative: When we falsely say, This is a Duty commanded by God; or
when we falsely say, This is a sin forbidden by God. Take heed of both. I do not
speak here of doing or not doing the same things upon any other account (as
humane duties, or mere conveniences or the like) but as they are falsely
pretended to be Divine.

For first, this is properly a belying of God, and that adding to his word
(whether precepts or prohibitions) which he has so strictly forbidden us. Ier.
5. 12. Deuteronomy. 12. 32.

Secondly, it debaseth Religion objectively considered as mixture of base
metals debaseth the Kings coin: To join things humane with things divine, and
say they are Divine when they are not, is putting of dung into the treasuries
of God. Nothing will be found fit for Divine reverence and honor, which is not
Divine indeed.

Thirdly, it corrupts Religion in the minds of men; and causes them to fear
where no fear is, and to be devout erroneously: As if one should mistake the
person of the King, and give his honor to another who is like him: or should
run into a playhouse to do his devotion, and think that he is in the Church.
Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship, Ioh. 4. 22.

Fourthly, This superstition tends to destroy true Religion, by gratifying
and increasing aversation and opposition; by making it seem an unlovely
tiresome thing. All that is truly of God is Rational and amiable, and wisely
contrived for our good: And the enemies of Godliness, have not a word of solid
Reason, to say against it: But that which is brought in by corrupters may be
confuted: And unnecessary things become a burden, Act. 15. 28. What a toilsome
task does Popery contain? of positives and negatives? ceremonies, and
austerities, and useless labors? And then they that take their pilgrimages,
and penances, and night-risings, and multiplied formalities to be a burden, and
hear them called by the name of Religion, do account Religion it self a burden,
as taking this to be a part of it: And when Religion is not loved it is lost.
To make it seem bad and unlovely, is the way by which the devil destroys it
in the world.

Fifthly, Superstition is the great dividing engine, which satan uses to cut
the Churches of Christ into Sects and pieces; and consequently to stir up party
against party, to the hating and persecuting of one another: For while some
take that for Religion which is none; others will see their error and avoid
it: And thus the division will lay the foundation of disputes and quarrels, of
enmity and opposition. For who can think that all the Churches should ever be
so blind and slavish, as to take up that as a part of Religion, and a divine
institution, which was forged by the private spirit of some erroneous person of
an overheated brain.

Sixthly, Lastly, Superstition much displeases God; and makes us sinners,
even in that, in which we think especially to honor him. Math. 15. 9. In vain
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men: Though God
in mercy can distinguish between his own and ours, and does not count the whole
worship to be in vain, where any degree of superstition is mixed (For then most
zealous persons were undone;) yet the superstitious part of worship is always
in vain; and all the rest is made as vain, where that is the predominant and
denominating part. Thus overdoing is undoing, and thus the superstitious are
(materially) righteous overmuch. And not only much cost and pains is lost, but
the soul corrupted, the Church divided, Religion debased and endangered and God
displeased, by ignorant zeal.

Here note to prevent mistakes; First, that as God is related to our actions,
either as the efficient commanding, or as the final cause; so there is a double
superstition; One (which is the greatest as comprehending the other) when that
which God never commanded or forbade, is feigned to be commanded or forbidden
by him: The other when we feign him finally to be pleased with a Religious
worship of our own invention, though we confess it to have no higher an
original than our selves.

Secondly, That the matter of this later sort of superstition is either that
which God forbids and so is displeased with; or that which he has made and
holds indifferent; and so is neither pleased or displeased with, in any moral
consideration, in it self considered. He that of^ereth God a ^^crifice of sin
(or things prohibited) or of a worthless and indifferent thing, and takes God
to be pleased with the later, or not displeased with the former, does indeed
displease him by either of these conceits. And the general prohibition of not
adding or diminishing, rightly understood, may notify things as under the
former head.

Thirdly, But it is no superstition to hold a good thing to be good; a bad
thing to be bad; or an indifferent thing to be indifferent.

Fourthly, Nor yet to determine of those circumstances of worship which God
has left to humane determination; being made necessary in genere by nature or
scripture: Nor yet to judge that God is pleased with such a prudent
determination.

Fifthly, it is not superstition to do the same material thing, which another
does superstitiously; if we have not the same superstitious conceit of it as he
has. If a Papist should ananoint the sick, as a Sacrament, and a Protestant do
it as a medicine, the former is snperstition, and not the later. And so in
other things.

Sixthly, Whether that indifferent thing remain indifferent to our use, which
others use to superstition, is a case which a judicious collation of
circumstances must determine. His superstitious use does not make it simply a
sin in any other, who has none of his false conceits and ends: (else some
superstitious persons so abusing meat and drink and clothes, and all things in
the world might make all things become unlawful to us: or at least deprive us
of all our liberty in things indifferent.)

Seventhly, If we avoid another uperstition as to the form or intention which
makes it superstition, and this as a sin, we do well: If we avoid the matter
it self which he uses superstitiously, because it is by him made scandalous,
we do our duty, when it is scandalous indeed, and no contrary greater accident
makes it our duty. But if we take it to be simply superstition or sin, to do
materially the same action, which a snperstitious person does, we are
superstitious in avoiding his superstitious act.

For instance, a Papist vi^iteth the Lady of Lauretto as a divine duty: This is
superstition: A Protestant goes thither upon lawful and necessary business:
This is no superstition: Another Protestant who has no necessary business
there, avoideth it that he may not be scandalous and encourage others to it.
This is well done. A Sectary thinks it superstition or other sin, simply to
go thither what ever his necessity or intention be: This is superstition: Or a
feigning God to forbid that which he forbids not.

A Papist fasteth on Friday, or avoideth flesh in Lent as a Divine duty:
superstitiously: A Protestant fasteth the same day, because an Act of
Parliament commands it, which renounceth the Papists religious end; Or
because his Physician prescribes it as necessary for ^is health. This is not
superstition. Another Protestant avoideth it through necessity for his health:
And another in Popish Countries avoideth it only as scandalous: Neither of
these are superstitious. Another fasteth on a Friday for his own necessity or
conveuience, as a time which he may lawfully choose. And another fasteth on a
Friday; because the Master of the family, or the Pastors of the Church, have
appointed a fast on that day. This is no superstition. A Sectary thinks that
it is superstition or some other sin to fast the same day that the Papists do,
because the Papists do it superstitiously. This is superstition (unless in the
case of scandal as aforesaid.)

The multitudes of superstitions by which the Papists or any others, have
corrupted and debased the Christian Religion, I shall not n^w digress to
mention; But only touch upon a few instances, of the superstitions of those
godly persons of this age, to whom I am now writing: To show them, that it is
the Religious sort, that are the common beginners of superstition, by
over-doing, out of a mistaken zeal, or fear of sinning.

I refer the Reader to Bi^^on for full proof.

But here again I must first crave the patience of those that love not error
better than information; and desire them not to be too angry with me for
telling them what I confidently hold, though it diff^^ from the opinions of
many whom I greatly reverence and honor; while I profess withal that I do it
not in a Magisterial imposing way, nor as slighting the persons from whom I
differ, but as offering my brethren that Light which I think needful to their
own and to the Churches cure: And I will thank them if they will do the like by
me, if I be guilty of any superstitious error.

First, the Scripture tells us of no Church-Elders but what were ordained;
and of none but such as were of the same Office with the preaching Pastors or
Elders: of none that had not authority to baptize and administer the Lords
supper: Nor does Church History tell us of any other as a Divine office. But
when one Assembly had many Elders or Pastors, those that were best gifted for
public Sermons did preach; and the rest did help to rule the Church, and to
catechize, and instruct and visit particular families and persons, and other
parts of the office, as there was cause. But now we have concluded that there
is a distinct office of Ruling-Elders, who need not be ordained, and who have
no power to baptize or to administer the Lords Supper. This I think is a
superstition: For we feign God to have made a Church-office which he never
made. And though we must honor and hold Communion with the Churches which have
this blemish; yet still it cannot be freed from superstition.

Secondly, God has required nothing but profession of the Baptismal Covenant,
to prove a man's title to his entrance and privileges in the universal Church:
And a consent to our Relation to the particular Churches, to our membership in
them. But mistaking-zeal has accounted this too loose a way, and has devised
stricter terms: Many must have other proofs of Godliness, besides the
understanding, voluntary assent and consent to the Baptismal Covenant: Yea of
those that are in the universal Church already; before they can be admitted to
its privileges, or to a particular Church. And which is worse, they here give
the Church no certain rule, instead of Christ's rule, which they cast by: But
one man requires one account, and another requires another; and the rule and
test does vary as the charity or prudence of men do vary. This is a
superstition, which has already torn the Churches in pieces, and is going on
still to do worse: And its raised by mistaking-zeal.

Thirdly, that none that at the same time or before are not entered members of
some particular Church, may by Baptism be entered into the Universal Church; is
a superstition, which some good men have taken up.

Fourthly, that he who is a member only of the Universal Church, may not in
transitu be admitted to communion with particular Churches, unless he bring a
Certificate from a particular Church of which he ^ometime was a Member.

Fifthly, that the Pastor may not lawfully receive any member into a particular
Church without the consent of the Major Vote of the people.

Sixthly, that a Minister of Christ may not by Baptism receive any into the
Universal Church, but by the consent of the Major Vote of some particular
Church.

Seventhly, that no man is a Minister or Commissioned Officer of Christ, for
the discipling and baptizing of those without the Church, unless he be also the
Pastor of some particular Church (or at least have been such.)

Eighthly, that the people do not only ch^sse the persons who shall be their
Pastors, but also give them their office or power.

Ninthly, that the people have the power of the Keys, or of Church Government,
by Vote.

Tenthly, that the people of a particular Church, do give authority to men to
be Ministers in the Universal Church, and to preach and baptize among those
that are without.

Eleventhly, that he that is a member of one Church, may not communicate with
any other, but by the consent of the Pastor and people of that one.

Twelfthly, That he that is a member of a Church may not remove his relation to
another Church, (when his occasions and personal benefit require it, and the
public good of many is not hurt by it) without the consent of the Pastor and
people of that Church.

Thirteenthly, that it is simply unlawful to use a form of prayer, or to read a
prayer on a book.

Fourteenthly, That if a Schoolmaster impose a form upon a scholar, or a
parent on a child, it makes it become unlawful.

Fifteenth, that our presence makes us guilty of all the errors or unmeet
expressions of the Minister in public worship: At least if we before know of
them. And therefore that we must join with none whose errors or
mis-expressions, we know of before.

Sixteenth, that as often as a Minister is removed from his particular flock, he
becomes but a private men, and is no longer a Minister and Officer of Christ.

Seventeenth, that we are guilty of the sins of all unworthy or scandalous
Communicants if we communicate with them: Though their admission is not by our
fault.

Eighteenth, that he whose judgment is against a Diocesan Church, may not
lawfully join with a Parish Church; if the Minister be but subject to the
Diocesan.

Nineteenth, that whatsoever is unlawfully commanded is not lawful to be obeyed.

Twenty, that it is unlawful to do any thing in the worship of God which is
imposed by men, and is not commanded it self in the Scripture (As what
Translation of the Scripture shall be read; what meetre and what Tune of Psalms
shall be in use; what hour and at what place the Church shall meet; Pulpits,
Tables, Fonts, etc. Printing the Bible, etc. dividing it into Chapters, verses,
etc.)

These and more such as these are superstitions which some religious people
have brought up.

And among those who are of another opinion, and will speak against all the
forementioned superst^t^ons, there are too many introduced, which they are as
fond of, because they are their own.

As that all the Pastors of the Protestant Churches abroad, who had only the
election of the people and the ordination of Parochial Pastors, and not of
Diocesan Bishops, are no true Ministers of Christ, but Laymen.

That therefore those Churches are no true Churches (in a political sense, and
as organized.)

That therefore their Baptism is unlawful, and a nullity, and all those nations
are no baptized Christians. (Though the Papists who hold the validity of
Laymens baptizing, do here censure more easily.)

That it is not lawful to communicate in such Churches, and receive the
Sacrament of the Lords supper from such Ministers.

That those Countries which are baptized by such, should be rebaptized.

That those Ministers who are ordained by such, should be re-ordained.

That it is unlawful to join with those Churches, where the Minister prays
only from a Habit of of prayer (called extemporary) without a fore-known form;
because they know not but he mayx put somewhat unlawful into his prayers; and
because the mind cannot so readily try and approve and consent to words, which
are hastily uttered, and not known to the hearers before.

These and abundance other superstitions some men would introduce on the other
side. And by all such inventions fathered upon God, and made a part of
Religion, the minds of men are corrupted and disquieted, and the Churches
disturbed and divided; by departing from primitive simplicity.

I shall only now propose this to the consideration of those of the first sort.

Whether they are sure that these superstitions of theirs may not run the round
as other superstitions have done before them? Or some of them at least? What if
the next age should turn them into a dead formality? And what if the next age
after that should make Laws to enforce them? And then Godly people first
scruple them, and then fly from them as discerned superstition? And then the
worst men b^ glad of that advantage to persecute those that would not submit to
them? By this circulation, if the same men who invented un-ordained Elders, new
and needless Church-Covenants, etc. could but live two or 300 years, they might
come to be among the number of those who cry out of them as superstitious, and
suffer persecution because they will not use them.

Yea there are among you now many things of a lower nature, which some dare
scarce plainly say, God commands or forbids, and yet they are censorious
enough about them: As heretofore many were against wearing the hair of any
considerable length; Against wearing cuffs upon a day of humiliation: Against
dressing meat or feasting at least, on the Lords day (which is a day of
Thanksgiving of divine institution) and held, That it is necessary to feast
twice at least, upon a day of Thanksgiving (of man's appointment:) That a
Minister should not life up his eyes, much less kneel down to signify his
private prayer, when he goes into the Pulpit. Nor any other when they enter
into the Church: That no prayer may be used, and no Psalm sung in our common
mixed Assemblies, which have any expressions, which all both good and bad may
not fitly use as for themselves: That no Minister may use notes in preaching to
help his memory. That the sacramental bread and wine must not (say some) or
must (say others) be delivered by the Minister into each man's hand. That no
gesture but sitting is lawful at the sacrament. That it is unlawful to wear a
Gown in divine worship, if it be commanded: That it is unlawful to keep any
aniversary day of humiliation or thanksgiving of man's appointment: That just
such and such hours for family worship must be observed by all: Or as others
say, that no set times or number of family prayers are to be observed. That it
is not lawful to preach or hear a sermon upon a humane holiday. With abundance
more such, (about phrases, and gestures, and fashions of apparel, and customs,
etc. I am not at all now accusing these opinions of superstition, nor telling
you whether I take them to be right or wrong: Much less would I persuade any to
make no conscience how they order these or any other the smallest circumstances
of their lives: Obedience must extend to the smallest parts of the laws of
God. But I am showing you the circular course of many religious people in the
world. Suppose now that the next age should make strict laws for every one of
your own opinions, in all these points. And that the Religious people should
then scruple them, because they are imposed: And that the Rulers then should
make their Laws more strict, and that all the common people should take up
these opinions, and all that sort of men that first were zealous for them,
should turn against them, because the common people are for them; and should
call them Popish superstitions, and should suffer imprisonment rather than
conform to them; I pray you tell me if you foresaw all this, what is it you
would advise a sober Christian to do, in such a time and case as that? Would
you have the same men that now are for these opinions, cry out against them,
and censure all as superstitious who are for them: and separate from them; and
rejoice in their sufferings on that account? Why I tell you that many of the
customs and practices in the Church, which you now thus avoid as superstition,
were brought in at the first thus, by the most Religious sort of people: And
yet it is now accounted by many, a necessary part of Religion to avoid them:
And all because that men take up their opinions of such matters in Religigion,
from the estimation of the persons that are for them; and avoid those things
with prejudice and scrupulosity, which are liked, or practiced or commanded by
those, whom they think ill of, and take for the adversaries of Religion.

DIRECT. LIX.
If through the faults of either side or both, you cannot meet together in the
same particular Church or place, yet preserve that unity in Faith, Love and
practice, which all neighbor Churches should maintain with one another, and
use not your different Assemblies to revile each other, and kill your Love.
ALL distances are undesirable and tend to more: But yet our Unity lies not so
much in meeting in one place, as in being of one Mind, and Heart and Life: Many
occasions may warrant our corporal distance; but Heart-divisions should be most
avoided. It is the principles and motives upon which you withdraw, which are
more considerable than the local distance.

Therefore on one side let us take heed how we ^nchurch and unchristen any with
whom we do not corporally join: And on the other side, let us take heed how we
revile them all as Sectaries and Separatists, who do not join with our
assemblies: But let us know the reason of their practice before we peremptorily
judge them.

I. Perhaps you think that such or such a Church Government, or Forms, or
Ceremonies, are unwarrantable, and such and such oaths and subscriptions are
unlawful, and therefore you cannot have local communion with the Churches that
impose them. If it were so, yet take heed of (...) these no Churches of Christ,
or pretending that Christ disowneth and rejects them. If they cast out you by
imposing any thing which you think is sin, yet take heed that you excommunicate
not them. If there be a difference between a weak and culpable Christian, and
no-Christian, there is a difference between a weak and culpable Church, and
no-Church; And as there are innumerable degrees of good or evil, strength or
weakness in particular Christians, so there is in Churches also.

You may perhaps find that another Minister is more profitable to you, and
another Churches principles more pleasing to you, and their discipline better
in your account: And therefore you think that you are bound, to choose the best
for your personal Communion. Be it so: There is yet some modesty in these
terms: But do not therefore conclude that Communion with that Church which you
turn from is simply unlawful; or that another may not use it who can have no
better! Or that you your selves should not rather join with that than with
none? Or that you may not occasionally sometimes communicate with them, though
your more ordinary communion be elsewhere. Nor do not disown all spiritual
communion with them, though in body you are absent. But when ever you pray to
God, go to him as a member of the Universal Church, and and not of a Sect only:
Pray for the whole Church, and desire a part in the prayers of the whole. Own
them and their worship so far as Christ owneth them. While you disown their
errors and failings, yet own their faith, and all that is sound in their
prayers and worship; And see that you love them as members of Christ, who if
weak are yet Christians, and perhaps in other respects better than you. (To say
nothing whether it be they or you that are in the right.) You like not all that
is done in the Lutherans Churches, much less in the Greek and Ethiopian: And
yet I hope you disown not their spiritual communion as Churches though faulty,
and as members of the same body. But if you are not content to choose an
ordinary communion most suitable to your self, but you must conclude that such
are no Ministers or no Churches of Christ: their worship is not accepted by
him, it is not lawful to have communion with them, but rather to join with no
Church, than with them; and will accordingly contemn them and irritate and
alienate men's minds against them; Be sure that you prove well what you say, or
wonder not if all wise and sober men do take this for downright odious schism,
and one of the worst of the works of the flesh. Gal. 5. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2,
3, 4.

II. On the other side if any withdraw from our Communion, let us not too
hastily accuse them of schism: And when we do, let us well distinguish of
schism, and not go further from them than they have gone from us, and to be our
selves the Schismatics while we oppose it.

There are many cases in which local separation may be lawful. First, As if our
callings justly remove us to another place or Country. Secondly, If our
spiritual advantage bind us to remove to a better Minister and more suitable
society when we are free. Thirdly, if our lawful Pastors be turned out of the
place, and we follow them, and turn away but from Usurpers. Fourthly, If the
Pastors turn Heretics or Wolves. Fifthly, If the public good of the Churches
require my removal. Sixthly, If any sin be imposed on me, and I be refused by
the Church unless I will commit it. In these and some other such cases a remove
is lawful.

And when it is not lawful, yet it may be but such a blemish in the departers,
as the departer^ find in the Church which they depart from; which will on
neither side dis-oblige them from Christian Love, and such Communion as is due
with neighbor Churches.

There is a schism from the Church, and a schism in the Church: There is a
schism from almost all the Churches in the world, and a schism from some one or
few particular Churches. There is a separation upon desperate intolerable
principles and reasons, and a separation upon some weak but tolerable ones.
These must not be con^ounded. The Novatians were tolerated and loved by the
sober Catholics, Emperors and others; when many others were otherwise dealt
with.

If any good Christians in zeal against sin, do erroneously think that an
undisciplined Church should be forsaken, that they may exercise the discipline
among themselves which Christ has appointed; It is the duty of that Church to
take this warning to repent of her neglect of discipline, and then to love and
honor those that have (though upon mistake perhaps) withdrawn. But if when
they have occasioned the withdrawing by their corruption, they will prosecute
the persons with hatred, revising, slanders, contempt or persecution, and
continue impenitent in their own corruption, they will be the far greater
Schismatics, and err a more pernicious error.

DIRECT. LX.
When the Love-killing spirit, either cruel or Dividing is abroad among
Christians, be not idle nor discouraged spectators, nor betray the Churches
Peace by a few lazy wishes; but make it a great part of your labor and
Religion, to revive Love and peace, and to destroy their contraries: And let n^
censures or contempt of any Sect or party take you off: But account it an
honor to be a Martyr for Love and Peace, as well as for the Faith.
OF all parts of Religion, (I know not how unhappily it comes to pass) men
think that Negatives are sufficient for the service of Peace: If a man live not
unpeaceably and do no man wrong, nor provoke any to wrath, this is thought a
sufficient friend to peace. And therefore it is no wonder that Love and Peace
so little prosper. When Satan and his instruments do all that they can by fraud
and force against it, and we think it enough to stand by and do no harm. It is
the Peacemakers that Christ pronounces blessed, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven, Math. 5. 9. Here he that is not with Christ and the Church is against
it. Why should we think that so much actual diligence, in hearing, reading,
praying, etc. is necessary to the promoting of other parts of holiness, and
nothing necessary to Love and Peace, but to do no hurt, but be quiet patients!
Is it not worthy of our labor? And is not our labor as needful here as any
where? Judge by the multitude and quality of the adversaries: and by their
power and success. Is it a mark of hypocrisy to go no further in duties of
Godliness, than the safety of our reputation will give us leave? And is it not
so in the duties of Love and Peace? If the Kingdom of God be in Righteousness
and Peace, then what we would do to promote Gods Kingdom, we must do for them.
Romans 14. 17. And if dividing Christ's Kingdom is the way to destroy it (and
Satan himself is wiser than to divide his own Kingdom, Math. 12.) then what
ever we would do to save the Kingdom of Christ, all that we must do to preserve
and restore the peace of it, and to heal its wounds.

I know if you set your selves in good earnest to this work, both parties who
are guilty will fall upon you, with their censures at least: One side will say
of you that you are a favorer of the Schismatics, and Sectaries, because you
oppose them not with their unhappy weapons, and love them not as little as
they. (As they say of Socrates and Sozomen the Historians, that they were
Novatians because they spoke truth of them and called them honest men: And as
they said of Martyn, and Sulpitius Sever^s, that they were favorers of
unlearned Fanatics, and of the Priscilian Gnostics, because they were not as
hot against them as Ithacius and Idacius, but refused to be of their Councels
or communicate with them, for inviting the Emperor to the way of blood and
corporal violence.)

And the other side will say that you are a temporizer, and a man of too large
principles, because you separate not as they do; And perhaps that you are wise
in your own eyes, because you fall in with neither Sect of the extremes: But
these are small things to be undergone for so great a duty. And he that will
not be a peacemaker upon harder terms than these, I fear will scarce be meet
for the reward. I again repeat Iam. 3. 17. The wisdom from above is first pure
and then Peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy: and the fruit of righteousness
is sown in peace of them that make peace.

Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies live peaceably with
all men. Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness.

Obj. But is it not as good sit still as labor to no purpose. What good have
ever any peacemakers done among differing Divines.

Answ. A grievous charge upon Divines and Christians: Are they the only Bedlams
or drunken men in the world? If Princes fall out, or if neighbors fall out,
arbitrators and peacemakers labor not always in vain: But I answer you, It
is not in vain: Peace-breakers would have yet prevailed more and made the
Church unhappier than it is, if some Peacemakers had not hindered them. The
minds of thousands are seasoned with the Love of Peace, and kept from cruelties
and Schisms, by the wholesome instructions and examples of Peacemakers. And it
is worth our labor to honor so holy and sweet a thing as Love and Peace; and
to bear our testimony for it in the world. And Gods promise of reward does tell
you that you labor not in vain. Is that in vain which Heaven is promised to?

Quest. But what is it that you would have (...) do for Love and Peace, and
against the contraries?

Answ. First, Preach and write, if it be your calling.

Secondly, Let the cause of Love and Peace, be much in your secret and open
prayers to God.

Thirdly, Instruct all that learn of you with principles of Love and Peace, and
labor to plant them deep in their minds, and make them as sensible of the evil
of the contraries, as they are of any other sin. Unless Divines and Parents do
take the way to bring up the people, and children under this kind of doctrine,
that Love and peace may become their Religion, the Church is never like to be
recovered.

Fourthly, In all your conference, labor (seasonably and prudently) to
inculcate these matters on the hearers minds, and to bear your testimony
against cruelty and division.

Fifthly, Put such books into peoples hands as plead best the cause of Love and
Peace. Among others get men to read these: Bishop Usher's Sermon on Ephesians. 4. 3.
at Wansted before King James, Bishop Hall's Peacemaker: Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs
of Heart-divisions; and Mr. Stillingsteet's Irenicon; and all Mr. Duries.

Sixthly, Disgrace not your Doctrine by the badness of your own lives; but be
as much more Holy than them as you are more Peaceable, that they may see that
it is not a carnal unholy Peace that you desire. But these things belong to the
following Directions.

Finally, Brethren, farewell, Be perfect; be of good comfort: Be of one mind:
Live in Peace: And the God of Love and Pea^e shall be with you. 1 Cor. 13. 11.
Phil. 4. 9. 1 These. 5. 23. And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet shortly. Romans 16. 20. Now the God of Peace be with you all. Amen. Romans 15.
33.

Martyrdom for Love and Peace is as honorable and gainful, as Martyrdom for
the Faith.

Part. II. DIRECTIONS TO THE PASTORS, HOW TO Esteem and use Christ's Flock* EVEN
The weak ones and the quarrelsome Children: And what must be done by themselves
in the first place, both to prevent and heal DIVISIONS.
THe Practice of which, the Author does humbly and earnestly beg of them, as
with tears upon his knees, for the sake of Christ, that purchased the weakest
with his blood; for the sake of those that must live in peace with Christ for
ever; for the sake of those who are in danger of turning to Popery or
contemning Godliness, through the scandal of our Divisions, to their own
damnation: for the sake of these poor distracted Churches; for the sake of the
King, that he may have the comfort of Governing a quiet and united people: and
for their own sakes, that they may give up their account with joy, to the chief
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, and not with terror, for the consuming and
scattering of his flock.

And (that he may both begin and end with Divine Authority) the Author humbly
beggeth of them all, that England may but SEE and FEEL, that the PASTORS do
UNDERSTAND, BELIEVE, CONSIDER and OBEY that will of God, which these following
Texts of Scripture do express.

Psalm. 15. 4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them,
that fear the Lord.

Math. 25. 40, 45. Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not, to one
of the least of these (my Brethren) ye did it not to me.

Math. 18. 6, 10. But who so shall offend one of these little ones which
believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea -- Take heed that ye
Despise not one of these little ones: for I say unto you, that in Heaven their
Angels do always behold the face of my father which is in heaven. II For the
Son of man is come to save that which was lost.

2 Cor. 4. 3. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lest.

1 Cor. 9. 16. For necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto me if I preach not
the Gospel.

Act. 20. 20, 24, 28, 33. I have taught you publicly and from house to house
-- But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself,
so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have
received of the Lord Jesus -- Take ^eed therefore to your selves and to all the
flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood -- I have coveted no man's
silver or gold or apparel --

1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; nor for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind; neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the
flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear ye shall receive a Crown of
Glory, that fades not away.

Luke 22. 24, 25. And there was a strife among them, which of them should be
accounted the Greatest: And he said unto them; The Kings of the Gentiles
exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon them are
called Benefactors; But ye shall not be so: but he that is greatest among you
let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve -- I am
among you as he that serves.

1 These. 5. 12, 13. Know them which LABOR AMONG you, and are over you in the
Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them very highly in Love, for their WORK
sake, and be at peace among your selves.

1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double
honor; Especially, they who labor in the WORD and DOCTRINE.

Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife,
and some also of good will: The o^r preach Christ of contention, not sincerely,
supposing to add affliction to my bonds: What then! Notwithstanding every way,
whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is preached, and I do therein rejoice,
yea and will rejoice.

Act. 28. 30, 31. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and
received all that came in unto him; preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man
forbidding him.

Romans 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. Him that is weak in the faith receive ye; but not to
doubtful disputations: For one believes that he may eat all things: Another
who is weak, eats herbs: Let not him that eats despise him that eats not;
And let not him which eats not judge him that eats: For God has received
him: Who art thou that judge another man's servant? To his own Master he
stands or falls: yea he shall be holden up: For God is able to make him
stand. One man esteems one day above another: Another esteems every day
alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

Romans 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. We then that are strong, ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves: Let every one of us ^
ease his neighbor for his good to edification. For even Christ pleased not
himself -- Now the God of Patience, and Consolation grant you to be like minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind and
one mouth glorify God -- Wherefore RECEIVE ye one another, as Christ also
received us to the Glory of God.

Romans 14. 17, 18, 19, 20. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
Righteo^sness and PEACE and Joy in the Holy Ghost: For he that in THESE THINGS
serves Christ, is Acceptable to God, and APPROVED of MEN. Let us therefore
follow after the things which make for PEACE, and things wherewith one may
Edify another -- For meat destroy not the work of God -- Happy is he that
condemns not himself, in the thing which he allows (that is acknowledges
to be indifferent or lawful.) And he that doubts is damned if he eat.

The rest, and some of the same again you shall have in the Conclusion, and I
shall not accuse my self of vain repetition; but account my self and England
happy if twice or ten times warn^ng you of your undoubted duty, in the plain
words of God which you cannot without professed Infidelity deny; will but
persuade you to heal our grievous wounds, at so cheap a rate, as the doing of
that good and blessed work, which NONE may so EASILY do as YOU, and none are
more OBLIGED to do, nor shall suffer more everlastingly for not doing it, if no
Scripture, no reasons, no experience, no petitions, no groans and tears of the
distressed Church of Christ can entreat you to it.

But alas,

Romans 3. 16, 17, 18. Destruction and misery are in their ways: The way of
PEACE they have not known: There is no fear of God before their eyes. --

Eccles. 7. 7. SURELY OPPRESSION MAKES A WISE MAN MAD.

Rev. 6. 10. QUAMDIU DOMINE, SANCIE, VERAX.

Psalm. 120. 6. DIU HABITAVIT ANIMA MEA, INTER OSORES PACIS.

The Preface.
THE Reason why I think it needful, to adjoyn these few Directions to the
Pastors, are: First, Because I think that the rest will do but little good
without them. Though the people are more inclined to separations than the
Pastors, yet are the Pastors the greater causes of most of the Divisions in the
Church; And therefore must be the chiefest in the Cure: Because the advantage
of their parts and place, does make them most significant in both: (And their
office obliges them to be the most skilful and forward in the Cure.)

Secondly, Because I should be chargeable with such partiality as beseems not
a Minister of Christ; if I should fall upon the miscrariages of the people
only, and say nothing to my self and brethren, who are as deeply concerned in
the matter in hand.

Yet I must here premise, that as I have done this part with greater brevity,
so also with submissive tenderness and respect: And that I do not at all intend
any of the Directions following, as a Magisterial Dictator to those in
authority; nor any of the admonitions, as factious reflections upon superiors
or inferiors; or as pleading for or against any party now among us.

To the reasons after given for tenderness to Religious dissenters, though too
much inclined to separations, I shall here only add First, That the general
weakness, even of the Pastors through most of the Churches upon earth, should
make us rather pity the weakness of the people, than angrily revile them: And
to think of Christ's words, Let him that is without sin cast the first stone.
Alas, our preaching, our praying, our conference, our living, tell all the
world too lowdly that we are weak! How few are there that be not either
ignorant, or injudicious, or imprudent, or dull and liveless, or dry and
barren, or of a st^mmering tongue, in our Ministerial work? And in so high a
business, any one of these is a loathsome blemish. If we are put to defend our
Religion, or any necessary part thereof, how weakly and injudiciously is it
usually done? In a word, Our great divisions among our selves, with our
censures and usage of one another, do tell^all the world not only that we are
weak, but that too many of us account one another to be worse than weak, even
intolerable, and unworthy of our sacred office. And shall we by our weakness
and faultiness become the peoples scandal, and tempt them to undue separations;
and when we have done be impatient with their weakness, while we overlook our
own?

Secondly, Let us be so impartial as to remember, how far some have spoken to
their sense, who have been of most veneration in the Church. I instance but in
two: First, The wise and ancient Britain, Gildas, who says no less, than,
Apparet ergo eum qui vos sacerdotes sciens ex cord dicit, non esse eximium
Christianum: Sane quod sentio proferam -- O inimici Dei and non sacerdotes! O
licitatores malorum, and non pontifices! traditores, and non sanctorum
Apostolorum successores ^ impugnatores, and non Christi ministri! -- Sed
quomodo vos aliquid solvetis, ut sit solutum and in coelis, a coelo ob scelera
adempti, and immanium peccatorum sun^bus compediti? etc. If the Author of these
words ^e Venerable, account not the speakers of such like now, to be utterly
intolerable.

The second is St. Martin, whose story out of Sulpitius Severus, I have
afterward abbreviated. If a Sainted Bishop most famous for miracles, pretend
to Angelical Revelation for so much as is there mentioned; let us be charitable
and patient to those tender conscionable Christians, who mistakingly go in such
like ways.

I am my self so sensible of the evil and danger of Dividing separating
principles and ^ayes, that it is much of my labor to cure them with all! And
therefore I have written what I have here done, though I am sure I shall
displease the guilty: But overdoing and illdoing will prove but undoing.

The Lord give more Wisdom, Holiness and Love, to Pastors and people; and open
our ears to healing counsels* before we are incurable!

Amen.
Directions to Pastors how to deal with those weak Christians who are inclined
to Divisions.
WHen the young and ungrounded sort of Christians, do by their errors, pride or
passions disturb the Churches peace and orde, it is the Pastors usually that
are first and most assaulted by their abuses, and therefore are most impatient
and exasperated against them: And it were well if we were so innocent our
selves, as that our consciences need not call us to enquire; whether all this
be not partly the fruit of our own miscariages. However seeing that both the
eminency of our grace, and the nature of our office, should make us more
sensible of the Churches dangers, and more solicitous of its safety, than the
private members are; I think that the chief part of the Duty is incumbent upon
us, which must be done in order to the prevention of these maladies, and to the
cure. And therefore I think that the principal work of a Director or Counselor
in this case, must be with the Ministers of Christ themselves; The Churches
peace lies most upon our hands: And if we miscarry, and will not understand
instruction, nor bear admonition, nor do our parts, how little hope will be
left of our tranquillity? The body must needs languish, when the Physician is as
bad as the disease.

DIRECT. I.
Let it be our first care to know and do our own duty, for the strengthening
and uniting of the people: And when we see their weakness and divisions, let us
first examine and judge our selves, and lament and reform our own neglects.
THat the state of the flocks does usually follow the state of the Pastors, is
known by the experience of all the Churches, in all ages and places of the
world. Where there is a holy, faithful, able, diligent, concordant Ministry,
there is usually a reformed and agreeing people. And where there is an
ignorant, lazy, formal, ungodly and contentious Ministry, there is either a
people divided, or else agreeing in ignorance, formality and ungodliness. At
least if such a Ministry have been long among them.

And we need no other proof of this, and of the chief cause of the peoples
divisions and mistakes, than the accusations and charges of the Ministers
against each other. On every side it is the Pastors of the flocks that are
accused, by those of the adverse party, as the chief offenders. One side says,
It is you that teach the people errors, and put scruples into their minds, and
lead them into contempt of order and authority! And the other side says, It is
you that proudly usurp authority which Christ never gave you, and lord it over
Gods heritage, and by your own inventions lay snares before the people to
divide them, and will not suffer them to unite in their proper center, and
agree in the primitive simplicity. And that bring the Ministry into hatred and
contempt by your cruelty and vicious lives.] And whilst each side is thus
accused by the other, they have all the greater cause to suspect themselves:
Because it seems to be agreed on all hands, that it is the Pastors who are
principally in the fault, though it be not agreed what the fault is, nor which
party of the Pastors must bear the blame.

And indeed where are there any sects or factions, but there are Ministers that
head them, and that caused them at first, and keep them up? Is it not the
Bishops that have caused the long division, between the Greek and Latin
Churches? Was it not principally a contention for their interests, which of
them should be the greatest (so little does C^rists own decision of that
controversy among his Apostles, signify with those men, who are contending
about a successive infallible Judge.) Is it not their Councils and their
contentious writings and practices, which have been the grand causes of this
woeful schism? And are not the dividing snares, which cause most of the rest of
the schisms of Christendom, the mere usurpations, and impositions of the Roman
Prelates? It was the Bishops of each party, with their Presbyters, who headed
the divi^i^^ in the second Council of Ephesus, and in the Council of Ariminum,
and many others: And by them the Heres^es of the Arrians, the Nestorians, the
Eutychians, etc. with the schisms of the Novatians, Donatists and most others,
have been maintained. And among our selves, most parties have their Leaders,
who first made the breach, and still keep it open. It is therefore but
reasonable that we all suspect and search our selves: And perhaps the lot may
find out that Achan who is thought most innocent, and Jonah who is not the
worst in the ship, may be the man; and he may be the Judas who is last in
asking, Master is it I? And it is ten to one but the leaders of every party
will be found blameworthy in part, though not in equality.

Besides all that shall be intimated in the following Directions, these causes
of the peoples weakness and Divisions are so openly manifest in too many
Pastors, that they cannot be concealed or excused.

First, There is so much Ignorance in many that they are not able judiciously
to edify the flocks; nor to teach sound principles in a suitable manner and
method to their hearers. Who can teach others that which they never learned
themselves?

Secondly, Too many are strangers to the people whom they teach, and know not
the weaknesses of the vulgar, and therefore neither justly resolve their
doubts, nor answer their objections, nor indeed speak that language which the
people understand. They have been bred from their childhood in the Universities
among Scholars, and have little conversed with Plow-men and poor people and
ignorant persons, who have quite other conceptions and expre^^^ons than
scholars have. Their accurate styles and wellcouched words, and elegant
phrases, are most of them like an unknown tongue, to the greatest number of
their auditors. And that which they use as congruous to the matter, is so
incongruous to their hearers, that its little to their benefit.

Thirdly, And some in avoiding this exream, do fall into the contrary; and
never go beyond the present understanding of the people, and teach them nothing
but what they know already; And hereby they bring themselves into contempt
entising the hearers to think that their Teachers, are as ignorant as they, and
know no more than they teach; And they tempt the people to be puffed up, and
think themselves worthy to be preachers, because they can do as much and as
well as their teachers use to do.

Fourthly, And how cold and unskilful are many in the application of that
doctrine which they have tolerably opened? And speak the truths of the living
God, without any affecting reverence or gravity. And talk as drowsily of the
evil of sin, the need of grace, the love of God in Jesus Christ, yea of death
and judgment, Heaven and Hell, as if it were their design to rock the auditors
asleep, or to make them believe that it is but an histrionical fiction which
they act, and that nothing which they say is to be believed! There is no need
of any more forcible means to entice men to sin, than to hear it preached
against so coldly: Nor is there need of any more to teach men to set light by
Christ and Grace and Heaven it self, than to hear them so hearteslly commended:
We speak a few good words to the people in a reading tone, like a child that is
saying his lesson, as if we believed not our selves; and then we blame the
people for their being no more edified by us; and we look they should be much
affected with that which never much affected the speakers. If Christ himself
who preached with authority, and used to awaken them, with an [He that has
ears to hear let him hear] did yet convert no more than he did, what can we
expect upon our drowsy and dry discourses, but drowsiness in the hearers, if
not contempt.

Fifthly, And alas the private work of the Ministry is done as poorly by too
many who do pretty well in public, as if they knew not that it is any
considerable part of their employment; or as if indeed they believed not the
immortality and preciousness of souls! And if the praise of men constrained
them not, to do the public part somewhat better, they would become
contemptible burdens of the Church.

Sixthly, the great duty of Catechizing is so much neglected, that few of the
people understand the great fundamental truths; and few are instructed in the
true method of the Christian doctrines, who know somewhat of the matter of
them. And such defects and languor in the Vital parts, will one time or other
appear in the externals.

Seventhly, Formality and imagery choaketh or excludes the sense, life and
power of the most necessary truths. They that teach youth the ^^rds of the
Catechism, do often content themselves with that much, as if they had made them
understanding Christians; and leave them as ignorant and senseless of the
importance of those words, as they were before ever they learnt them. The
foresaid unacquaintedness with the people and their weaknesses, does make many
teachers lose their labor; while they measure the common people by themselves,
and think that they can understand such words as they themselves can
understand: When they little know how utterly ignorant abundance are of the
matter, when they have learned to speak all the words by rote. Therefore
experience has often constrained me to say* that after all their study and
learning in the Universities, such Pastors as did never familiarly converse
with the poor and vulgar of the flocks, and try the exercise of personal
instruction and exhortation upon them, are no more to be regarded in many
controversies about the Pastoral work and discipline, than an unexperienced
Physician, or Chyrurgeon, or Soldier or Pilot in many cases of their
professions: Which makes many learned self-conceiced Doctors, become the
plagues, while they think themselves the pillars of the Church.

There are no parents or masters but find it presently in their children, how
quickly they will learn a Catechism, and therein the Creed, Lords Prayer and
Decalogue, while they scarce understand the sense and matter of any of the
plainnest words which they have uttered: And we find it is just so with too
many of the aged also. And therefore if by other questions and explications,
you put them out of their rode, and teach them not to fix their thoughts upon
the matter, as well as on the words, it will all prove but as the teaching of a
Pa^rot, and not of a true believer.

And what I have said of Catechizing, is true also of Prayer and Confession and
every other part of worship: In which the Hypocrites part is easy; even the
outside form and lifeless image; But it is the inward Life, the spirit and
truth, which is the excellent, heavenly and difficult part.

Eighthly, And some make a formality and a snare of the gift of extemporary
expression; And by a preposterous care to avoid all forms, they teach them not
these Catechism forms, with that diligence as the matter does require: But
leave their minds void of those orderly well-setled second notions, which
should help the first: And thus while some neglect the soul or spirit of
Christ^anity, and others neglect the form or body of it; betwixt them both it
is too much neglected by almost all.

Ninthly, Too many are mere wordlings, and ungodly self-seekers, and enter upon
the Ministry but as a trade to live by, and never had that humble holy mind
themselves, which they expect in the people; But as riches, and preferment and
honor and ease, are the things which they most seek, so they do proportion and
choose the means accordingly; And when they have thus made themselves
contemptible, and alienated the hearts of the people from them, they the^ call
them all that passion can suggest, not for their sin against God, but for
crossing their carnal ends and interest.

Tenthly, And under all this ignorance, negligence and vice, pride makes too
many of them to be enemies to repentance, and to all that would bring them to
it: so that they are not so much offended with the people for their own faults,
as for disliking theirs: scarce a drunkard a swearer in all the parish is so
impatient of hearing of their sins, as many of these high minded impenitent
Ministers. Nay so far are they from enduring to be accounted of as they are,
that they expect applause and great veneration, when they deserve not pardon:
And they think they are neglected or treated unreverently, if their ignorance
be not called wisdom, and their hypocrisy go not for the only pie^y, and
their carnal discourse and conversation, (for which God threatens their
damnation, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8, 13.) be not clothed with some fair and
honorable names. And when they have thus set the people so pernicious an
example, they storm against them for not being more obedient to them, than they
themselves will be to God; and for rejecting the precepts and reproofs of that
Scripture which they have rejected and despised before their faces.

I humbly propound it therefore to my Brethren, that if they have a people who
despise their Ministry, and turn away from them, and speak against them, and
seek after other teachers; that they would first impartially ask their
consciences, I have we given them no cause or occasion of all this? Is it not
long of us? Have we so preached, so privately overseen and taught them, and so
lived, as that all this confusion will not be justly laid at our doors?] When
we have first truly cleared things at home, we are the fitter then to
expostulate with our people; And when we have pulled out the beam of
selfishness, carnal^ty, negligence, and pride out of our own eyes, we may the
better see to cast the motes of childish peevishness, and discontent out of the
peoples eyes.

DIRECT. II.
^t is needful to the peoples edification and concord, that their Pastors much
excel them in knowledge and utterance, and also in prudence, holiness and
heavenliness of mind and life: that so both the reverence of their calling and
persons may be preserved, and the people instructed by their examples.
I Doubt not but the ministrations of a weak and of an ungodly Minister, are
valid and may be effectual to the flock; And that the innocent people forfeit
not their privileges in acceptable worship and effectual Sacraments, though a
wicked Pastor may forfeit his own acceptance and reward with God. But yet
because there are none of us so innocent, whose consciences may not justly tell
us that we have deserved to be afflicted in that kind, and because God uses to
work by means, and vary the success according to the quality of the means and
instruments, we may well conclude that the Gifts and Holiness of the Pastors is
a very excellent and needful help, to the peoples settled Piety and Pence: And
that where this help is wanting, that ordinary means is wanting, by which God
uses to convey this blessing.

I have met with many who are either insufficient or ungodly themselves, or are
guilty of bringing such into the Churches, who use to make very light of this,
and say, God is not tied to men's goodness or abilities in distributing his
graces: which is true, but nothing to the purpose: He is not tied by any force
or necessity; nor is he so tied as that he cannot do otherwise: But yet this is
his ordinary way of working: which has made it a maxim, that as to means,
Infused graces are obtained in the same way as acquired gnifts: And let the
contrary minded answer me these questions.

First, If it be only the Office of the Ministry, and not the Gifts and Graces
that are ordinarily needful to their success, why does Religion decay and
perish in all parts of the world, where the Gifts and Graces of the Ministers
decay? Why are almost all the Greek Churches, the Armenians, the Russians, the
Abassians, so lamentably ignorant? and most of them as vicious as ignorant; in
so much that the notorious wickedness of their lives, and contemptibleness of
their understandings, does keep Christianity out of most of the Heathen and
Infidel Nations of the world, that are acquainted with them? and keeps up the
reputation of Mahometanism and Heathenism. Is not the experience of all the
Christian world a sufficient proof? The Greeks and other such corrupted
Churches, have a truly ordained Ministry as well as we, if that were enough to
serve the turn.

Secondly, What is more evident among our selves than that Parishes do much
vary in piety and concord as their Pastors vary in ability, piety, diligence
and fidelity.

Thirdly, Though Parents have all equal authority to instruct and rule their
children and families, is any thing more notorious, than that notorious
ignorance and impiety prevails in most families where the Rulers are ignorant
and impious? Yet they have as true a power from God to do their duty, as the
Pastor has to do his: yea and promises from God for the success.

Fourthly, What is the Office, but an Authority and Obligation to do the
Ministerial work? And will work succeed well that is not done? Or will it be
done by bare Authority and Obligation to do it? Will it serve to the building
of your house, to the conduct of an Army, to the healing of your sores or
sicknesses, that you have an Architect, a Captain, a Chyrurgeon, and Physician,
whose office is to do these works?

Fifthly, What need men study or bestow so many years at the University, if
Ordination and Office be enough?

Sixthly, Interpreting the Original Text is one part of the Ministerial work:
If the bare Office without the Tongues, did never make any of you a good
Translator and Expositor, why should the bare office serve turn for other parts
of the work, without proportionable abilities?

Seventhly, Why do you lay so much blame on the Ministers who dissent from you,
or that are the teachers of the dissenting people, as if all the divisions were
caused by them, if the difference of teachers make no difference in the work
and flocks.

Eighthly, Why is it that in most ages of the the world, the Pastors of one
mind have desired the silencing or deposing of those that were against them, as
being injurious to the flocks, if all Ministers be alike to them, what need
there so much silencing, imprisoning and banishing as the world has seen, if
the Office alone do make sufficient Pastors?

Ninthly, Why also is there so much difference between the Pastors reputations
and their labors when they are dead? Why is the name and works of an
Augustine, a Hierome, a Basil, a Nazianzen, more honorable than of any other
Pastor, who had as true ordination and office as they?

Tenthly, Why should the Kingdom be at so much cost upon the Ministry? And
why should one have more maintenance than another? If the Office alone be all
that's necessary, one Ab^na may serve for ordination in all the Empire of
Abassia, and a few Priests may be had for ten pounds a year, who have the same
ordination as the ablest men. But having sufficiently shamed this error I
dismiss it.

If the reverence due to the Office be once lost, the labors of all the
Ministry will be obstructed: And if only the Person lose the reverence of his
place, his own labors will be hindered: The contempt of the Office, and so the
whole Ministry tends to Infidelity or Atheism: And the contempt of
particular Ministers, tends to Schism, and to the ignorance and corruption of
their flocks. And though the contempt of the person is bad enough of it self,
yet if it fall on many, and there remain not a considerable number who preserve
their necessary reputation, it turns to the contempt of the Office it self,
and consequently of the Gospel.

And it must be apparent worth, that must preserve the persons honor. The
silver lace did make the Apprentices in Apelles shop to reverence a foolish
gallant a while; but when he began to talk, they all fell on laughing at him.
Our grave attire will go but a little way, to keep up our reputation, without
some better testimony of our worth. An empty head, a stumbling and hesitant
tongue, dry and dull and disorderly preaching; and senseless, cold or confused
praying, a vain and frothy kind of talk; a common and carnal conversation; all
these or any one of these, will more abate the reverence of our persons, than
the title of Doctors, or the length of our clothing, or the enlarging of the
philacteries, will advance it. Math. 23. 5. Mark. 12. 40. Luke 20. 47. It is
their double measure of the spirit, of wisdom, and Goodness, which must
procure a double measure of honor to the Ministry.

And if we excel them never so much in Learning, it will not suffice unless we
excel them in our proper Ministerial gifts of preaching exhortation and prayer,
which are the works of our Office, it will neither preserve the honor of our
Office, nor attain its ends. When many of the people can open the case of their
souls in prayer, in more orderly, clear and congruous expressions than the
Pastor can, it tends to bring down the honor of the Pastor, in the peoples
esteem. Some think to repair this, by casting out all prayer except that which
is read out of a book, or recited by memory alone; that so there may be no
observable difference of men's abilities: But this is so far from curing the
peoples disease, that it increases it: And they still say, all this is no more
than we can do our selves, or then a child of ten years old can do. And if you
extend the case to all other parts of the Ministry, where the reason is the
same, they will say [what reverence is due to such? or why should we maintain
and honor men, for doing no more than our children can do?]

And the Popish devise, to make a disparity, by keeping the people in
ignorance, is the basest and most pernicious plot of all. When the Pastors
instead of excelling the people, would keep down the people from increasing in
their knowledge and expression, this is so notorious a discovery of envy, pride
and malignity conjunct, that the people presently fly from such Pastors, as
supposing them to be ministers of the Devil, because they see them bear his
image. What do we teach them for, if we would not have them learn and profit?
What greater honor can a Teacher have, than to make his Scholars as wise and
able as himself? Every one who is a child of Light, and believes in him who is
the Light of the world, will suspect that man to be a Minister of the Prince of
darkness, who is a malicious adverstry of Light. This is that brand of the
Roman iniquity, the hindering men from the reading of the Scriptures, and
magnifying ignorance, which makes men so commonly think them to be the
Ecclesia malignantium and the Antichristian brood. Thus Cardinal Wolsey
declaimed against the Art of Printing, as that which would take down the honor
and profit of the Priesthood, by making the people as wise as they. It is not
by keeping them down, or envying their abilities, that we must keep our
distance from the people; but by rising higher our selves, and excelling them
in all ministerial gifts. Else why should we be thought any fitter to be their
Teachers and Guides, than they to be ours?

Yea though we excel them in all these abilities, it will not serve turn to the
ends of our Ministry, unless we also excel them in holiness and every
Christian virtue. The Devil knows more than Ministers: And if he have a
tongue to speak he wants not utterance. He is the most excellent and
honorable, who is likest to God, and has most of his image. And God has more
proposed himself to man's imitation in Goodness, than in Greatness: He has not
said, Be Great, for the Lord your God is Great: but [walk in the Light, as he
is in the Light, 1 Job. 1. 7. and Be holy for the Lord your God is holy. 1 Pet.
1. 16. Lev. 20. 7. and 19. 2. and 21. 8. To be Great and Bad is to be able to
do mischief: To be Learned ingenious and Bad, is to be wise to do evil, and a
crafty and subtle instrument of the devil, Ier. 4. 22. It was no laudable
description of Elymas, Act. 13. 8, 10. [O full of subtlety and all mischiefs,
thou child of the devil and enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of the Lord? Satan would never transform himself into
an Angel of Light, nor his ministers into the Ministers of Righteousness; nor
would Pharisees and hypocrites cover oppression by long prayers, if Light,
Righteousness, and long prayers, were not laudable in themselves, and necessary
in the preachers of the word of God, and had not a goodness in them capable of
being a cloak to their iniquity. 2 Cor. 11. 14, 15. Mat. 23. 14. God is Light.
1 Job. 1. 5. And God is Holy: If therefore Satan or any hypocrite would credit
their falsehood and wickedness, they must pretend to Light and Holiness: And he
that will keep up the true honor of his Ministry, and be accepted with God,
and reverenced by good men; m^st do it by real Light and Holiness. An ungodly
Minister has a radicated enmity to the holy doctrine which he preaches, and
to the holy duties and life which he exhorts the people to: And how well, how
sincerely, how readily, how faithfully, they are like to do the work which they
are enemies to, you may easily judge. The carnal mind is enmity to God: for it
is not subject to his law, nor indeed can be. Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. I kno^ that they
are not enemies to the honor nor to the maintenance: and therefore may force
themselves to do much of the outside of the work: But where there is an inward
enmity to the life and ends of it, we can expect but a formal, unwilling, and
unconstant discharge of such unpleasing duty. Truth is for Goodness: The
Knowledge which makes you not Good is lost, and has mist its end. If
therefore your Love to God and man, your mortification and unblameableness of
life, your heavenly mindedness, be no greater than the peoples (or perhaps much
less) do not wonder if you lose your honor with them, and if you grow
contemptible in their eyes. Mal. 1. 10. 14. I have no pleasure in you says the
Lord -- Cursed be the deceiver which has in his flock a male and voweth and
sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. Mal. 2. And now O ye Priests, this
commandment is for you: If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to
heart, to give glory to my name, I will send a curse upon you -- The Law of
truth was in Levi's mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: He walked
with me in peace and equity, and did turn away many from iniquity! For the
Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth;
for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts: But ye are departed out of the
way; ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the Covenant
of Levi, says the Lord of hosts: Therefore also have I made you contemptible
and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but
have been partial in the Law.

1 Samuel 2. 17. 24, 30. The sin of the young men was very great, before the
Lord; for men abhorred the offering of the Lord: -- Ye make the Lords people to
transgress -- Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice, and at my offering, which I
have commanded -- I said indeed that thy house -- should walk before me for
ever: But now the Lord says, Be it far from me; for them that honor me, I
will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

If as Moses you stand nearer to God than the people do, you must be so much
holier than they, and your faces must shine with the beams of God in the
peoples eyes. They that with open face behold in Christ as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the
spirit of the Lord. 2 Cor. 3. 7. 17, 18.

If therefore by your low and common parts, and carnal lives, you make your
selves contemptible, instead of exclaiming against the people, cry out against
your selves, and lament your sins; and the more you have aggravated the crimes
of Schism and other errors in your flocks, the more penitently bewail your sin
which caused it, and remember that you have aggravated your own transgression.
If you are children in parts and goodness your selves, you are unfit either to
upbraid the people with their childish weaknesses, or to cure them.

DIRECT. III.
In all your public Doctrine and private Conference, inculcate still the
necessary conjunction of Holiness and Peace; and of the Love of God and Man;
And make them understand that Love is their very Holiness, and the sum of their
Religion; the end of Faith, the heart of Sanctification, and the fulfilling of
the Law: And that as Love to God uniteth us to Him, so Love to man, must unite
us to one another; And that all Doctrine or practice is against God and against
Christ and against the great work of the Spirit, and is enmity to the Church
and to mankind, which is against Love and Unity. Press these things on them all
the year, that your hearers may be bred up and nourished with these principles
from their youth.
IF ever the Church be recovered of its wounds, it must be by the peaceable
Disposi^ions of the Pastors and people. And if ever men come to a peaceable
Disposition, it must be by peaceable Doctrine and principles: And if ever men
come to peaceable Principles, it must be by the full and frequent explication
of the nature, pre-eminence, necessity and power of Love: That they may heat of
it so much, and so long, till Love be made their Religion, and become as the
very Natural Heat and Constitution of their souls. And if ever men be generally
brought to this, it must be by daily sucking it from those breasts which
nourish them in the infancy and youth of their Religion, and by learning it
betimes as the sum of Godliness and Christianity. And if ever they come to
this, the Aged experienced ripe and mellow sort of Ministers and private
Christians, must instill it into Scholars and into the younger sort of
Ministers, that they may have nothing so common in their ears and in their
studies, as Uniting-Love: That they may be taught to know that God is Love, and
tha^ he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in him. 1 Ioh. 4. 16.
And that the Love of God, does ever work toward his image in man: 1 Ioh. 4. 7,
11, 12, 20. And that all men as men have some of his Image in their Nature, as
they are Intellectual, Free Agents exalted above the bruits. Genesis 9 6. And
therefore we must Love men as men, and Love Saints as Saints; That it is Love
to God and man, which is the true state of Holiness, and the New creature, and
which Christ came to recover lapsed man to, and which the Holy Ghost is sent to
work, and all the means of grace are intended and fitted for, and must be used
for, or they are misused. In a word, that FAITH WORKING BY LOVE; or LOVE and
THE WORKS OF LOVE KINDLED BY THE SPIRIT BY FAITH IN CHRIST; is the sum of all
the Christian Religion. Gal. 5. 6, 13, 22. 1 Timothy 1. 5.

He that cries up Holiness and Zeal, without a ^ue commemoration of Love and
Peace, does first deceive the hearers about that very Holiness and Zeal which
he commends, whilst he lamely and so falsely represents and describes it;
and does not make them know how much of Holiness consists in Love; nor that
true zeal is Love it self in its ferv^ur and intense degree: And so people are
enticed to think that Holiness is nothing but the passions of fear and grief,
and earnest expressions in preaching and praying, or scrupulousness and
singularity about some controverted things, or some other thing than indeed it
is. And they are tempted to think that Christian zeal is rather the violence of
partial passions, and the fervor of wrath, and the making things sinful which
God forbids not, than the fervors of Love to God and man. And when the mind
is thus mocked with a false Image of Holiness and Zeal, it is cast into a
sinful mold, and engaged in the pursuit of an erroneous dangerous course of
life; And at last it comes to an enmity and contempt of that which is Holiness
and Zeal indeed: For it accounts Love but a Moral-vertue (which they
ignorantly take for a diminutive title of the great and primitive duties
required by the light and law of nature it self.) And zealous Love is accounted
by them but a carnal and selfish compliance and temporizing, and a pleasing of
men instead of God; And ^ zealous promoting of Unity and Peace, is taken but
for a cowardly neutrality and betraying of some truth, which should be
earnestly contended for.

And on the other side they that preach up Love to man, and Peace and Concora
without putting first the Love of God, and a Holy and Heavenly mind and life,
they will cheat the poor ignorant carnal people, by making them believe that
God and Heaven may be forgotten, and good neighborhood to each other is all
that is needful to make them happy.

And they will tempt the more religious sort to sin more against Love and Peace
than before: Because they will think that it is but a confederacy for Satan
against Christ, and a submission to the wills of proud usurpers, to strengthen
their worldly interest against godliness, which these preachers mean when they
plead for peace. And thus as I have known ungodly Preachers by crying down
Schism, bring Schism into request, while it was no such thing as real schism,
which they meant in the^r exclamations (till at last the true eruption of
schism with its monstrous effects, made good people see that such an odious sin
there is;) Even so I have known that a carnal Preacher, contemning Holiness,
and crying up Love and Peace, has tempted the people to have too light
thoughts of Love and Peace, (because it was but a confederacy in sin with a
neglect of godliness, which the preacher seemed to cry up.) Till riper
knowledge better taught good people to perceive, that Love and Peace are more
Divine and excellent things, than carnal preachers or hearers can imagine. The
wisdom from above is first pure then peaceable: Let it therefore be a true
conjunction of Holiness and Peace which you commend.

DIRECT. IV.
If others show their weakness by any unwarrantable singularities or divisions,
show not your greater weakness by passions, impatiency or uncharitable censures
or usage of them: especially when any self-interest does provoke you.
NOne usually are so spleenishly impatient at the weakness of Dissenters or
Separatists as the Pastors are? And what is the cause? Is it because they
abound most in Love to the souls of those who offend, or them who are
endangered by them? If so, I have no more to say to such. But when we see that
the Honor and Interest of the Pastors is most deeply concerned in the
business, and that they are carried by their impatiency into more want of
Charity, than the other express by their separations; and when we see that they
well enough bear with themselves in such sins as this, or in others as great;
and that they can beat with as great sins in the people with too much patience,
when their own interest concurreth not to raise their passions; in such cases
we have reason enough to fear, lest pride and selfishness have too great a
part, in much that is said and done against schism in the world.

Is it a greater shame for children to cry and wrangle with the Nurse and one
another or for the Nurse or Parents to go to law with them for it, or to hate
them, and turn them out of doors? Is it a fault for children to be so impatient
as to cry and quarrel? And is it not a greater fault in Parents that pretend to
greater wisdom, to be impatient with them for it? I know you will say that
Parents must not be so patient with sin, as to leave their children
uncorrected: But, I answer, correction must not be the effect of impatiency,
but of Love and Wisdom and dislike of sin, and must be chosen and measured in
order to the cure of it. Its one thing to be angry for God against sin, and its
another thing to be angry for our selves against the crossing of our wills and
interests: And its one thing to correct so as tends to a cure; And another
thing to be revenged or do mischief, or to cast out of doors. Are not you
guilty of Ministerial weaknesses in preaching and praying, and of many
omissions in your private oversight? And do you think that it is meet for the
people therefore to revile you with odious titles, and stir up the Magistrate
against you for your infirmities?

Is it seemly for them who are the fathers of the flock and should excel the
people in Love and lowliness, in patience and gentleness and meekness, to be so
proud and passionate, as to storm against the most conscientious persons, if
they do but set light by us and cast off our Ministry, though perhaps they
hear and submit to others who are as able and as faithful and more profitable
to them than we? When we can ^asi^er bear with a swearer or drunkard or the
families that are prayerless and ungodly, than with the most religious, if they
do not choose our Mini^^^^y, but pr^^er some others before us as more edifying?
When we can bear with them that have no understanding or seriousness in
Religion at all, but make the world or their lusts their idols, but cannot bear
with the weak irregularities of the most upright and devout? If they were never
so irregular in preferring us before others, and in leaving others to follow
us, we can easily bear with them, and think their disorders may be well
excused: And to show the height of our pride, we still are confident (whether
we are uppermost or undermost, whether we have public liberty or are forbidden
to preach) that we are the persons only that are in the right, and therefore
that all are in the right that follow us, and all are in the wrong that turn
away from us; That it is Unity and duty to follow us and adhere to us, and all
are Schismatics who forsake us and choose others. And thus the selfishness and
Pride of the Pastors, making an imprudent and impatient stir against all who
dislike them, and applauding all how bad soever who adhere to them and follow
them, is as great a cause of the disorders of the Church, as the weakness and
errors of the people.

DIRECT. V.
Distinguish between those who separate from the Universal Church, or from all
the Orthodox or purest and Reformed parts of it, and those who only forsake the
Ministry of some one person, or sort of persons, without refusing Communion
with the rest.
AS many occasions may warrant a removal from a particular Church, but nothing
can excuse a separation from the Universal Church, so he that separateth only
from some particular Churches, and yet is a member of the Universal Church, may
also be a member of Christ and be saved. He may be a Christian who is no member
of your flock, yea or of any particular Church: But he is no Christian who is
no member of the Universal Church. Paul and Barnabas may in the heat of a
difference part from one another, and yet neither of them part from Christ or
the Church-Universal.

I do not excuse the fault of them who sin against any one Church or Pastor:
But I would not have the Pastors therefore sin as much, by making their fault
greater than it is; nor to suffer their own interest partially to call men
Schismatics or Separatists, in a sense for which they have no ground. If they
can learn more by another Minister than by me, what reason have I to be
offended at their edification, though perhaps some infirmity of judgment may
appear in it. A true mother that knows her child is like to thrive better by
a nurses milk than by her own, will be so far from hatred or envy either at the
nurse or child, that she will consent, and be thankful, and pay the nurse.
Solomon made it the sign of the false mother, that could bear the dividatur,
the hurt of the child for her own commodity; and of the true mother, that she
had rather lose her commodity than the child should suffer. And Paul gives God
thanks that Christ was preached, though it was by them that did it in strife
and envy, to add affliction to his ^ands. Phil. 1. He is not worthy of the name
of a Physician, who had rather the patients health were deplorate, than that he
should be healed by another who is preferred before him. If I knew that man by
whom the salvation of my flock were like to be more happily promoted than by me
(whatever infirmity of theirs might be the cause) I should think my self a
servant of Satan the envious enemy of souls, if I were against it.

DIRECT. VI.
Distinguish between those who deny the Being of the Church or Ministry, from
which they separate: and those who remove only for their own edification, as
from a weaker or worse Minister, and from a Church more culpable and less pure.
FOr these last are not properly Separatists in a full sense: Though they think
it unlawful to join with you, as supposing that you impose some sin upon them,
or that you deprive them of discipline or some ordinance of God; Whether they
be in the right or in the wrong, yet still they hold inward Communion with you,
in faith and love and in the same species of worship. And this is such a
communion as we hold with many foreign Churches, with whom we have no local
present communion.

DIRECT. VII.
Distinguish between those who hold it simply unlawful to have communion with
you; and those who only hold it unlawful to prefer your assemblies before those
which they judge more pure; but hold it lawful to communicate with you
occasionally; yea and statedly when they can have no better.
I Excuse not all such from the guilt of all sin herein. For if they prefer
that Church or Ministry which they should not prefer, it is their sin. But it
is not that sin which of old has been called Separation and Schism. While a
man is free, if he love himself we cannot wonder if he choose that society and
Ministry where he thinks his salvation may be best furthered and secured:
All sober Divines who write of the Ministry and of company, do declare that
the difference between good and bad, yea good and better, in both these, is of
so great imp^^tance, that all wise men should be very careful of their choice.
If we may without reproach be allowed to be cautelous what wife we choose, what
master or servants, what house, what neighborhood, what soil, what air; Much
more may we be allowed to be cautelous what Church and Ministers we join with;
And if we are allowed to choose what Physician we will commit our health and
lives to, and are not constrained to use one that we judge to be ignorant or
false, surely it would be no heinous schism, if the like liberty be granted and
used for our souls. The very Papists give the people liberty to ch^ose their
Confessors, without removing their dwellings for it: And surely my conscience
would tell me at last, that I am very selfish and proud if I thought none so
fit to instruct and edify any of the people as my self? No nor tolerable in
endeavoring it. Have I not heard many, do I not know many, who preach more
convincingly, more plainly and more powerfully than I? And what harm is it then
if the people hear them? So Christ be preached, and the people instructed,
sanctisied and saved, what if it be done by another rather than by me? Have not
I liberty to do my best? Shall I be an envier at the Gospel and its success!
God forbid that I or any faithful Minister, should ever be guilty of so odious
a sin! I speak without respect of persons: It is easy and usual both in
public allowed Churches, and in privater assemblies, to preach our selves
while we seem to be preaching Christ; and by our perverse preaching to seek
disciples and esteemers for our selves, when we are preach^^g up self^denial,
and seem to be most zealous for the saving of souls. Acts 20. 30. 11.

DIRECT. VIII.
Remember Christ's interest in the weakest of his servants, and do nothing to
them which Christ will not take well.
THink well how far he bears with them, and how far he owneth them, and how
tender he is of them in all their weaknesses. If it be a member of Christ that
you are offended with, though you must never the more love the fault, yet
remember how you must use the person. It was not for nothing that he sets
little children before his disciples, when he would teach them not only
humility, but respect and patience toward each other by his example. Math. 18.
And how terrible a passage is it v. 5, 6. Who so shall receive one such little
child in my name, receives me: But who so shall offend one of these little
ones, that believe in me, it were far better him that a millstone were hanged
about his neck and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. And Math. 25.
What is done to one of the least of his brethren (for so he calls them)
Christ judges as done unto himself. He will not break the bru^sed reed, nor
quench the smoking flax, until he bring forth judgment unto victory. Remember
but Christ's interest in them and affections to them, and imitate his tenderness
and pity.

DIRECT. IX.
Distinguish between weakness of Gifts and of Grace, and remember that many
that are weak in the understanding of matters of Church Order, may yet be
stronger in grace than you.
HE is the strongest Christian and the most Godly man, who has the greatest
Loveto God, and heavenliness of mind and life: And this may be the case of many
a one, who by some error about the circumstances of discipline and worship, is
yet a trouble to the Church. He that offends yo^ by his mistake and
unwarrantable singularity, though he be weak in judgment in that point, and
perhaps in many other controversies, may yet be a far stronger Christian, than
I who see his error: He may have more Love to God and man, more humility and
self-denial, more fear of sinning, and more fitness to die, and more heavenly
desires, and patience in tribulation. Let us therefore value men according to
the Image of God upon them, and not despise them as weak in grace, because they
are weak in this point of knowledge: Though still their errors are not to be
owned.

DIRECT. X.
Remember the common calamity of the Church and of all mankind: What strange
disparity there is in men's understandings! and how the Church on earth is a
Hospital of diseased souls, and no one man perfectly healed in this life.
WHo can say I have made my heart clean? Prove. 20. 9. He that is kept from
presumptuous sins, and heartily prays and striveth against his known
infirmities, and is desirous to know his unknown sins that he may avoid them,
has attained so far as to be justified by Christ, and loved of those who love
as Christ does. Psalm. 19. Ioh. 3. 19, 20. Seneca could say that to carp at that
fault which was every man's fault, is not to reprove an offender, but to
reproach humane nature and all mankind: Christians indeed must lament even the
vices which are common to depraved nature, but it is with a common lamentation,
which falls on one man no more than on another. Even as we lament mortality,
which is the common punishment of mankind. But he that would have punishment
inflicted for a fault which is common to all, would have all men punished or is
partial.

If our infirmities are not all the very same, yet it is certain that we are
all infirm. Yea we are all of imperfect and erroneous understandings, though
all err not the same error. ^ And we are every man certain in general that we
have errors, though no man know in particular which be his own errors! (For
it is a contradiction to say that while I err in judgment I know my error) so
that other men know our errors when we know them not our selves, as we know
theirs which are unknown to them. For as all have their common defects, so most
men have their peculiar defects and errors, and others excel those persons in
some particulars, who excel them in almost all the rest. Therefore if no error
were to be tolerated, no man were to be tolerated: And the wisest in the world
must be numbered with the intolerable as well as the rest. And every one that
punishes others, must be conscious of the same intolerable evil in himself,
and that nothing but power exempteth him from the same suffering, and therefore
none but the King should escape. In many things we offend all: Therefore be not
many Masters (too imperious or too censorious toward dissenters and the
infirm) lest ye receive the greater condemnation. Jam. 3. 1, 2.

GOD who is One, has made the creatures MANY and diverse: And the further they
go from Him, the more they run into multiplicity and diversity: It is admirable
in Nature to see that among the millions of persons in the world, there are no
two that differ not sufficiently to be discernable from each other: And among
the bruits and inanimates it is so too: Among horses and oxen and sheep and all
creatures, yea though non ovum ov^ similius be a proverb, yet there are no two
that do not differ: No nor among the millions of stones which lie scattered
over the surface of the earth. There are no two persons in all the world, who
are just of the same intellectual complexion and degree, nor no two who are in
all things of the same opinions or apprehensions: No nor any one man who is in
all things long of the same apprehensions and opinions with himself: Nor is
there any man whose thoughts and affections do perfectly consent with
themselves in matter and order, any two hours in all his life. And if
multiplicity and diversity have so much cause in nature, how much more must
needs be added by the common corruption and pravity of nature? When all mankind
has so much ignorance of the mysteries of Religion, and so many degrees of
enmity and unsuitableness to holy things, a great difference of judgment is an
unavoidable consequent of this.

And men's various educations, and converse, and employments must needs cause a
great variety of apprehensions: As their nature so their education may agree in
some generals: But there are no two persons at age in the world, whose
educations have been the same in all particulars: Though they were children of
the same parents, and bred in the same house and time, yet all that they have
seen and heard and meddled with has not been in all points just the same: the
same in matter, and time and order and all circumstances. And we see what great
diversity of judgments any one of these does daily cause. To have parents of
several minds and tempers: To be bred in families where there is great
diversity of knowledge and practice: To live among company of contrary
principles and practice; when one man hears one thing, talked of and
maintained in his daily converse, and another the contrary: When one has a
teacher of one opinion and another of another: Or one has a teacher that is
cold, and another one that is servent; one a judicious one, and another a rash
and intemperate one; what diversity of apprehensions may arise from any one of
these?

And so there may from variety of passions of the mind, through a diversity of
bodily temperatures: One that is naturally fearful is apt to apprehend a
thousand things as terrible, and consequently to be filled with scruples, and
to run away from doctrines and practices as dangerous, where another does
apprehend no danger. And one that is dark, or incredulous, or rash or stupid,
or hardened by any sinful course, is apt to conceive that he is safe in every
dangerous way, and to sleep quietly at the brink of death and hell, and to
laughed at them that tell him of his peril: As men sit under the same
instructions with variety of affections, of fear or hope, of Love or hatred, of
joy or sorrow, so variously are they disposed to apprehend what they hear,
seeing recipitur ad modum recipientis.

And variety of Gods disposing providence must needs also have some such
effect. While one is rich and another is poor; one has crosses of diverse
sorts, and another has prosperity; one is full and another is hungry; one is
observed, admired and honored, and another is taken little notice of, or is
vilified and despised; One has many friends and another many enemies: One has
friends that are kind and constant, and the other such as are unkind and
mutable; One is preferred by Rulers, and the other is ruined or oppressed; All
these will occasion variety of apprehensions: As it was with the Lady who
coming in very cold, in a frosty day, pitied the naked beggars at the door; but
when she was well warmed chid them away: We all find that our apprehensions are
very apt to vary in sickness from what they were in health; and in poverty from
what they were in plenty; and when we are angered, displeased or abused, from
what they were when we were pleased: Yea when we have but read a lively book,
or heard a lively Sermon, from what they were before our affections were so
excited.

Also variety of Temptations may occasion great variety of apprehensions: When
one man's temptations are all alluring, to lust or gaming or stage plays, or
Romances, or drunkenness, or gluttony, or pastime; and another temptations are
all to melancholy, and inordinate at sterities and despair; When one man is
tempted to errors of one kind, and another to the contrary. Even he that
overcomes in the main, yet seldom so far conquereth as to receive no
misimpression upon his mind.

Moreover variety of Callings, studies and employments occasioneth variety of
apprehensions: A man's mind is much wrought upon by the business and objects
which he is daily conversant about: And therefore we find that usually the
Courtier, the Soldier, the Seaman, the Citizen and the Countryman much
differ in their apprehensions. And usually (though not every individual yet) as
to the most part, all men are wisest in their own professions: Lawyers are
wisest in matters of Law and Divines in matters of Divinity. Opportunities of
study and instruction make exceeding great differences in the world. The Lawyer
and Physician perhaps may on the by, have bestowed a few years time in
Divinity, in the midst of other interrupting studies: When the Divine has
studied almost all his life, and drawn out his meditations in one uninterrupted
thread. And so we discern that Lawyers and Physicians have often different
apprehensions, of matters of doctrine, worship and discipline, from those of
the best Divines.

And diversity of Interests makes no small difference of apprehensions. And
those that are advantaged by their helps and studies may be disadvantaged by
their interests. And therefore we say the Magistrate and the subject, the
Lawyer and the Divine, the Prelate and the Presbyter, the Papist and the
Protestant (both Princes, Prelates and People) so strangely differ in their
thoughts; that one seems certain of that which another seems certain to be
false; and one ventureth his salvation on that, which another ventureth his
salvation against. Interest works secretly and too much with the best; but
openly and predominantly with the worst.

And then the interest and opinion of the several Kingdoms, Churches, Pastors,
parties or Sects which men are related to, or are engaged with, does strongly
tend to different apprehensions in all matters which those interests are
concerned in. And many very good men think, that public interest may be
allowed much power upon their minds, though private and personal must be
denied. Is it not a wonder to see, not only that almost all Christians are
incorporated into one sect or party or other, but how easily the inconsiderable
reasons of their party can prevail with them, and how hardly the better reasons
of their adversaries, seem to them of any weight or worth? Not only the parties
of Papists and Protestants, Lutherans and Reformed, etc. show this; but in the
same Church the Regulars and Seculars, the Bishops and the Jesuits, the
Dominicans and Jesuits, the Thomists, Scotists, etc. declare it. And the
difference made by, natural capacities is yet more than all this. When one man
is born to a duller understanding, and another has a quick and clear
apprehension; All that these men read and hear and meditate on, is like to make
different impressions on their minds. And this is the greatest thing of any
one, which makes many controversies endless, and makes both Divines and
people run away from one another as dangerously erroneous: If a few men have
clearer understandings than the duller and unstudied sort, they are like to be
the minor part: For the dull and slothful (and yet self-conceited) will ever be
the greater part, many to one, till the golden age return. And when all the
world feels the consequents of this difference, can we doubt of it, or so far
dote, as to think it possible to cure it?

Yet the various degrees of the Grace of God, do certainly also make great
variety of apprehensions. When God gives to some those true illuminations,
those ^hirsting desires after truth, those heart-experiences, those delightful
rel^shes, those powerful effects and victories, which he gives not to others,
they are made to differ and must needs have different apprehensions of such
things. In which sense Christ says, that he came not to send peace but
division, that is, to be such an object, and preach so holy a doctrine, and
give such grace, as would ^ccasion divisions, by making his sanctified ones
differ from the world, and occasioning the erritation of the worlds malignity.

And indeed the grand difference between the seed of the woman and of the
serpent, the holy and the carnal seed, is that which is the root of the
greatest and sorest divisions in the world; which will never be reconciled till
Christ at the day of judgment shall say to one part, Come ye blessed, and to
the other Go ye cursed: For the carn^l mind is enmity against God, and is not
subject to his law, nor indeed can be (in sens^ comp^sito.) Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. It
was not for nothing that God permitted that great eruption of it, in the first
man that ever was born into the world, against his innocent brothers life, on
the bare account of their religious sacrifices! And the Cainites are still too
strong for Alel's successors, and too numerous. And why did he kill his
brother? But because his own works were evil and his brothers righteous. Genesis
4. 10, 11. 1 John 3. 12. And as Paul says of the two sons of Abraham, as he
that was born of the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even
so it is now. Gal. 4. 29. For the flesh fights against the spirit and the
spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other. Gal. 5.
17. And that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit. Joh. 3. 6. And they that are of the flesh do savor mind or
understand the things of the flesh, and they that are after the spirit do mind
the things of the spirit. Romans 8. 5, 6. Our heavenly teacher told his
disciples, that if they were of the world the world would love them; but
because they are not of the world, but he had chosen them out of the world, the
world would hate them (even as it hated him.) Ioh. 15. 18, 19, 24, 25. Ioh. 17.
14. And every one that does evil hates the light. Ioh. 3. 19, 20. Nothing then
can be surer or plainer to a believer, than that there will be still as great
divisions and diversity of apprehensions as radicated enmity can breed.

And (to prevent many objections) let these three things be noted.

First, That this grand difference which lies in the greatest matters, in head
and heart, must needs have influence upon abundance of inferior controversies:
Both as the Persons and main cause are concerned in them. Reason and experience
have put this past controversy.

Secondly, That this does not concern only the visible Church and the world,
but the visible Church within it self: For all the Hypocrites and carnal
worshippers, have still the Cainish serpentine nature: Yea those that by
advantages and interest are brought over to the Orthodox as well as Christian
side. And it is a happy Church where the Hypocrites are not the greater part:
And it is neither great Learning, nor degrees, nor the Pastoral office, nor the
profession of the highest zeal, which will serve turn to cure the carnal
enmity, without the sanctifying spirit of grace. So that when controversies
arise, we see not in the hypocrites that carnal mind, which in the strictest
pro^ession, or greatest learning, or most venerable function, will work against
the interest of holiness: But we are sure that there it is, though we know not
the persons in whom but by the full effects.

Thirdly, And note also that there is a mixture or remnant of this unhappy root
and principle even in the sanctified themselves. And it is hard in a
controversy to perceive in our selves, much more in others, how much our
judgments may be moved by this party; and what influence it may have into our
conclusions.

So that all this makes it but too manifest, what a certainty there is of
perpetual differences in the Church, upon all these foresaid accounts.

Add also this great and unavoidable cause, that one error leads in another:
And no man being without some; and every one being generative, and inferring
more, what will it come to when all those also shall have their offspring? and
the further they go, the more they will increase and multiply?

And as the judgment by one is laid open to another (even as truth infers
truth) so the will is engaged, and espouseth men's own opinions as their
interest; which makes them stretch their w^ts in study to maintain what once
they have received and asserted: And alas how often have I heard wise and
reverend persons cry out against this pride and partiality in others, who in
their next discourse or the same, have shamefully showed it in themselves:
making much of their own inconsiderable reasonings, and vilifying cogent
evidence against them; and being so intent on their own inventions and cause,
that they could scarce have patience to hear another speak; And when they have
heard him, their first words show, that they never well weighed the strength of
his arguments, but were all the while thinking what to say against him, or how
to go on as they had begun.

Lastly (not to run into any more causes) there is an universal lamentable
cause of differences, that almost all people naturally are apt to be very
confident of all their own apprehensions, And very few have any due suspicion
of their own opinions; or an understanding submission to wiser men. Yea boys
(that are once past their Tutors dictates) and the weakest women, are usually
as confident that they are in the right, as the most learned and experienced
persons. Yea none are so apt to be too doubtful and di^^ident of their own
understandings, as the Learned who are next the highest form: For they have
knowledge enough to know what can be objected against them, and to see an
hundred difficulties, which the ignorant never saw. So that the more weak and
worthless and erroneous any ones judgment is, usually the more furious are they
in their prosecution of it, as if all were most certain truth which they
apprehend: These are the boldest both in schisms and persecutions; as being so
sure that their conceits are right, that they dare censure or separate or scorn
or despise, or afflict dissenters.

It is a common thing to hear religious people speak meanly and humbly of their
own understandings in the general; But when it comes to particulars, it is the
rarest part of humility in the world, to find: Very few do show any competent
modesty (except the grossly ignorant who have no pretense to wisdom): What
abundance of good people of the darker sort, have I been fain to rebuke for
their over-valuing me and my understanding; who when I have but crossed their
opinions about any thing, which most groundlesly, they took for a duty or a
sin, have held as fast their vain conceits, and made as much of their most
senseless reasonings, and as passionately and confidently rejected the most
unquestionable proof which I have offered them, as if they had been infailible,
and had taken me for an errant fool.

And this is not the case of one or two Sects only; but naturally of almost all
men, till God has taught them that rare part of humility, to have Humble
Understandings, and low thoughts of their own judgments, and a due suspicion
of their apprehensions.

And their cure is the harder because they know not how to have a humble
suspicion of themselves without running into the contrary, extreme of
skepticism, and being cold and unfaithful to the truth; They know not how to
hold fast that which is good, and to be constant in religion, without holding
fast all which they have once conceited to be good, and being constant in their
error: Especially when good or evil is voted to them by that party whose piety
they most esteem and reverence.

Nor is this a Religious distemper only, but it is so natural to mankind, that
even in common matters neighbors and neighbors, masters and servants, husband
and wife, and almost all, have a strange diversity of apprehensions: One thinks
that this is the best way, and another that the other is best; and let them
reason and wrangle it out never so long, usually each party still holds his
own, and hardly yields to another reasons.

And when they do yield, they are so unhappy that they are as like to yield to
one more erroneous than themselves, and to change into a worse opinion, as to
yield to the truth. For commonly, Appearance, Advantage, Interest, and a taking
tone and voice, do more with them than solid evidence of truth.

Out of all this if you infer a necessity of Government, so do I. But if a
necessity of force and rigor, think on it again, and first hear what I shall
further say: And consider what I have said already. Distinguish between the
common frailties of mankind, and special enormities: And forget not that you
are men and live among men: And let not men be cast out for Original sin; nor
punish a few for that which is common to all the world; Nor condemn not your
selves in condemning others. Of which I further add:

DIRECT. XI.
Evermore distinguish between the necessary truths and duties, and those which
are not of necessity; and between the Tolerable and the intolerable errors:
And never think of a Common Unity or Concord, but upon the terms of necessary
points, and of the primitive simplicity of doctrine, discipline and worship;
and the forbearance of dissenters in tolerable differences.
IF I were to speak but once to the world whilst I lived, this should be my
Theme: And yet (for ought that I can perceive by any visible effects) I never
spoke of any thing with less success. One party writes copiously of the
mischiefs which will ^ollow Tolleration. And they say true, i^ they mean the
tolleration of things intolerable: The other write as copiously of the
necessity of Tolleration and Liberty of Conscience: And they say true, if they
mean only the Tolleration of things tolerable. But neither of them says true
if they mean universally, and speak in any other sense: There is nothing more
plain and sure, than that the tollerating of all errors and faults which
conscience may be pretended for, or of none at all, are utterly destructive of
Christian and humane peace and safety. He is scarce well in his wits that
holds either part universally and unlimitedly: For the one would have no
Government, and the other would have no subjects to be governed. Seeing
therefore bounds and limits there must be, we may reckon them as the third sort
of distracted persons, who think that the bounds are so undiscoverable, that
the mention of them is in vain; and therefore either All or None must be
tolerated according as Rulers are disposed, or their interest seems to
require: And therefore they say, What points be they that are necessary, and
what unnecessary? What errors are tolerable, and what are intolerable? Can
you name and number them? Or, who must be the judge? To which I answer.

First, Let it be first supposed that God has given us a Law to judge by, and
then we shall quickly tell you who shall be the Judge (A question which the
confused world does further their confusion by, when they are a thousand times
answered past all rational contradiction) Judgment is private or public: The
judicium privatum discretionis, which is but the guide of rational acts,
belongs to every private man (which none that is a man did ever yet deny) The
judicium publicum is either in foro civili determining in order to corporal
coaction, and this belongs only to the Magistrates; Or it is in foro
Ecclesiae determining in order to Church Communion or Excommunication; and this
belongs only to the Church; (but under the coactive Government of the
Magistrate: the Pastors being the Governors, and the people in part the
executioners.) He that requires more understands not this.

Secondly, And what if ther^ be a difficulty what points are necessary and what
errors are into^erable? Yet as long as it is certa^n that such a difference
there is, and that accordingly men must do; does it not rather concern both
parties to search after it, and practice as far as they can discern, than to
cast away Reason, because there is a difficulty in using it aright? Just thus
the Papists do with us about the like notion of fundamentals or essentials of
Christianity; They call to us for a just enumeration of the fundamentals, and
because they find so much difficulty there, as may find words and work for a
perverse wrangler, they insult as if they might therefore take either all
things or nothing to be essentials, and of necessity: As if Christianity had no
constitutive essential parts, and so were nothing. And when they have all done
they are forced themselves in their writings to distinguish the fundamentals,
essentials, and universally necessary points from the rest, (as Dave^p^rt,
Costerus, Bellarmine, Holden, etc. do.) And does it not then concern them as
much as us, to know which they be? What if it be a hard thing to enumerate just
how many bits a man may eat, and not be a glutton? or how many drops a man may
drink and be no drunkard? or just what meats and drinks must be used, to avoid
exce^s in quality? or just what sort of stuffes or silks or cloth or fashions
may be used without excess in apparel? will you thence infer that men may eat
and drink any thing in quantity and quality, or else nothing? or that he may
wear any thing, or must go naked? What if you cannot justly enumerate what
herbs or roots or drugs are wholesome and what are unwholesome? which purge too
much and which too little? Must therefore all be used indifferently or none? If
I am not able to enumerate just how many faults or weaknesses may be tolerable
in my servants? Must I therefore have none, till I have those that are
faultless? or else must I allow them to do any thing that they list? Though
just at the verge of evil, even that which is good may be matter of doubt, yet
God in Nature and Scripture has given us sufficient light for an upright, safe
and peaceable life.

Thirdly, And if ever Baptism had been well understood, by these objectors, the
essentials of Christianity had been understood. Has not Christ himself
determined who they be that shall be admitted into the Church and numbered with
Christians, in the very tenor of the Baptismal Covenant? And did not the Church
take the Creed to be sufficient for its proper use, which was to be the matter
of the Christian profession, as to the Articles of faith to be believed? And
yet are we now to seek in the end of the world, what Christianity is, and what
are the essentials of our faith, and who is to be received as a professor of
Christian^ty.

But this is a subject more largely to be handled if Rulers will permit it: And
in the mean time because it is not the Magistrates but the Pastors that I am
now speaking to, I shall pretermit the most which is to be said, and only
acquaint you in the conclusion, that one of these following ways must be
chosen.

I. Either to tolerate all men to do what they will, which they will make a
matter of conscience or religion; And then some, may offer their children in
sacrifice to the devil, and some may think they do God service in killing his
servants; and some may think it their duty to persuade people that there is no
God nor life to come, nor duty, nor sin; but all things are left to our own
wills as lawless.

Secondly, Or else you must tolerate no error or fault in religion; And then
you must advise what measure of penalty you will inflict. If but a little, then
you tolerate the error still: For they that err will err still; and they that
conscienciously pray as Daniel did, Dan. 6. or forbear to obey the King as the
three Confessors did. Dan. 3. will do so still, for all your penalty; And so
there is no cure, but a tolleration still.

But if you inflict upon them, banishment, or death, you must resolve that the
King shall dwell alone, and have no subjects, and so be no King; nor have any
servant, and so be no Masters; nor endure so much as a wife, and so be no
husband; and if he have children must use them as K. Philip of Spain did his
eldest son Prince Charles, and so be no Father. It can be no less than this at
last.

Or if you will imprison them, every subject must be in prison, and then who
shall be the Jailer, and who shall find them food?

Thirdly, Or else you must deal partially and unjustly, and condemn one while
you acquit another, for the same fault; or condemn one sort of errors, while
you allow to tolerate others as great: As if all were to be punished who
believe not Christ's descent into Hell, while all are tolerated, who deny the
rest of the Articles of the Creed.

Fourthly, Or else you must make sure that all the Kings subjects shall be born
under the same Planets, and of the same parents, and have the same temperament
and complexion, and the same teachers, and company, and all hear the same
words, and all see the same objects, and all have the same callings,
employments, interests, passions, temptations, advantages, and the same degree
of natural capacity, and of grace: That so there may be no difference or defect
in their apprehensions.

Fifthly, or else you must ^istinguish and say, that some are tolerable and
shall be tolerated, and some errors ar^ intolerable and shall not be
tolerated (in the tongue I mean; for you must tolerate them in the mind
whether you will or not) And then you will find a necessity of discerning as
well as you can, the tolerable from the intolerable.

And if so, for Christ's sake and his Churches sake and your own sake, bethink
you whether Christ be not the King of his Church, and whether he has given his
Church no Laws for its Constitution and Administration? By which we must try
who are to be the members of himself and his Church, and to have Communion with
himself and one another? and who are to be rejected and avoided? And whether
the Holy Ghost i^ not the Author of the Church-establishment in the Scriptures?
And whether we can expect more infallible deciders of such cases, than Christ,
and his Spirit and Apostles? And whether the Church be not the same thing now
as then, and and its universal constitution and necessary administration the
same? And whether the primitive Church or ours be the purer and more exemplary?
And whether it would do Kings and Kingdoms and the souls of men any dangerous
hurt, to have all Christians hold their Union and Communion just on the same
terms as they did under Peter and Paul and all the Apostles? Or at least
whether it be worthy all the calamitous divisions in Christendom, and the
blood of the many hundred thousands that have for conscience sake been shed,
and the enduring of the outcries of the imprisoned and banished, and their
prayers to heaven for deliverance from men's hands, and the leaving of such a
name on record to posterity, as is usually left in History on the authors of
such sufferings; besides the present regret of mind, in the calamities of
others, and the sad divisions and destruction of Charity, which comes
hereupon; I say whether it be worth the suffering of all this (and O how small
a part is this) and all to keep our Churches from the primitive simplicity, and
from the same way and Communion which Peter and Paul and the Churches of their
times, established and practiced? Shall we speak so highly of Christ and his
Apostles and the sacred Scriptures, and yet think all this blood and misery,
division and distraction, worthy to be endured, rather than our Union and
Communion should be held on the terms which they did appoint and practice? or
rather than such terms should be tolerated among us? I know what is said
against all this; But this is no place to answer all that is said by such as
cannot see how to answer themselves in so clear a case.

DIRECT. XII.
Remember that the Pastoral Government is a Work of LIGHT and LOVE: and what
cannot be done by these is not at all to be done by you: And therefore you must
make it your great study and employment, first to Know more than the people,
and to Love them more than they Love you or one another; and then to convince
them by unresistable evidence of truth, and to cause the warmth of your Love to
be felt by them, in every word and act of your Ministration; As the Mi^k is
wa^m by the natural heat of the mother, and so is fitted for the nourishment of
the child.
AS the Gospel is the revelation of the Love of God, and it is a message of
Love which we have to bring, and a work of Love which we cooperate to effect;
so it is a spirit of Love which must be our principle, and it is an office and
work of Love which we are called to; and the manner must be answerable to the
work. Faith is the Head, and Love is the Heart of the new Creature: And as
there is no Light in our office and work, if there be no Faith and evidence of
Truth, so there is no Life in it, if there be no Love. God himself in the great
work of our Redemption, and Christ in his Incarnation, life and suffering, has
taught the world, that the manifestation of Love is the way to win Love and to
cure enmity: And he is not worthy the name of a Minister of Christ, who has
not learned this lesson, and does not imitate his Lord in this: That as our
office participateth subordinately of his office, both Ruling, Teaching and
Priestly, so we may participate of that Spirit of Love, which was his Principle
and must be ours. If it be not a work of Love which we do, it is not the work
of a Minister of Christ, and Preacher of the Gospel. Can you well Preach so
great Love of Christ to men without Love? if you show not Love to them, you can
never expect to win their Love to your selves. And when you overmuch desire to
be loved your selves (as which of you does not,) you pretend that it is, to
make your endeavors more successful, when you persuade them to the love of
Christ. And doubtless a just Love to the person of the Preacher is a good
advantage to this success. And in good sadness, can you believe that any thing
is so likely to win Love as Love, or did experience ever teach you, that
reproach, or contempt, or hurting men, was the effectual way to make them Love
you? This way has been long tried by the Mountebanks in Italy, Spain and many
other Countries, but alas with what success? Indeed solitudinem faciunt and
pa^^m vocant, as Tertullian says: When they have killed those that they had
first oppressed, they affrighted the rest to say they loved them, and really
won the Love of their surviving blood-thirsty enemies: but that was all. If the
new knack of transfusion of blood cannot do this feat, by letting in the blood
of a Spaniel (who loves him that beats him) when you let out their own,
phlebotomy will never do it.

Account then that Sermon, that converse, that reproof, that discipline in
which Love is not apparently predominant, to be but a lifeless useless thing,
as to the winning of a sinners heart to Christ. Though I deny not but when the
case of the sinner appears desperate, the severity of Discipline in casting
him off, may express more of another affection as to him: But that is because
in so doing you must show greater Love to the Church which must be saved from
the infection.

But perhaps you will say, They despise me, and injure me, and follow others and
admire them, who deserve not so well of them as I do.

Answ. First, we are most of us too partial to be competent Judges of our own
deserts. Selfishness too often makes us think better of our selves, our
preaching and our lives, than there is cause: And it too often fills men with
envy against those, whose greater worth and better labors cause them to be
preferred by the hearers: And envy usually breeds detraction. I know that many
giddy persons heap up Teachers to them selves and follow seducers, and coutemn
the faithfullest servants of the Lord. But I know withal, that there is
usually a convincing power in the preaching of able experienced Ministers,
which is not to be found in the cold and formal discourses of an hypocrite. And
that there is a suitable principle in true spiritual experienced Christians,
which causes them to relish this spiritual experimental preaching much more
than the more-adorned carkas^es of formality: And seriousness is still
acceptable to serious Christians: Yea even to common natural men, unless the
malicious possess them by slanders with prejudice against it. Now if this
should be the cause that others are preferred before you, O how heinous were
your sin? As if it were not enough for you to neglect your duty, and to do the
work of God deceitfully, and injure the souls of men in a cause of such
importance, but you must also impenitently justify such a crime, and also
malign those that have more of the grace and gifts of God than you, and that
do more to help to save men's souls!

Secondly, But suppose that your deserts be as great as you conceive, and their
love to you as little; I would further ask you: First, is it for their own sake
who thus hinder their own edification by it, that you are troubled at them? or
is it for your selves, because you have not the respect which is your due. If
it be the later, I need not tell you what it is for Ministers of Christ thus to
seek themselves, and overvalue their own esteem: If it be the former, 2 Why
does it not please you then that they are edified by others, though not by you.
Do you think that it is not the same Gospel which others preach to them. And
may not that Gospel edify and save them, by the Preaching of another as well
as by yours. And if their dis-esteem of you, be a sign or means, that they are
not edified by you, is not their great esteem of others who are as faithful a
sign and means that they are or may be edified by them.

Thirdly, And why are you not much more troubled at the state of all those who
are not converted or edified by you, though they do not slight you or forsake
you. How many be there that seem to love and honor you, and yet do not love
and honor God? but despise religion and their own Salvation? If it be for
their sakes and not your own that you are offended, you will grieve most for
them that are most ungodly, though they honor you never so much; and you will
be glad for them that are faithful and Godly, whose Ministry soever it be that
they most esteem.

Fourthly, But suppose them yet so foolish and faulty, as to run from you to
their own perdition; The question is, What is the way to c^re them? Is Love
caused by hard words or stripes? Will you say to them, Love me, or you shall be
fined or imprisoned? Christ does not teach you, to use such arguments when you
speak for him, but to beseech men in his name and stead tobe reconciled to God,
2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. But your own work will be done in your own way.

Obj. But Christ threatens Hell to the impenitent, and Paul pronounces him
Anathematized that loves not the Lord Jesus: and he talks to his hearers of
coming with a rod.

Answ. No doubt but the corrupted mind of man, has need not only of Love to
draw them home to God, and work the cure, but of Threatenings to drive them and
to help on the cure! And though it be Love that causes Love, which is their
Holiness, yet Fear removes many impediments: But still remember that it is
Love which is predominant, and fear is but subservient; And that the fear which
is contrary to Love is a vice, and hinders the^r salvation: And remember that
Fear and Love toward God, will better stand together, than Fear and Love to
you will: For men know Gods Sovereignty and Justice; and know that he is not to
be questioned or resisted: But if they suffer by you, it will not be so
digested, nor will it so consist with love. A patient will not bear to be whipped
by his Physician to force him to take his medic^nes, though a child will bear
it from his parents, whose Love and Power are more unquestionable to him. I
desire you but to mark your own experience, and let your Love be predominant in
all your ministrations, and use no force or hurting course which will really
abate their Love to you, and then I shall leave you in the rest to your
discretion. Secondly, Yet still we grant that Christ's threatenings may be
preached by you, and must be; Thirdly, And that the rod of discipline must be
used: But this must be done only on the scandalous and such as more dishonor
Christ than you: And it must be so done, that it may appear to be Christ's own
work, and done by you upon his interest and at his commund, and not either
arbitrarily or for your selves.

And I shall be bold with confidence to add that in those cases where violent
restraint or ^oaction is necessary, the Pastor is the unmeetest person to
meddle in it. It is the Magistrates work to drive and force (where it must be
done) and the Pastors to persuade and draw. The flock of Christ is led by
himself the Lamb of God, and his Ministers must go before with him, and attend
him in the conduct; and the Magistrate must come behind and drive; and it is
the hindermost, and not those before that must be driven. Pastors should be so
far from calling out for the help of violence (unless it be to keep the peace)
that they should rather show their love and tenderness, by seeking as far as
they may to mitigate it: And they should desire that no such ungrateful work be
at all imposed upon them, as to seem the afflicters of their flocks: because
when once they have lost their love, they have lost their opportunity and
advantage of edifying them.

And it is not Pilate's hypocritical washing of his hands, that will excuse
him: Nor the Romish Clergies disclaiming to meddle in a judgment of blood,
which will reconcile the minds of sufferers to them, as long as they are
Masters of the Inquisition, or deliver them up to the secular power, and
excommunicate and depose the temporal Lords who will not do such execution as
they require.

Though I have some where else mentioned it, I will again request the Reverend
Pastors of the Church, to peruse the story of Idacius and Martin in Sulpitius
Severus. The sum of it is this. Priscillian and many others (some Bishops and
some Presbyters and some private persons) were zealous in religion, but
heretical (Gnostics says Sulpitius:) Ithacius and Idacius were two Orthodox
Bishops who were very hot against these her^ticks: Both of them men of rash and
haughty spirits, and one of them at least (says Sulpitius) an injurious person
that scarce cared what he said or did by others (see what persons a good cause
may be defended by.) These Bishops drew in the Bishops of the neighboring
Churches, and in their Synods first condemned the Priscillianists; and next
provoked the Emperor against them. The Priscillianists found that if that were
the way, an Emperors Court was not so Orthodox or constant, but there might be
as good hopes for them: And therefore they got a powerful friend in Court to
undertake their business, and got the better of the Bishops: The Bishops being
born down for a time, at last Maximus was proclaimed Emperor, and came over
with power and victory into Germany (such another as Cromwell, who by the
Bishops was accounted a very Religious Christian, but usurped the Empire, and
fought against and killed one of the Emperors, and pretended that the
soldiers made him Emperor against his will.) This Maximus (whether sincerely
or for his own advantage is unknown) did take part with the Orthodox and
greatly honor the Bishops and promote Religion, and got a great deal of love
and honor. Ithacius and Idacius and the rest of the Bishops apply themselves
to Maximus against the Priscillianists; who hearkened to them, and to please
them put Priscillian and some others to death, and punished others by other
ways of violence. The more rude ungodly sort of Christians, so far concurred
or over-went the Bishops, that they turned their fury against any that seemed
more Religious than their neighbors: so that if any one did but fast and pray
more, and read the Scriptures more than others, he was reproached as a Heretic
and favourer of the Priscillianists: Martin Bishop of Turen was at that time a
man of no great Learning, but so famous for Holiness, Charity, and numerous
miracles, as the like is scarce written with credibility of any man since the
Apostles (for which he is canonized a Saint.) This Martin was grieved partly to
hear strictness brought into reproach, and partly to see Magistrates called to
the suppression of heresies by the Bishops; and so every heretic taught how to
persecute and suppress the truth, who could burget the Emperor on his side:
Therefore he petitioned the Emperor for mercy to the Priscillianists, and told
him that it was a thing not used by Christians, to propagate sound doctrine or
suppress men's errors by the sword: He also avoided the Synods of the Bishops,
and refused not only their Councils, but their Communion: Whereupon the Bishops
not only despise him as an unlearned man, and one that deceived the people with
false miracles; but also suggested to the Emperor that he was a favourer of
the heretics himself: Insomuch that Martin hardly escaped suffering with them,
through the Bishops calumnies. But the great piety and clemency of the Emperor
preserved him; And at last did promise him the saving of the lives of some that
were further appointed to suffer, on condition that he himself would
communicate with the Bishops. Martin saw that there was no other means to save
the life of one that else was presently t^odie, and thinking that Christ who
would have mercy and not sacrifice, would in such a case allow it, he promised
to have Communion with the Bishops, and so did communicate with them the next
day, and saved the man's life. When he had done it he was in great doubt and
perplexity about it, whether he had done well or not? and in this trouble went
secretly out of the City homewards: And by the way in a Wood as he was in
heaviness and doubt, an Angel appeared to him, and rebuked and chastened him,
for communicating with them, and bid him take warning by this, lest the next
time he hazarded his salvation it self by it. And Martin professed that long
after this, the gift of miracles was denied him; but he communicated with the
Synod and Bishops no more.

This History I only recite without determining how far the Reader is to
believe it: But I must say that the reading of it was a temptation to me, to
doubt concerning my Communion, the Reader may easily know with whom. For though
I know how credulous and fabulous many ancient Writers were, yet I considered,
that th^s Historian is one of the most ancient, one of the most learned, one of
the most strictly Religious of all the old Historians of the Church; and that
he was himself an intimate acquaintance of Martins, and had it from his own
mouth; and most solemnly protests or swears that he feigneth nothing, and
that the miracles of Martin were known to him partly by his own sight, partly
by Martin's own Relation, and partly by many credible witnesses: And they were
so believed commonly in that age by good men, that it was the occasion of his
Canonizing. And if such History is not to be believed, I will not mention the
consequences that will hence follow.

And yet on the other side I considered; First, That it was possible that a
holy man might be mistaken by fear and scrupulosity, and take that for an
Angels appa^ition which was but a dream: Secondly, That his avoiding Communion
with the Bishops might be only a prudential act, fitted to that time and place,
upon accidental or circumstantial reasons which will not suit with another time
and place: Thirdly, It is dangerous making the actions of any men, upon
pretense of any Revelations and Miracles, to be instead of Scripture, the rule
of our faith or duty; much more to prefer them before the Scripture when there
is a contrariety between them. Fourthly, And his separation was but temporary,
not from the Order, nor from any of the other Pastors, or from the people; but
only from those individual persons, whom he supposed to be scandalous. And
these considerations I judge sufficient to resist that temptation.

Whoever understands what a man is, and what a Christian is, and what the
office and work of a Pastor is, will make no doubt, but that his Guidance must
be paternal, and that as Love is the effect to be produced in the people, so
Love in him must be the means of causing it; and that he must expect that the
success of his preaching and discipline should not exceed the measure of Love,
which is manifested therein; further thanas God may extraordinarily work beyond
the aptitude of the means. And when he has complained of the people as sharply
as he will, he shall find that whatsoever it is that Love cannot do, in order
to their conversion and edification, and which Light or evidence cannot do in
order to their conviction, is not by him to be done at all. And if he will be
trying with edge tools, he may cut his own fingers sooner than cure an erring
mind; And shall find that the people will much worse endure acts of force and
corporal penalty, from a Pastor, than from a Magistrate; and will hardly
believe by any clothing that he is a sheep, if they once perceive that he has
bloody teeth. Our work is to win the heart to Christ: And he is unfit to be a
Pastor, that knows not how hearts are to be won.

DIRECT. XIII.
When you have thought of all the evils that will be uncured, when Love and
evidence have done their part; yet reject not this way till you have found out
a better; which will do the work that is to be done, and that with fewer
inconveniences.
I Am not now about to state the bounds of Liberty in matters of Religion; (It
requires a full Treatise by it self; and many tediously dispute the case
before they ever truly stated it.) Much less am I persuading Magistrates, that
they must permit every deceiver to do his worst, to dra^ the people from God,
or from Christ Jesus the Mediator, from faith^ and godliness, any more than
from Loyalty, Peace and Honesty. But I am speaking only against that partial,
factio^s, needless, dividing and pernicious violence; which is pretended to be
the chief, if not the only cure of all the errors or disagreements in the
Churches, by those that know no part of Chyrurgery but amputation.

Some speak much of the many disorders which will be uncured, if Violence do
not more than Teaching and Love: But I humbly ask of them: First, are those
disorders such as are curable in this life; or such as are the unavoidable
miseries of our corrupt and imperfect state? Secondly, will force cure them
better than evidence of truth, and Love will do? Thirdly, will they be so cured
without a greater mischief! God tells the Sabbath Breakers of Israel, that
when they were rooted out, the land should keep her Sabbaths: Was that a mercy
or a judgment? Would you so cure Sabbath-breaking and disorder? and take a
solitude for Peace? Fourthly, is not the work to be done, the saving of men's
souls? And shall any be saved against his will? And then should not all force
be merely such as is subservient to the ends of Love? Fifthly, will stripes
change the judgment in matters of Religion? Sixthly, is he any better than a
Knave or an hypocrite, who will say or swear or do that through fear, which he
verily thinks God forbids him, and is disple^sed for, and fears it may
damn his soul? Seventhly, Is it the honor and felicity of so^ls to be such? or
of Church or Kingdom to be composed of such? Eighthly, is not a conscientious
fear of sinning against God, a thing well pleasing to him, and necessary to
men's salvation, and to the Churches welfare, and to the safety of the lives of
Kings, and of the Kingdoms peace? And is there not then great cause to cherish
it (though not the errors that abuse it.) And should not all care be used to
cure the ungodly world, of impiety and ^earedness of conscience, which makes
them make a mock of sin. And if conscience were once debauched and mastered by
fear, and the people be brought to prefer their their fleshly interest before
their spiritual, and to fear men's punishment more than Gods, would not such
debauched consciences have a great advantage, to make such men the masters of
the estates and lives of others? And are the lives of Kings, and the estates of
neighbors, and the peac^ of Kingdoms, competently secured, where God is not
feared more than fines or corporal penalties? Ninthly, if force be so far
followed till it have changed men's judgments or conquered conscience, or
exterminated and destroyed all that will not be thus changed or conquered, who
differ from superiors in unnecessary things, will it not (all things well
considered) prove a dear price for that which might be had at much cheaper
rates? Are not the most conscientious, necessary helpers of the Ministry, by
their example, to cure the unconscionableness of the rest? And therefore should
be countenanced and encouraged? Tenthly, would not the cessation of unnecessary
impositions, cast out the most of the scruples of conscientious people, and
cease the saddest divisions of the Churches? If Rome could have been content
with a Religion of no more Articles than the Apostles was, and would on those
terms have held Communion with other Churches? O what rends and ruins had it
prevented in the Christian world? Are not the old Apostolical rules and terms
sufficient to the safety and peace of Christians? Were those worthy persons. B.
Usher, B. Hall, B. Davenant, B. Morton, with the Bergii, the Crocii, and all
the great pacificators deceived, who wrote and preached and cried out to the
world that [so much as all Christians are agreed in, is sufficient matter for
their concord; if they would lay it upon no more] vid. Vsh. sermon. before King
James at Wansted. Or do you think it was their meaning [Let all Rulers multiply
unnecessary scrupled impositions in their own dominion, and for scrupling them,
let them silence, imprison and banish at home; And then let them send to their
neighbor Churches for Unity, Peace and Concord, and tell them that the
subscribing to the Scriptures generally, and to the Creed, Lords Prayer, and
Decalogue and Sacraments particularly, are terms sufficient to this end.
(Supposing that good order, deconcy and peace be kept up by suitable discipline
both Ecclesiastical and Civil.) And why would not this serve for all the world?
Or why should more scrupled things be called necessary to order and decency
than indeed are so? My desire of the Churches peace which caused me to write
all the rest, provokes me to touch this subject briefly, which will scarce
endure to be touched.

DIRECT. XIV.
When you reprove those weak Christians, who are subject to errors, disorders
or divisions, reflect not any disgrace or contempt upon Religion, and
conscientious strictness; but be the more careful to proclaim the innocence and
honor of serious Godliness, lest the profane and ungodly take occasion to
despise it, by your opening the faults of such as are taken for the zealous
Professors of it.
HOnest hearers take most notice, what is the main scope which the Preacher
aims at, and the business which he drives on. Some men take occasion by the
errors and faults of such as have seemed seriously religious, to make all
seriousness and diligence for our salvation, to seem to the hearers to be mere
hypocrisy, and not only a needless, but a hurtful thing; and to persuade the
people that an ignorant carelessness of their souls, with good neighborhood,
quietness and mirth, is better than all this ado. Which is no more or less than
to preach for Atheism and Ungodliness in practice, so it be veiled with the
hypocritical profession of the Christian faith. And this unhappy sort of
Preachers do seldom miss to fall upon the real and supposed miscarriages of
men that are or seem religious, in some part of their sermons and familiar
discourse; which being done to so odious an end, as to bring seriou^
Religiousness it self into dislike, it makes the best of the hearers abhor
such reflections, because they abhor the scope of them; Believing that Holiness
need not to be preached against in the world, till men's hearts are more
inclined to it, and till all its enemies abate their opposition* And if it were
to be done, yet not by a Minister of Christ: He that preaches against Holiness
(how covertly soever) preaches against God. Whereas if a man's design be to
promote Religion, the sober hearers (though partly guilty) will bear his
reproof of the faults of professors, with much more patience, when they see it
is for God and godliness that he does it. I speak by experience, and must give
them this testimony, that I have many and many a time poured out my soul in
earnest reprehensions of the errors and disorders of rash- dividing zeal; and
the hearers have taken all with patience: when the same persons could not bear
the tenth part so much, from some preachers whom they imagined to aim in it at
the depressing of the honor of true and serious religion. Therefore be sure
what sort of men soever you are reproving, that you say nothing which tends
to make the ignorant or ungodly sort of your auditors think, that it is zeal,
or strictness, or careful diligence about their souls, which you condemn: But
still put in sufficient caution for the necessity of a holy heart and life.

DIRECT. XV.
Discourage not the Religious from so much of Religious exercises in their
families, or with one another, as is meet for them in their private stations.
BY this means many Pastors have been very great causes of schisms and
separations. Some of them are so carnal and selfish, that they make the
Ministry but a trade for their benefice and honor: And therefore for fear
left the people should encroach upon their advantages, they drive them as far
off as they can, and care not how ignorant they are, so that thereby they may
but lock up the mystery of their trade securely for themselves; and keep the
people in a blindfold reverence, dependence and obedience: How ordinarily the
Roman Clergy practice this iniquity, the nations that are kept in darkness by
them, are doleful testimonies. Like the great dog that will not endure the
little one to come near his carrion or his bone. And some are so excessively
fearful of schism, that they dare not endure the people to pray together, or
repeat a sermon, or search the scripture, and exhort one another daily, in that
manner which God requires private men to do, for fear lest they should go
further, and grow proud of their own gifts and doings, and despise their
Pastors, and set up for themselves! When as this very inordinate jealousy is
the likely and the common way to bring them, to the evil that is so much
feared. While peoples care of their salvation is cherished and stirred up, and
the Pastors do provoke them to pray and search the scriptures and help each
other in the way to heaven, they are honored and loved by the faithful of
their flocks, as men that indeed are true to their great trust, and have a love
and care for the peoples souls: And then those Pastors who further the people
in such religious exercises, may usually as fathers rule them in it, and keep
them from usurping any thing that is proper to the officers of Christ, and from
errors, and factions and divisions; and may easily suppress any arrogancy
when it appears. And that honest desire which religious persons have to do
good to others, is thus satisfied by such sober exercises as belong to them:
And so Pastor and people do peaceably, lovingly and successfully concur to
carry on the work of Christ, whilst each one moves in his proper place. I
speak this, through the great me^cy of God, from very great and long
experience: having still kept up such lawful meetings and sober exercises as
are not unfit for private Christians, and thereby kept out all heresies,
factions, schisms, and arrogancies from the flock; with the great increase of
their knowledge, humility, piety, and just observance of their guides.

Whereas when the foresaid inordinate jealousy does restrain people, or
discourage them from any of that which is their proper work; First, they grow
into distaste of such Pastors, and take them for enemies to godliness and to
their souls: Secondly, they grow next as jealous of all the Pastors doctrine,
as he is of them; and think it no fault to draw often further from him
themselves, and then to disaffect others to him: Thirdly, their appetite to
religious exercises, when it is restrained grows inordinate, and affects
that which belongs not to them. Fourthly, they conceit that there is some
necessity of their turning teachers, to do that which the Teachers will not do.
Fifthly, they next keep their meetings by themselves, from under the eye and
inspection of their Teachers. Sixthly, then they take liberty to vent what
comes in their minds, whilst there is none to regulate and contradict them.
Seventhly, and at last they set up for themselves, and the chief speakers among
them become Pastors to the rest, and so too often speak perverse things to draw
away disciples after them. Act. 20. 30.

Wisdom and Love may prevent all this: Envy not the gifts or graces of your
people? Is it not the end of all your studies and labors to to promote them?
Are they not the fruits of Gods mercies and your own endeavors: Will you
grudge at your own successes? In stead of restraining them, let none so
earnestly drive them ^n, to such religious exercises that belong to them, as
your selves; and help them and over^^e them in the performance; And then you
shall have advantage to restrain them from that which belongs not to them:
And you shall have them the great assisters of your Ministry, who will more
uphold your honors, than all the profane and ignorant will do: yea they will
be your glory, crown and joy at the appearing of Jesus Christ. 1 These. 2. 19,
20.

DIRECT. XVI.
Be not wanting in abilities, watchfulness, or diligence, to resist seducers by
the evidence of truth; that there may be no need of other weapons: And quench
such sparks among your people before they break out into flames.
THe clamours and ways of violence used by many Pastors, are often but an
unhappy means to supply the defect of their own abilities and duties: And those
who are conscions of an insufficiency in themselves to do their parts, do most
intemperately call out to the Magistrates to help them, and do most unmannerly
censure them, if they answer not their expectations: And indeed if the sword of
the Magistrate be such an universal remedy, and may serve instead of the
ability and labor of the Minister, let it also serve to cure the sick, instead
of the skill and labor of the Physician; and let all other callings as
needless be put down, and let us have none but Magistrates alone.

First, Some Ministers are so ignorant, that if one of their people do but turn
Antinomian, Anabaptist or Separatist, they are not able to confute them: Much
less if one that is learned and well-studied introduce these errors: If the
Sectary challenge them to dispute, its two to one but error will triumph,
through the insufficiency of him that should defend the truth. And then this
insufficient Minister, will turn to railing, or call out to the Magistrate for
his help, to declare to all that he is too weak: which will harden and increase
the seduced party, and make them think that it is the weakness of his cause.

Secondly, And too many Ministers, who seem more able, are Lordly and lazy, and
carry themselves strangely and at a distance from the people, and are seldom
familiar with them in private: And so they give advantage to such seducers as
creep into houses, to sow their tares; and for the weaker sort to vend their
errors, when there is none to contradict them: These Pastors take their proper
work, to which they are called, for a slavery or a toil. They are so proud and
idle, that for them to watch over all the ^lock, and to teach them publicly
and from house to house, night and day with tears as Paul did, and to watch
where any spark appears, and presently to quench it, does seem to them such a
drudgery and burden, that God were unmerciful if he should impose it on them:
That is, They think God unmerciful if he will not rather let the patient die,
than put the Chyrurgeon to the trouble of dressing his sores: If he will not
let the people be damned rather than put Ministers to so much labor to
instruct and save them. If it were but to take their tithes and honor, and to
be reverenced by the people, and to preach once or twice a week, a sermon which
tends to their applause, they could submit to this much: But Paul's
exhortation Act. 20. seems intolerable preciseness. But souls will not be
informed or reformed at so cheap a rate. Sin has corrupted them more than so.
If we will sleep, the envious man will not sleep: but when we awake, we shall
find that he has sowed his tares. Sometimes grievous Wolves will enter, not
sparing the flock: and sometimes of our own selves will men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them: Therefore watch. Study hard
and meditate on these things, and give your selves wholly to them, that your
profiting may be known to all: that you may be able to stop the mouths of
gainsayers; and to edify and stablish all the flock; that they be not as
children tossed to and fro, and carried up and down by every wind of doctrine,
by the c^nning slight and subtilty of men, by which they lie in wait to
deceive. For to this end did Christ give offices and gifts: Study therefore to
show your selves workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing,
methodizing, opening, and so defending the word of truth. Act. 20. 20, 28, 29,
30. Ephesians. 3. 12, 14. 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2. ^, 15.

DIRECT. XVII.
Be not strange to the poor ones of your flock: but impartial to all; and the
servants of all; mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate.
Romans 12. 16.
ALL souls are equally precious unto Christ; whether rich or poor. O set the
strange example of Christ's condescension still before your eyes. Was it the
high or the low that were his familiars? Did he live in fullness, and ride in
po^p, and associate only with the rich and great? O see him washing his
disciples feet? And hear him teaching them by that example, what they ought to
do for one another. He came not to be ministered unto but to minister: How
sharply did he rebuke his disciples when they strove who should be greatest?
And setting a little child before them, has taught us what must be our
ambition: And that he that will be the greatest must be the servant of all: Our
greatness lies in the greatest of our humility and usefulness: Math. 18. 1, 2,
3, 4. and 23. 11. Luke 22. 24, 25, 26. Math. 20. 28.

It is lawful and meet that men in power should be honored by us, and also
that the people be taught to honor them: and that you keep such interest in
them as is needful to the public good: and therefore all converse with them is
not unlawful: But when Ministers only attend on the rich, and are strange and
seldom among the poor, it makes them accounted carnal worldly men; and is
unsuitable to their Lords example, and to the work of their calling. The poor
are far more numerous than the rich; and therefore our work is more among them.
And death will quickly level all. And when we have all done, we shall find,
that the poor receive the glad fidings of the Gospel; and the poor of the world
may be rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which God has prepared for
them that love him. Mat. 11. 5. Iam. 2. 5, 6. And that the rich do hardly enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. Iam. 2. 6, 7. But ye have despised the poor: Do
not the rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats? It is
the poor that must be the chief crown and comfort of your labors: Therefore be
not strangers to them; if you would not have them account you lordly, worldly
and self-seeking men: If you will leave them to themselves, and think your
selves too good to be their companions, or to come into their smoaky Cottages,
and then think that a lordly command or rebuke, should serve the turn to keep
them from error and schism and disorder, you may find your error to the
Churches cost, when it is too late. And it will be but a pitiful excuse for
your pride or laziness, to cry out of seducers for creeping into such houses,
which you disdained to come into your selves: what do you by avoiding them, but
invite any others thither that will come, and leave them as it were swept and
garnished for such evil spirits?

DIRECT. XVIII.
Spend and be spent for your peoples good; and do all the good that possibly
you can for their bodies as well as for their souls: and think nothing that you
have too dear to win them: that they may see that you are truly Fathers to
them, and that their welfare is your chiefest care and business.
ALl men love themselves; and naturally and necessarily love those that they
know do greatly love them. And all men are sensible of their bodily
concernments, and consequently of that good that is done to their bodies: He
that sets himself to relieve the poor, and to put on others to relieve them,
to visit the sick, and help those that are in trouble, and to comfort the
afflicted, to do what good he can to all, and hurt to none, shall find that
their ears will be open to his doctrine, and that they will follow him toward
heaven with much less resistance, than otherwise he must expect. Few such
Ministers do ever want success of their labors. And the coveto^s, close
handed, self-seeking and cruel, are always hated. And let his money perish with
him, who thinks it better than the souls of men, and the work of God.

DIRECT. XIX.
Keep up the Reverence of the ancient and experienced sort of Christians, and
teach the younger what honor they owe to those that are their elders in age
and grace: For whilst the elder who are usually sober and peacaable, are duly
reverenced, the heat of rash and giddy youth will be kept in order.
USually where the elder bear the sway, the Church has peace (Though I know
some deceive is grow worse and worse:) And it is where the young and rash are
become the predominant most esteemed party, that schism and disorders do
prevail. And though some tell the people, what honor they owe their Elders by
office; yet few acquaint them what honor youths owe both to the Elder in age
and in experience and grace. It will therefore be much of the prudence of the
Pastors, to keep up the honor of the Elders of the people, and to preserve in
the younger a due esteem and reverence toward them.

DIRECT. XX.
The Pastors who will preserve the Churches Peace, must neither neglect to
preserve their interest in the Religious persons of their charge; nor yet be so
tender of it as to depart from sober principles or ways to please them, nor to
make them their rulers, nor follow them into any exorbitancies to avoid their
censures.
BOth these extremes will tend to confusion: First, They that care not at all
what men think of them, do but despise their advantages to do good, whilst
they think that they only despise the praise or dispraise of men. We are
commanded not to please our selves, but to please all men for their good to
edification. Romans 15. 1, 2, 3. Our power over them is upon their minds and
wills, and not like Magistrates upon their bodies or estates: Therefore when we
have lost their hearts, we have lost our power to do them good: They will not
easily hear him that is despised or abhorred by them. Therefore a prudent care
must be taken, that we be not prodigal of our interest in them, lest it prove
to be cruelty to their souls.

Secondly, And yet if we give up our selves to their conceits and humors, and
forsake the way of truth or peace to keep their favor, it will prove the more
dangerous extreme. I have before noted the peril of Ministers and the Church by
this temptation. The rawest and the rashest professors are commonly the most
violent and censorious; And so ready to scorn and vilify the gravest wisest
Pastors, who cross their opinions, that many honest Ministers have been
overcome by the temptation; to forsake their own judgment, and to comply with
the violent to escape their censures and contempt: But this is not the way to
the Churches peace. It may prove a palliate cure for a time, to put by at the
present some sudden inconvenience: But it prepares for after troubles and
confusions. First, it will make the rashest and indiscreetest people (which is
usually the women and young men) to be the Governors of the Church: Whilst
all their Teachers must humor them lest they displease them. Secondly, When
you have followed them a little way, and think there to stop, you must follow
them still further, and never can foresee the end: For that weakness and
passion of theirs which cries up one error to day, is pregnant with
innumerable more; and may cry up more to morrow, and so on. And one error
commonly draws on more, and one miscarriage engages them to another: And the
last are usually the worst: And the same ends and reasons which made you go out
of the way to please them, will make you still follow them, how far soever they
go, unless you repent. Thirdly, And if you repent and leave them, it must cost
you dearer than prevention would have done: And you might have at much cheaper
rates, forsaken them just there where they forsook the way of truth and peace.
Fourthly, And you will by following the conduct of giddiness and passion,
dis^dvantage your Ministry as to all the less zealous, and all the more sober
and peaceable of the godly; And you will bring your selves into contempt with
these, for your levity injudiciousness and instability: And so you will lose
much more than you will get. Fifthly, And in the mean time you will be made but
the vulgars instrument to do hurt: you will be used by them but to confirm
themselves in their errors, and to further dividing and unpeaceable
designes-Sixthly, And when all is done, and your consciences are wounded, and
you are made the heads or leaders of factions, at last those of themselves that
God shows mercy to, will see their error, and when they repent, they will
give you little thanks for your compliance. A sinful humouring of rash
professors, is as great a temptation to godly Ministers, as a sinful
compliance with the Great ones of the world: I mean it is a sin, which our
station and disposition afford us as great temptations to. For though to a
worldling, wealth and honor be stronger temptations; yet to a godly man the
applause or censure of those whom we account most wise and godly may tempt much
stronglier. And alas how ordinarily does the fire of Church and state, which
flameth about our own ears, convince us of our error, in following those whom
we should lead! O how many doleful instances of it does Church history afford
us! There are not many of the tumults that have cost the lives of thousands
about Religion, but were kindled by the young injudicious professors, who drew
in their Teachers to humor them in countenancing too much of their disorders.
Historians tell us that when King Francis of France had forbid the reproaching
of the Papists way of worship, and silenced the Ministers for not obeying him;
many of the hot brained people, took up the way of provoking them by scornful
pictures and libels; hanging up and down in the streets suchridi^ulous and
reproachful rhimes and images: But this (which was none of the way of God)
began that persecution (by provoking the King) which cost many thousands, if
not hundred thousand lives before it ended. And the Synod at Rochel which
refused the grave counsel of Du Plessis, Du Moulin and many such others, was
stirred up by the peoples zeal; and ended in the blood of many score thousands,
and the ruin of the power of the Protestants in France. Abundance of such sad
instances might be given, if England need to go any whether else for matter of
warning than to it self. He that after the experiences of this age, will think
it fit to follow the conduct of injudicious zealots, is left as unexcusable as
almost any man, that never had a sight of hell. The dreadful ruin of Jerusalem
according to Christ's prediction (such as the world has scarce seen besides)
was just in the like manner brought about, by those furious ones whom Josephus
calls the zealots.

But if you will do all things good and lawful to win men, and offend them by
no unnecessary thing; and yet stand your ground, and stir not an inch from
truth or seberness, piety or peace, to please any people in the world. This way
shall do your work at last: Men will at last perceive the worth of sober
principles and ways: At least when Mountebanks have killed most of their
patients, the rest will repent, and wish that they had hearkened to the
counselors of peace. They that run round, when they find themselves giddy and
ready to fall, will lay hold upon somewhat which is firm and stable. Compliance
with one of the contentious parties, may make you cried up by that party for a
time: But the contrary faction will as much cry you down; and your estimation
is but like an Almanac for a year: And they themselves that needed your sinful
help for some present job, will be like enough ere long to cast you off (as is
aforesaid:) And if they do not, you are objects of pity to sober standers by:
And in the next age, the name of a Melancthon, a Bucer, a Bergiu^, a Crocius,
an Usher, and other such Peacemakers, will be precious to posterity, when the
memory of fiery dividers will be dishonorable. Keep your standing, and stick
closer to truth and justice and peace, than to any party, and resolvedly give
up your selves to please God, and you will be no loosers by it; And its two to
one but at last some of the contenders, will desire you to be the arbitrators
of their controversies, when they are weary of contending, and will give you
the honor of healing the wounds, which their rash injudicious zeal has made.

DIRECT. XXI.
The Pastors who will preserve the peace of the people, must not contend among
themselves: Especially they must take heed, that they engage not in any
needless enmity, against any of those Divines, who for their learning or piety
are most highly reverenced in the Church.
FIrst, When Pastors fall into parties, they always draw the people with them:
some will take one part, and some another. If the Officers divide, the
soldiers will certainly be divided. And though one of the dividing parties may
get the advantage of the sword, and suppress the other, they are nevertheless
in the way to increase the schism, while the people will think never the worse
of the party which is afflicted and trodden down. Schisms are most commonly
begun or at least formed among the Pastors: And among them the cure must be
begun; and principally performed. And when the wound is made, it must not be
despised; but the threatened issues must be foreseen; and the necessity of a
cure apprehended: and scarce any pains or cost must be thought too great to
quench the fire. The proud and carnal person, who thinks all is well, if he can
but secure his interest, and by spurning at dissenters, make them seem
contemptible; does cast oil upon the flames, and may himself feel the greatest
heat at last. And he that can stand by as unconcerned, and deny his service to
Love and Peace, and to the wounded Church, lest it cost him too dear, may soon
find that he has lost, even that which he has thought to save. O that the
Peacemakers would cry aloud, and sound the retreat to contending Pastors, and
O that God would rebuke that pride and carnality, self-conceitedness and love
of worldly things, which will not suffer them yet to hear.

Secondly, And especially when those that are most reverenced and valued by the
zealousest Christians, are envied, or afflicted by the rest, it ever tends to
divisions in the Church. For the sufferings of such will never abate their
esteem, with those who honor them. And if fear should stop their mouths for a
time, the fire will still burn within, and be too ready to break out into more
open schisms when opportunity serves them. Yea the Churches of old have found
great cause to be very tender how they used such reverenced valued Pastors,
though they should fall into any error; and sometimes to connive or bear with
much, lest they should occasion a far worse disease, by the imprudent curing of
a lesser.

And I dare be bold to proclaim to the contentious Pastors, of all the Churches
wheresoever, that True Piety, Love, Humility and Prudence, can happily heal a
great many of dissentions, which to the carnal, uncharitable, proud and
imprudent, seem uncurable, and by their malignant-medicines are still
exasperated and made worse.

But alas this quarrelsome distemper in Ministers, has had such pernicious
effects upon the Church, and is still going on to more confusion, that it
deserves and calls for our common lamentation. And if we must lament it with
despair, as an uncurable disease, I fear we must with equal despair lament the
Churches ruins, and the consumption of Religion. For how can we expect that
the people should hear, if the Pastors be obdurate and remediless? And who
shall cure them, if their Physicians themselves be they that do infect them?

I speak not against the necessary defense of Truth, so be it that it be truth
indeed which we defend, and that the defense be indeed necessary; and that the
manner be suited to the end, and to the nature and rule of Christianity. But
the itch which caused the Churches scab, is of a different description. For
first, it proceeds from a salt acrimoni^us humor in the blood: Not that
there is no blood in our veins which has better principles and qualities: But
alas it is tainted with this c^rroding salt, which has bred our leprosy: As
if Christ had made us the salt of the earth, not to preserve the world from
putresaction, but to bite and fret all that we have any thing to do with (yea
and those that we have nothing to do with) and by the salt Ca^a^^hs of our
back-bitings and peevish censures and reproaches, to bring the Church of Christ
into a consumption. There is in many of us a love and zeal for Truth in the
general (and no wonder if we are but men.) But when we meet it we know it not;
but ^evile it, and scratch it by the face: As the Jews did long for the coming
of the Messiah, but when he came, they knew him not, but crucified him as a
deceiver and blasphemer; their prejudice fixing them in the dungeon of
unbelief. Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3. The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
Temple; ^ven the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in -- But who may
abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears. For he is
like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap: and he shall sit as a refiner, and
purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi -- What abundance of
the zealous ^^nourers of Tristh are daily employed in revising and
contradicting it? As they do by Peace, even prosecute it to the death, by the
most perverse oppositions, and unpeaceable principles and practices, while they
cry up nothing more than Peace? And do they deal any better by Holiness it
self. He that is for a Holiness, which consists not in Love to God and man,
(to God for himself and to Man for his sake) is like the Heathens who are
zealous for a God; but he must be made of something unlikest to him that is God
indeed: Or like the Mahometans, who are zealous Musselmans or believers; but it
is in the most gross deceiver. And he that will promote Love by sna^ling and
barking at all that are strangers to him, and not of his own house, shall at
last partake of the fruits of such Love as he promoted: And he may as wisely
hope at last to bring the Church to Peace also, by werrying it, by splenetick
censures and divisions, in despite of the experience of our present age, and
of all the world. What ever is done against LOVE is done against Holiness and
against God, and against the Life of the Church: And therefore if any
Love-killer do call himself, a servant of Christ and a friend to Holiness or to
the Church, he must first prove that murdering it is an act of friendship, and
a service acceptable to Christ: One would think by their practice, that some
men took Abraham's trial for their Law, and accounted it the work of justifying
faith, to kill the Church, and offer it up in sacrifice to Christ: But before
they bring us to believe that such a sacrifice is acceptable to him, who
offered himself a sacrifice for the Church, and who calls for a living
acceptable sacrifice, Romans 12. 1. They have need to make a better proof of
their authority, than Kelley did of his Revelation, when he brought Doctor Dee
to consent to adultery by the same pretended warrant: God who is Love accepts
not such a sacrifice at the hands of Love-killers and Church-destroyers.

But especially when besides this acrimony of mind, there shall other more
pernicious diseases be contracted, and foment these censures and reproaches of
their brethren; the malignity of the disease is a sad prognostic. Two such
causes of it Paul lays open, one Act. 20. 30. the other Romans 16. 17, 18. One
is the devilish sin of pride; and a desire to have many disciples to be our
applauders [They shall speak perverse things to draw awaydisciples after them]
The other selfishness, carnality and coveteousness [They serve not the Lord
Jesus, but their own bellies.] And so 2 Pet. 2. 3. Through Coveteousness they
shall with feigned words make Merchandise of you: They buy and sell men's souls
for gain: These are Gainsayers in a double sense: Their craft brings them in
no small gain, and lest it should be set at naught, for gain they do gainsay
the truth, and raise up tumults against the best of the servants of Christ; as
Act. 19. 24, 27. It is for gain and worldly glory, that they say what they say
against those that are wiser and sincerer than themselves.

The sum of all this (and most that follows) is in 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. If any
man teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words, the words of our
Lord Jesus Christ (mark, it is not to the words of any new faith-makers
dev^sing, and to the doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is proud
(though he may cry down pride) knowing nothing (though he may cry down
ignorance) but doting about questions (though he may seem to be wise and of
high seize) and strifes of words while he seems to plead for the life
of Religion) whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings (while they
pretend to no less necessary a work, than the saving of Truth and the peoples
souls): Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds (the impatient scratchings
of those whose corrupt blood must needs have vent, and therefore causes this
itch of quarrelling) and destitute of the truth (whilst they think they are
saving the life of truth) supposing that gain is godliness (being so blinded by
the love of gain that they make themselves believe, that is the cause of truth
and Godliness which makes for their gain; and that the raising of them, is the
raising of the Church; and that all tends to the interest of religion, which
tends to make them great and rich) From such turn away (that is; own them not
in hypocritical wranglings, but turn your backs upon them, as men unworthy to
be disputed with in their way. Answer not the fool according to his folly, i.
e. word it not with him in his foolish way; lest you make him think himself
worthy to be disputed with. Talk not with him at his rates; And yet answer him
according to his folly; by such conviction and rebukes as is meet for fools,
and as may make him understand his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes, and
think that none can stand before him.

Secondly, And it is commonly the most ignorant sort of Ministers, who are the
liberallest of their supercilious contempt of those, whose understandings and
worth are above their censures. If a controversy be started, which they either
never studied, or have only turned over the pages of a few books, to number the
sheets, and never spent one year in the deep and serious search of the truth
which is in question; Or if they have clumsie wits, that cannot feel so fine a
thread, nor are capable of mastering the difficulties; None then are (usually)
so ready to shoot their bolt, and pass a Magisterial sentence, and gravely and
ignorantly tell the ignorant, what e^rours such or such a one maintains, as
these that talk of that which they never understood. For as I have known many
unlearned sots, that had no artifice to keep up the reputation of their
learning, than in all companies to cry down such and such (who were wiser than
themselves) for no scholars, but unlearned men; so many that are or should be
conscious of the dullness and ignorance of their fumbling and unfurnished
brains, have no way to keep up the reputation of their wisdom, with their
simple followers, but to tell them, O such a one has dangerous errors, and
such a book is a dangerous book; and they hold this, and they hold that; and so
to make odious the opinions or practices of others, which they understand not:
And this does their business with these silly soals, who hear not what can be
said against them, as well as if they were the words of truth and soberness.

As for the younger and emptier sort of Ministers, it is no wonder, if they
understand not that which they had never opportunity to study, or have taken
but a superficial taste of: But it were to be wished that they were so humble
as to confess that they are yet but beardless; and that time and long study is
needful to make them as wise as those (who with equal wit and grace) have had
many more years of serious study, and greater opportunities to know the truth:
and that they have not their wisdom by special inspiration or revelation; nor
so far excel the rest of mankind in a miraculous wit, as to know that by a few
years lazy study, which others know not by the laborious humble fear^h^s of a
far longer time. One would think that a little humility (...) the turn for thus
much.

But it ignorance get possession of the ancient and (...) headed, it triumphs
then, and desi^^ (...), and says, Give me a man that (...) with him? Or
rather, Away with (...) is not worthy to be disputed (...) grows not with
years: (...) wit may be poaring forty or fifty (...) that which another may
sooner understand. Much time and study is necessary to great wisdom: But much
time and study may consist with very mean seize; and does not always
reach the wisdom which is sought. And in such a case, the ancient and
grey-headed think that veneration is their due; and that if they gravely
sentence such or such to be erroneous, they are injured if they are not
believed. They have not wisdom enough to make their age honorable; and
therefore they expect that their age should make their wisdom honorable.

Thirdly, and because they are not able to endure the light, nor to stand
before the power of open truth, they find it necessary to do almost all their
work by backbiting: When they are out of the hearing of those whom they
back-bite, among such as are as little sensible of this hateful sin as they;
then they have this man and that man; this party and that party to reproach.

Fourthly, And (as Mr. Robert Bolton well notes) to hide the malignity of
their sin, and to cheat the hearers and their own consciences) they will first
seem to praise him, and to confess that he is in other respects a very worthy,
a learned or a pious man, and then bring in their backbiting with a [but.] And
that which must sanctify all this sin, and turns it into a work of zeal, is
the seeming interest of God, and of religion. They do all out of a zeal of God
(I cannot say, A zeal for God) though it be not according to knowledge. If it
was an untruth which they spoke it was for religion: If they did back-bite it
was to preserve the hearers from error and danger: If they reviled that which
they never understood, it was to keep the Church from the infection: If they
tear the Church, and use their reputation to murder Love, and to make others
odious who are wiser than they, all this is but for the defense of truth: And
if it be nonsense or envy which they vent, they never repent of it (that's the
mischief) because they think that the Lord and the Church, and the hearers have
need of it. And so all those Texts are to them Apocripha, which condemn their
sin. Psalm. 15. 3. 2 Cor. 12. 20. Romans 1. 30. Prove. 25. 23. And sin is so be
friended in man's corrupted nature, that they meet but with few angry
countenances to drive away such reverend backbiting tongues.

Nay that they may abuse Gods word and name, against God, to the devils
service, they arm themselves (as the Tempter did Math. 4.) with Gods authority
and scripture, and will charge those with sin who would reprove their sin, and
bring them to repentance: And as Master Herbert notes, how the Pope under the
reverend garb of Christ's Vicar, does do the like things to the suppressing of
the Church and Truth, as Turks and Heathens do under the name of open enemies:
so these men find that the names of Ministers and Christians, with the words of
God abused, are among the well-meaning, a more effectual means to do that work
which God abhors. I have long used to resist this sin of backbiting; and
(not to justify the faults of any, but) to convince the back-biter of his sin.
And I seldom do it, but they report of me that I am a defender of such and
such corruptions: One backbiteth men as Prelatists and formalists; another the
Presbyterians; another the Independents; and another the Anabaptists; and say
such a one is of such a sect, and ever with epithetes of reproach: And when I
tell them that the way to do them good, is to convince them of their error to
their faces, and not to talk of them behind their backs, they report me
presently to be a patron of the sect, because I was a reprover of their
unchristian vice.

And many of them having not so far digested their Religion, as to see the
evidences of it in themselves, are fain to take it upon trust from others: And
they choose that party to cast this great trust upon, which they think to be
most venerable. The Papist chooses for number and worldly pomp and order: The
carnal self-seeker chooses the party, which may most further his preferment
and honor in the world: The honester sectaries do choose the party, which
seems to them to be the most illuminated or most strict: And some have the
wit, to look most at those, that set as many of these together as may be hoped
for. But among whomsoever they cast their lot, their way to preserve the
reputation of Orthodoxness, and the peace of that conscience which made the
choice, is to be liberal in reproaching those that differ in any thing from the
sect which they have chosen. (For how much of the Christian world is now in
sects, is a thing which requires more lamentation, than proof.) As the
Dominicans when they have written far much more than Calvin about
predetermination, they have no way to keep their honor with their sect (the
Papists) but to rail at the Calvinists and belie them, and charge them with
that which they abhor, that so they may seem sufficiently to differ from them.

But the greatest reason of this contentious backbiting quarrelling humor, is
Ignorance it self; which will not give them leave so much as to see the
difficulty of the points which they oppose; much less the truth of that which
they have not been used to. The way which is spoken against, they think they
may also boldly speak against.

And hypocrisy (though mixed with sincerity) has too great a hand in this
with many. The less men are taken up in that true religion which consists in
Hea^en-work and Heart-work, in the Love of God and man, and the mortification
of their selfishness and pride; the more they are addicted to make it up with a
contentious zeal for their several ways, opinions and modes of worship, that
they may not seen to be cold or neutral in religion. They never understood the
third Chapter of I^mes, nor many other such texts of scripture.

O that the Ministers of Christ were once sensible, not here only but through
all the Christian world, what a plague the conjunction of their ignorance and
contensiousness, and their dividing selfish zeal has been to the Churches of
Christ? And what they have done against the souls of men, by violence, and by
heading parties, and by laying Heaven and Hell upon the opinions, which they
never understood! and by departing from the primitive simplicity and charity!
And how odious a practice it is, of ignorant Ministers, to keep up the
reverence of their wisdom, or Orthodoxness or piety, by the secret
back-bitings and reproaches of others, whose persons perhaps they never saw; or
whom they never once soberly discoursed with face to face; or whose writings
perhaps they never read, or thought it not worth their time and labor to
understand them; and yet take it to be their piety to revile by hearsay and
blind surmises, and judge in a cause which they never impartially heard and
understood.

There is none of those Ministers of Christ whom you reproach, but is to be
serviceable to h^s master for the saving of men's souls: And you are satan's
instruments to block up their way, and to turn away the hearts of people from
their doctrine. If every Minister (especially your selves) who has as great an
error, should be made odious for it to their hearers; you might all put up
your pipes, and find that your artifice has first silenced your selves, by the
righteous law, -- Nec enim lex justior ulla est: Quam necis artifices art
perire sua. Or in the words of Christ; With what measure you mete, it shall be
measured to you again.

Did you see the ugliness of Ignorant peevish contentious zeal, as contrary to
holy Light and Love, you would think you saw a devil, spitting out fire and
brimstone, and would never more take it for your honor, nor for a mark of a
child of God.

And if you knew how every word of oblequy especially by backbiting against
your brethren* does tend to infect the hearers with the same vices and kill
their Love, and lead them into divisions, you would take heed for the sake of
others. (Unless you are of those who are foolisher than the devil, and would
build Christ's house and Kingdom by dividing it. Math. 12.) One raileth at
Luther, and another at Calvin, and another at Arminius, and another at this
man, and another at that, for matters which are above their reach; and the
people are taught to rail at all; and to make it also their talk behind men's
backs, ^o prate against this man and that man and the other; and in time to
show it, by breaking into sects: In a word such carnal courses of their
Teachers, do make or harden carnal professors, to be one for Paul, and another
for Apollo, and another for Cephas, but few sincerely and prudently for Christ:
so that instead of Holiness, Love and Concord, we have in almost all company
little but ignorant censorious wrangling, at the opinions of those that they
never were acquainted with, or at the controverted practices, or circumstances
of worship, which are not suitable to their prejudice and custom, and of which
they never desired to be the impartial hearers of a just account.

If ever God will show mercy to his Church, he will give them Pastors after his
heart, who shall abound in Light and Love, and lead the people into Concord
upon the ancient terms; and make it their work, to bring this Love-killing
spirit in^o hatred; whether it work by the way of st^iving-disputes, or
dividing principles or practices, or by reproaching others: by corporal
cruelty, or by a Religious censorious cruelty, which does not strike men, but
unchurch and damn them, and separate from them as men unfit for christian
communion. And whilst the Pastors take another course, we must patiently wait
and pity the Church, and foresee our further misery in this prognostic;
though the guilty being puffed up with the conceits of their preciousness to
God, do promise themselves the desires of their hearts.

Are not the sons of Levi yet refined? when they have been in so many furnaces
and so long! When wisdom, holiness and humility are their nature, and selfish
pride and worldliness are cured, this wrinkled malignant ENVY will then cease;
and an honest emulation to excel one another in wisdom and Love and all good
works, will then take place. And then we shall not, like drunken men, one day
fight and wound each other; and the next day cry out of our wounds; and yet go
on in our drunken fits, to make them wider.

DIRECT. XXII.
Lastly, Let all the Ministers of Christ, so deeply study their wonderful
pattern of Love and tenderness, meekness and patience, and all those passages
of Holy Scripture, which still commend those virtues to his servants, till
their souls are cast into this sacred mould, and habituated to this Image and
imitation of their Lord: And then Virtue will go from them, and they will be
healing among all wherever they shall come; As fire goes out from the flinty
contenders by their collisions, which makes them still incendiaries and
consumers of the Churches Peace.
I Will therefore end these Directions with the bare repetition of some more of
those sacred words, (besides those forecited) which may be fit to breed such a
gracious habit, in those that will faithfully study and receive them.

Isa. 9. 6, 7. The government shall be laid upon his shoulder, and his name
shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting father,
the Prince of Peace: Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be
no end.

Isa. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd; he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young.

Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3. 4. Behold my servant whom I uphold: mine elect in whom my
soul delights: I have put my spirit upon him; he shall bring forth judgment
to the Gentiles: He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard
in the street: A bruised reed shall he not break; and the smoking slax shall he
not quech: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth: He shall not fail nor be
discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth; and the isles shall wait
for his law.

Isa. 44. 3, 4, 5. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground: I will pour my spirit on thy seed and my blessing on thy
offspring: And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the
watercourse: One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by
the name of Jacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and
surname himself by the name of Israel.

Psalm. 110. 2, 3. Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies: Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness.

Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4, 5. Woe to the shepherds of Is^ael that feed themselves;
should not the shepherds feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat and cloth you with
the wool, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock: The diseased
have ye not strengthened; neither have ye healed that which was sick; neither
have ye bound up that which was broken; neither have ye brought again that
which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; But with
Force and with Cruelty have ye ruled them; and they were scattered because
there is no shepherd -- Read the rest of that Chapter.

Isa. 11. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Iesse, and a
branch shall grow out of his roots: And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might,
the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord: and shall make him of
quick understanding, in the fear of the Lord, and he shall not judge after the
sight of his eyes, nor reprove after the hearing of his ears; but with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked -- The wolf shall dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid: and the calf and the young
lion and the fa^ling together; and a little child shall lead them: And the cow
and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion
shall eat straw like the ox; and the sucking child shall play on the hole of
the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice d^n. They
shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. See also cap.
65. 25.

Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains,
and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it: And
many people shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will reach us of his ways, and
we will walk in his paths: For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word
of the Lord from Jerusalem: And he shall judge among the nations, and shall
rebuke many people: And they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and
their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
neither shall they learn wa^s any more. O house of Jacob, come ye and let us
walk in the light of the Lord.

Mal. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. My covenant was with (Levi) of life and peace; and
I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me, -- The law of truth was
in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: He walked with me in
Peace and Equity; and did turn many from iniquity: For the Priests lips should
keep knowledge and they should seek the Law at his mouth: for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of hosts. But ye are departed out of the way: ye have
caused many to stumble at the Law: ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi; --
Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people,
according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

Zech. 9 9. Behold thy King comes unto thee* he is just, and having salvation;
lowly and riding on an ass -- He shall speak peace to the heathen, and his
dominion shall be from sea to sea --

Math. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find
rest unto your souls.

Luke 4. 18. He has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent
me to heal the brokenhearted -- 43 I must preach the Kingdom of God to other
Cities also, for therefore am I sent.

Mark. 3. 20, 21. The multitude comes together again, so that they could not
so much as eat bread. And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay
hold on him; for they said, He i^ beside himself.

Ioh. 4. 32, 34. I have meat to eat that ye know not of -- My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me and to finish his work.

Ioh. 9. 4. I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day: the
night comes when no man can work.

Luke 22. 24. And there was a strife among them, which of them should be
accounted the greatest. Math. 20. 25, 26, 27. But Jesus called them to him and
said, ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and
they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among
you: but whosoever will be great among you let him be your Minister; and
whosoever will be chief among you let him be your servant: Even as the son of
man came not to be ministered to, but to minister and to give his life a ransom
for many.

Ioh. 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this world -- ^lse would my servants fight.

Luke 12. 14. Who made me a judge or a divider over you?

1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the
over-fight thereof; not by constraint but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but
of a ready mind. Neither as being Lords over (or, Overruling) Gods heritage,
but bein ensamples to the flock: And when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye
shall receive a crown of Glory.

2 Cor. 1. 24. Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers
of your joy.

Math. 23. 8. Be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master Christ: and all ye
are brethren.

1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God.

2 Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 8, 10. For we can do nothing against the truth, but for
the truth; according to the power, which the Lord has given me to edification,
and not to destruction.

Act. 20. 18, 19. Ye know after what manner I have been with you at all
seasons: serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears, -- 20
And have taught you publicly and from house to house -- In every City bonds
and afflictions abide me; but none of these things move me, neither count I my
life dear unto my self, that I might finish my course with joy; and the
ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify to you the grace
of God. -- 29, 30, 31. Grievous wolves shall enter -- And of your own selves
men shall arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them:
Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years I ceased not to
warn every one night and day with tears.

33, 34. I have coveted no man's silver or gold or apparel: yea your selves know
that these hands have ministered to my necessities, and to them that were with
me: I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to support the
weak --

2 Cor. 12. 5. Of my self I will not glory but in my infirmities. So 9, 10. I
take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong.

2 Timothy 2. 23, 24, 25. But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that
they do gender strifes: And the servant of the Lord must not strive but be
gentle to all men; apt to teach, patient in meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth.

1 Timothy 3. 2, 3. A Bishop must be blameless, apt to teach -- no striker, nor
greedy of filthy lucre, but patient --

Tit. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. A Bishop must be blameless as the Steward of God, not
self-willed (or self-pleasing, or stiff in his own conceit) not soon angry,
not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre, but a lover of
hospitality, a lov^r of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate, holding fast
the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound
Doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers, for there are many
un^uly and vain talkers and deceivers, whose mouths must be stopped --

2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5. For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the
flesh: For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through God, to
the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
disputations -- Let not him that eats despise him that eats not; nor him
that eats not judge him that eats: for God has received him -- To him that
esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean* But if thy brother be
grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably: destroy not him with
thy meat for whom Christ died -- For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink,
but righteousness, and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost: For he that in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. Let us
therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith
one may edify another -- He that doubts is damned if he eat --

Romans 15. 1, 2, 3. We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his neighbor
for his good to edification: For even Christ pleased not himself. Now the God
of patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus, tha^ ye* (...) with one mind and one mouth glorify
God -- Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ received us to the glory of
God.

Phil. 3. 15, 16. Let us as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even th^s unto you. Nevertheless
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the
same things.

Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. With all lowliness and meekness, with long suffering forbearing
one another in love: endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace -- 15. Speaking the truth in love -- 16. Edifying in love.

Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness
of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. Look not every man on
his own things, but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in
you which was in Christ Jesus -- that made himself of no reputation -- 14. Do
all things without murmurings and disputings.

Iam. 3. 17. The wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of mercy, etc.

1 These. 2. 5, 6, 7. Neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know,
nor a cloak of covetousness, God is witness: Nor of men sought we glory,
neither of you nor yet of others, when we might have been burdensome (or used
authority) as the Apostles of Christ: But we were gentle among you, even as a
nurse cherishes her children. So being affectionately desirous of you, we were
willing to have imparted to you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own
souls, because ye were dear unto us.

Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness --

2 Cor. 10. 1. I Paul beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ --

Gal. 6. 1. Brethren if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye that are spiritual
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness -- Bear ye one another burdens
and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Col. 3. 12, 13. Put on as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, etc.

1 Timothy 6. 11. Follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience,
meekness.

Tit. 3. 2. To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness to all men --

1 Pet. 3. 4. The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, in the sight of God is
of great price.

Lev. 19. 18. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Romans 12. 9, 10. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in
honor preferring one another.

Romans 13. 10. Owe nothing to any man but Love -- Love works no ill to his
neighbor -- Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

Ioh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to another.

Ioh. 13. 34. and 15. 12, 17. This is my commandment that ye love one another
-- As I have loved you -- A new commandment --

Gal. 5. 14. The Law is fulfilled in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self.

1 These. 4. 9. Ye are taught of God to love one another.

1 Pet. 1. 22. Love one another with a pure heart fervently.

1 Pet. 3. 8 9. Be all of one mind; having compassion one on another; love as
brethren; be pitiful be courteous: Not rendering evil for evil, (...) railing
for ra^ling; but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called,
that ye should inherit a blessing.

Pet. 2. 23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered he
threatened not.

Math. 5. 44, 45. Love your enemies; bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you; and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you;
that you may be the children of your father, which is in heaven -- For if ye
love them that love you, what reward have you? do not even the publicans the
same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more than others? do not
even the publicans the same?

Math. 6. 14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will
also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
father forgive your trespasses.

Math. 5. 39, 40, 41. I say unto you that ye resist not evil: but whosoever
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also: And if any man
will sue thee at Law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also --

1 These. 5. 12, 13, 14. We beseech you brethren to know them which LABOUR AMONG
YOU, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very
highly in love for THEIR WORK SAKE, and be at peace among your selves: Now we
exhort you brethren warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded,
support the weak, be patient toward all men: se that none render evil for evil
to any man; but ver follow that which is good, both among your selves and to
all men.

1 Cor. 9. 19. Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant
unto all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew that
I might gain the Jews: to them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I
might gain them that are under the Law: To them that are without law as without
law (being not without law to God, but under the law to Christ) that I might
gain them that are without law: To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain
the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some:
and this I do for the Gospels sake.

1 Cor. 8. 1. Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth: and if any man think
he knows any thing he knows nothing yet as he ought to know: But if any man
love God, the same is known of him. v. 4. But take heed lest by any means this
liberty of yours become a stumbling block to those that are weak: 12. But when
ye sin against the brethren and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against
Christ. 13. Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend.

Ioh. 13. 3. Jesus knowing that the father had given all things into his hands,
and that he was come from God and went to God, he rises from supper and laid
aside his garments, and took a towel and girded himself; After that he pours
water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples feet, and to wipe them with
the towel wherewith he was girded. 12, 13. So after he had washed their feet
and had taken his garments, and was set down again he said unto them, Know ye
what I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I
am: If I then you Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash
one another feet: For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have
done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you that the servant is not greater
than his Lord, neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him. If ye
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Qu. To what purpose do you set together all these words of Scripture, without
any exposition, or telling us what you conclude from them?

Answ. I purposely avoid glosses and collections, that you may not say that I
obtrude any thing on you of my own, which is not the mind of your Lord himself.
And I set them together that they that overlook them, may have a deeper
apprehension than they have had. First, What is the true spirit of a Christian,
and nature of Christianity? Secondly, What is the office and work of the
Ministry, and which way they are to win souls, and convince or silence
gainsayers and extirpate errors, and prevent or cure schisms, and secure the
Churches peace? And as for them that can seriously peruse all these words of
the spirit of God, and yet can find in them no matter of correction or
instruction without a Commentary and argumentation, I have no more to say to
them at this time; but to add Christ's next words Ioh. 13. 18. I speak not of
you all! I know whom I have chosen.] And I shall annex a few texts which
characterize the contrary spirit; Contrary I say, to CHRISTIANITY and the
faithful MINISTRY, and with them I shall conclude.

1 Ioh. 3. 12, 13. Not as Cain who was of that Wicked One, and slew his
brother. And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil and his
brothers righteous (Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent
sacrifice than C^in) v. 13. Marvel not my brethren if the world hate you --
Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer: And ye know that no murderer has
eternal life ab^ding in him. (We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.)

Ioh. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do: he was a murderer from the beginning --

1 Samuel 25. 25. 17. As his name is so is he: Nabal is his name, and folly is
with him -- He is such a son of Belial that a man cannot speak to him.

Read the story of Doeg, 1 Samuel 22.

Read also Ezra 4. 13, 14, 15, 17.

Esth. 3. 8. Haman said to the King -- There is a certain people scattered
abroad, and dispersed among the people, in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom;
and their Laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the Kings laws:
therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them.

Dan. 3. 12. There are certain Jews -- that O King have not regarded thee; they
serve not thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up --

Dan. 6. 5. We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find
it against him concerning the Law of his God -- 7. All the Presidents of the
Kingdom, the Governors and Princes, the Counselors and Captains have
consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree,
that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for 30 days, save of
thee O King he shall be cast into the den of Lions. v. 11. These men assembled
and found Daniel praying and making supplication before his God (which he did
three times a day as aforetime) -- 13 They said, that Daniel that is of the
captivity, regards not thee O King, nor the Decree that thou have signed, but
makes his prayers three times a day --

Amos 7. 12, 13. Amaz^ah said to Amos, O thou Seer, go flee thee away into the
Land of Juda, and there eat bread and prophecy there: But prophecy not again
any more at Bethel: for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court.

Math. 23. 29, 30, 31. Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrite^, because ye
build the tombs o^ the Prophets, and garnish the sepulchers the righteous, and
say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses to
your selves that ye are the children of them which killed the Prophets: Fill ye
up then the measure of your fathers --

Ioh. 11. 48. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and the
Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.

Act. 4. 1, 2. And as they spoke to the people, the Priests and the Captain of
the Temple, and the Sadduces came upon them, being grieved that they taught the
people -- And they laid hands on them and put them in hold -- v. 17. That it
spread no further among the people, let us straightly threaten them that they
speak henceforth no more in this name. 18. And they called them and commanded
them not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus.

Gal. 4. 29. But as then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the spirit, even so it is now --

3 Ioh. 9. 10, 11. I wrote to the Church, but i^^ otrephes who loves to have
the pre-eminence among them receives us not -- and not content therewith
neither does he himself receive the Brethren, and forbids them that would,
and casts them out of the Church. Beloved follow not that which is evil, but
that which is good. He that DOES GOOD, is of God; but he that does evil has
not seen God.

1 These. 2. 14, 15. For ye also have suffered like things of your own
Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews: who both killed the Lord Jesus and
their own Prophets; and have persecuted us: and they please not God, and are
contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be
saved; to fill up their sin always: for the wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost.

Luke 9. 54, 55. Lord will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven,
and consume them, even as Elias did? But he turned and rebuked them and said,
ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of: for the son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them.

I conclude as I began: that the consciousness of our own ordinary and
lamentable infirmities, and the greatness of the Churches sufferings thereby,
in all foregoing ages and in this, will condemn us of impudent self-ignorance,
if Ministers be not compassionate and tender toward the weaknesses of the
people, who cannot be expected to equal them in knowledge. Alas, Brethren, what
are we (even after so many years study and preparation) that we should be
supercilious and cruel to the infirm! what difficulties puzzle us? what a loss
are we at in our ordinary studies? How weakly do we preach and pray and write?
How easily do we see this in one another, as our mutual censures and severities
show? Who troubled Paul and the first Churches, but erroneous Teachers? Who
prated maliciously against John, and cast out the brethren, but a Diotrephes?
Who brought in the errors of the Millenaries, the corporeity of Angels, the
errors of the Arrians, Eunomians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Macedonians, and
almost all the rabble ine Epiphanius, Augustine and Philastrius, but Bishops or
Presbyters? Who have caused and kept open the wounds of the Churches of the
East and West so long? Who introduced all the errors (about praying for and to
the dead, etc.) that are in most of the Liturgies of the Churches in East and
West? And all the errors that are found in so many Councils and Confessions of
Churches; and in so many Volumes of Controversy as are extant? Who set up the
Roman Usurpation and Tyranny? Who set up the Papal power above Princes; and
determined in the Laterane Council for their power to depose them and alienate
their dominions? Who set up Usurpers and raised wars against Emperors and Kings
upon these grounds? Who brought in Transubstantiation with the rest of the
Roman absurdities? Who have been the Masters of the bloody Inquisitions? And
who hinders the preaching of the pure doctrine of the Gospel in all the
Romanists dominions? Is it not an erroneous Clergy?

You Will say, Those are Papists and so are not we?

Ans. No, God forbid we should! But they are a mistaken Clergy; which shows
us that the Clergy are as liable to be dividers and troublers of the Church as
the Laity are; and have done much more.

If any hence would infer, that the Pastors must be vilified or deprived of
their just liberties and power, I would more largely tell such a one, that it
is also the Clergy that have opposed all these Heresies and sins; and that have
maintained obedience to Princes; and that have preserved the Scriptures and the
Christian says; and that have been the salt and lights of the world, without
whom Christianity never long continued in any nation; And that have been the
chief instruments of bringing all the souls to Heaven that have passed thither
from the militant Church. (But I have done this in two sheets for the Ministry
long ago.) So that our faults consist with the honor of our function, and of
our necessary labors, and with the praise of the more blameless.

And even so, though the peoples weakness, and inclinableness to unwarrantable
separations and schisms, be blameworthy, as a fruit of their infirmity and
injudiciousness: Yet must we remember that they are the members of Christ, and
we must ^ot deny his interest in them; nor judge or use them hardlier than
Christ himself has done, or allows us to do: But study his Love and
tenderness and forbearance, that we may follow him in serving him; and not
follow our uncharitable passions, and call it, a serving of him; who likes no
such hurtful service. He that loves Christ in none of his Infants or weaker
members, but in the strong and more prudent sort alone, does love him in so
few, that he may question whether he loves him indeed at all; And whether ever
he shall hear, In as much as ye did it to the least of these my brethren, ye
did it unto me.

April 14. 1668.
The way of Division by Violence.
I.
Depart from the Apostolical primitive simplicity; and make things
un-necessary, seem necessary in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Conversation.
II.
Endure no man that is not of your mind and way; But force all t^ concord upon
these terms of yours, what ever it cost.
III.
^rand all D^^. ^ters with the (...) maticks, ^^ereticks, or ^^ditious Re^els;
that the^ (...) become ^teful to high and low.
IV.
When this ^ath greatly ^ncreased their ^isaffection to ^ou, accus^ their
Religion of all the expressions of that disaffection, to make i^ odious also.
V.
Take thos^ for your enemies that ar^ their friends, ^. those for your friends
which are their enemies* And cherish those be they never so bad that will be
against them, and help you to roo^ them out. But remember that for all this you
must come to judgment. And read these following words of Mr. R Hookers, which
he uses of some part of the History, which out of Sulpitius I before
mentioned* Eccles. P^l. Epist. Dedic.

The way of Peace by Love and Humility.
I.
Adhere to the ancient simple Christianity, and make nothing necessary to your
Concord and Communion, which is not necessary.
II.
Love your neighbors as your selves; Receive those that Christ receives, and
that hold the necessaries of Communion; be they Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independants, Anabaptists, Arminians, Calvinists, etc. so they be not proved
Heretical or wicked.
III.
Speak evil of no man, and especia^ly of Dignities and Ru^lers: Revile not when
you are reviled: speak mo^^ of the good that is in Dislenters; and do them all
the Good you can.
IV.
If any wrong you, be the more watchful over your passions, and opinions, and
tongues: lest Passion carry you into extremes: Love your enemies; ^less them
that curse you; do good to them that hate you: and ^ray for them that
desp^ghtfully use you and persecute you: And do no^ evil, that good may come by
it.
V.
Impartially judge of men by Gods in^erest in them, and ^ot your own or your
parties. Reprove the ways of Love-killers and Backbiters; and let not the fear
of their Wrath or Censures carry you into a compliance with them, or cause you
by silence to encourage them: But rejoice if you should be Martyrs for Love and
Peace: For -- Blessed are the ^eek, for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed
are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are
they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of
heaven.

The way of Division by Separation.
I.
Depart from the Apostolical Primitive simplicity; on pretense of strict
observing it; And make New Duties and new sins, which scripture makes not such.
II.
Account all those ungodly that use set prayers, or worship not God in the same
manner as you do.
III.
Brand all Dissenters with the odious names of gracele^s forma^ists* That you
may make them all seem unlovely to others.
IV.
When this has stirred them up to wrath, call them wicked persecutors, and
have no communion with them.
V.
Backbite and reproach all those as Compliers with sin; or such as strengthen
the hands of the wicked and the persecutors, who would recall you to Love and
Humility: And cherish all sects be they never so erroneous or Passionate that
will take your part, and speak against them: But First, when the Wrath which
you thus kindled has consumed you; Secondly, or your Divisions crumbled you
all to dust: Thirdly, and your scandals hardened men to scorn Religion to their
damnation; remember, Woe to the world because of offenses, and woe to him by whom
offense comes. Read Act. 20. 30. 1 Cor. 1. 10. 13. and 3. 3. Romans 16. 17, 18.
Iam. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Study these on your knees.



I deny not but that our Antagonists in these Con^roversies, may peradventure
have met with some not ^nlike to Ithacius, who mightily bending himself by ^^ll
means against the Heresy of Priscillian, (the ha^red of which one evil was all
the virtue he had) became so wise in the end, that every man careful of
virtuous conversation, studious of the Scripture, and given to any abstinence
in diet, was set down in his Calendar* for suspected Priscillianist^ For whom
it should be expedient to approve their soundness of faith, by a more
licentious and loose behavior. Such Pr^ctors and Patrons the truth might ^are.
Yet is not their grossness* so ^^^^llerable as on the contrary side, the
scurrilous and more than satirical immodesty of Marrinism; the first published
schedules whereof being brought to the hands of a grave and very honorable
Knight, with signification given that the Book would refresh his spirits, he
took it, saw what the title was, read over an unsavory sentence or two, and
delivered back the Libel with this answer; I am sorry you are of the mind to be
solaced with these sports, and sorrier you have herein thought my affection
like your own.

FINIS.
Errata.
P R^f p. ^. lin. 23. for (...) read not, page (...). l. 27. for en^^ame^r.
enslave.

Contents p. 1. l. 14. dele to be* p 2* l. 3. for timer. true p. 3. l. 3. for
own Church read outward Church, p. 6. l. 28. for Solomon's knowledge r. common
knowledge, p* 7. l. 11* for their r. then, p. 17. l. 32. r. christianity, p.
26. l. 11. for moved r. proved, p. (...) 15. for s^em r. serve, p* 9. l. 27 for
they read the* p. 95 (...) 26. dele in, p. 132. l. 19. read ^word them, p. 144.
l* 11. for ever* r. even, p* 162. l. 26. for them (...) p. 165. l. 4. for
Historical read Histerical, p. 16^. l. 1. read reveal (...) p. 16^. l. penultu.
for is read in. p. 180. l. 30 dele be, p. 181 l. ^. dele time, p. 183. l. 20.
read 20 years, p 185. l. 30 read de^ecti^e, p. 21^. l. 15. read (...), p. 221.
l. ^. read (...) ta^^ p. 13^. l. ^. read Independency, p. 170. l. 13. read
appealed* p. 298. l. 27. for be, read become.

A Catalogue of Books written and published by the same Author.
1. THE Aphorisms.

2. The Saints Everlasting rest, in quarto.

3. Plain Scripture proof of Infant Church Membership and Baptism, in quarto.

4. The right Method for a settled Peace of Conscience and Spiritual Comforts,
in thirty two Directions, in octavo.

5. Christian Concord: or the Agreement of the Associated Pastors and Churches
of Worcestershire, in quarto.

6. True Christianity, or Christ Absolute Dominion, etc. in two Assize Sermons
preached at Worcester, in twelves.

7. A Sermon of Judgment preached at Paul's, London, December. 17. 1654. and new
enlarged. 12o.

8. Making light of Christ and salvation too often the issue of
Gospel-Invitations, manifested in a Sermon preached at Lawrence Jury, in
London, in octavo.

9. The Agreement of diverse Ministers of Christ in the County of Worcester, for
Catechi^ing, or Personal Instructing all in their several Parishes that will
consent thereunto; containing 1. The Articles of our Agreement. 2. An
Exhortation to the People to submit to this necessary work. 3. The Profession
of Faith and Catechism, in octavo.

10* (...); The Refo^med Pastor^ showing the nature of the Pastoral work,
especially in private Instruction and Catechizing, in octavo.

11. Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments, and the true nature of
visible Christianity, in quarto.

12. Of Justification: four Disputations clearing and amicably defending the
Truth, against the unnecessary Oppositions of diverse. Learned and Reverend
Brethren, in quarto.

13. A Treatise of Conversion, preached and now published for the use of those
that are strangers to a true Conversion, etc. in quarto.

14* One sheet for the Ministry against the Malignants of all sorts.

15. A winding sheet for Popery.

16. One sheet against the Quakers.

17. A second sheet for the Ministry, etc.

18. Directions to Justices of Peace, especially in Corporations, to the
discharge of their duty to God, etc.

19* The crucifying of the World by the Cross of Christ, etc. in quarto.

20. A call to the Unconverted to Turn and Live, and accept of mercy; while
mercy may be bad, as ever they would find mercy in the day of their extremity:
From the Living God: To be read in Families where any are unconverte^^ (...)

21. Of saving Faith: That it is not only gradually, but specifically distinct
from all Common Faith. The Agreement of Richard (...) with that very Learned
consenting Adversary, that has maintained his Assertion by a pretended
Consu^ation in the end of (...) Shepherds Book of Sincerity and Hypoc^^^^ in
quarto.

22. Directions and Perswasion^ to a sound Conversion, etc. in octavo.

23. The Grotian Religion discovered, at the invitation of Mr. Thomas Pierce in
his Vind^cation: With a Preface, vindicating the Synod of Door from the
calumnies of the new Ti^^nus: and David, Peter, etc. and the Puritans, and
Sequestrations, etc. from the censures of Mr. Pierce, in (...)

24. Confirmation and Restoration, the necessary means of Reformation and
Reconciliation, etc. in octavo.

25. Five Disputations of Church Government, in quarto.

26. A Key for Catholics, to open the juggling of the Jesuits, and satisfy
all tha^ are* but truly willing to understand, whether the cause of Roman or
Reformed Churches be of God; and to leave the Reader utterly ^nexcusable that
after this will be a Papist, in quarto.

27. A Treatise of Self-denial, in quarto.

28. His Apology against the Exceptions of Mr. Blake, Kendal, Crandon, Eires,
L. Moulin^ in quarto.

29. The unreasonable^ess of Infidelity in four part^, etc. in octavo.

30. The Worcestershire (...) to the Parliament, for the Ministry of England,
defended, etc. in quarto.

31. His Holy Common^wealth or Political Aphorisms, opening the true principles
of Government, (...)

32. His Con^ession of Faith. etc. in quarto.

33. His humble Advice; or the heads of those things which were offered to many
honorable Members of Parliament, in quarto.

34. The Quakers Catechism; or the Quakers questioned, in quarto.

35. An account of his present Thoughts concerning the Controversies about the
perseverance of the Saints, in quarto.

36. His Letter to Mr. Drury for Pacification, in quarto.

37. The safe Religion; or three Disputations for the Reformed Catholic
Religion, against Popery, etc. in octavo.

38. Catholic Unity; or, the only way to bring us all to be of one Religion,
etc. in twelves.

39. The true Catholic and Catholic Church described, in twelves, etc.

40. The successive visibility of the Church of which Protestants are the
soundest members, etc. in octav.

41. The Sermon of Repentance.

42. Of Right Rejoicing.

43. Sermon of Faith before the King.

44. Treatise of Death.

45. The Vain Religion of the Formal Hypocrite, etc. in several Sermons
preached at the Abbey in Westminster, in i^^lves.

46. Two sheets for Poor Families, etc.

47. Short instructions for the sick: a sheet.

48. A Saint or a B^^it, etc. in quarto.

49. The mischief of Self-ignorance, and benefit of Self-acquaintance, in
octavo.

50. Universal Concord etc. in octavo?

51. The last work of a Believer, etc. in (...).

52. The Divine Life in three Treatises* The first of the Knowledge of God: The
second, of Walking with God: The third, of Conversing with God in Solitude, in
quarto.

53. The Reasons of the Christian Religion, etc.

54. Directions for weak distempered Christians* to grow up into a confirmed
state of grace, etc. (...). The Characters of a sound confirmed Christian
written to imprint on men's minds the true Idea or Conception of Godliness and
Christianity, in octavo.

55. Now or never, in twelves.

56. The Life of Faith, in 3 parts, in quarto.

These Books following are also printed for Nevil Simmons, at the three Crowns
near Holborn Conduit.
THE Novelty of Popery opposed to the Antiquity of true Christianity. By Peter
Dismoulin, D. D. in folio.

A Commentary or Exposition upon the five Books of Moses together with the
following Books; Joshua, Judges, Ruth; first and second of Samuel; first and
second of Kings; and first and second of Chronicles, in folis.

The Beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposition on Psalm. 82. By Thomas Hall, B. D.

The Souls Looking glass; wherein a man may discern what estate his soul stands
in toward God, and what evidences he has for Heaven, etc. By Edward Bury,
^^ate Minister of great Bol^s in Shropshire, in octavo.

The Profit of Godliness, set forth in 5 Sermons, on 1 Timothy 4. 8. The
unprofitableness of worldly Gain, in four Sermons on Mark 8. 36, 37. The
Parable of the barren Fig Tree, in seven Sermons, on Luke 13. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Victorious Violence, in two Sermons, on Mat. 11. 12. By Tho. Brindal, late
Minister of Walshal in Staffordshire, in octavo.

The Girdle of Holy Resolution, in two Sermons, on 1 Pet. 1. 13. By William
Gearing, Minister of the Gospel, in quarto.

The Lovesick Spouse, in 4 Sermons on Ca^t. 2. 5. By Will. Gearing, Minister of
the Gospel, in quart.

A Discourse on Prodigeous Abstinence, occasioned by the twelve months fasting
of Martha Tailor. By John Reynolds, in quarto.

The Dead Pastor yet speaking, in two Sermons, preached on Bartholome^ day,
Aug. 24. 1662. in Bewdly Chapel. By Henry Osland, then Minister there, in
octavo.

The Christians daily Walk, a sheet. By the same Author.

A Sinners Justification on the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord our Righteousness;
in several Sermons. By Obadiah Grew, D. D. late Minister in Coventry, in octavo.

The Repenting Sinner pardoned, being a brief Relation of the wicked life and
penitent death of James Wilson of Wolverhampton in St^ffordsh. in 8.

The English School; or the readiest way to teach children, or elder persons,
to read, spell and rightly pronounce English; fitted to the use of common
English Schools, illustrated with five bras^ Cuts. By Tobias Ellis, in octavo.

D^* Bryan's eight Sermons, in octavo.

FINIS.

