Tuesday May the first, 1660. Ordered,
THat the thanks of this House be given to Mr. Baxter for his great pains in
carrying on the work of Preaching and Prayer, before the House at Saint
Margarets Westminster yesterday, being set apart by this House for a day of
Fasting and Humiliation. And that he be desired to Print his Sermon, and is to
have the same Privilege in Printing the same, that others have had in the like
kind.

And that Mr. Swinfin do give him notice thereof.

W. Jessop Cler. of the Commons House of Parliament.

Richard Baxter's Farewell Sermon, Prepared to have been Preached to his Hearers
AT Kidderminster At his departure, but forbidden.

LONDON, Printed for B. Simmons, at the Three Golden Cocks on Ludgate Hill, at
the West End of St. Paul's* 1683.

To the Inhabitants of the Borough and Foreign of Kidderminster in the County
of Worcester,
Dear friends,
WHile I was lately turning up the rubbish of my old Papers, I found this
Sermon in the bottom, which I had quite forgotten that I kept, but thought it
had been cast away with many hundred others. Much of the last sheet was added
to the Sermon after I came from you; and I remember that when I intended to
send you this Sermon as my farewell, I durst not then have so much converse with
you, for your own sakes, lest it should raise more enmity against you, and your
displeasing circumstances of religious practice, should be said to come from my
continued Counsels to you.

I have lately taken my farwell of the World, in a Book which I called My Dying
Thoughts: My pain of Body and debility increasing, and my Flesh being grown to
me more grievous than all my enemies or outward troubles, I remembered the
benefit I often received upon your Prayers; and craving the continuance of
them till you hear of my dissolution, therewith I send this, as my special
farewell to your selves, whom I am bound to remember with more than ordinary
Love and Thankfulness, while I am

Richard Baxter.

John 16.22. And ye now therefore have sorrow; but I will see you again, and
your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.


My dearly beloved in our dearest Lord,
I Will so far consent to your troubled thoughts of this unwelcome day as to
confess that to me as well as you, it somewhat resembles the day of death. 1.
Death is the separation of the dearest consorts, Soul and Body: And how near
the Union is betwixt us, both that of Relation, and that of Affection, which
must admit this day of some kind of dissolution, I will rather tell to
strangers then to you. 2. Death is unwelcom both to Soul and Body of itself;
(though it destroy not the Soul it does the body.) So dear Companions part not
willingly. Your hearts and Mine are here so over forward in the application,
that words may be well spared where sense has taken so deep possession. 3.
Death is the end of humane converse here on earth. We must see and talk with
our friends here no more. And this our separation is like to end that converse
between you and me, which formerly we have had in the duties of our Relations.
We must no more go up together as formerly to the house of God; I must no more
speak to you publicly in his name, nor solace my own soul in opening to you
the Gospel of Salvation, nor in the mention of his Covenant, his Grace, or
Kingdom: Those Souls that have not been convinced and Converted, are never like
to hear more from me, for their conviction or conversion. I have finished all
the instruction, reproof, exhortation and ^erswasion, which ever I must use in
order to their salvation. I must speak here no more to inform the ignorant, to
reform the wicked, to reduce the erroneous, to search the hypocrite, to humble
the proud, to bow the obstinate or to bring the worldly, the impenitent and
ungodly to the knowledge of the world, themselves and God. I must speak no more
to strengthen the weak, to comfort the afflicted, nor to build you up in faith
and holiness. Our day is past, our night is come when we cannot work as
formerly we have done! My opportunities here are at an end. 4 Death is the end
of earthly comforts: And our separation is like to be the end of that
comfortable communion, which God for many years has granted us. Our public
and private communion has been sweet to us: The Lord has been our Pastor,
and has not suffered us to want: He made us lie down in his pleasant pastures,
and has led us by the silent streams! Psalm. 23.1, 2. He restored our Souls,
and his very Rod and Staff did comfort us. But his smiting and scattering time
is come. These pleasures now are at an end. 5. Death is the end of humane
labors: There is no plowing or sowing, no building or planting in the grave.
And so does our Separation end the works of our mutual relation in this place.
6 Death is the effect of painful sickness, and usually of the folly,
intemperance or oversight of our selves. And, though our conscience reproach us
not with gross unfaithfulness, yet are our failings so many, and so great, as
force us to justify the severity of our father, and to confess that we deserve
this rod. Though we have been censured by the world, as being over strict, and
doing too much for the saving of our own and others Souls, yet it is another
kind of charge that conscience has against us: How earnestly do we now wish
that we had done much more? that I had preached more fervently, and you had
heard more diligently, and we had all obeyed God more strictly, and done more,
for the Souls of the ignorant, careless, hardened sinners that were among us?
It is just with God that so dull a preacher should be put to silence, that
could ever speak without tears and fervent importunity, to impenitent sinners,
when he knew that it was for no less than the saving of their Souls, and
foresaw the joys which they would lose, and the torment which they must endure,
if they repented not. With what shame and sorrow do I now look back upon the
cold and lifeless Sermons which I preached? and upon those years neglect of the
duty of private instructing of your families, before we set upon it orderly and
constantly? Our destruction is of our selves! Our undervaluings and neglects
have forfeited our opportunities. As good Melancthon was wont to say, In
vulneribus nostris proprias agnoscimus pennas; The arrow that wounds us, was
feathered from our own wings. 7. Death uses to put surviving friends into a
dark and mourning habit. Their lamentations are the chief part of funeral
Solemnities. And in this also we have our part: The compassion of condolers is
greater than we desire. For sorrow is apt to grow unruly, and exceed its
bounds, and bring on more sufferings by lamenting one; and also to look too
much at the instruments, and to be more offended at them than at our sins. 8.
But Death is the end of all the living. The mourners also must come after us:
And, alas, how soon! It makes our fall more grievous to us, to foresee how
many must ere long come down! How many hundred Pastors must shortly be
separated from their flocks. If there were no Epideicmal malady to destroy us,
our Ministry has its mortality. Your Fathers where are they? and the prophets,
do they live for ever? Zech. 1.5. This made us the more importunate with you,
in our Ministry, because we knew that we must preach to you, and pray with you,
and instruct you, and watch over you, but a little while. Though we knew not
what instrument death would use, we knew our final day was coming when we must
preach and exhort and pray our last with you! we knew that it behoved us to
work while it was day, (and O that we had done it better!) because the night
was coming when none could work, Joh. 9.4.9. And as it is appointed to all men
once to die, so after death there follows Judgment. And we also have our
further judgment to undergo. We must expect our hour of temptation: We must be
judged by men, as well as chastened by God: We must prepare to bear the
reproach and slanders of malicious tongues, and the unrighteous censures of
those that know us not, and of those who think it their interest to condemn us.
And we must also call our selves to judgment: We are like to have unwelcom
leisure, to review the days and duties which are past! It will then be time
for us to call our selves to account of our preaching and studies, and other
ministerial works, and to sentence our labors and our lives: And it will be
time for you to call your selves to account of your hearing and profiting, and
to ask, How have we used the mercies which are taken from us? Yea God himself
will judge us according to our works! He will not justify us, if we have been
unfaithful in our Little, and have been such as Satan and his instruments, the
accusers of the Brethren, do report us. But if we have been faithful we may
expect his double justification. 1 By pardon he will justify us from our sins.
2. By Plea and righteous sentence he will justify us against the false
accusations of our enemies. And that is enough. How small a thing should it seem
to us, to be judged of man, who must stand or fall to the final sentence of the
Almighty God? 10. The separated Soul and Body do retain their Relations, and
the Soul its inclination to a reunion with its Body. And though our nearest
obligations may be now dissolved, and the exercise of our communion hindered,
yet I know we shall never forget each other, nor shall the bond of Love which
does unite us, be ever loosed and made void. And so much of our Relation shall
still continue, as is intimated in those texts, 1 Cor. 4.15, 16.12.14. Phil.
4.1. etc. 11. And the power of Death, will not be everlasting. A Resurrection
and reunion there will be at last. But whether in this world I cannot
prophesy. I am apter to think that most of us must die in the wilderness; and
that our night must bear some proportion with our day. But things unrevealed
belong only unto God. It suffices me to be sure of this, that as our kingdom
so our comforts are not of this world, and that as Christ so his servants under
him, may say, Behold, I and the Children which God has given me, Heb. 2.13.
and that we shall present you as chaste Virgins unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. And
therefore we have preached, taught and warned, that we might present you
perfect in Christ Jesus. Col. 1.28. For what is our hope, or joy, or Crown of
rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
Coming? For ye are our glory and our joy, 1 Thessalonians 2.19, 20.

But yet the Resemblance between Death and this our separation, holds not in
all things. 1. It is not I nor any Pastor, that is the Churches Soul or life.
This is the honor of Christ the Head. Being planted into him you may live,
though all his Ministers were dead, Isa. 30.20.
or all your Teachers driven into corners. 2. The continuance of your
Church State depends not on the continuance of any one single Pastor
whatsoever. God can provide you others to succeed us, that may do his work for
you more successfully than we. And could I but hope that they should be as
able, and holy, and diligent, as I desire, how little should I partake with you
in this days sorrows? Had I not given you these exceptions, malicious tongues
would have reported that I made my self your Life or Soul* and take the
Churches to be all dead when such as I are silenced and cast out. But I
remember, Psalm. 12.

Though what I have said, and what you feel, may make you think, that a funeral
Sermon is most seasonable on such a day, yet I have rather chosen to preach to
you the doctrine of Rejoicing; because you sorrow not as men that have no hope:
and because I must consider what tends most to your strength and
stedfastness; And that you may see herein, I imitate our Lord, I have chosen
his words, to his troubled Disciples, before his departure from them, Joh.
16.22. And, though I make no question but it will be said with scorn, that thus
I make my self as Christ, and that I seditiously encourage you by the
expectations of my restitution, yet will I not therefore forbear to use my
Saviors Consolatory words; But will remember to whom and on what occasion he
said, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up:
Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch, Math. 15, 13.14.

The words are Christ's Comforts to his Orphane, Sorrowful Disciples, expressing
first their present Condition, and that which they were now to taste of, and
secondly their future state: Their present case is a state of sorrow, because
that Christ must be taken from them: Their future case, will be a state of joy,
which is expressed 1. In the futurity of the cause [But I will see you again.]
2. In the promise of the effect: [ and your heart shall rejoice*] 3. In the
duration and invincib^lity of it: [ and your joy no man takes from you] or [
shall take from you.] He had before likened their sorrows on this occasion, to
the pains of a woman in her Childbearing, which is but short and ends in
joy. And in relation to that similitude, the Syriack translateth (...) [
sickness] and the Persian translateth it [ Calamity] some expositors limit the
cause of their sorrows, to the absence of Christ, or that death of his, which
will for a time both shake their faith, and astonish their hopes, and deprive
them of their former comforts: And others limit the word [therefore] to the
following Crosses or sufferings which they must undergo for the sake of
Christ: And accordingly they interpret the cause of their succceding joy. But I
see no reason but both are included in the Text; but principally the first, and
the other consequently. As if he had said [When you see me Crucified your
hearts and hopes will begin to fail, and sorrow to overwhelm your minds, and
you will be exposed to the fury of the unbelieving World, but it will be but
for a moment: for when you see tha^ I am risen again your Joy will be revived;
and my Spirit afterward and continual encouragements shall greatly increase
and perpetuate your Joys, which no persecutions or sufferings shall deprive you
of, but they shall at last be perfected in the heavenly everlasting Joys.] The
cause of their sorrow is first his absence, and next their sufferings with him
in the World. when the bridegroom is taken from them they must fast; that is,
live an afflicted kind of life, in various sorrows: And the causes of their
succeeding Joy, are first, his Resurrection, and next his Spirit which is their
comforter, and lastly, the presence of his Glory at their reception into his
glorious Kingdom. Their sorrow was to be short as that of a woman in Travail,
and it was to have a tendency to their Joy. And their Joy was to be sure and
near, [I will see you again] and great [your heart shall rejoice] and
everlasting [your joy no man takes from you.]

The sense of the Text is contained in these six Doctrinal propositions.

Doct. 1. Sorrow goes before joy with Christ's Disciples.

Doct. 2. Christ's death and departure was the cause of his Disciples Sorrows.

Doct. 3. The Sorrows of Christ's Disciples are but short: It is but [ Now.]

Doct. 4. Christ will again visit his Sorrowful Disciples: though at the
present he seem to be taken from them.

Doct. 5. When Christ returns or appears to his Disciples, their sorrows
will be turned into joy.

Doct. 6. The joy of Christians in the return or reappearing of their Lord, is
such as no man shall take from them.

Of these by Gods assistance, I shall speak in order, and therefore be but
short on each.

Doct. 1. Sorrow goes before joy with Christ's disciples.

The evening and the morning make their day. They must sow in tears before they
reap in joy; They must have trouble in the World, and peace in Christ. God will
first dwell in the contrite heart to prepare it to dwell with him in glory. The
pains of travail must go before the joy of the beloved birth.

Qu. what kind of sorrow is it that goes before our joy.

Ans. 1. There is a sorrow positively sinful, which does (but should not) go
before our joy. Though this be not meant (directly) in the text, yet is it too
constant a foregoer of our comforts. It is not the joys of Innocence that are
our portion, but the joys of Restoration: And the pains of our disease go
before the ease and comfort of our recovery: we have our worldly sorrows, and
our passionate and pievish sorrows; like Jonas's for the withering of his
gourd. According to the degree of our remaining corruption, we have our
sorrows, which must be sorrowed for again. Sometimes we are troubled at the
providence of God, and sometimes at the dealings of men; at the words or
doings of enemies, of friends, of all about us: we are grieved if we have not
what we would have, and when we have it, it becomes our greater grief: nothing
well pleases us, till we so devote our selves to please our God, as to be
pleased in the pleasing of him.

2. And we have our sorrows which are sinful through our weakness and
imperfection when through the languishing feebleness of our Souls, we are
overmuch troubled at that which we may lawfully sorrow for with moderation.
When impatience causes us to make a greater matter of our afflictions than we
ought. If God do but try us with wants or Crosses; if we lose our friends, or
if they prove unkind; we double the weight of the Cross by our impatiency. This
comes from the remnants of unmortified selfishness, carnality and overloving
earthly things. Were they less loved, they would be less sorrowed for. If we
had seen their vanity and mortification had made them nothing to us, we should
then part with them as with vanity and nothing. It Is seldom that God or men
afflict us, but we therefore afflict our selves much more. As the destruction
of the wicked, so the troubles of the godly is chiefly of themselves.

3. There is a m^er natural suffering or sorrow, which is neither morally good
or bad: As to be weary with our labor, to be pained with our diseases; to be
sensible of hunger and thirst, of cold and heat; to be averse to death as death
(as Christ himself was;) and at last to undergo it, and lie down in the dust.
There are many sorrows which are the fruits of sin, which yet in themselves are
neither sin nor duty.

4. There are castigatory sorr^ws from the hand of God, which have a tendency
to our cure, if we use them according to his appointment. Such are all the
foresaid natural sufferings, considered as Gods means and instruments of our
benefit. He wounds the Body to heal the Soul. He lanceth the sore to let out
the corruption: He lets us blood to cure our Inflammations and Apostemated
parts. He chasteneth all that he loves and receives; Heb. 12. from v. 1. to
(...)
and we must be subject to a chastening Father if we will live. For he does it
for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.

5. There are honorable and gainful sufferings from blind malicious wicked
men, for the cause of Christ and righteousness. Such as the Gospel frequently
warns believers to expect. These are the sorrows that have the promises of
fullest joy. Not that the mere suffering in itself is acceptable to God. But
the Love which is manifested by suffering for him, is that which he cannot but
accept. So that the same measure of sufferings are more or less aceptable, as
there is more or less Love to God expressed by them! and as the honor of Christ
is more or less intended in them. For to give the body to be burned, without
Love, will profit us nothing. But when the cause is Christ's, 1 Cor. 13.3.
and the heart intends him as the end of the suffering, Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12.
then, Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the Kingdom of heaven, etc.

6. There are penitential and medicinal sufferings, for the killing of sin, and
helping on the work of grace, which are made our duty. In the former we are to
be but submissive patients; but in these we must be obedient agents, and must
inflict them on our selves. Such are the sorrows of contrition and true
repentance. The exercises of fasting, abstinence and humiliation. The grief of
the Soul for Gods displeasure, for the hiding of his face, and the abatement of
his graces in us. And all the works of mortifying self-denial (and forbearing
all forbidden pleasures) which God does call his servants to: Though in the
Primitive and Principal part of Holiness, there is nothing but what is sweet
and pleasant to a Soul, so far as it is holy: (As the Love of God and the Love
of others, and worshipping God and doing good, and joy, and thanks, and praise,
and obedience, etc.) Yet the Medicinal parts of grace, or holiness, have
something necessarily in them that is bitter, even to nature as nature, and not
only as corrupt, such as are contrition, self-denial, mortification,
abstinence, as aforesaid.

7. There are Charitable sorrows for the dishonor of God, and for the sin and
hurt and miseries of others. These also are our Duties and we must be Agents in
them as well as Patients. As we must first pray for the Hallowing of the name
of God, and the coming of his kingdom, and the doing of his will, on earth as
it is done in heaven! So we must most grieve for the abuse and dishonor of Gods
name, the hindering of his Kingdom, and the breaking of his Laws, that so many
Nations see not the Peril, and know not God, and have not the Gospel or will
not receive it; but live in rebellion against their maker, and in blindness,
obstinacy and hardness of heart, Ephesians. 4.18, 19.
and are given up to commit uncleanness with greediness: that so many nations
which are called Christians, are captivated in ignorance and superstition, by
the blindness, pride, carnality and covetousness of their usurping,
self-obtruding Guides. That so many men professing Christianity have so little
of the knowledge, or power of what they generally and ignorantly profess, and
live to the shame of their profession, the great dishonor and displeasure of
their Lord, and the grief or hardening of others; that the Church of Christ is
broken into so many sects and fractions, possessed with such an uncharitable
destroying zeal against each other, and persecuting their Brethren as cruelly
as Turks and Heathens do! that the best of Christians are so few and yet so
weak and liable to miscarriages; All these are the matter of that sorrow which
God has made our duty. And all these sorts of sorrow do go before a Christians
fullest joy.

Reas. 1. God will have some conformity between the order of Nature and of
Grace. Nonentity was before created entity: The evening before the morning:
Infancy before maturity of age: weakness before strength: The buried seed
before the plant, the flower and fruit: And infants cry before they laugh;
weakness is soon hurt, and very querulous! No wonder then if our sorrows go
before our joys.

2. Sin goes before grace, and therefore our sorrows are before our joys. The
seed is first fruitful which was first sown. Joy indeed has the elder Parent
in esse reali and absoluto, 1 Cor. 15. John 3.6.
but not in esse causali and relativo. We are the Children of the first Adam,
before we are Children of the second; we are born flesh of flesh, before we are
born Spiritual of the Spirit. And where Satan goes before Christ it is equal
that sorrow be before joy.

3. Our gracious Father and wise Physician, does see that this is the fittest
method for our cure. That we may deny our selves, we must know how little we
are beholden to our selves; and must smart by the fruit of our sin and folly
before we are eased by the fruit of Love and grace. It is the property of the
flesh to judge by sense, and therefore sense shall help to mortify it. The
frowns of the World shall be an antidote against its flatteries. It kills by
Pleasing and therefore it may help our cure by displeasing us. Loving it is
men's undoing; and hurting us is the way to keep us from overloving it. These
wholesome sorrows do greatly disable our most dangerous temptations; and preserve
us from the pernicious poison of prosperity! They rowze us up when we are lazy
and ready to sit down: They awake us when we are ready to fall asleep: They
drive us to God when we are ready to forget him, and dote upon a deceiver: They
teach us part of the meaning of the Gospel: without them we know not well, what
[a Savior, a promise, a pardon, grace] and many other Gospel terms, do
signify. They teach us to pray, and teach us to hear and read with
understanding; They tell us the value of all our Mercies, and teach us the use
of all the means of grace. They are needful to fix our flashy, light,
unconstant minds. Which are apt to be gazing upon every bait, and to be
touching or tasting the forbidden fruit; and to be taken with those things,
which we had lately cast behind our backs, till medicinal sorrow does awake our
reason and make us see the folly of our dreams. Yea if sorrow check us not and
make us wise, we are ready to lay by our grace and wit, and to follow any
goblin in the dark, Prove. 7.22, 23.
and like men bewitched, to be deceived by we know not what, and to go on as a
bird to the fowlers snare, as an ox to the slaughter, and as a Fool to the
correction of the stocks.

4. Moreover precedent sorrows, will raise the price of following Joys. They
will make us more desirous of the day of our deliverance, and make it the
welcomer to us when it comes. Heaven will be seasonable after a life of so much
trouble, and they that come out of great tribulation, Rev. Luke 14.28, 33. Romans
8.17, 18. Tim.
will joyfully sing the Praises of their Redeemer.

5. And God will have the members conformed to their Head: This was Christ's
method, and it must be ours. We must take up the Cross and follow him if ever
we will have the Crown; and we must suffer with him if we will be glorified
with him. Though the will of God be the Reason which alone should satisfy his
creatures yet these Reasons show you the Equity and goodness of his ways.

Use. 1. If sorrow before Joy be Gods ordinary Method of dealing with his most
beloved servants, learn hence to understand the importance of your Sorrows! You
say as Baruch, Jer. 45.3. Woe is me now! For the Lord has added grief to my
sorrow! I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest! You are ingenious in
recounting and aggravating your afflictions. But are you as ingenious in
expounding them aright? Do you not judge of them rather by your present sense,
than by their use and tendency? You will not do so by the bitterness of a
Medicine, or the working of a Purge or Vomit? You will like it best when it
works in that way, as usually it does with them that it cures. And should
you not be glad to find, that God takes that way with you, which he most
usually takes with those that he saves. Sure you do not set light by the Love
of God! Why then do you complain so much against the signs and products of it?
Is it not because you have yet much unbelief, and judge of Gods Love as the
flesh directs you, instead of judging by the effects and prognostics which
he himself has bid you judge by? We will grant to the flesh, that no
chastisement for the present seems joyous, but grievous; If you will believe
the Spirit, that nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, to them that arexercised thereby; and that whom the Lord loves
he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6, 11.
Misunderstand not then the prognostics of your present sorrows! Think how they
will work as well as how they taste. They boden good, though they are
unpleasant. If you were bastards and reprobates you might feel less of the Rod.
When the Plowers make furrows on you, it prepares you for the seed; and the
showers that water it prognosticate a plenteous harvest. Think it not strange
if he thresh and grind you, if you would be bread for your masters use. He is
not drowning his sheep when he washes them; nor killing them when he is
shearing them. But by this he shows that they are his own! And the new shorn
sheep do most visibly bear his name or mark, when it is almost worn out, and
scarce discernable, on them that have the longest fleece. If you love the world
and prosperity best, rejoice most in it, and grieve most for the want of it:
But if you love God best, and take him for your part and treasure, rejoice in
him, and in that condition which has the fullest significations of his love,
and grieve most for his displeasure, and for that condition which either
signifies it, or most enticeth you to displease him. 2 Cor. 4.18. Mat. 6.20,
21. Col. 3.1, 2, ^, 4.
If things present be your Portion, then seek them first, and rejoice in them,
and mourn when they are taken from you. But if really your portion be above
with Christ, let your hearts be there; and let your joys and sorrows and
endeavors signify it. The sense of bruits does judge of pain and pleasure only
by their present feeling: but the Reason of a man, and the Faith of a Christian
do estimate them according to their signification and importance. I know that
it is in vain to think by Reason, to reconcile the flesh, and sense unto its
sufferings; But if I may speak to you as to Men, much more if as to Christians,
and reason with your Reasonable part, I shall not at all despair of the success.

Qu. 1. Tell me then who it is that you suffer by; that has the principal
disposing hand in all? Is it one that you can reasonably suspect, of any want
of power, wisdom or goodness? Is he not much fitter to dispose of you, than you
or any mortals are? If the Physician be fitter than the patient, to determine
how he shall be ordered, and if you are fitter than your infant Child, and if
you are fitter than your beast, to determine of his Pasture, work and usage,
sure then you will grant, that God is much more fit than We. And if he would
give you your choice and say; [It shall go with thee all thy days, for
prosperity or adversity, life or death, as thou will thy self, or as thy
dearest friend will] you should say, Nay Lord, but let it be as thou will: For
I and my friend are foolish, and partial, and know not what is best for
ourselves. Not our wills but thy will be done.

Qu. 2. Do you not see that carnal pleasure is far more dangerous than all your
sorrows? Look on the ungodly that prosper in the world, and tell me whether you
would be in their condition? If not, why do you long for their temptations? and
to live in that air whose corruption causes such, epidemical mortalities? If
you would not with the Rich man, Luke 16. be damned for sensuality, nor with
the fool, Luke 12.19, 20. Say, Soul take thy ease, etc. When your Souls are
presently to be taken from you; or with him, Luke 18.22, 23. Go away sorrowful
from Christ, desire not the temptations which brought them to it. If you would
not oppress the people of God with Pharaoh, nor persecute the Prophets with
Ahab and Jezebel, nor resist the Gospel, and persecute the preachers of it with
the Scribes and Pharisees, 2 These. 14, 15, 16. Desire not the temptations which
led them to all this.

Qu. 3. Would you not follow your Savior, and rather be conformed to him and
to his Saints, than to the wicked that have their portion in this life. I doubt
you do not well study the life and sufferings of Christ, and the reason of
them; when you find your selves so little concerned in them, and so desirous of
another way. And would you not go to Heaven in the common way, that the Saints
of old have gone before you in. Read the Scripture and all Church history, and
observe which is the beaten path of life; and whether even among believers and
the Pastors of the Church, it was the persecuted or the prosperous that most
honored their profession! and which of them it was that corrupted the Church
with pride and domination, and kindled in it those Flames of contention which
are consuming it to this day. And sowed those seeds of divisions whose sour
fruit have set their Childrens teeth on edge. Mark whether it was the suffering
or the prospering part that has had the greatest hand in her after-sufferings.

Qu. 4. What says your own experience, and how has God dealt with you in the
time that is past? Has not your suffering done you good. If it have not, you
may thank your selves: For I am sure Gods rod has a healing virtue, and others
have received a cure by it. How much is mankind beholden to the Cross? When
David went weeping up mount Olivet, he was in a safer case, than when he was
gazing on Bathsheba from his battlements? And when Christ was sweating blood
upon mount Olivet, Luke 22.44.
it was a sign that man's Redemption was in hand: and when he was bleeding on
the Cross, and drinking vinegar and gall, it was almost finished. And if the
Cross has born such happy fruit, what reason have we to be so much against it?
If it have proved good for you that you were afflicted, and no part of your
lives have been more fruitful, why should your desires so much contradict your
own experience? If bitter things have proved the most wholesome, and a full and
luscious diet has caused your disease, what need you more, to direct your
judgment, if you will judge as men, and not as bruits?

Obj. But (you will say) it is not all sorrow that foretells Joy: some pass from
sorrow unto greater sorrow. How then shall we know whether our sorrows tend to
worse or unto better?

Ans. It is true that there are sorrows which have no such promise, as these
have in the text. As 1. the mere vindictive punishment of the wicked. 2. The
sinful sorrows which men keep up in themselves; proceeding from their sinful
Love of creatures. 3. And the corrections which are not improved by us to our
amendment and reformation.

But the promise belongs 1. to those sorrows which in sincerity we undergo
for the sake of Christ and righteousness. 2. To those sorrows which we our
selves perform as Duties, either for the dishonor of God or the sins or
miseries of others; or our penitential sorrows for our own offenses. 3. And to
those sorrows of chastisement which we patiently submit to and improve to a
true amendment of our hearts and lives. For though sin be the Material cause,
or the Meritorious cause, yet Love which makes Reformat^on the effect, will
also make the end to be our Comfort.

Use. 2. If this be Gods Method, condemn not then the generation suffer more
than other men. Think it not a dishonor to them to be in poverty, prisons,
banishment, or reproach, unless it be for a truly dishonorable cause. Call not
men miserable, for that which God makes the token of his love, and the
Prognostic of their joy. Methinks he that has once read the Psalm. 37. and 73.
and Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. and Joh. 13. and 15. and 2 These. 1. and well believes
them, should never err this old condemned Error any more. And yet it is common
among carnal men, to do as some beasts do, when one of their fellows is wounded
they all forsake him: so these stand looking with pity, or fear, or strangeness
upon a man that is under sufferings and slanders, as if it must needs be a
deserved thing; and think it a great dishonor to a man how innocent soever,
when they hear that he is used as offenders and malefactors are; forgetting
how by this, they condemn their Savior, and all his Apostles and Martyrs, and
the wisest, best, and happyest men that the earth has born. And all this is
but the blind and hasty judgment of sense and unbelief, which has neither the
wit to judge by the word of God, nor yet the patience to stay the end, and see
how the sorrows of the godly will conclude, and where the triumph of the
hypocrite will leave him.

And yet some there be that are apt to err on the other extreme, and to think
that every man is happy that is afflicted, and that such have all their sorrow
in this life; and that the suffering party is always in the right, and
therefore they are ready to fall in with any deluded sect, which they see to be
under reproach and suffering. But the cause must be first known, before the
suffering can be well judged of.

Christ's death and departure was the cause of his disciples sorrrows.

This is plain in the words [ Ye Now therefore have sorrow; but I will see you
again.] And the causes of this sorrow were these three conjunct. 1. That their
dear Lord whom they loved, and whom they had heard, and followed, and put their
trust in, must now be taken from them. If the parting of friends at death, do
turn our garments into the signs of our sad and mournful hearts, and cause us
to dwell in the houses of mourning, we must allow Christ's disciples some such
affections, upon their parting with their Lord.

2. And the Manner of his death, no doubt, did much increase their sorrows.
That the most innocent should suffer as a reputed malefactor, that he that
more contemned the wealth and pleasures and glory of the World, than ever man
did, and chose a poor inferior life, and would not have a Kingdom of this
World, and never failed in any duty to high or low, should yet be hanged
ignominiously on a Cross, as one that was about to usurp the Crown? That
deluded Sinners should put to death the Lord of life, and spit in the face of
such a Majesty, and hasten destruction to their nation and themselves; and that
all Christ's disciples must thus be esteemed the followers of a crucified
usurper, judge if we had been in their case our selves, whether this would have
been matter of sorrow to us, or not. Had it not been enough for Christ to have
suffered the pain, but he must also suffer the dishonor, even the imputation of
sin, which no man was so far from being guilty of? and of that particular sin,
usurpation of Dominion, and Treason against Caesar, which his heart and life
were as contrary to, as light to darkness? And was it not enough for Christians
to suffer so great calamities of bodies for righteousness sake, but they must
also suffer the reproach of being the seditious followers of a crucified
malefactor whom they would have made a King? No! our Lord would stoop to the
lowest condition for our sakes, which was consistent with his innocence and
perfection! Sin is so much worse than suffering, that we may take this for the
greatest part of his condescension, and strangest expression of his Love, that
he should take not only the nature and the sufferings of a man, but also the
nature and the Imputation of sinners. Though sin itself was inconsistent with
his perfection, yet so was not the false accusation and imputation of it: He
could not become a sinner for us; but he could be reputed a sinner for us, and
die as such. And when our Lord has submitted to this most ignominious kind of
suffering, it is not fit that we should be the choosers of our sufferings, and
say, Lord we will suffer any thing except the Reputation of being offenders,
and the false accusations of malicious men! If in this we must be made
conformable to our head, we must not refuse it, nor repine at his disposal of
us.

3. And their sorrow for Christ's departure was the greater, because they had so
little foresight of his Resurrection and return. It is strange to see how dark
they were in these articles of the faith, for all their long converse with
Christ, and his plain foretelling them his death and resurrection: and how much
of their teaching Christ reserved to the Spirit after his departure from them,
Joh. 12 16. Luke 18.31.32.33.34. Then took he unto him the twelve, and said
unto them, behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the
prophets concerning the Son of man shall be accomplished: For he shall be
delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked and spightfully, entreated,
and spit upon, and they shall scourge him and put him to death, and the third
day he shall rise again. And they unstood none of these things, and this saying
was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken. Had they
known all that would follow, and clearly foreseen his Resurrection and his
Glory they would then have been troubled the less for his death. But when they
saw him dye, and foresaw him not revive and rise and reign, then did their
hearrs begin to fail them, and they said, Luke 24.21. We trusted that it had
been he which should have redeemed Israel. Even as we use to lament
immoderately when we lay the bodies of our friends in the grave, because we see
not whither the Soul is gone, nor in what triumph and joy it is received unto
Christ; Which if we saw it would moderate our griefs. And even so we over-pity
our selves and our friends in our temporal sufferings, because we see not
whither they tend, and what will follow them. We see Job on the dunghill, but
look not so far as his restoration, Jam. 5.11. Behold we count them happy which
endure: Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy. There is no judging by
the present, but either by staying the end, or believing Gods predictions of it.

Use. It is allowable in Christ's disciples to grieve (in faith and moderately)
for any of his departure from them: They that have had the comfort of communion
with him in a life of faith and grace, must needs lament any loss of that
communion: It is sad with such a Soul, when Christ seems strange, or when
they pray and seek, and seem not to be heard! It is sad with a believer when he
must say, I had once access to the Father by the Son; I had helps in prayer and
I had the lively operations of the Spirit of grace, and some of the joy of the
holy Ghost, but now, alas, it is not so. And they that have had experience of
the fruit and comfort of his Word, and Ordinances, and Discipline, and the
Communion of saints, may be allowed to lament the loss of this, if he take it
from them. It was no unseemly thing in David, when he was driven from the
Tabernacle of God, to make that lamentation, Psalm. 42, and 43. As the heart
pants after the Water brooks, so pants my Soul after thee* O God: My Soul
thirsts for God, for the living God: When shall I come and appear before God?
My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say unto me,
where is thy God? -- O my God, my Soul is cast down within me, etc. And Psalm.
84.2, 3, 4. My Soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord: My
heart and my flesh cries out for the living God; yea the Sparrow has found an
house, and the Swallow a nest, etc. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house:
They will be still praising thee. -- For a day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand: I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell
in the tents of wickedness. It signifies ill when men can easily let Christ
go, or lose his word, or helps, and ordinances. When sin provokes him to hide
his face, and withdraw his mercies, if we can senslesly let them go, it is a
contempt which provokes him much more: If we are indifferent what he gives
us, it is just with him to be indifferent too, and to set as little by our
helps and happiness, as we set by them our selves. But we little know the
misery which such contempt prepares for, Jer. 6.8. Be thou instructed O
Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee! lest I make thee desolate; a Land not
Inhabited. Hos. 9.12. Yea, Woe also unto them when I depart from them. When God
goes, all goes: Grace and Peace, Help and Hope, and all that is good and
comfortable is gone, when God is gone! wonder not therefore if Holy Souls cry
after God, and fear the loss of his Grace and Ordinances; and if they lament
the loss of that, which dead-hearted Sensualists are a weary of, and would
drive away; it will be the damning sentence, Luke 8.37. Math. 25.41. Mat. 7.23.
Luke 13.27.
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity: And therefore all that is but like
it, is terrible to them that have any regard of God, or their Salvation.

Doct. 3. The sorrows of Christ's Disciples are but short. It is but NOW that
they have sorrow. And how quickly will this NOW

Reas. 1. Life it self is but short, and therefore the sorrows of this Life are
but short. Man that is born of a Woman is of few days, and full of trouble: He
comes forth like a flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a shadow, and
continues not, Job 14.1, 2. Though our days are evil, they are but few, Genesis
47.9. As our time makes haste, and posteth away, so also do our sorrows, which
will attain their period together with our Lives. As the pleasure of sin, so
the sufferings of the godly are but for a season, Heb. 11.26. Now, for a
season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, 1 Pet.
1.6. The pleasures and the pains of so short a life, are but like a pleasant or
a frightful Dream: How quickly shall we awake, and all is vanished. If we lived
as long as they did before the Flood, then worldly interest, prosperity and
adversity would be of greater signification to us, and yet they should seem
Nothing in comparison of Eternity: For where now are all the fleshly pains or
pleasures of Adam or Methuselah? Much more are they inconsiderable in so short
a life as one of ours. Happy is the Man whose sorrows are of no longer
continuance than this short and transitory life!

Reas. 2. Gods displeasure with his Servants is but short; and therefore his
corrections are but short, Psalm. 30.5. His anger endures but for a moment, but
in his favor is life, Isa. 54.7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken thee,
but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer, Isa. 26.20. Come my People, enter into thy
Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a little
moment, until the indignation be overpast. Thus even in Judgment does he
remember mercy, and consumes us not, because his compassions fail not, Lam. 3.
He will not always chide, nor will he keep his anger for ever, -- For he
knows our frame; he remembers that we are dust, Psalm. 103.9.14. His short
corrections are purposely fitted to prepare us for endless consolations.

Reas. 3. Our trial also must be but short, and therefore so must be our
sorrows. Though God will not have us receive the Crown, without the preparation
of a Conflict and a Conquest, yet will he not have our Fight and Race too long,
lest it overmatch our strength, and his Grace, and we should be overcome.
Though our Faith and we must be tried in the fire, yet God will see that the
Furnace be not over hot, and that we stay no longer, but till our Dross be
separated from us, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 9. Ps. 119.67.75. Ps. 129.1, 2, 3. Isa.
49.13. Psalm. 18.27.
God puts us not into the fire to consume us, but to refine us: That when we
come out we may say, It is good for us that we were afflicted, Psalm. 119.71.
and then he will save the afflicted People.

Reas. 4. The power of those that afflict Gods Servants wrongfully is but
short, and therefore the sorrows of such affliction can be but short; though it
be foreign Churches of whom I speak: I hope it is to such as take their case to
be to them as their own. While they are breathing out threatenings, they are
ready to breath out their guilty Souls. If a man in a Dropsy or Consumption
persecute us, we would not be over fearful of him, because we see he is a dying
man. And so little is the distance between the death of one man and another,
that we may well say all men's lives are in a Consumption; and may bear their
indignation, as we would do the injuries of a dying man! How short is the day
of the Power of darkness: Christ calls it but an hour, Luke 22.53. This is
your hour, and the power of darkness. How quickly was Herod eaten of Worms, and
many another cut off in the height of their prosperity, when they have been
raging in the heat of persecution? Little thought Ahab that he had been so near
his woeful day, when he had given order that Michaiah should be fed with the
Bread and Water of affliction, till he returned in peace: What persecutions
have the death of a Licinius, a Julian, a Qu. Mary, etc. shortened? While they
are raging they are dying; while they are condemning the Just, they are going
to be condemned by their most just avenger. How quickly will their Corpse be
laid in dust, and their condemned Souls be put under the Chains of darkness,
till the judgment of the great and dreadful day? He is not only an Unbeliever,
but irrational or inconsiderate, 2 Pet. 24. Jude 6.
that cannot see their end in the greatest of their glory! How easy is it to
see these bubbles vanishing, and to foresee the sad and speedy period of all
their cruelties and triumphs? Job 20.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Know thou not this of
old, since man was placed upon Earth, that the triumphing of the wiched is
short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment? Though his excellency
mount up to the Heavens, and his Head reach unto the Clouds, yet he shall
perish for ever like his own dung: They which have seen him shall say, where is
he. -- He shall fly away as a Dream, and shall not be found; yea, he shall be
chased away as a Vision of the night. The Eye also which saw him, shall see him
no more, neither shall his place behold him. Though pride do compass them about
as a Chain, and violence cover them as a Garment, and they are corrupt and
speak oppression or calumny wickedly, they speak loftily (or from on high)
Though they set their mouth against the Heavens, and their tongue walks
through the Earth, yet surely they are set in slippery places. God does cast
them down into destruction: How are they brought into desolation as in a
moment? They are utterly consumed with terrors; as a Or as Amyraldus Paraphras.
Cum olim evigilabunt, praesens eorum felicitas erit instar somnii, quod somno
discusso dissipatum est: quin etiam antequam evigilent, in ipsa illa urbe, in
qua antea florebant vanam istam felicitatis po^pam, in qua antea volitabant,
reddes contemnendam, tanquam umbram aut imaginem evanescente^* in qua nihil
solidi est.
Dream from one that awaketh, so, O Lord, in awaking, (or raising up, that is,
says the Chaldee Paraphrase, in thy day of judging) or as all the other
Translations, in civitate tua, in thy Kingdom or Government) thou shall despise
their Image, that is, show them and all the World how despicable that Image of
greatness and power, and felicity was which they were so proud of. If such a
Nubecula est cito evanescit, said Athanasius of Julian.
bubble of vain glory, such an Image of felicity, such a Dream of power and
greatness, be all that the Church of God has to be afraid of, it may be well
said, as Isa. 2.22. Cease ye from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils? For
wherein is he to be accounted of? When Julian's death was told at Antioch, they
all cried out, Maxim fatue! ubi sunt vaticinia tua? Vicit Deus and Christus
ejus. Abbas Vrspargens. page 91.
Psalm. 146.4. His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth; in that very
day his thoughts perish. And Isa. 50.9. Behold the Lord God will help me, who
is he that shall condemn me? Lo, they all shall wax old as a Garment; the Moth
shall eat them up. And Isa. 51.7, 8. Hearken unto me ye that know
righteousness, the People in whose heart is my law: Fear ye not the reproach of
men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings: For the Moth shall eat them up
like a Garment, and the Worm shall eat them like Wool: But my righteousness
shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation. The sorrows
which so short-lived power can infl^ct, can be but short: You read of their
Victories and Persecutions in the News-books one year, and quickly after of
their death.

Use. Hence therefore you may learn how injudicious they are, that think
Religion is disparaged by such short and small afflictions of Believers; and
how unexcusable they are* who yield unto temptation, and venture upon sin, and
comply with the ungodly, and forsake the truth, through the fear of so short
and momentary sorrows: When there is none of them but would endure the prick of
a Pin, or the scratch of a Briar, or the biting of a Flea to gain a Kingdom, or
the opening of a Vein, or the griping of a Purge to save their Lives. O how
deservedly are ungodly men forsaken of God: For how short a pleasure do they
forsake him, and the everlasting pleasures? And how short a trouble do they
avoid, by running into everlasting trouble? If sin had not first subdued
reason, men would never make it a matter of question, whether to escape so
small a suffering they should break the Laws of the most righteous God; nor
would they once put so short a pain or pleasure into the balance against the
endless pain and pleasure? Nor would a temptation bring them to deliberate on a
matter, which should be past deliberation with a man that is in his Wits. And
yet alas, how much do these short concernments prevail through all the World!
Unbelievers are short sighted; they look only or chiefly to things near and
present! A lease of this empty World for a few years, yea an uncertain tenure
of it, is preferred before the best security for eternal life. Its present
pleasures which they must have, and its present sorrows which they take care to
escape. As Christ has taught us to say about these worldly things, so the
Devil has taught them to say about everlasting things, Care not for to morrow,
the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self; sufficient to the day
is the evil thereof, Math. 6.34. Therefore when the day of their calamity shall
come, a despairing Conscience will perpetually torment them, and say, This is
but the sorrow which thou chosest to endure, or the misery which thou would
venture on, to escape a present inconsiderable pain.

If there be any of you that shall think that present sufferings are
considerable things, to be put into the scales against eternity, or that are
tempted to murmuring and impatience under such short afflictions, I desire them
but to consider, 1. that your suffering will be no longer than your sin. And if
it endure but as long, is it any matter of wonder or repining. Can you expect
to keep your sickness, and yet to be wholly freed from the pain? Can sin and
suffering be perfectly separated? Do you think to continue ignorant and proud,
and selfish, and in so much remaining unbelief, carnality, worldliness and
sloth, and yet never to feel the Rod or Spur, nor suffer any more than if you
had been innocent? Deceive not your selves, it will not be. Sin lies at the
door, and be sure at last it will find you out, Prove. 11.31. Genesis 4.7. Numb.
32.23.
Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the Earth, much more the ungodly
and the sinner. Judgment must begin at the House of God, and the righteous are
saved with much ado, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. God is not reconciled to the sins of any
man: And as he will show by his dealings, that he is reconciled to their
persons, so will he show that he is not reconciled to their sins. If God
continue your sufferings any longer than you continue your sin, and if you can
truly say, I am afflicted though I am innocent, then your impatience may have
some excuse.

2. Your sorrows shall be no longer than you make them necessary, and will you
grudge at your own benefit? Or at the trouble of your Physic while you
continue your disease? It is but [ if need be] that now for a season ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6, And who makes the Need? Is
it God or you? Who makes you dull and sloathful, and sensual? Who turns your
hearts to earthly things, and deprives you of the sweetness of things spiritual
and heavenly? Who makes you proud and unbelieving, and uncharitable? It is he
that does this, that causes the need of your afflictions, and is to be blamed
for the bitterness of them; but it is your Physician that is to be thanked and
praised for fitting them so wisely to your Cure.

3. Your sorrows shall not be so long as you deserve. It is strange
ingratitude, for that man to grudge at a short affliction that is saved from
everlasting misery, and confesses he has deserved the pains of Hell. Confess
with thankfulness, That it is his mercy that you are not consumed and
condemned, because his compassions fail not: If God be your portion, hope in
him: For the Lord is good to them that wait for him; to the Soul that seeks
him: It is good that you both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the
Lord: It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth: He sits alone
and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him: He puts his mouth in
the dust, if so be there may be hope. He gives his Cheek to him that smites
him, he is filled full with reproach: For the Lord will not cast off for ever,
but though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the
multitude of his mercies, Lam. 3.22. to 33. Ezr. 9.13. All that is come upon us
is for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses, and God has punished us
less than our iniquities.

4. Your sorrows shall not be so long as the sorrows of the ungodly, nor as
those that you must endure, if you will choose sin to escape these present
sorrows. Abels sorrow is not so long as Cains: Nor Peter's or Paul's so long as
Judas's. If the Offering of a more acceptable Sacrifice do cost a righteous man
his life, alas what is that to the punishment that malignant envious Cainites,
or treacherous Judas's must endure. What is the worst that man can do, or the
most that God will here inflict, to the Reprobates endless hellish torments? O
had you seen what they endure, or had you felt those pains but a day or hour, I
can hardly think that you would ever after make so great a matter of the
sufferings of a Christian here for Christ, or that you would fear such
sufferings more than hell. It is disingenuous to repine at so gentle a Rod, at
the same time whilst millions are in the flames of Hell, and when these
sufferings tend to keep you thence.

5. Your sorrows shall not be so long as your following joys, if you be
persevering conquering believers. What is a sickness, or a scorn, or a Prison,
or banishment, or shame, or death, when it must end in the endless joys of
Heaven. O do but believe these with a lively, sound, effectual Faith, and you
will make light of all the sufferings in the way. Nihil crus sentit in nervo,
says Tertullian, Heb. 11.25, 26, etc.
cum animus est in Coelo: The mind that is in Heaven, and sees him that is
invisible, will easily bear the Bodies pains. Mistake not in your accounts, and
you will reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17,
18. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, does work for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: For the things which are
seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

Use 2. And if it be but for a [ Now] that you must have sorrows, how
reasonable is it that those sorrows be moderated and mixed with joy? And how
just are those commands, Rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.16. Math. 5, 10, 11, 12.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, Romans 12.12.
Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, Act. 5.42. How rational was their
joy, who being beaten and forbidden to Preach, departed from the presence of
the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the
name of Christ; 1 Pet. 4.13, 14. Rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of
Christ's sufferings. -- If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are
ye; for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you* On their part he is
evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified: It is a shame to be dejected
under a short and tolerable pain, which is so near to the eternal pleasure; and
to suffer as if we believed not the end, and so to sorrow as men that are
without hope.

Doct. 4. Christ will again visit his sorrowful Disciples. He removes not from
them with an intent to cast them off. When he hides his face, he means not
to forsake them: When he takes away any ordinances or mercies, he does not
give them a Bill of divorce. When he seems to yield to the powers of
darkness, he is not overcome, nor will he give up his Kingdom or Interest in
the World. When he lets the Boar into his Vineyard, it is not to make it
utterly desolate, or turn it common to the barren wilderness. For,

1. He has conquered the greatest enemies already; and therefore there
remains none to conquer him. He has triumphed over Satan; Death and Hell: He
has conquered sin, and what is there left to depose him from his Dominion?

2. He retains still his Relation to his Servants: Whether he be corporally
present or absent, he knows his own! and it is their care also, that whether
present or absent, they may be accepted of him, 2 Cor. 5.7, 8, 9. He is their
Head while they are suffering on Earth; and therefore he feels their
sufferings and infirmities, Heb. 4.15. And hence it is that he thus rebukes a
persecuting Zealot, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, Act. 9, 4.

3. He has not laid by the least measure of his love; he loves us in Heaven
as much as he did on Earth; Having loved his own which were in the World, to
the end he loved them, Joh. 13.1. And as Joseph's love could not long permit him
to conceal himself from his Brethren, but broke out the more violently after a
short restraint, so that he fell on their Necks and wept; so will not the more
tender love of Christ permit him long to hide his face, or estrange himself
from the People of his Love: And when he returns, it will be with redoubled
expressions of endearment.

4. His Covenant with his Servants is still in force; his Promises are sure,
and shall never be broken, though the performance be not so speedy as we
desire, Deuteronomy. 7.9. Know therefore that the Lord thy God he is God, the faithful
God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep his
Commandments to a thousand generations, and repayeth them that hate him to
their face to destroy them: He will not be slack to him that hates him, he
will repay him to his face, 1 King. 8.23. He keeps Covenant and Mercy with
his Servants that walk before him with all their heart, So Dan. 9.4. Neh. 1.5.
and 9.32. And it is the promise of Christ when he departed from his Servants,
That he will come again and take them to himself, that where he is, there they
may be also, Joh. 14.3. and 12.26.

5. His own interest, and honor, and office, and preparations, do engage him to
return to his disconsolate Flock: His Jewels and peculiar Treasure are his
interest, Mal. 3.17. 1 Pet. 2.9. Exodus 19.5. He that has chosen but a little
Flock (Luke 12.32.) and confined his interest and treasure into such a narrow
compass, will not forsake that little Flock, but secure them to his Kingdom. He
that has made it his office to Redeem and Save them, and has so dearly bought
them, and gone so far in the work of their Salvation, will lose none of all his
cost and preparations, but for his People, and his Blood, and his Honor, and
his Fathers Will, and Love will certainly finish what he has undertaken. And
therefore his withdrawings shall not be everlasting.

6. It is for their sakes that he withdraws for a time: Though the bitter
part be for their sin, it is intended as Medicinal for their benefit; sometimes
he does it to awake and humble them, and stir them up to seek him, and call
after him: To show them what they have done in provoking him to withdraw and
hide his face, that renewed repentance may prepare them for the comforts of his
return. Sometimes he has such work for them to do, which is not so agreeable
to his presence; as fasting, and mourning, and confessing him in sufferings,
Math. 9.15. And sometimes he has comforts of another kind to give them in his
seeming absence, Joh. 16.7. I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that
I go away: For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I
depart I will send him to you. As there were comforts which the Disciples were
fittest for in Christ's Bodily absence, so when he will take away his
ordinances, or our prosperity or friends, there are comforts of another sort,
in secret Communion with him, and in suffering for him, which his people may
expect: Not that any can expect it, who on that pretense do reject these
Ordinances and Mercies, no more than the Disciples could have expected the
Comforter, if they had rejected the corporal presence of Christ: But God has
such supplies for those that mourn for his departure.

Use 1. Misunderstand not then the departings of your Lord! It is too bad to
say with the evil servant, My Lord delayeth his coming; and worse to say, he
will never return. 1. He will return at his appointed day to Judge the World;
to justify his Saints whom the World condemned; to answer the desires, and
satisfy all the expectations of Believers; and to comfort, and everlastingly
reward the faithful that have patiently waited for his return. And when he
returns with Salvation, then shall we also return from our calamities, and
shall discern b^tween the righteous and the wicked, between him that served
God, and him that served him not, Mal. 3.18. Undoubtedly our Redeemer lives,
and shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and though after our Skin,
worms devour these Bodies, yet in our Flesh we shall see God, Job. 19.25, 26.
Behold he comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him, and all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him, even so
Amen, Rev. 1.7. Though unbelieving Scoffers shall say, where is the promise of
his coming? 2 Pet. 3.4. Yet Believers consider, that a day is with the Lord as
a thousand years, and a thousand years but as a day; and that the Lord is not
slack of his promise, but long suffering, v. 8.9. He will not leave us
comfortless, but will come unto us, Joh. 14.18* The patient expectation of the
Just shall not be forgotten, Ps. 9.7, 8.
nor in vain. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with
us; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his Mighty Angels,
in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power,
when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that
believe in that day, 2 These. 1.6. to 11.

2. And he will return also to the seemingly forsaken Flocks of his Disciples:
He has his times of trial, when the Shepherds being smitten, the Sheep are
scattered; and he has his times of gathering the scattered ones again
together, and giving them Pastors after his own heart, that shall feed them
with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3.14, 15. And shall say, What is the
Chaff unto the Wheat, Jer. 23.28. When we cry, Woe is me for my hurt! my wound
is grievous! We must also say, Truly this is a grief, and I must bear it: My
Tabernacle is spoiled, and all my Cords are broken: My Children are gone forth
of me, and they are not, there is none to stretch forth my Tent any more, and
to set up my Curtains; for the Pastors are become brutish, and have not sought
the Lord. -- O Lord correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest
thou bring me to nothing, Jer. 10.19, 20, 21.24. Many Pastors have destroyed my
Vineyard, they have trodden my Portion under foot, they have made my pleasant
Portion a desolate Wilderness, and being desolate it mourns to me; the whole
Land is made desolate, because no man lays it to heart, Jer. 12.10, 11. But
woe be unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter the Sheep of my Pasture, says
the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord against the Pastors that feed my
People, ye have scattered my Flock, and driven them away, and have not visited
them: Behold I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, and I will gather
the remnant of my Flock. -- And I will set up Shepherds over them which shall
feed them, and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be
lacking, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 34. Woe to the Shepherds of Israel that feed
themselves; should not the Shepherds feed the Flocks? Ye eat the fat, and
cloth you with the Wool, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the
Flocks. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that
which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was
lost; but with FORCE and with CRUELTY have ye ruled them. -- Thus says the
Lord, behold I am against the Shepherds, and I will require my Flock at their
hands, and cause them to cease from feeding the Flock, neither shall the
Shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my Flock from their
mouth. -- Behold I, even I, will both search my Sheep and seek them out, and
will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the
Cloudy and dark day. -- And as for you, O my Flocks, behold I judge between
Cattle and Cattle, between the Rams and the Hee-Goats? Is it a small thing to
you, to have eaten up the good Pasture, but ye must tread down with your Feet
the residue of your Pastures, and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must
foul the residue with your Feet? And as for my Flock, they eat that which you
have trodden with your Feet, and they drink that which ye have fouled with your
Feet. Therefore thus says the Lord God unto them, behold I, I will judge
between the fat Cattle and the lean? Because ye have thrust with Side and with
Shoulder, and pushed all the Diseased with your Horns, till ye have scattered
them abroad, etc. Read the rest. Particular Churches may be scattered to
dissolution, but none of the faithful Members shall be lost.

3. And Christ has his returning time, to the Souls of his Servants which seem
to be forsaken by him: Weeping may endure for a Night, but Joy comes in the
Morning, Psalm. 30.5. When he seems their Enemy, and writes bitter things
against them, he is their surest friend, and will justify them himself from
their accusers. Though they may be troubled when they remember God, and their
Spirit be overwhelmed in them, and their Souls refuse to be comforted, and say,
will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? is his
Mercy cle^n gone for ever? does his pr^mise fail for evermore? has God
forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? yet must
we rebuke this unbelief, and say, This is my infirmity, I will remember the
works of the Lord, surely I will remember thy wonders of old. I will meditate
of thy works, and talk of thy doings, Psalm. 77. The long Night that has no
day, the long Winter that has no Summer is the reward of the Ungodly: But
Light arises to the righteous in his darkness, and Joy to them that are
upright in heart, Psalm. 112.4. Light is sown for them, and in season will
spring up, Psalm. 97.11. The Righteousness which was hid from the World by false
accusations, and from our selves by the terrors and mistakes of darkness, will
God bring forth as light, and our Judgment as the noon day, Psalm. 37.6. Our
Eclipse will vanish when the Sun returns, and our sins no longer interpose.
And though all our enquiries and complainings have not brought us out of the
dark, yet God is the Lord who shows us light, Psalm. 118.27. And in his light
we shall see light, Psalm. 36.9. Say then, O distrustful trembling Christian,
Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and why art thou thus disquieted within me?
Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
Countenance and my God, Psalm. 42.5.11. and 43.5. Though now you go mourning
because of the oppression of the Enemy, God will send out his light and truth,
and they shall lead you, and bring you to his holy Hill and Tabernacle. Psalm.
43.2, 3, 4.
And then you shall go with praise to the Altar of God, even of God your
exceeding joy.

Use 2. Learn then how to behave your selves in the absence of your Lord, till
his return: If you ask me, How? Ans. 1. Be not contented and pleased with his
absence. You must bear it, but not desire it. Else you are either Enemies, or
Children that have run themselves into such guilt and fears, that they take
their Father for their Enemy. 2. Nay be not too indifferent and insensible of
your Lords departure. Love is not regardless of the company of our Beloved. He
may well take it ill, when you can let him go, and be as merry without him, as
if his absence were no loss to you. If you care no more for him, he will make
you care, before you shall feel the comforts of his presence. Such contempt is
the way to a worse forsaking: Call after him till he return, if he hide his
face. 3. Turn not aside to the creature for content, and seek not to make up
the loss of his presence, with any of the deceitful comforts of the World. Let
him not see you take another in his stead, as if Riches, or Power, or Worldly
friends, or fleshly pleasure, would serve your turn instead of Christ: If once
you come to this, he may justly leave you to your vain contents, and let them
serve your turn as long as they can; and see how well they will supply his
room. O see that no Idol be admitted into his place till Christ return. 4. Be
not emboldened by his absence to sin: Say not as the evil Servant in your
Hearts, My Lord delayeth his coming, and so begin to smite your fellow
Servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, lest your Lord come in a day
when you look not for him, and cut you asunder, and appoint your Portion with
the Hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Math. 24.48. to
51. Because Christ comes not to judge the wicked as soon as they have sinned,
they are emboldened to sin more fearlesly: And because Sentence against an evil
work, is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of the Sons of M^n, are
fully set in them to do evil, Eccl. 8.11. But behold the Judge is at the door,
Jam. 5.9. He that comes will not tarry. And for all these things you must come
to Judgment, Eccl. 11.9. and 12.14. 5. Be not discouraged by your Lords delay,
but wait his coming in faith and patience. Can you not wait for him so short a
time! O how quickly will it be accomplished! sink not into despondency of mind!
be not dismayed in the duties or sufferings to which you are called. Lift up
the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, and make straight paths for
your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather
be healed, Heb. 12.12, 13. Be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be sober and hope unto the end, 1 Pet. 1.13. Ye are the
House of Christ, if ye hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope
firm unto the end, Heb. 3.6.14. and 6.11. Ye have need of patience, that having
done the Will of God, ye may inherit the promise, Heb. 10.36.11.

Doct. 5. When Christ shall again appear to his Disciples, their sorrows shall
be turned into joy: When Christ returns, Joy returns, says David, Psalm.
30.7. Thou hidest thy face, and I was troubled. But v. 11, 12. Thou have turned
for me my mourning into dancing: Thou have put off my Sackcloth, and girded me
with gladness, to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be
silent: O Lord my God I will give thanks unto thee for ever. When the Sun
arises it is day, and its approach dispelleth the Winter Frosts, and reviveth
the almost dying Creatures, and calls up the Life which was hidden in the
seed, or retired unto the root, after a sharp and spending Winter, how quickly
does the Suns return recover the verdour and beauty of the Earth, and cloth it
in green, and spangle it with the ornaments of odoriferous Flowers, and enrich
it with sweet and plenteous fruits: The Birds that were either hid or silent,
appear and sing, and the face of all things is changed into joy. So is it with
the poor deserted Soul, upon the return of Christ; unbelieving doubts and fears
then vanish: The Garments of sadness are laid aside, and those of gladness are
put on: The language of distrust and despairing lamentations are first turned
into words of hope, and then into words of peace, and then into joyful
thankfulness and praise. The Soul that was skilled in no spiritual discourse,
but complaining of a dead and frozen heart, of dull and cold and lifeless
duties, is now taken up in the rehearsals of the works of infinite love, and
searching into the mysteries of redemption, and reciting the great and precious
promises, and magnifying the name and grace of its Redeemer, and expatiating in
the praises of the everlasting Kingdom, the heavenly glory, the blessed
Society, and especially of the Lamb, and of the eternal God. You would not
think that this is the same Person, that lately could scarce think well of God,
or that dwelt in tears and dust, and darkness, and could think of nothing but
Sin and Hell, and from every text and every Providence, concluded nothing, but
[ undone] or damned: Would you think this joyful, thankful Soul, were the same
that lately was crying on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me!
that could find nothing written on the tables of his heart, but forsaken,
miserable and undone; that daily cried out, It is too late, there is no hope, I
had a day of grace, but it is past and gone. When Christ returns, and causes
his face to shine upon them, all this is turned into [ Praise and honor and
glory unto the Lamb, and to the Almighty and most Holy God, that lives for
ever, and is the everlasting Joy and Portion of his Saints.] And sooner or
later, thus will it be with all the upright, that wait on God in the day of
trial, and deal not falsely in his Covenant: The Son who was brought up with the
Father, and was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, rejoicing also
in the habitable parts of the Earth, whose delights were with the Sons of Men,
does bless the Children of Wisdom with a participation of his delights: For
blessed are they that keep his ways. -- Blessed is the Man that hears him,
watching daily at his Gates, waiting at the Posts of his Doors: For he that
finds him finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord, Prove. 8.30. to
the 36. Though Christ had left his Disciples so lately under fears and trouble,
guilty of deserting him, and seemingly now deserted by him, yet early on the
third day, he arises for their consolation, and presently sends them these
joyful words, in the first speech he utters, and that by a Woman that had
been sorrowful and a sinner, [ Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend
to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God] Joh. 20.17. Those
that his Ministers have long been comforting in vain, when Christ returns he
will revive and comfort them in a moment, and with a word. The Soul that now
Cries [ O it is impossible, it will never be] does little know how easy it is
with Christ. It is but saying, Lazarus arise: Or, Let there be Light, and there
will be Life and Light immediately at his command.

2. And so when he restores his Ordinances and Order to a forsaken Church, and
restores their holy opportunities and advantages of grace, what gladness and
praising their Redeemer will there be? As it was with the Churches upon the
death of Julian, and after the Heathen and the Arrian persecutions, in the
happy Reign of Constantine, Theodosius, Marcian, etc. How joyfully did the
English Exiles return to Worship God in their Native Land, upon the death of
Queen Mary; and see the fall of Bonner and Gardener, that had sacrificed so
many holy Christians in the Flames? How gladly did they grow in the Soil that
was manured with the Blood and Ashes of their faithful Brethren, and reap the
fruit of their fortitude and sufferings? When Christ whipped the Buyers and
Sellers out of the Temple, and would not let them make the House of Prayer a
place of Merchandise, what Hosanna's were sounded in Jerusalem, Math. 21.15,
16. When the Salvation of Israel comes out of Zion, and the Lord brings back
the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad,
Psalm. 14, 7. Blessed are they that dwell in his house, for they will be still
praising him! For a day in his Courts is better than a thousand, Psalm. 84.4.10.
Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound; they shall walk, O Lord, in
the Light of thy countenance; in thy name shall they rejoice all the day, and
in thy righteousness shall they be exalted: For the Lord is our defense, and
the holy One of Israel is our King, Psalm. 89.15, 16, 17, 18. What gladness was
there at a private meeting of a few Christians that met to pray for Peter, when
they saw him delivered and come among them, Act. 12.12.5.14. When the Churches
had Rest, they were edified and walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost* Act. 9.31.

3. But the great joy will be when Christ returns in his Glory at the last
day! what a multitude of sorrows will there be ended? And what a multitude of
Souls will then be comforted? What a multitude of desires and prayers, and
expectations will then be answered! How many thousand that have sowed in tears,
shall then reap in everlasting joy! When the Creature shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans
8.26, 27. When all the faith and labor, and patience of all the Saints from
the beginning of the World, shall be rewarded with the Rivers of celestial
pleasure, and the just shall enter into their Masters joy, Mat. 25.21.

That you may the better understand the sweetness of all these sorts of joy,
which Christ's return will bring to Saints, observe these following ingredients
in them.

1. It is Christ himself that is the object of their joy: He that is the dearly
beloved of their Souls; that for their sakes was made a man of sorrows. It is
he who is their hope and help: with whom they are in covenant as their only
Savior. In whom they have trusted, with whom they have deponed their Souls! If
he should fail them, all would fail them; and they were of all Men most
miserable: They would be comfortless if he should not come unto them, and were
not their comfort. The World cannot help and comfort them, for it is empty,
vain, a transient shadow: It will not, for it is malignant, and our professed
enemy. For we know that we are of God, and the whole World is in maligno
positus, set on wickedness, (or as some think because (...) is put for the
Devil in the foregoing Verse, and the Article here also used) is as it were
planted into the Devil, or put under the Devil to War against Christ and the
holy Seed: And indeed Satan seems in this War against the Church, to have
somewhat like success as he had against Christ himself: As Christ must be a Man
of sorrows and scorn, and be crucified as a Blasphemer and a Traitor, before
he rejoice the hearts of his Disciples by his resurrection, so the Church was a
persecuted, scorned handful of Men, for the first three hundred years, and then
it rose by Christian Emperors to some reputation, till Satan by another game
overcame them by Judas his Successors; that for [ what will you give me] by
Pride and Worldliness betrayed them into that deplorate state, in which they
have continued these 900 Years at least: So that the Christian name is confined
to a sixth part of the World; and serious sanctified Believers are persecuted
more by the Hypocrites that wear the Livery of Christ, than by Heathens and
Infidels themselves. And when the Church is so low, almost like Christ on the
Cross and the Grave, will not a Resurrection be a joyful change? When it cries
out on the Cross, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Will not Christ
appearing for its deliverance be a welcome sight?

It was when Adam had brought a Curse on himself and his Posterity, and all the
Earth, that Redemption by the holy Seed was promised; and when Satan had
conquered Man, that Christ was promised to conquer him. It was when the World
was destroyed by the deluge that its reparation was promised to Noah: It was
when Abraham was a Sojourner in a strange Land, that the peculiar promises were
made to him and his Seed. It was when the Israelites were enslaved to
extremity, that they were delivered. And it was when the Scepter was departing
from Judah, and they and the World were gone from God, that Christ the Light of
the World was sent. And when the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the
Earth? When we see how vast the Heathen and Infidel Kingdoms are, and what a
poor despised People those are that set their chief hopes on Heaven, and how
Satan seems every where to prevail against them, and most by false and
Worldly Christians, what a trial is this to our Faith and Hope? As the
Disciples said of a Crucified Christ, We trusted it had been he that should
have Redeemed Israel; we are almost ready in the hour of temptation to say, We
trusted that Gods Name should have been Hallowed, and his Kingdom come, and his
Will be done, on Earth as it is in Heaven? And O how seasonable, and how joyful
will the Churches Resurrection be after such low and sad distress? Many a sad
Christian under the Sentence of Death, is going hence with fear and trouble:
When a Moment shall transmit them into the joyful presence of their Lord, and
the possession of that which with weakness and fear they did but believe.

2. And Christ will not come or be alone: With him will come the New Jerusalem:
He will put glory on each Member, but much more on the whole O how many of our
old Companions are now there? Not under temptation, or any of the tempters
power? Not under the darkness of ignorance, error, or unbelief? Not under the
pains of a languid, diseased, corruptible Body? Not under the fear of Sin, or
Satan, or wicked Men: Not under the terror of Death or Hell, of an accusing
Conscience, or the wrath of God: O with what joy shall we see and enjoy that
glorious Society? To be translated thither from such a World as this, from such
temptations, sins, such fears and sorrows, such perfidious malignant
wickedness, what will it be but to be taken as from a Goal unto a Kingdom, and
from the Suburbs of Hell, unto the Communion of Blessed Saints and Angels, and
into the Joy of our Lord.

Doct. 6. Your Joy shall no Man take from you: The Joy that comes at Christ's
return will be a secure everlasting joy. Impregnable as Heaven it self: Christ
and his Church will be Crucified no more: Nor any more despised, scorned,
persecuted, or falsely accused and condemned: Look not then for Christ or his
Church in the Grave; he is not here, he is risen: Who can we fear will deprive
us of that joy?

1. Not our selves: And then we need to fear no other: Our folly and sin is our
Enemies strength: They can do nothing against us, without our selves. The
Arrows that wound us are all feathered from our own Wings. But our trying time
will then be past, and confirmation will be the reward of Conquest. He that
has kept us in the day of our trial, will keep us in our state of rest and
triumph. How the (now) fallen Angels came to lose their first innocence and
welfare, is unknown to us: But we have a promise of being for ever with Christ.

2. Nor shall Devils deprive us of that joy: Neither by those malicious
temptations wherewith they now molest and haunt us: Nor by the unhappy
advantages which we have given them by our sin, to corrupt our imaginations and
thoughts, and affections, or to disturb our passions, or pervert our
understandings. Nor by any terror or violence to molest us.

3. Nor shall any Men take from us that joy: The blessed will increase it:
Their Joy will be ours; and the wicked will be utterly disabled: They will be
miserable themselves in Hell. They will no more endanger us by flattering
temptations; nor terrify us by threats; nor tread us down by their power; nor
hurt us in their malice; nor render us odious by false accusations; nor triumph
over us with pride and false reproach. They that said of the Church as of
Christ, He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him; for he
said, I am the Son of God; Mat. 27.43.
they shall see that God has delivered his Church, and he will have it.

Use. And will not a firm belief of all this, rejoice the Soul under all
disappointments and sufferings on Earth? And does not our dejectedness and want
of Joy declare the sinful weakness of our faith? O Sirs, our sadness, our
impatience, our small desire to be with Christ, the little comfort that we
fetch from Heaven do tell us that Christianity, and a life of Faith, is a
harder work than most imagine: And the Art and Form* and Words of Holiness are
much more common than a holy Heavenly mind and life. Christ speaks many words
of pity, to his Servants under sorrows and sinking grief, which some mistake
for words of approbation or command. Why are ye afraid, O ye of little faith,
were words both of compassion and reproof. I am sure the great unbelief that
appears in much of our dejectedness and sorrow, deserves more reproof than
our sufferings deserve to be entertained with those sorrows.

Use 2. I will therefore take my farewell of you, in advising, and charging you
as from God, that you be not deceived by a flattering World, nor dejected by a
frowning World, but place your hopes on those Joys which no Man can take from
you. If you cannot trust the Love of God, and the Grace and Promises of our
Savior, and the witness of the Holy Spirit, you must despair; for there is no
other trust.

So many of you seem to have chosen this good part, the one thing necessary
which shall never be taken from you, that in the midst of our sorrows, I must
profess that I part with you with thankfulness and joy. And I will tell you for
what I am so thankful, that you may know what I would have you be for the time
to come.

I I thank the Lord that chose for me so comfortable a station, even a People
whom he purposed to bless.

II. I thank the Lord that I have not labored among you in vain, and that he
opened the Hearts of so great a number of yours, to receive his Word with a
teachable and willing mind.

III. I thank the Lord that he has made so many of you as helpful to your
Neighbors in your place, as I have been in mine; and that you have not been
uncharitable to the Souls of others, but have with great success endeavored
the good of all.

IV. I rejoice that God has kept you humble, that you have not been addicted
to proud ostentation of your Gifts or Wisdom, nor inclined to invade any part
of the Sacred Office, but to serve God in the capacity where he has placed you.

V. I rejoice that God has made you Unanimous, and kept out Sects and
Heresies, and Schisms, so that you have served him as with one Mind and Mouth:
And that you have not been addicted to proud wranglings, disputings, and
contentions, but have lived in Unity, Love and Peace, and the practice of known
and necessary truths.

VI. I rejoice that your frequent meetings in your Houses, spent only in
Reading, Repeating your Teachers Sermons, Prayer and Praise to God, have had
none of those effects which the Conventicles of proud Opiniators, and
Self-conceited Persons use to have, and which have brought even needful
converse, and godly communication into suspicion at least with some, that argue
against duty from the abuse.

Yea, I rejoice that hereby so much good has been done by you. You have had
above Forty years experience of the great benefit of such well ordered
Christian converse, increasing knowledge, quickening holy desires, prevailing
with God, for mavelous, if not miraculous answers of your earnest prayers,
keeping out errors and Sects.

VII. I am glad that you have had the great encouragement of so many sober,
godly, able, peaceable Ministers, in all that part of the Country round about
you, and mostly through that and the Neighbor Countries: Men that avoided vain
and bitter contentions, that engaged themselves in no Sects or Factions, that
of a multitude not above two that I know of, in all our Association had ever
any hand in Wars: But their principles and practices were reconciling and
pacificatory: They consented to Catechize all their Parishioners, House by
House, and to live in the peaceable practice of so much Church Discipline, as
good Christians of several parties were all agreed in. And you have lived to
see what that Discipline was, and what were the effects of such agreement.

VIII. I am glad that you were kept from taking the Solemn League and Covenant,
and the Engagement, and all consent to the change of the constituted Government
of this Kingdom. I took the Covenant my self, of which I repent, and I Will tell
you why: I never gave it but to one Man (that I remember) and he professed
himself to be a Papist Physician newly turned Protestant, and he came to me to
give it him: I was persuaded that he took it in false dissimulation, and it
troubled me to think what it was to draw multitudes of men by carnal interest
so falsely to take it: And I kept it and the engagement from being taken in
your Town and Country. At first it was not imposed but taken by Volunteers: But
after that it was made a test of such as were to be trusted or accepted.
Besides the illegality, there are two things that cause me to be against it.

1. That Men should make a mere dividing engine, and pretend it a means of
Unity: We all knew at that time when it was imposed, that a great part, if not
the greatest, of Church and Kingdom were of another mind: And that as Learned
and Worthy Men were for Prelacy, as most the World had (such as Usher, Morton,
Hall, Davenant, Brownrig, etc.) And to make our terms of Union to be such as
should exclude so many and such Men, was but to imitate those Church Dividers
and Persecutors, who in many Countries and Ages, have still made their own
Impositions the engines of division, by pretense of Union. And it seems to
accuse Christ, as if he had not sufficiently made us terms of Concord, but we
must devise our own Forms as necessary thereto.

2. And it was an imposing on the Providence of God, to tie our selves by Vows
to that as unchangeable which we knew not but God might after change, as if we
had been the Masters of his Providence. No Man then knew but that God might so
alter many circumstances, as might make some things sins that were then taken
for duty, and some things to be duty which then past for sin: And when such
changes come, we that should have been content with Gods Obligations, do find
our selves ensnared in our own rash Vows.

And I wish that it teach no other Men the way of dividing Impositions either
to cut the Knot, or to be even with the Covenanters.

IX. I greatly rejoice that Family Religion is so conscionably kept up among
you, that your Children, and Apprentices, seem to promise us a hopeful
continuation of piety among you.

X. And I thank God that so great a number of Persons Eminent for holiness,
temperance, humility and charity, are safely got to Heaven already, since I
first came among you, and being escaped from the temptations and troubles of
this present evil World, have left you the remembrance of their most imitable
Examples.

And having all this comfort in you as to what is past, I shall once more leave
you some of my Counsels and Requests, for the time to come, which I earnestly
entreat you not to neglect.

I. Spend most of your studies in confirming your belief of the Truth of the
Gospel, the Immortality of the Soul, and the Life to come, and in exercising
that belief, and laying up your treasure in Heaven; and see that you content
not your selves in talking of Heaven, and speaking for it; but that your Hopes,
your Hearts, and your Conversation be there; and that you Live for it, as
worldlings do for the Flesh.

II. Flatter not your selves with the hopes of long Life on Earth, but make it
the sum of all your Religion, Care and Business, to be ready for a safe and
comfortable Death: For 'till you can fetch comfort from the Life to come, you
can have no comfort that true reason can justify.

III. Live as in a constant War against all fleshly lusts, and love not the
World as it cherishes those lusts: Take heed of the love of Money, as the root
of manifold evils: Think of Riches with more Fear than Desire: Seeing Christ
has told us, how hard and dangerous it makes our way to Heaven. When once a
Man falls deeply in love with Riches, he is never to be trusted, but becomes
false to God, to all others, and to himself.

IV. Be furnished before hand with expectation and patience, for all evils that
may befall you: And make not too great a matter of sufferings, especially
Poverty, or wrong from Men. It is sin and folly in poor Men, that they
overvalue Riches, and be not thankful for their peculiar Blessings. I am in
hopes that God will give you more quietness than many others, because there are
none of you rich: Its a great means of safety to have nothing that tempts
another Man's desire, nor that he envieth you for: Despised Men live quietly,
and he that has an empty Purse can sing among the Robbers. He that lies on
the ground fears not falling. When Judea (and so when England by Saxons,
Danes, etc.) was Conquered, the poor were let alone to possess and Till the
Land, and had more than before: It was the Great and Rich that were destroyed,
or carried, or driven away. Is it not a great benefit to have your Souls saved
from rich Men's temptations, and your Bodies from the envy, assaults and fears,
and miseries that they are under?

V. Take heed of a Self-conceited unhumbled understanding, and of hasty and
rash conclusions; it is the Fool that rages and is confident: Sober Men are
conscious of so much darkness and weakness, that they are suspicious of their
apprehensions; Proud self conceitedness, and rash hasty concluding, causes
most of the mischiefs in the world; which might be prevented, if Men had the
humility and patience to stay till things be thoroughly weighed and tried. Be
not ashamed to profess uncertainty where you are indeed uncertain: Humble
doubting is much safer than confident erring.

VI. Maintain Union and Communion with all true Christians on Earth; and
therefore hold to Catholic principles of mere Christianity* without which you
must needs crumble into Sects. Love Christians as Christians, but the best
most: Locally separate from none, as accusing of them further than they
separate from Christ, or deny you their Communion unless you will sin. The zeal
of a Sect as such is partial, turbulent hurtful to Dissenters, and makes men
as Thorns and Thistles: But the zeal of Christianity as such, is pure and
peaceable, full of mercy and good fruits, mellow and sweet, and inclines to
the good of all. If God give you a faithful or a tolerable public Minister, be
thankful to God, and love, honor and encourage him; and let not the
Imperfections of the Common Prayer make you separate from his Communion;
prejudice will make all Modes of Worship different from that which we prefer,
to seem some heinous sinful Crime: But humble Christians are most careful about
the frame of their own Hearts, and conscious of so much faultiness in
themselves and all their service of God, that they are not apt to accuse and
aggravate the failings of others, especially in matters, which God has left to
our own determination: Whether we shall pray with a Book or without, in diverse
short Prayers, or one long one, whether the People shall sing Gods praise in
Tunes, or speak it in Prose, etc. is left to be determined by the general rules
of Concord, Order, and Edification. Yet do not withdraw from the Communion of
Sober, Godly Nonconformists, though falsely called Schismatics by others.

VII. Be sure that you maintain due honor and subjection to your Governors:
Fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change,
Prove. 24.21. and that in regard of the Oath of God, Eccl. 8.2. Curse not the
King, no not in thy thought, and curse not the Rich in thy Bedchamber; for a
Bird of the Air shall carry the voice, and that which has Wings shall tell the
matter, Eccl. 10.20. Obey God with your first and absolute obedience, and no
man against him, but obey the just commands of Magistrates, and that out of
Obedience to God; and suffer patiently when you cannot obey. And if God should
ever cast you under oppressing and persecuting Governors, in your patience
possess your Souls; trust God and keep your innocence, and abhor all thoughts
of Rebellion or Revenge: He that believes will not make haste: Do nothing but
what God will own, and then commit your selves and your way to him: Repress
wrath, and hate unpeaceable Counsels: Our way and our time must be only Gods
way and time. Self-saving men are usually the destroyers of themselves and
others: Peter that drew his Sword for Christ, denied him the same Night with
Oaths and Curses. Fools trust themselves, and Wise Men trust God: Fools tear
the Tree by beating down the Fruit that is unripe and harsh; and Wise men stay
till it is ripe and sweet, and will drop into their hands: Fools rip up the
Mother for an untimely Birth; but Wise Men stay till Maturity give it them.
Fools take red hot Iron to be Gold, till it burn their Fingers to the Bone:
They rush into Seditions and Blood, as if it were a matter of jest; but Wise
Men sow the fruit of righteousness in peace, and as much as in them lies live
peaceably with all men. All men are mortal, both oppressors and oppressed:
Stay a little and mortality will change the Scene; Gods time is best. Martyrdom
seldom kills the hundredth part so many as Wars do. And he is no true
believer, that takes Martyrdom to be his loss: And Christ is more interessed
in his Gospel, Church and Honor than we. Queen Mary's cruelties, and the
Bishops bonefires, made Religion universally received the more easily when her
short Reign was ended. We may learn wit of the Fool, that seeing great Guns,
and Muskets, asked what they were to do; and the answerer said, to kill men,
says he, Do not men die here without killing? In our Country they will die of
themselves.

VIII. Be sure that you keep up Family Religion; especially in the careful
Education of youth. Keep them from evil company, and from temptations, and
especially of idleness, fullness and baits of lust. Read the Scripture and good
Books, and call upon God and sing his Praise: And recreate youth with reading
the History of the Church, and the Lives of Holy Men and Martyrs; instruct them
in Catechisms and Fundamentals.

IX. Above all, live in Love to God and Man; and let not selfishness and
worldliness prevail against it. Think of Gods goodness as equal to his
Greatness and Wisdom, and take your selves as Members of the same Body with all
true Christians. Blessed are they that faithfully practice those three grand
principles which all profess, viz.. 1. To love God as God above all, (and so to
obey him.) 2. To love our Neighbors as our selves. 3. And to do as we would be
done by. Love is not envious, malignant, censorious, it slandereth not, it
persecuteth not, it oppresses not, it defraudeth not, it striveth not to gain
by another loss: Get Men once to love their Neighbors as themselves, and you
may easily prognosticate peace, quietness and concord, happiness to the Land,
and Salvation to the peoples Souls.

Finally, Brethren live in love, and the God of love and peace shall be among
you. The Lord save you from the evils of which I have here and often warned
you: Remember with thankfulness the many years of abundant mercy which we have
enjoyed (tho too much mixed with our sins, and vilified by some) 1 These. 5.11,
12, 13. Comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even as also ye
do; and I beseech you Brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in Love
for their work sake, and be at peace among your selves. And the Lord deeply
write on all your Hearts these blessed words, 1 John 4.16. We have known and
believed the Love that God has to us. God is Love, and he that dwells in
Love, dwells in God, and God in him. And remember, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 13.
Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye to
be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and hasting to the
coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved,
and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat: Nevertheless we according to his
promise, look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

I need not lengthen my Counsels further to you now, having been called by the
Will and Providence of God, to leave behind me a multitude of Books, which may
remember you of what you heard, and acquaint the world what Doctrine I have
taught you: And if longer studies shall teach me to retract and amend any
failings, in the writings or practice of my unripe and less experienced age, as
it will be to my self, as pleasing as the cure of any Bodily Disease, I hope it
will not seem strange or ungrateful to you: Though we must hold fast the truth
which we have received, both you and I are much to be blamed, if we grow not in
knowledge, both in Matter, Words and Method; The Lord grant that also we may
grow in Faith, Obedience, Patience, in Hope, Love and desire to be with Christ.

Now the God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great shepherd of the sheep through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is
well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and
ever. Amen. Heb. 13.20, 21.

FINIS.
These Books following are lately Printed for, and Sold by B. Simmons, at the
Three Golden Cocks, at the West end of Paul's.
A Full Treatise of Episcopacy, for the Primitive sort only.

Poetical fragments: Heart Employment with God and it self. The Concordant
Discord of a broken healed heart. Sorrowing, rejoicing, fearing, hoping, dying,
living. By Richard Baxter in Octavo. Price bound 1 s.

Of the Immortality of Man's Soul, and the nature of it, and other Spirits. Two
Discourses one in a Letter to an unknown doubter; the other in a reply to Dr.
Henry Moors Animadversions on a private Letter to him! which he published in
his Second Edition of Mr. Joseph Glanvils Saducismus Triumphatus, or History of
Aparitions. By Richard Baxter in Octavo. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

Richard Baxters Dying Thoughts upon Phil. 1.23. written for his own use in the
latter times of his corporal pains and weakness in Octavo. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

A^ditions to the Poetical fragments of Richard Baxter, written for himself,
and communicated to such as are more for serious Verse than smooth, in Octavo.
Price stitcht 6 d.

Truth and Peace promoted: Or a Guide to young Christians in the way of
Salvation, past the danger of errors, and difficulties of curiosity: In a
familiar Dialogue between a Minister of Christ, and a devout private Christian.
With an Appendix concerning the length of a Sabbath days Journey. By Adam
Martingdale a Minister of the Gospel in Cheshire. Price bound 6 d.


