THE Nonconformists ADVOCATE: Or, A farther ACCOUNT Of their JUDGMENT IN
Certain things in which they are misunderstood. Written Principally in
Vindication of A LETTER from a Minister to a Person of Quality, showing some
Reasons for his Nonconformity, Modestly answering the Exceptions of two violent
Opposers of the said REASONS.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Prince's Arms in Ludgate Street,
MDCLXXX.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER
Courteous Reader,
SOme years since I was called upon by a Person of Quality, to acquaint her
Ladyship with the reasons of my Nonconformity: for it had been suggested to
her Ladyship, that I had none; but only was swayed by the Example of some
others, much reverenced by me, to tread in their steps, at all adventures. As
if I had been one of those mentioned by Origin in his first Book against
Celsus, who chose (...) to be of this Sect and Party, not out of any sound mind
and judgment, (...) but by a certain illogical hurry of determination without
all deliberation. Upon this I was necessitated, to put pen to paper, and give
her Ladyship such an hasty account, as the time would permit: which was under
the limit of five or six days. I could not therefore search into all things
affording matter of scruple, they being too large and numerous; but only
singled out those mentioned in my letter, as being next at hand, and moreover
obvious, and easy to be understood by her Ladyship, at the first reading of
them. A Copy of this letter, such as it was, without adding, diminishing, or
the least alteration, was appointed to be printed about three months since: but
printed it was not a long time after; at least I supposed so. But when I deemed
no such matter, my Copy was brought unto me printed, together with a printed
Confutation of it at the same time in Quarto. This seemed strange to me, but I
being in that instant oppressed with bitter grief, by the death of a
darling-Child, was not in a condition to read it over, much less to justify my
self against it. And now within less than a week after, another second
Confutation was directed to me, upon which I thought I had a loud call,
notwithstanding my great indisposition, to undertake mine opponents, and make
good my reasons against all their gainsayings. With what evidence of truth, I
must leave you and others to judge, my sheets are now ready for the Press, but
when that will give them a more public Passport, I know not. Farewell.

October, 27. 1679.
ERRATA.
PAge, 8. The four last lines must not be read. p. 15. l. 3. quae tales, r. qua
tales, p. 51. l. 13. after the word likewise the word is must be put in, p. 53.
l. 20. after the word condition the word of must be put in, p. 61. l. 33.
Aucupare r. aucupari. Several other faults about the stops left to be corrected
by the reader.

A REFUTATION, etc.
SIR,
BEfore you would confute me, you thought meet to defame me, in these words;
Being lately in a Book sellers Shop, I met with a Letter pretended to be writ
from a Minister to a Person of Quality, showing some Reasons of his
Nonconformity. And you add, Page 1.
I have often observed this humor in some mean, but vain people, who dare not
look upon Persons of Quality, when they are present, to talk of them with great
familiarity, and as their peculiar Intimates and Confidents. But I answer; Why
should you a Minister be so censorious and uncharitable, as to charge one who
is styled a Minister, and I suppose utterly unknown to your self, with Pride
and Lying at the first dash? with Pride, in a vain humor of aspiring unto
acquaintance with Persons of Quality; with Lying, in pretending unto such a
familiarity, when indeed there is no such matter. The Printer, or some other,
affixed this Title, for my Copy had none at all; but yet it is altogether
truth; though I have reason to blush, and crave pardon for being no more
mannerly and Courtly in my Style and Address to such a Person of Honor. By
this, and what follows, I observe in you a strange Spirit, which I pray God
convince you of, and deliver me from: a spirit haughty and scornful, bitter and
revengeful, and yet elsewhere too too friendly and amicable.

Sir, You style me Gentleman, again and again, ironically and contemptuously
enough; and what I have written, p. 2 l. 16.
you call it Stuff to impose upon the injudicious Rabble, p. 2 l. 7, 10, 11.
and parallel it with Poor Robin; and many such opprobrious reflections you
fasten upon it. This is pride and scorning; which can never satisfy (as you
would be thought to aim at) an honest impartial Inquirer, p. 2. l. 17.
but much rather cloud his eyes from beholding, and harden his heart from
receiving, whatsoever can be offered (though with far more powerful and
persuading Oratory than your own) to change his mind, or turn him into another
Path.

2. l. anpenult.
Sir, You alarm the Magistrates and Governors to a jealousy against us:
wherein you sufficiently signify, not only your grief and grudging at our
present Indulgency, but also your desire to have us made Examples for daring to
mutter a word, and pleading on our own behalf, though purposely to show that we
are not wilful, fanatical, and obstinate in our nonconformity (which is
commonly objected against us) but have in our own apprehensions insuperable
objections blocking up the way, and obstructing us from complying. But what is
it not enough that we are removed ab Officio and Beneficio, unless also we be
further persecuted and torn in pieces by the Secular Powers? What must a (...),
our utter ruin and destruction be the Epilogue? This is bitter malice in
extremity, far from the good Spirit of God, which was seen in the shape of a
Dove, but never in the appearance of a Vulture, or Bird of Prey.

^ 10.23.
Sir, You plead for the truth of Apocrypha, yea of the most exploded parts of
it: here your fierce frowns against poor Non-conformists are turned into sweet
and gracious smiles upon the Roman Party, as if Father Parsons, Campian, and
such others, had your heart already; and you hereby intimate beforehand (if
the Wind shall ever turn to that Corner, which God in his great mercy keep off)
how willingly and easily you could turn about with it into their Tents.

Sir, You quarrel my Introduction, and charge it with the want of sense and
Grammar, p. 2. l. 21.
but you show not wherein, and I am pretty confident you cannot; both the
Syntax of it, and my mind in it being plain and obvious to every Schoolboy;
but I well perceive the very first sight of my Sheet, fronted with the
mostodious word of Nonconformity (so great is your distaste against us)
immediately rufled your patience, and like the appearance of Purple or Scarlet
before the eyes of an Elephant, put you presently in apassion; which misted
your understanding, and hindered you from discerning, what, to an unprejudiced
person, would be most clear and intelligible.

Our great difference is in making a just Comment, and in finding out the true
sense and meaning of the words of the first Declaration. Here by the way there
is just matter of complaint, that the said words should need any Comment; for I
look upon this Declaration (thus openly to be made before the face of God, and
the whole Congregation) of the same nature, and congenerous with an Oath;
wherein things ought to be expressed perspicuously and evidently, the sense of
them easy and fixedly the same to every understanding; and this, if possible,
beyond all scruple or hesitation; and not like Delph Oracles, with their
meaning doubtful, intricate, and involved; and as occasion shall serve, (...)
quickly to be turned from what at the first hearing they seemingly imported and
intended.

You say Assent and Consent intend no more than Use and Submission, and that
this is all in effect which is required of the Conforming Clergy: I wish it had
been so worded in the Declaration, p. 9. l. 10
and instead of saying, I A.B. do declare my unfeigned assent and consent to
all and every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book, entitled the
Book of Common Prayer; we might have said, I A.B. will submit to the use of all
and everything contained in, etc. Because for peace sake I can submit, where I
do not like and choose; and in this sense (notwithstanding your scorn of a very
wise and grave observation) I do yet take the words Assent and Consent, p. 7.
l. 18.
and am not removed from my first apprehension and explanation of them.

In the words of the Declaration there is an Agent, an act, the object: The
Agent is the Person or Minister declaring, and this unfeignedly and sincerely
from his heart; the Act is this person his assenting and consenting: Now this
act of assenting, as to the Party declaring, relates to his understanding; and
as to the thing assented to, relates to the truth and rightfulness of it: So
likewise again, the act of consenting relates to his will, and as to the thing
consented to, to the goodness, expediency, and behooffulness of it. This is
what you deride, and hold that the intervention of truth and goodness need not
be supposed as a necessary ingredient to what we declare we assent and consent
unto; but in so declaring we mean and intend only this, that we will submit to
the use of all and every thing contained and prescribed, etc. p. 7. l. 23.24.
whether they be in their own nature (if strictly examined) most eligible and
behoofful to be observed and practiced, yea or not. p. 7. l. 2^.
Now this your Exposition of assent and consent, I look upon as weak and
faulty, no more coming up to the full purport of the words considered in
themselves, than to the purpose of the Lawmakers, who framed and enjoined them
to be declared. For I take it for granted, that this Declaration was thus
worded by the most Reverend Clergy, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and such other
Divines, and this too for Divines and Ministers of the Gospel to be declared by
them, as the test of their worthiness and meetness for the Ministerial
Function; accordingly therefore such persons may rationally and well be
supposed to use the words in sensu Theologico, in a Divine or Scriptural sense,
and not otherwise: Now in the Scripture phrase we find assent and consent,
fully and altogether according to the exposition which I have given of them. As
for example sake, we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of
Sedition among the Jews; and the Jews assented, saying, Act. 24.9.
These things were so. Assented, that is, they avouched what Tertull^s had
witnessed against Paul, was the very truth. Shall not their Cattle, and their
substance, and every beast of theirs be ours? Genesis 34.23.
Let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us. Let us consent unto
them, that is, let us willingly and readily choose and embrace their terms,
since the end obtained by them will be so good and gainful, so beneficial and
profitable for us. Thus S. Paul says, To. 7.16.
I consent unto the Law, that it is good, (...), eo quod, or therefore, because
it is good. Thus generally these words are taken in the description of Faith
among Divines, who tell and teach us, that Faith is made up of these three
parts, Assent, Consent, and Affiance. Faith, as it is assent, acknowledges and
avoweth the truth and certainty of Gospel-Revelation, especially concerning the
Messiah, and the promise of life by and through him: Faith as it is consent,
imbraceth and receives the blessing and goodness of this promise, as most
behoofful and advantageous unto us: And from hence is excited readily,
cheerfully, and thankfully to close in with Christ upon his own Conditions and
Proposals, as the only way to happiness: Faith, as it is affiance, rests and
relieth upon the veracity of the Speaker, and stability of the Covenant to
felicitate our state, and save us from all the evil and misery sin has brought
upon us. By what I have spoken, we may the better perceive the genuine force
and meaning of assent and consent; the Object of these acts now therefore
offers it self to our consideration, which I say (according to the Declaration)
is all and every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book entitled
the Book of Common Prayer; whereas you, as a general Salvo, suppose the word
Use to be the next object or matter of those acts on which they terminate; as
thus, I assent and consent to the use, p. 17. l. 33.
ordoing of all those things contained in, and prescribed by, etc. But now is
this seemly or tolerable in a most solemn Protestation, oran Oath, to have the
main matter of it brought in only by the blind Wicket and backdoor of a
supposition? why was not this word openly mentioned and expressed? why was it
not enjoined us thus to declare, I assent and consent to the use and doing of
all and every thing contained, etc? How can we know the Lawmakers intended, or
will admit of any such a Subaudi? What you mention as their Preface to the
Declaration is somewhat, p. 8. l. 21.
but not sufficient; my Reason is this; because in the Book of Common Prayer
there are Credenda, as well as Agenda; things of Faith, as well as of Practice;
yea, some things only of Faith, and not of Practice: Now I cannot but think our
Law-m^kers in commanding this Declaration, did as zealously and carefully
design the conformity of our Faith, even as of our practice, to the Frame and
Model of Theology contained in the Liturgy: I am sure, in right reason, the
first ought to be aimed at by them, before the last and the last only as the
result of the first, unless they thought all Conformists (...) bruit Animals,
rather than rational Creatures; surely they would not thus reproach them of
their own Coat, who bear themselves high upon their own understanding above
others, and think it but Justice to be reputed the most sapient and judicious
amongst men. It appears by the woeful event, that more than a thousand
Nonconforming Ministers could not thus construe the words of the Declaration,
when it was first put unto them, and required of them; which (with some other
things commanded) made them to turn out, and lose all, rather than lose their
Souls, in doing what was clearly against their Consciences. So that it is not
perverseness and folly (whatever you say or think) to stick at the words
assent and consent, but rather from the dictates of a sound mind, influenced
and awed by the fear of the Lord.

Sir, Far beyond my desert, by the good Providence of God, I have had the
favor and countenance of several great Persons of Quality, who have received
me very lovingly and familiarly: This I speak (my Witness is in Heaven) neither
to vaunt my self with the glory of it, nor yet to put you under any disarray
again by the vanity of my pretension, but to acquaint you with something to our
purpose in the matter before us. A little before the black Bartholomew, one of
the foresaid in discourse enquired of me, what mine intentions were? and
whither I would conform, yea or not? I answered his Lordship, such things were
required and enjoined, as I could not swallow, and therefore should be
necessitated to march off, and sound a Retreat. His Lordship seemed to be much
concerned for me, using many Arguments (as good as ever I have heard or read
from any) to reconcile me to a compliance; but perceiving me not to be overcome
by them, while I urged some of these things now mentioned as a just cause of my
refusing; at last he said with a sigh, I wish it had been otherwise; but they
were resolved either to reproach you, or undo you. Of which wise and weighty
Apothegm I leave you to be the Interpreter. Was not Conformity contrived in
such a way and manner on purpose, either to expose us to common Infamy, as
Persons who would say, and swear, and do any thing, rather than lose our
Livings? or else to ruin and undo us, by turning us out a grazing in the woeful
wild of extreme poverty and want? About a year after another great Peer ordered
me to wait on his Lordship, and proposed something to be done by me with
reference to the Liturgy, which (as I thought) in my then present
circumstances, having neither call nor necessity to do, I humbly craved leave
of his Lordship to be excused therein; and speaking yet further, about the
strict and hard terms of Conformity, his Lordship replied, I confess I should
scarcely do so much for the Bible, as they require for the Common Prayer. Both
these, I assure you, are great and learned Noblemen, and as far from being
Presbyterians as your self; yet you may see their Resentments, as to what was
commanded, how little they were pleased with such high and rigorous
proceedings, and how in the bottom of their hearts, they were rather the
Advocates, than the Accusers of the Non-consenters: Yea, I persuade my self,
that many among your selves had scruples more than a few, or easy, and would
then with all their hearts have declined the Test of assent and consent, if by
any other means they could have escaped the danger: it is well for them if they
tentured not their Consciences, while they tendered their worldly interests and
necessities; but to choose to do it from any free act of their own option and
will, as what was desired and delighted in by them (setting aside some high
Prelatical Churchmen, who returned in anger and meditated retaliation) was not
to be found in the Bosom of many; yet even these are called forth to declare
their unfeigned assent and consent, etc. than which words, I know none more
significant of heart and good will, of love and choice, as to all and every
thing contained in and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer. For I pray,
Sir, were you to express your judgment and affection in any matter, and how
your whole soul and mind is fully pleased, satisfied, and gratified therein,
and this beyond all demur and exception; how could you more clearly discover
your (...), than by the (...) of an unfeigned, assent and consent unto it? for
mine own part, I profess I know not: Therefore it is well remarked by you, that
assent and consent, and approve, are words synonymous. But you say, Cannot we
approve of the use of a Book, p.o.l. 3.
or approve of a Book, as lawful to be used, as well as assent and consent to
the use of it? Yes surely: But you mistake me, p. 9. l. 5, 6, 7.
for I neither can assent nor consent, nor approve of the Book, or the use of
the Book, so as hereby to witness mine own will or desire for the same; yet I
can use it in submission to Command, if I shall judge it not simply unlawful
and sinful to do it: I, can, as I have said, silently and patiently swallow
down some Gnats, if my Superiors will have it so; but if I shall be required
to say, I assent and consent, and approve of swallowing down Gnats, this alters
the case; and now I can no more swallow them down, than if they were Camels.
Wherefore, eo nomine, upon the very same account, as you ingenuously confess,
you would be a Nonconformist to any Church in the World, I am at this present
to the Church of England. p. 3. l. 20.
And upon the same score I think present Conformity harder than formerly, the
now Declaration being much more comprehensive in its own nature, and taking in
much more of our mind, will, and approbation, as to all and every thing
recounted and specified therein, than any foregoing subscription; especially
than that mentioned by your self in the time of Queen Elizabeth, wherein the
Clergy were only required to subscribe this promise; I shall read the Service
appointed plainly, distinctly, and audibly, that all people may hear and
understand. As for the Articles published by the Authority of King Edward the
VI. and particularly that concerning the Book of Common Prayer, with
subscription thereunto, p. 5. l. 2.
I have not seen them, except in your Quotation, and therefore can say nothing
in the case, one way or other: but I have two Books of Common Prayer printed in
his days, the first about the middle, 1549. 1552.
the second in the last year of his Reign; in neither of which is to be found
any Rubric asserting the certainty of Childrens undoubted Salvation out of
Gods Word, though they are baptized and die before actual sins; there is not, I
say, one syllable to the said purpose in either of them. Even this very
particular would have rendered Subscription more facile and passable to me, had
I lived in those days. As for the subscription of the three Articles in the
time of King James, I acknowledge this was one, Quod Liber Publicae Liturgiae,
etc. That the Book of Common Prayer contains in it nothing contrary to the Word
of God, etc. Unto which I had rather, and should much sooner subscribe, than
declare my unfeigned assent and consent (supposing the same Book of
Common Prayer) to all and every thing contained in, and prescribed by it. For
though I cannot prove such and such things to be absolutely contrary to, or
against Gods Word, yet I cannot therefore presently affirm them to be according
to Gods Word, either as expressly revealed, or positively commanded by the
Sacred Canon; which yet I must be able to do, before I can declare my unfeigned
assent and consent to the said particulars; else I should strangely violate my
Conscience, and blindly rush forward at all adventures, without all reason or
judgment. As for example, though I cannot say concerning Children baptized, and
dying before actual sin, that their undoubted Salvation is absolutely contrary
to the Word of God; yet never the more can I affirm, that their undoubted
Salvation is certain and express by the same. Therefore though perhaps I might
subscribe to the former, yet I could not declare my unfeigned assent and
consent to the latter.

One thing I take notice of in these Subscriptions, and I wish you would also
for your better information; viz. That assent and consent, relate unto the
acknowledgment or avouching the truth and goodness of the things assented and
consented to, as well as to the use

The Great Ends generally mentioned for these Declarations and Subscriptions,
are Unity and Uniformity in the matters of Religion and Worship; whereas the
contrary effects of animosity and difference have woefully followed hereupon,
time after time, as we have seen by long and sad experience in continual
breaches and dissentions. There is, and will be, a judicium discretionis in
every person, who will be a Judge in his own concern contra Gentes; his own
mind and apprehension shall and will dictate to him what is right, and what is
wrong, what is good, and what evil, both to be believed and practiced by him;
the greatest Authority of his Superiors, and the wisest Models of their
devised forms for his devotion, in any wise notwithstanding; nothing shall be
able further to subjugate his thoughts to any Idea or System of Service, than
to what may be truly said to be his own, I mean according to his own
understanding; and therefore much less to an oneness and sameness of opinion
and judgment of it with those that are above him (though commending and
commanding it to be received and observed) merely because they are so.
Wherefore as it is the wisdom of the Church to choose such a Creed, as all who
style themselves Christians do universally agree in; so likewise it would be
the highest prudence, to pitch upon such a Declaration which all Ministers
might securely and freely assent and consent unto, without all scruple or
hesitation, as the Test of their Conformity. I will not presume to mention the
nature and quality of such an one; but shall leave it wholly to my Superiors
and Betters: And let these, in Gods Name, enjoin all Ministers both to declare
and do whatsoever the Word of God requires of them, to capacitate them for
Church-work, and no more; then should I expect Unity and Uniformity in all
things of moment, with peaceable toleration and forbearance in the rest, to the
glory of God, and the greatest edification of the Church, and never before:
Then also I would be among the first, who would humbly offer my self as a
Candidate to that high and holy Function, though in the meanest and poorest
place of preferment.

But it is high time to come to particulars: I cannot approve of the Order
appointed for the reading of the Scriptures; my reason was, because many Books
of Apocrypha are commanded to be read for the Lessons of the day, as the
fabulous Legends of Tobit and his Dog, Bell and the Dragon, etc. while some
Books of the Sacred Canon are wholly left out, etc.

This I perceive touches you to the quick; this is confidence and impudence, p.
9. l. 30.
this is matter of exclamation against our invenomed tongues and pens, p. 11.
l. 2. l. 15.
and against our persons as Pharisaical Schismatics, p. 13. l. 11.
and what not? I see your zeal for Apocrypha will cause you presently to fly on
the faces of those who shall dare to speak a word in any diminution or
derogation of it, and this only too as it Rivals the Holy Canon: Yet say what
you can in the justification of Apocrypha (how the stories therein were
received by many of the Ancient Fathers for truth and reality, p. 10. l. 23.
and how (supposing them fiction and fancy) profitable they are for
instruction, comfort, reproof, as the Parables of Christ himself; (so many say,
p. 10. l. 33.
they can profit as much at a Play, as at a Sermon) yet Apocrypha is Apocrypha
still, and those very Books appointed to be read, full of absurdities and
impossibilities, as I could easily demonstrate in several notorious
circumstances; but this would be actum agere, since it has been sufficiently
manifested by many Protestant Pens against the Papists; here therefore I shall
leave you to be censured and chastised of all, who are not of the red Letter,
or looking that way: As for mine own part, I ran over the Calendar, and saw
there one whole Month together: viz. October, filled with Apocryphal Books,
Forenoon and Afternoon, appointed for the Lessons of the day; the same likewise
in November, unto the twenty fourth day of it, besides what went before in
September of the same kind, while some Books Canonical are wholly left out,
which I did not approve of; neither can I find any thing of better information
from your self to change my mind: and the rather, because I am fully persuaded
some parts of Scripture are omitted and shut out, which contain in them more to
the profit and edification of the Hearers, than all the Books of Apocrypha put
together; yea, it were little less than a Blasphemy to say and think otherwise:
Let us not presume to be wiser than God. But you say, Nothing of Apocrypha is
appointed for Sundays; p. 9. l. 29.
whoever laid this to your charge? Yet if you speak truth, then some of your
Ministers are not well skilled in the order of reading, who, as I am told by
Ear-witnesses, do sometimes on Sundays read out of Apocrypha; whether they then
read according to the common Monthly Calendar, and not according to the proper
Lessons appointed for Sundays, or whether they so read when an Holy Day, whose
proper Lesson is out of Apocrypha, falls to be on a Sunday, when there is
proper against proper, and the Minister left at discretion which of the propers
he will choose; I shall not trouble my self about it, but leave it in medio, to
the wise and learned in the case. You say in our Conventicles we read little of
Scripture; p. 9. l. penult.
indeed too little! Pudet haec opprobria nobis, and wish it were otherwise with
all mine heart; for I am as far from assenting and consenting to any such
omission and neglect, as I would be to all and every thing contained in, and
commanded by the Book of Common Prayer: Should I be required to give my
approbation of this fault, or else could not be admitted into Society with
them, I would rather bear their Excommunication, and like an Hermit serve God
in the Wilderness by my self alone, than join myself to them. So vast a
difference there is between being in Communion where faults are (for what
Church is free from them?) and owning those faults; yea, making such an owning
and approbation the Lydius lapis, whether we are fit for Communion yea or not.
Now this is the very case of poor Non-Conformists, with those who have outed
them. But to return, Recrimination is no Self-justification: besides, in most
of our Meetings, there is on Lords-days, at least, constant reading of the
Scripture, besides the Exposition, and giving of the sense of it, with much
care and pains, to the edification of the Hearers.

I cannot approve of the Order appointed for the Ministration of Baptism,
because of the strict requiring of Godfathers and Godmothers to stand as
bounden Sureties and Undertakers for the Child, viz. that he shall renounce the
Devil, and all his Works, etc. You say, ^. 13.22, 23.
Godfathers and Godmothers are not so strictly required as to make it essential
to the nature of Baptism, as is evident in private Baptism, which is declared
valid without it. I never objected any such essential strictness; this
therefore is mere impertinency: Yet reading over the Ministration of private
Baptism, as it is appointed to be further and fully completed by the Minister,
there I find Godfathers and Godmothers interrogated, and fully engaging on the
Child's behalf, as well as in public. But suppose Godfathers and Godmothers are
not called upon in private Baptism to make such a promise; this is only in a
rare extraordinary case of extremity, and out of the general usual road: we
know some others, in the like exigency, will grant a greater liberty; so much
do they attribute to the Opus Operatum, that they will give leave to the
Midwife to baptize, rather than fail: One Swallow makes no Summer. Herein also
you run from the matter in hand. I say, Godfathers and Godmothers are usually
brought to the Font to avouch a great untruth; for though they make such a
solemn promise on the Child's behalf, they seldom perform it. This you fully
acknowledge past contradiction, but charge it as a fault upon the Godfathers
and Godmothers, ^. 14. l. 20. l. 22. l. 23. l. 25.
and not at all upon the Constitution; yea, you highly applaud the prudence and
piety of the Church in taking such a care for the virtuous education of the
Children baptized. But quo warranto? who has authorized the Church to lay such
a charge upon any, besides the Parents upon whom God has laid it? and if upon
any, why upon those who are called Godfathers and Godmothers, rather than upon
others of the Congregation, who are all eyewitnesses of the baptizing of the
Child, as well as they? As we may not make more sins than God has made sins, so
neither more duties than God has made duties: why therefore in particular
should we impose the duty on Godfathers and Godmothers, to look to the well
education of the Child baptized, when God has not imposed it? especially we may
not do it, where the fulfilling this duty is an utter impossibility, as
sometimes it falls out in the matter before us. Sometimes persons are Sureties
for Children by their Proxies, themselves living in another Country; how can
these see the said Children virtuously brought up, when they never see them?
Sometimes Boys and Girls stand as Godfathers and Godmothers for the Infant at
the Font; these are very likely to make good their promise, when they are
scarce in a capacity to understand what they say; so far are they from a right
apprehension of the matter they engage in: Whereby it appears, that the great
care of the Church for the health and safety of those she receives into her
Bosom, (which is so much spoken of, and magnified) is no more than a mere
pretense, and dwindles into a sorry shadow of words and names: For if there was
such a true and real care as is given out, and vaunted, why will ye, the
Ministers, admit of any such, as I have now mentioned, to be Godfathers and
Godmothers? ye except against none, that I hear of. And why will you lay a
charge upon these, of doing what in reason ye cannot but be convinced they are
not in a condition to perform? Verily, if a man should judge according to your
Quotidian practice, I should be prone to believe, ye your selves scarce think
it an absolute necessity, for Godfathers and Godmothers to perform their
Font-promises; for setting aside only what is there barely read before them, I
never met with any Book, Sermon, or Discourse, wherein the duty of Godfathers
and Godmothers is pressed upon them, with reference to their God-children, not
any thing to mind them of their Obligation, or move them to the fulfilling of
it: Who therefore can imagine ye think it much material, further than the Pomp
and Ceremony of their appearing, whether such Godfathers and Godmothers look to
the good manners of the Children baptized, yea or not? If men and women were
thoroughly convinced by the Word of God, what great Bonds they lie under by
being Godfathers and Godmothers, according to their own oral protestation, and
form of speech there dictated to their hands, notwithstanding what you speak of
the easiness of the performance of the promise, it would be hard to find out
such voluntary Stipulators, p. 15. l. 1, 2.
or collateral security in the case; but the Minister and his Clerk should be
necessitated to undertake that Province from time to time.

Again, I approve not of the Order appointed for the Ministration of Baptism,
because the Father of the Child is left out, not mentioned and taken notice of
at all in the public Stipulation, as if he had no concern in it, though it is
his proper place to undertake this charge for his own Child, according to the
Law of God and Nature. ^* 14. ^ ^ 4, 5.
With the highest scorn you justify this way, by the similitude of a Debtor,
and Sureties bound with him for an hundred pounds: But I never yet saw such a
Bond, where the Principal, and indeed the sole Debtor, is not expressly, and in
the first place named; for if he be not expressly named, how can any notice at
all be taken, that the Money was lent unto him, which is, as you know, p. 14.
l. 8.
your own concession? yea, if he be not expressly named as a Debtor, in point of
Law, he has nothing to do with the Bond, or the Bond with him; which yet is the
thing you would expose me for. Your comparison affects me not, nor makes
against me, but rather on my side: For let the Father be the chief Debtor to
bring up his own Child in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and some of
his Friends (I mean Godfathers and Godmothers) be Sureties with him, that this
Debt shall faithfully be paid and discharged; shall not this Chief, and indeed
sole Debtor, be called upon, and that too in the first place, to pay his Debt?
In right reason he should; and you your self would be of the same mind, were
you in some great Bond only Collateral Security to a Friend, and this too in
little more than a Complement. Now therefore that the Principal and sole Debtor
is not once mentioned or called upon for the payment of the Debt, but only the
Collaterals; this is my Exception, and I think not without cause. p. 14. l. 13.
But you say, Nature and Religion call upon the Principal Debtor, viz. the
Father of the Child, and that is sufficient, without any further Call from the
Minister. I know what you would reply in the case, but I am not so spirited.
Nature and Religion call upon us to keep the Moral Law, or ten Commandments;
and therefore the Ministers Call to keep them is needless, and out of doors.
This is to make composita to be opposita: The more Obligations are upon us from
Religion and Nature to fulfill any duty, the more we are to be called upon by
Arguments out of those Topics to perform the same, and all little enough: If
not always Nature, yet always Religion does bind Godfathers and Godmothers quae
tales to perform the promise made on the behalf of the Child baptized, for if
it be not from Religion, there can be no tie in the case; yet the Church thinks
not Religion enough to bind them, without the further help of additional
Exhortation: why therefore should not the same be thought necessary to the
Father himself, to bind him also to his duty, notwithstanding any preceding
Obligation of Nature?

I approve not of the Sign of the Cross, nor that Sacramental mystical way of
signing with this Sign, as if baptizing with Water in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, were not sufficient; but moreover, the
Sign of the Cross needful, to bind the Conscience, and confer the Blessing. You
say, The sum of my Argument against signing with the Cross is, p. 16. l. 23.
because lest by a perverse interpretation it may seem to the vulgar people
what it is not, and what I my self dare not affirm it to be: but herein you are
either wilfully blind, or grossly in the dark; for though I mentioned my fear,
lest the action then done by the Minister ( for then the Priest shall make a
Cross upon the Child's Forehead) and the words then uttered by him, ( We receive
this Child into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, and do sign him with the
sign of the Cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess
the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his Banner against
Sin, the World, and the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier unto
his lives end) might be taken in a wrong sense, and mistaken by the generality,
and do fear it still; yet the presumptuous addition of the Cross to Baptism,
and this too after the manner of another Sacrament, the devised Sacrament of
man to the instituted Sacrament of God was the grand cause of my exception
against it: for if we may add at our pleasure the Sign of the Cross* why not
also with some others Cream, Salt, and Spittle; yea, whatsoever else the daring
invention of man shall think meet to devise and conjoyn? Who, in this case,
shall set the limits, and say, Ne plus ultra? As for mine own part, I would
sooner yield to have my Child baptized with Cream, Salt, and Spittle, yea,
though Snow and Soap also were put into the Laver, than to have it signed with
the Sign of the Cross in such a mystical manner. We are neither to add nor
diminish in the matter of Gods Worship; and particularly this holds good in the
Sacraments of the Gospel, which in their own nature are Signs and Ceremonies;
wherefore if we shall arrogate to our selves the license of adding Sign to
Sign, and Ceremony to Ceremony, in so doing we boldly set Threshold against
Threshold, and proudly usurp no less than the place, and Dictatorship of God
himself. This likewise more than faintly and covertly speaks the Baptism of
Water to be lame, and wanting of it self alone; which I have the courage to
speak out in the hearing of all, p. 16. l. 10.
according to your command; yea, I promise you, if you will be at the charge to
procure me one of Sir Samuel Moreland's Stentorean Tubes, I will take the pains
to go up to the Monument, and at the top of it I will trumpet it out as a truth
all over the City; and if I could, I would cause it to ring and echo from one
end of the Nation to another: Why else is this dedicating sign of the Cross, at
the time of the Infants Dedication, by washing in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, thought so necessary, and constantly co-applied? p. 16. l. 16.
l. 17.
But you have a Church-Canon by you, mounted and bent on purpose to discharge
upon me, prim'd with the Rubric, and ready to give fire, upon all occasions,
with a loud contrary report: Well, be it so; yet after all, it is but brutum
fulmen, I mean only protestatio contra factum, and therefore ipso facto void,
and of none effect. As if you should vow and protest you were no Idolater, and
yet at the same time worship a Crucifix, adore the Host, or bow your knee to
the Image of Baal. You indeed baptize the Child with Water in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and you say, the Child so baptized, is lawfully
and sufficiently baptized; p. 16. l. 19.
yet notwithstanding, at the same time, you sign him with the sign of the
Cross, in token hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of
Christ crucified, and manfully fight under his Banner against Sin, the World,
and the Devil, etc. Now this is the answer of a good Conscience, and the main
End and Obligation of Baptism, as to the party baptized, which the Cross, and
the signing him with that sign (and not washing alone) must at least mind him
of, if not spirit him in, and engage him to with the greatest manhood and
courage; else signing with the sign of the Cross is a mere insignificancy, and
a ridiculous nothing. Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate. What need
the Cross, if washing with water could sufficiently bring about its own ends?
The Cross therefore, as it is there used, loudly proclaims, washing of and by
it self incomplete, and imperfect.

Something was spoken further by me, about laying aside the use and custom of
signing with the sign of the Cross, to distinguish our selves from the
Idolatrous Papists, who superstitiously adore the Cross, foolishly, fondly, and
wickedly signing themselves with it, upon every occasion, putting no little
confidence in it, to free them from evil, and to furnish them with all good.
But upon this score, to leave off Crossing, you call it vanity and affectation,
p. 17. l. 21.
which is peculiar to the Pharisees, and some other people who are very like
them. I understand your Elegant Periphrasis, and the biting Sarcasme in it: Oh
how sweet are your lips! Honey and Milk are under your tongue; yet what is the
reason of all this rancour and bitterness? what is the cause ye cannot speak
peaceably of us, or to us? what is our desert? what our provocation? are we not
abased sufficiently? have ye not all in possession? do ye envy our being and
breathing amongst you? Death has eased you of many of us already; and cannot
you quietly expect a little longer, and we shall all retire, and trouble you no
more? I grieve, and am sad to see you of this spirit, but rejoice and am glad
my Soul is not under your power; for if it were, I might fear unplacable wrath,
never to be appeased, would never forgive me, neither in this world, nor in the
world to come. p. 17. l. 18. l. 19.
But to come to our business; you say, I am much mistaken in the temper of the
Church of England, (verily I am not at all mistaken, for I see it evidently in
her Children, the Sons of the Church, especially if all be of your temper) for
the Church of England neither does any thing, l. ^0.
nor leaves any thing undone, merely for a note of distinction and separation.
I know not what weight and stress you put upon the word merely, or else as good
a Church, and better than ever the Church of England was, notwithstanding its
Grandeur and Glory with the Pomp of that name, has (and that too by the counsel
and command of infinite wisdom and reason) upon the account of distinction and
separation from others, not more idolatrous and sinful than the Papists in
their worship, left off several Rites and Customs, not only sinful and
unlawful, (so some will dare to say of signing with the Cross) but in
themselves otherwise innocent and harmless. I have a most unhappy memory, and
cannot recover the name of the Author, a Christian Jew, who apodictically, and
most elaborately discovers, that many things were directed in their Law by God,
both to be done and left undone by the Nation of the Jews, chiefly to difuse
and take them off from the ways and practices of the Gentiles that were round
about them. But let infallible truth be the judge in this matter, Levit. 18.3.
After the doings of the Land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, ye shall not do; and
after the doings of the Land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do,
neithet shall ye walk in their Ordinances. Then Moses, all along the Chapter,
enumerates many of those Heathenish doings, from which the people of God were
most religiously to abstain: but in the next Chapter following some other
things are mentioned; which in themselves absolutely considered, were neither
sinful nor unlawful, yet upon the score of Non conformity, were forbidden them,
ver. 27. Ye shall not round the corners of your Heads, neither shall thou mar
the corners of thy Beard. But why? what evil in it? Ainsworth gives us the true
reason of this Inhibition; This, says he, is likely to be the manner of the
Heathens, especially in their mourning, as these Laws compared with, Chap. 21.
v. 5. seem to imply; and he brings in the Authority of Maimonides, in these
words, It was the manner of Idolatrous Priests to mar their Beards; therefore
the Law forbids to mar the Beard. So again, v. 28. Ye shall not make any
cuttings in your flesh for the Dead, nor print any marks upon you. The
aforesaid most Learned Expositor here again, out of the same Maimonides,
informs us, what these prints or marks were; viz. When one did cut open his
flesh, and filled the cut place with Stibium, or with Ink, or some other
color; and this was the custom at the Heathens; and particularly this they
were wont to do in sorrow, and mourning for a S^ul departed, as it is in
Thargum Jonathan: Now from these, and other like Heathenish Rites, God will
keep his people; and therefore it is said, Ye shall not make any cuttings in
your flesh for the Dead. I could easily produce much more to the same purpose,
but I think it needless.

I excepted against what is annexed at the end of the Sacrament; It is certain
by Gods Word, that Children which are baptized, dying before they commit actual
sin, are undoubtedly saved. You say, Had you a mind, you might wave the
dispute: p. 17. l. 27. l. ult.
Surely it would be your prudence so to do; for though you affirm it evidently
to be the Doctrine of your Church, as appears from the Homilies, and several
passages in the Office of Baptism it self; p. 18. l*
yet I apprehend it beyond the wisdom and learning of all the Fathers and Sons
of the Church together, to make good the Enunciation, especially it being so
indefinite and unlimited, concerning the Children baptized, without all
restriction, and yet so positive and peremptory in the Predicate. I called for
the U^i out of Gods Word, viz. wherein I might be satisfied, beyond all doubt,
of Christened Childrens Salvation before actual sin: You should have designed
the Holy Page; this had been a direct and easy way of Confutation, by which I
must have been convinced and silenced, and there had been an end of the
Contest: But I see you cannot bring your proof, nor indeed offer any thing like
unto it out of Scripture; wherefore my Objection is just, and I suppose
unanswerable. Secret things belong unto the Lord; and surely the Salvation of
Infants, even as of the Adult, is inter arcana, one of Gods Secrets: Why
therefore should any presume to intermeddle with it, and confidently pronounce
concerning the whole Genus of such a sort of Infants. that they are all
undoubtedly saved? Though they are young, do they not make a number in
computation? which if they do, certainly their number is great, very great,
especially if that Observation be true, that well nigh half of all born and
Christened among us, depart this life before they have committed actual sin.
These are a swarming multitude; and yet shall all these undoubtedly be saved?
Far be it from me to limit the grace and mercy of God; yet methinks, even from
this consideration, we have some ground of a contrary suspicion out of Gods
Word, at least of suspending our judgment in the matter before us. For though
the number of the Children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a Remnant shall
be saved, Romans 9.27. There are few that are saved; only a Remnant, a little end
of the whole Piece; some few choice ones only among those who are styled the
Israel of God* shall be thought worthy of eternal life. But I forbear to bring
in any new Objections, only give me leave to ask you this question, How you can
fairly wave this dispute? how can you think it not incumbent upon you to make
good the Assertion, and justify what you have assented and consented unto? ^
17. ^ 29, 30, ^.
You tell me upon what account, Because though it be contained in, yet it is
not prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer; that is, it is never to be used;
and we assent and consent only to the use of those things which are both
contained in, and prescribed by that Book. This word both, thrust in by your
self, as you imagine, gives you your quietus est. Hitherto I have taken you for
a Divine, but now one would think you some cunning subtle Lawyer with your
Tricks and Quirks; you have found out an unexpected Loop-hole to escape, and
baffle your Bond, which has lost all force and virtue of Obligation in sensu
diviso, because it only binds in sensu composito. Yet pardon me, Sir, for I
must assume the liberty to keep this Yoke still upon your Neck, shake it off
how you can. But how? Thus; You dare not but acknowledge that the great and
learned Sages of the Church, who composed and worded this Declaration, were
compotes mentis, and understood what they did better than your self, or any
such Expositor; and therefore had, as it has been shown already, when they put
in these words, assent and consent, into the said Declaration, credenda as well
as agenda in their thoughts and intentions, they had equally an eye to both
these in the time of the composing it. Besides what is there spoken for the
clearing of this truth, I am now further confirmed in my Opinion by the two
following Participles, contained in, and prescribed by, which very naturally,
and almost necessarily, answer the foregoing Substantives Assent and Consent,
to such an end and purpose; as thus, I declare my unfeigned assent to all and
every thing (as truth and right to be believed) which is contained in the Book
of Common Prayer: and I declare my unfeigned consent to all and every thing (as
good and eligible to be practiced and observed) which is prescribed by the Book
of Common Prayer. Here is Grammar and sense, and I suppose the very sense
intended by the Lawmakers. Surely they well weighed every several and distinct
word in such a set and solemn Protestation; and therefore every several
distinct word in it, has its several distinct weight and purpose; for far be
it from me to charge such considerate Composers as guilty of any Tautology,
much less of Battology; unto which you will cause them to approach too near, if
assent and consent unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in and by the Book, etc. do refer to, and terminate
upon use and practice only, without any further aim; then it had been fully
enough to say, I declare my unfeigned consent to all and every thing prescribed
by the Book of Common Prayer, and no need at all either of the word assent, or
of the word contained in, to be once mentioned or thought upon. You therefore
deserve a rebuke from your Superiors for your presumptuous intrusion; who made
you of their counsel? why should you leave out, or put in any thing without
their Commission? why should you insert the word use, which they never
inserted? But then you go further; for having inserted the word use, you say
confidently enough, that assent and consent to all and every thing contained
in, and prescribed by, center wholly upon the word use, and have no other
matter to respect; and then again from hence you think you have gained another
point ( concesso uno absurdo, etc.) of freeing your self from the difficulty
and pressing force of the Exception against Christened Infants, their certain
and undoubted Salvation, dying without actual sin, by saying, You are not bound
to give assent and consent to this Rubric; because though it be contained in,
p. 17. l. 30.
yet it is not prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer, that is, it is never to
be used; and we assent and consent only to the use of those things which are
both contained in, and prescribed by that Book. But this is a deep fetch, and a
fine subtilty of your own, never to be allowed: What think you of the Church
Catechism, wherein we have a Compendium of the Churches Faith? what does not
the Declaration bind you to believe it your self, as well as to teach it the
Children? what think you of the Creed? does the Declaration only bind you to
rehearse the Articles of it before the Congregation, and not believe them your
self? Surely to the latter, as well as the former: Every Collect, every Prayer
has in it a Credendum, as well as an Orandum; and without the first the last
cannot be performed, since Faith is of the very essence of Prayer, properly so
called? But what do you imagine, the Declaration binds the Minister only to say
over those Prayers, and not to pray them, or pray in them? that is, not to
believe what he prays for to be right, and according to Gods holy will and
pleasure? This seems to me highly Paradox, and of a most dangerous consequence.
Grant you this Postulate, and you spoil the whole Declaration, as to the great
intents and purposes of it; for who may not declare in these words, I assent
and consent to all and every thing, etc. if nothing of belief, but only use and
submission be intended by them? I have heard of some Jews, continuing such,
without any change of their Religion, officiating as Priests among the Papists,
and Celebrating Mass; now why may not such Jews, yea Turks also, thrust in
among our Clergy, if by declaring their unfeigned assent and consent to all and
every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book of Common Prayer, they
signify no more, than that they will read over those Prayers, perform those
Offices and Ceremonies, and submit to the use and doing of every thing
enjoined; but in the interim, without being obliged at all to believe the
things so contained in, and prescribed by the Book, and so said and done by
them, to be right, good, and justifiable? They may act as upon a Stage for a
livelihood, and have no concern about the thing acted, or whom they personate:
Therefore Sir, I tell you again, you cannot wave the dispute, but are bound to
believe, as well as to do all and every thing contained in, and prescribed by
the Book of Common Prayer, and to believe this in particular, concerning the
undoubted Salvation of Children baptized, and dying before actual sin; and this
too as a truth asserted plainly and evidently out of Gods Word, past all cavil,
or gain saying. Wherefore I humbly and earnestly entreat you, as a most learned
Textuary, to quote the place, and satisfy my scruple; for until then, I dare
not declare my unfeigned assent and consent unto such a doubtful and questioned
Proposition contained in the Book. But you would know of me, whether nothing be
undoubtedly certain by Scripture, p. 18. l. 8.
but what we have an express Text for? Yes* many things are undoubtedly certain
by Scripture, not only in terminis express^s but also by an undeniable
consequence: wherefore let what is asserted concerning the undoubted Salvation
of such Infants, be confirmed and demonstrated out of Gods Word, in the true
sense and meaning of it, or by any certain and necessary In^erence and Reason
from it, and our business is at an end. This therefore you attempt as it were
Syllogistically.

If those who are regularly admitted into the Church of Christ* p. 18* l. 13.
have a right to the blessings of the Covenant, then they have a Title to
Salvation.

I answer, There is no such word in the Rubric as regularly admitted; which
makes me wonder at your confidence, to add what you please, from time to time,
to serve your turn. It Is an hard question, whether all Children in England be
regularly admitted (as you may expound the words) by Baptism into the Church,
yea or not? I cannot divine what are your thoughts in the case, nor what an
Avenue and Start-hole you would find from regularly admitted, rather than be
set up, and Mated. There is a great ambiguity in the word regularly admitted,
which must be ascertained: wherefore we must suppose all Infants baptized in
the Church of England, according to the Liturgy, are regularly admitted into
the Church of Christ, for the Rubric intends at least all of them; yea, it
speaks of Children indefinitely: wherefore if these being regularly admitted
(as we suppose they are) into the Church of Christ, have a right unto the
blessings of the Covenant, then they have a Title to Salvation. I answer, If by
having a right to the blessings of the Covenant, you mean all the blessings of
the Covenant, even to the ultimate and great blessing of all, viz. Salvation,
then there is Petitio Principii not to be granted, until it be proved, as being
the Bone of Contention: But if by having a right to the blessings of the
Covenant, you mean some blessings of the Covenant, I shall readily concede; for
even their admission into the Church, as visible Church Members, is a great
Covenant-blessing, immediately investing them with the actual privilege of
having God for their God, in a more peculiar manner, than those without the
Pale; besides, with a foundation right of enjoying the Oracles, Ordinances,
Communion of Saints, etc. Their admission into the Church by Baptism, gives
them from that time forward jus in re, though not jus ad rem, by reason of
their present incapacity.

But you further argue; p. 18. l. 15.
If they have not a right to the blessings of the Covenant, through a regular
admission into the Church by Baptism, then Baptism is an insignificant
Ceremony, and not the Seal of the Covenant. I answer, They have many blessings
of the Covenant (as I have now shown) though yet they may fall short of the
greatest of all; and therefore Baptism notwithstanding is not an insignificant
Ceremony, but a Seal of the Covenant. Shortly, Baptism supplied the room of
Circumcision, which was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith; yet we cannot
avouch, that all who were regularly circumcised, should have been undoubtedly
saved, had they died in their Infancy; for Esau was Circumcised as well as
Jacob, concerning whom, without all respect either of their doing good or evil,
that the Purpose of God might stand according to Election, it is written, Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated: Esau was hated both before and after
Circumcision; which therefore could never have been his sure Convoy to
happiness, had he immediately expired upon the receiving of this Seal:
Salvation depends upon Election, and not at all upon our sooner or later dying
after we are baptized. These are your Arguments, p. 19. l. 14. l. 23.
unto which I will not say with a just return in your own Dialect, The man is
mad, and raving, but his Logic is weak, and will not do the work: Yet it may
be from your civility and good nature thus to mollify and lenefie your hard
speeches with soft arguments: In the interim, we are now still under the same
doubt, about the undoubted Salvation of Christened Infants dying before actual
sin, as we were in the beginning, and so shall continue, until we see better
reasons to the contrary; and therefore cannot assent and consent.

My following Queries are neither captious nor impertinent, but natural and
apposite, if we look upon the words of the Rubric, as considered in
themselves; viz. It is certain by Gods Word, that Children which are baptized,
dying before they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved; for here is the
Opus Operatum, Children baptized, and dying before actual sin; here is the
effect, at least, the sure consequent of it, such are undoubtedly saved; here
is nothing mentioned concerning the Modus, how and in what manner the work is
or ought to be done to produce such an effect or fore-signifie such a
Consequent. Now therefore, if such a Consequent do necessarily follow after
such a Cause; then if it be in the power of Man to be such a Cause (as to kill
a poor Infant presently after Baptism) it will be in his power also to bring
about such an effect, viz. the Salvation of such an Infant. But you say, p. 18.
l. 20.
Regularly admitted by Baptism, which the Church of England supposes, answers
most of my captious Queries. I answer, Let me have liberty to put in and out,
and suppose what I please in all cases, (as you do from time to time) and I
will, nullo negotio, untye every Gordion Knot; I will affirm or deny any
Proposition, be it in it self true or false, right or wrong, without any
scruple or hesitation; no Priest or Jesuit shall be able to outdo me. How
know you that the Church supposes these words, Regularly admitted by Baptism?
Why should you presume to set such limits, to put such a close Hedge about the
Rubric, when it lies open, and in common? But if you will thus incroach
presumptuously from your own head and heart, why am I bound to give credit unto
you? or govern my Faith and Practice by your private Sentiments? Yet I wish
these words, Regularly admitted by Baptism, had been expressed in the Rubric;
which perhaps might have saved me the trouble of objecting, and so you of
confuting. But granting the truth of the Rubric in its latitude; I said, That
a Minister would be very cruel and unmerciful, to deny any Children their
Christendom, though their Parents out of weakness or tenderness of Conscience
scrupled Godfathers and Godmothers, and the Sign of the Cross, and durst not
upon that score bring their Children to be baptized; yet, as I added, if he
were a true Son of the Church, and punctually observed his prescribed Rule, he
must not baptize any Infant without Godfathers and Godmothers, without signing
of it with the Sign of the Cross, whether it be saved or damned. Here you say,
I am a man of Conscience, that is of no Conscience at all, p. 20. l. 6.
of a tender Conscience, that is cauteriz'd: But why? for bringing in such a
false and unjust Charge against the practice of the Church of England; which,
p. 20. l. 11.
as plainly appears in the form of private Baptism, has expressly ordered her
Ministers to baptize Children without Godfathers and Godmothers, or the Sign of
the Cross: You know not what remark to make on this, p. 2. l. 19.
but leave it to my self, and every impartial Reader, to think on it. Though
you do not know what Remark to make on my Objection, yet I know what Remarks to
make on your Confutation; for plainly, I observe in it falseness, and weakness:
First, there is a great untruth in it; for though you say, The Church of
England has expressly ordered (in that private form of baptizing) to baptize
Children without Godfathers and Godmothers, or the Sign of the Cross; yet there
is no such thing expressed or mentioned in the Order, but at the uttermost it
is only supposed by a Mute; and will you call silence expression? Here I leave
you to your self, and serious thoughts; so likewise to the thoughts of the
impartial Reader, how far you can stretch to bring in an Accusation. If the
Minister in private Baptism should sign the Infant baptized with the Sign of
the Cross, would he cross the intent of that silent (which you call express)
Order, yea or not? I believe nothing at all; which to do, had it been an
expressed or declared Order, would have been a manifest violation of the same:
And then as to Godfathers and Godmothers, they are both mentioned, and
interrogated, and as clearly brought in for the Consummation of private
Baptism, as in public. Secondly, There is a great weakness in our Confutation;
for my Objection lies against the manner of baptizing in ordinary, and you
answer me from the manner of baptizing in extraordinary, as in case of any
apparent danger of death. p. 20. l. 14.
What? can only Parents (whose Children are in danger of death) have these
scruples, mentioned by me, against Godfathers and Godmothers, and against the
Sign of the Cross, and not multitudes besides them? How shall the Children of
these, p. 20. l. 15.
how scrupulous soever they be, (as you avouch they may) come to their
Christendom? What shall these, whether these Children be in imminent peril of
death, yea or not, come with a lie in their mouths to the Minister, and say,
Pray, Sir, baptize our Children according to the private order of Baptism, for
they are ready to die, though they are not? Well, he comes, and on the contrary
sees their Children strong and well; ought he now to baptize them according to
the private or public form? Surely according to the public, because the
pretended necessity of the private is found a falsity: Here ergo the scrupulous
Parents are at the same Bar as at the beginning, and their Children as far from
being baptized as ever; and this too because the Minister will not, and,
according to order, ought not to baptize their Children without Godfathers and
Godmothers, and the Sign of the Cross.

Now what I have here spoken is not an idle Supposition, and ^ mere
Imagination, but I have reason to believe it a real truth, i^ matter of fact;
for I know the Person very well, who has again and again been desired by
Parents to baptize their Children, and being unwilling and averse to
intermeddle in that affair, has sincerely counseled the said Parents to have
a recourse to their own Parish-Minister to do it for them, whose proper office
it was: but they have replied, He will not baptize our Children without
Godfathers and Godmothers, and we know not where to get them.

My last scruple was against the Order and Office for the Burial of the Dead;
wherein we have as much said, as can well be signified and expressed by word or
tongue, concerning the most certain salvation and happiness of every one buried
by the Minister, though of the worst of men, though of the most flagitious and
facinorous persons, so living, and so dying. What think you of S. Coleman the
Traitor? I am assured from an Eye and Ear-witness, that he was buried in S.
Giles's Churchyard by one of the Readers, and by the Common Prayer Book; and
so perhaps were the rest, not of the Loyal, but Liolan and lying Saints after
him: At every such Interment, the Minister says, Forasmuch as it has pleased
God of his great mercy, to take unto himself the Soul of our dear Brother here
departed, etc. What can more plainly signify the safety and bliss of such a
Soul? what can more fully declare the love and favor of God toward it, and
place it in Heaven? You say, p. 21. l. 14.
It is no more than that of Solomon in the Ecclesiastes, Chap. 12.7. Then shall
the dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return unto God
who gave it. But surely, in my judgment, God his taking to himself (and this
too in mercy, in great mercy) every such particular soul, (whose body is
committed to the ground) sounds and imports much more than Solomon intended, by
his returning, of the Spirit unto God after death; for the whole verse is but a
general description of death, and to give us to understand, that after death
the Body goes one way, and the Soul another; the Body to the Ground, and the
Soul unto God; that is, ad Deum Judicem, unto God as unto a Judge, before whose
dreadful Tribunal the Soul immediately after death shall be brought to appear,
and there shall be sentenced according to desert, either to weal or woe, for
ever and ever. This is quite another thing from God his receiving of every Soul
departed in great mercy to himself; which implies the happy and settled state
and abode of such a Soul, in the place of Gods abode to all Eternity. You say,
To return to God, and to be taken to him, ^. 21. ^. 19.
signifies to be put in the immediate disposal of God; and for your Authority
and Vouch, you quote one Mr. Falkner: I see by your often quotations of him,
you securely rely upon him, as if he were an unerring Oracle, and an (...), an
unanswerable demonstration; nevertheless I know not the man, nor ever yet set
eye upon any of his learned Lucubrations; and therefore how truly or how falsely
you have quo^ed, or perhaps transcribed him, I can neither affirm, or deny. I
freely grant him to be a Reverend Person, of great Abilities, according as you
have reported him; ^. 21. ^. 21.
notwithstanding my Faith and Persuasion depend not upon his sense and
judgment, nor indeed of any man's else, though otherwise the most Renowned for
Learning in the Age, but only upon the Infallible Truth of Gods Word; and
therefore will follow him, and you also, as far as ye follow that, but no
further. He says, according to your quotation, Our Church acknowledges to be
an act of mercy in God, ^. 21. ^. 22.
through the Grace of Christ, who has the Keys of Hell and Death, that dying
persons do not forthwith go into the power of the Devil, who had the power of
Death, but do immediately go into the hands of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, to be disposed of by him, according to the promises and
conditions of the Gospel Covenant, etc. These are his words: but can these be
verified of every wicked and profligate Wretch buried by the Liturgy? Truth
says concerning such persons, 2 Timothy 2.16. (...), that while they were alive
(as the word imports) they were taken captive by the Devil: Who therefore can
believe, that they made an escape from him, and got out of his Clutches by
death, and not rather then fell under his power in a more fearful manner? The
Devil had, and has still, the power of Death, in respect of all impenitent
sinners, as the Carnifex, or Executioner, has power over those who are
condemned to die; and accordingly put into his hands, that the Sentence may be
actually fulfilled. But now are the Condemned ever known to escape from the
Hangman, after he has Noosed them in the Halter, and actually trussed them up?
I think not. So again, who can believe that abominable wicked workers (against
whom I make the objection) go immediately after death into the hands of the
great God, to be disposed of by him according to the promises of the
Gospel Covenant; when the said persons had never the least qualification of
Grace and Holiness to entitle them to the Covenant of Grace, or the promise of
the Gospel, but utterly the contrary? What therefore is this Harangue and
flourish of words (were they not only uttered by Mr. Falkner, but also by an
Angel) to satisfy my scruple, or give me a License when I am to bury the worst
and most vile amongst men, to say, Forasmuch as it has pleased God of his
great mercy, to take unto himself the Soul of our dear Brother? Neither is
there then place or season to mention any thing of a sure and certain hope of
the Resurrection unto eternal life, unless to imbolden wicked livers to
continue stil^ in their sins? much less to use any such expression in prayer,
That when we shall depart this life, we may rest in him ( Christ) as our hope
is this our Brother does. Alas! what well-grounded hopes can either Minister or
people have and h^rbour of Drunkards, Whoremongers, Adulterers, cursed
Swearers, and the like, their resting in Christ, who every day are brought unto
the ground, and buried by the Liturgy? You say, p. 22. l. ^^.
There are various degrees of hopes, and some of them so little, that we can
hardly deny them to any person, though never so wicked. I confess, in this
particular, your Charity and Hope is much beyond mine, and yet I think mine is
regulated according to the Gospel.

But your fullest justification of your Church in this matter, is by supposing
this Office of Burial to be performed only to persons dying in Communion with
the Church. I look upon it as the best Apology, and I have heard it again and
again, yet it is not equal nor satisfactory; because it supposes, if not an
impossibility, yet the greatest improbability: For it is known upon matter of
fact, that Excommunication was never duly exercised, nor Church Discipline ever
duly administered, nor indeed likely to be for the future; while in the interim
multitudes, multitudes of ungodly men are brought to the ground, and there the
last Office done unto them, as if they were the most Godly, and approved by the
Church. The Church supposes or makes a Foundation which is not, and then
builds her practice upon it, against all right and seemliness: It is as if I
certainly knowing such and such persons to be really mad, and out of their wits
by a long Quotidian experience, and yet from time to time would treat and
converse with them, as persons most sober and discreet, because being men, it
must be supposed that they have exercise of reason and understanding.

But rather than not justify the Office for the Dead, and not to help out the
defect of due Excommunication, you say, I doubt not but whosoever shall leave
out that sentence, p. 23. l. 14, 15.
as our hope is this our Brother does, at the burial of some notorious
profligate sinners, complies with the intention of the Church, and may justify
himself to his Superiors for doing so. I answer, Antiquum obtines, you are
semper idem, beginning and ending with the same mind, and in the same way. You
can put in, and leave out, to serve a turn, according to your pleasure, and yet
not be a Transgressor, but comply with the intention of the Church. Surely
there is no such matter; for the Church has expressly ordered concerning the
last prayers for the Office, whereof these words, as our hope is this our
Brother does, are a part, in this manner, Then the Priest shall say, shall say,
that is, he must and ought to say them, and never omit them. Here the Minister
is expressly commanded, and much more, than to baptize without the Sign of the
Cross, as you could urge in the case of private Baptism, though most
illogically, and most remotely from true reason, as far as a privative is from
a positive, and a Nonentity from a Being. To conclude, if you do not when you
bury the dead (though known beyond all peradventure to die in their sins) use
these very words, as our hope is this our Brother does, you are a Transgressor
against the Church, inasmuch as you directly disobey her express order and
rule, and you contradict your own Declaration, and little less than give the
Lie to your own solemn Oath and Asseveration; for then and there you declared
your unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing contained and
prescribed in and by the Book, entitled, the Book of Common Prayer; and
therefore to all and every thing contained in and prescribed by the said Book
for the Burial of the Dead; which yet you like not, nor approve in such and
such cases that too often occur, as to such and such persons, which are every
day upon the Biere; but rather you think it right and meet to omit and skip
them over, as not proper to be applied, not good to be mentioned. On the other
side, if you use these words, as our hope is this our Brother does, viz. rest
in Christ, at the Sepultures of the Sons of Belial, while you obey the Churches
order, you are a transgressor against your own Conscience, in uttering what you
believe not; and a transgressor against God, in mentioning this your hope
before him in your prayers, as if you had good ground and authority for it out
of his holy Word, concerning the persons deceased; when as in reality there is
nothing in the Scriptures of Truth to intimate or countenance such an hope, but
altogether, on the contrary, to strike a fear in our hearts of their most
miserable restless state under eternal death and damnation.

Sir, What in your Conclusion you are pleased to style the only piece of
ingenuity in me, is still my mind and judgment, p. 23. l. 20.
and I do not retract from it in the least, let it displease whom it shall
displease, as I believe it will do many. And what you say, I acknowledge to be
a great truth (whether properly and directly inferred from my Concession, yea
or not) viz. That there is a real difference between that conformity which is
required of a Clergy man, and that which is required of a Layman. You add
further, The use I would make of this acknowlodgment is this, that whatever
objections there may be against conforming as a Minister, there are none
against conforming as a private Christian; and therefore that nothing he has
said ought to dissuade private Christians from conforming to the Church of
England, by his own confession. I answer, Let the persons concerned judge, and
do according as God and a good Conscience shall dictate unto them; but as for
mine own part, were I one of them, I should not cordially choose and approve of
him to be my Shepherd, nor easily assent and consent to sit under his Pastoral
charge (if good Pasture might be found and had elsewhere) who enters not by
the door into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way; especially if this
other way appeared to me to be too too like the way which David most devoutly
prayed against, Psalm. 119.29. Remove from me the way of lying. Amen.

The Second Part.
AFter a Confutation in Quarto, another is brought to my hands in Folio: I have
killed him for a Villain, said he on the Stage, and made him an Example. What?
have you killed him? kill him again. I was killed sufficiently, as one would
think, by my first Antagonist; notwithstanding to make sure work, another comes
in with his deadly stab, and will needs kill me the second time; and yet I find
and feel a quite contrary effect, and even return into life by this renewed
death; while the first of these, as it were, with a strong puff of wind blows
out my Candle, and the second with a sharper blows it in again, and my Candle
burns still as bright as ever: For comparing one Confutation with another, I am
the better informed to answer them both, and continue more steadfastly the same,
what I was, in my first opinion; inasmuch as in several things mine Opponents
are not more contrary to me, than contrary to themselves, in what they write
against me: though yet in their spirit and temper they are one, full of wrath,
censure, and bitterness; a man that shall touch them must be fenced with Iron,
and the Staff of a Spear, else they will pierce and gore intollerably. I have
scuffled with the first as well as I could, and am now come to encounter the
last.

Sir, Your Introduction is (...), from the common place called, Revi^ing and
Reproaching; and though it be particularly calculated for a Preface against me,
yet it may indifferently serve as a general Exordium to any Philippick against
the whole Tribe of the Non conformists in all Controversies whatsoever. I have
heard of one beholding a great pair of Gates to a very little City, said
facetiously to the Citizens, Pray shut your Gates, lest the City run out, and
be lost; such me thinks is your large beginning above the proportion of the
following matter, it being more than a sixth of the whole. O how copious and
fluent are you in this kind of Rhetoric! how is your Pen as the tongue of a
ready Speaker! None, I dare say, about the Bridge can outdo you, or put you
down; but I check my self, for I have a better answer prepared to my hand, in
which I shall acquiesce, not rendering evil for evil, or rai^ing for railing,
but contrariwise blessing. I bless the Lord Jesus that I am accounted worthy
among my Brethren to suffer shame for his Name; and I pray God to bless you, in
turning your heart from your causless prejudice and wrathful indignation
against us. This is all I have to reply to your Premises, and now come to the
work before us.

I could not declare my assent and consent, mine unfeigned assent and consent
to all and every thing contained in and prescribed by the Book of
Common Prayer. This, you say, may be one of my chief scruples, that I could not
prevaricate with Authority; p. 2. l. 54.
had there been allowed a l^ttle Equivocation, and might I have been permitted
to give an assent and consent which were not unfeigned, the task had not been
so intolerable; but to require such an assent and consent, searches men to the
bottom, and beats the Hypocrite out of all his Subterfugies; who can bear it? I
answer, The declaring of my unfeigned assent and consent is a great scruple to
me, though not hereby to be kept from a little Equivocation with man, but from
a downright lying before God, and against mine own Conscience; and the rather
(as you truly observe) because such an unfeigned assent and consent search me
to the bottom, yet not because I am an Hypocrite (according to your
supposition) but because I am none; my tongue and my heart being, as they ought
to be, perfect Unisons, and going together: For if I were an Hypocrite indeed,
I could easily find my several Subterfugies, and no such Declaration should be
ever able to bear me out of them. Herein therefore you are out: But in the
interim, upon the whole matter you plainly infer, what was denied by your
Foreman, that Conformity is now much stricter than in former days; and this
also designedly.

You say, Because of some possible Errata or faults that may escape in the
printing of the Book of Common Prayer, or otherwise, I scruple to give my
unfeigned assent and consent unto all and every thing contained in it; but this
is a weak foundation, p. 2. l. penult.
and the Cavil trivial, and therefore you leave me to be noted in my folly. I
answer, It is you, and not I, who make such Errata, properly so called (which
may be found in the Common Prayer Book, as well as in any other Book, wholly
besides the intention of the Composers of them) to be the true, proper, and
main ground of my bogling at the Declaration; for I plainly by name except
against the Order appointed for reading the holy Scriptures, against the Order
appointed for the administration of Baptism, and so against the Order appointed
for the burying of the Dead: Now the things wherein I except against these, in
my apprehension, are not Errata, but Errors, not (...), but (...); however, I
am sure they are not escapes by accident, and besides the intention of the
Lawmakers, but are both contained in, and prescribed by the Book, as some of
the substance and chief matter of it; and this too confirmed by the Rubric. By
what I have now spoken, I clearly free my self from the absurdity of calling
Errata the Contents of any Book or Writing, as you would fasten upon me,
against all apparent truth and reason: And whereas you say, My scruple cannot
affect you here, p. 3. l. 5.
because though such Errata may be contained in, yet they are not prescribed by
the Book of Common Prayer. I have evidenced the contrary in the instances
forementioned: wherefore the Coat you would put upon me is more proper for
another, who lets the true Enemy alone, and fights against his own shadow, as
if it were an armed man; and then triumphs like a Thraso in his wonderful
Manhood for vanquishing such an Appearance. l. p. 3. l. 1.
But, say you, Do we not think we may safely assent and consent to the Contents
of any Writings that pass an Estate for fear of Errata, which by frequent
copying out, and transcribing the enrolled Deeds, may happen to be there? I
answer, I never yet heard of any such Writings of Conveyance, or Charters of
Liberties and Properties, where the Parties concerned were called to declare
their unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing contained in them, or
else should be punished with the loss of their Temporal Rights, which yet is
the penalty of all those who will not assent and consent to all and every thing
contained in the Book of Common Prayer. I have sometimes seen the Accounts of
Merchants adjusted, and subscribed by their names, but with this Proviso,
saving all errors in them unknown to our selves. Now upon this condition you
and I will quickly compromise the difference; let me insert these words, Saving
all errors which may be found therein, (as your Foreman was good at
inserting) and I will readily declare my unfeigned assent and consent to all
and every thing contained in, and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer.

But I charge my Governors, at least by insinuation, p. 3. l. 10.
with a pretending to an Infallibility, in their requiring an unfeigned assent
and consent to all things devised and prescribed by them; but this is an odious
Inference. I answer, How odious soever, yet if the Charge be true, the
odiousness is not at all to be imputed to the Insinuation, but wholly to the
Injunction.

But, say you, This is destructive to the reason of all Laws; p. 3. l. 11.
and by this Argument every Lawgiver must be supposed to be Infallible; the
end of all whose Injunctions are to be assented and consented to. I answer,
This is nothing destructive to other Laws; because Lawmakers in making those
Laws, never require of the people any such unfeigned assent and consent to all
and every thing contained in, and prescribed by their Institutes, but only
submission and obedience, Secular Laws reach only to compliance of the outward
man, and not meddle with our thoughts and Conscience; whereas this Declaration
requires the inward approbation of the mind, will, and heart, as well as the
outward observation in matter of practice, which is one great ground of our
Quarrel against it. But, say you, If it be necessary there should be a Rule of
Uniformity, it is necessary that men subscribe to it, p. 3. l. 16.
not as an absolute Rule of Conscience, but as a Rule of Peace and Ordor: and
this is all the Church requires, that they so far submit their wills and
understandings to their Governors, as for these ends to conform to what they
have prescribed. I answer, We must and ought to submit our will and
understanding to the prescription of our Governors, both in Conformity, and in
every case, so far forth as Conscience will allow us, and no further.
Conscience will intermeddle, and be inquisitive into all our actions, whether
we will or no; and if Truth and Right be not at the bottom, Peace and Order
(which otherwise in general should prevail much with us) will never be able to
free and justify us from the inward severe censure and condemnation of it.

The Composers of this Book of Common Prayer, thought all things therein right
and good in every particular: but unto this I replied, Though this was their
persuasion, yet it might not be every man's persuasion; and therefore I said, I
thought it not equal to compel all others* jurare in verba Magistri, to declare
themselves to be fully of the same mind and judgment with them: my reason was,
Have thou Faith? have it to thy self; force it not upon others, compel them not
to think as thou think, and to declare as thou declarest. Now you would know
of the scrupulous Nonconformist, ^ 3. l. 40.
whether this rule be given to the public Officers of the Church, or to the
private Christian? I answer, This Rule is given to all Christians, whether
public or private; according to the several occurences which may befall them.
You should have rather queried, About what this rule is given? I would have
told you, that it was given concerning things which are not evidently and
certainly true and good in their own nature, beyond all doubtful disputation:
Romans 14.1.
now such are many things contained in the Liturgy, as the reading of
Apocrypha, signing with the sign of the Cross, etc. these things are not of an
infallible truth, nor are we sure of the goodness of them in their own nature
by the Word of God: wherefore here the forementioned rule is most apposite and
necessary, Have thou Faith? have it to thy self: in these uncertain doubtful
matters compel not others to judge as thou judge, nor to affirm what thou
affirmest. But, say you, Why, or how then can there be any public Sanctions in
the world? p. 3. l. 55.
I answer, There should be no public Sanctions, especially in the matters of
God, and his Worship, unto which every private Professor shall be called, and
necessitated to give his unfeigned assent and consent (as we are bound to do in
all things, with reference to the Liturgy) but the truth and goodness of them,
in their own nature, should instantly and apparently be seen by every eye,
beyond all scruple, or doubtful hesitation; for otherwise, whosoever shall so
declare his unfeigned assent and consent, will either do it blindly, at all
adventures, or else unfaithfully, with a wavering uncertain judgment, or else
wickedly, against his own mind and thoughts. Wherefore the highest of public
Magistrates may not abuse their Power into any oppressive compulsion, but are
bound for Peace sake, and for Conscience sake, not to bind the Consciences of
the people to believe and embrace their private particular Sentiments, as if
they were Oracular, and beyond all questioning; but leave them to their own
liberty to judge as they please, until such time as they are better informed,
and more fully convinced.

But, say you, A public Church Officer may reject an Heretic. p. 3 l. 43.
I answer, What is this to the matter before us? Because he may reject an
Heretic, that is, one who denies the Fundamentals of Religion and Godliness,
therefore he is above this rule, Have thou Faith? have it to thy self; and may
compel those under him to believe what he believes, and say what he says: From
such a kind of wild reasoning, libera nos! I profess I am at my wits end here,
as in several other places, to find what you drive at; how then shall I fence
my self against you? I wished, as to the Liturgy, our Lawgivers had required
no more than use and submission, as preceding Governors, h^d done before them.
You say, p. 4. l. 2.
And what is more required? I answer, Very much: for when I declare my
unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing, etc. I speak as much as
can be spoken in words, to express my love, approbation, and choice, concerning
all and every thing contained in, and prescribed by the Book, as most true and
unquestionable to be believed, as most eligible and desirable to be observed in
every Office, Service, Rite, Ceremony, and Circumstance thereof; but when I
only submit to the use of the Liturgy, I yield, for peace and order's sake to
my Superiors, in things not simply sinful and unlawful, though in themselves
far from perfection, and far from my desire in my own free choice and election.
And what I have now asserted with little less than a contradiction to your
self, you have acknowledged already in your foregoing discourse, Paragraph 4.
And in this very Paragraph you do it again; when you say, It Is our Zeal too
they are offended at, p. 4. l. 18.
that beyond what our preceding Governors did, with reference to this Book of
Common Prayer, we thus strictly enjoin, that Ministers do declare their
unfeigned assent and consent; but are not the men we have to deal with, those
that are gone off from all obedience to Church and State, and is it not reason
we take some pledge of them for their future integrity? Is any man found guilty
of a much less heinous Indictment, and yet discharged without giving Sureties
for his behavior? Shall men who have broken through Oaths of Allegiance, shall
such men be displeased, if we cannot take the Viper into our Breast without
pulling out the Sting? That we dare not admit men of these Principles and
Practices to come into the Church, without giving such Caution of their being
in good earnest, as may justify those in admitting them, who have the care of
the Public? Now what is the purport and meaning of all these words, and many
more of the same nature, but plainly to tell us, that an harder Yoke is now put
upon our Necks, than upon Ministers in former days? and that our Governors had
all reason to make our Bonds stronger, as for the punishment of bypast
miscarriages, so for the prevention of future relapses? Here therefore you
forget your self.

But, you say, It is not necessary to the assent and consent here required, p.
4. l. 59.
that every particular person should take upon him expressly to determine in all
these points, it is sufficient that nothing is sinful; much less does it become
his humility to oppose the Opinion he has of a thing's being good and
expedient, to the sense and reason of his Governors; it is matter of obedience
belongs unto him, etc. I answer, Though this be your mind and judgment, I am
clearly of another Opinion; I must determine, in all points, whether the things
be right and good, yea or not, before I can assent and consent unto them; I
must be well ascertained what I affirm for a truth, to be a truth indeed, else
I may be guilty of some degree of lying in speaking the very truth. It is not
contrary to humility, but the just and due exercise of reason, to search into
the goodness and expediency of whatsoever I am called to assent and consent
unto, by whomsoever commanded; yea, and to oppose my private Opinion to the
sense and reason of my Governors, if what they style sense and reason, shall
evidently appear to be without sense and reason, and at the widest distance in
a contrary way. Every man is bound to see with his own eyes, and to judge from
his own understandings, if he will act like a rational Creature; it is not the
part of Gospel-humility, but of Sheepish stupidity to follow our Leaders, not
at all considering or judging of the way, but by a blind Implicit Faith and
submission, yielding to be turned into every path, merely because it is their
pleasure and appointment. Thus far in general, now in particular.

I excepted against the order and appointment for the reading of the holy
Scriptures, because many Books of Apocrypha are commanded to be read for the
Lessons of the day, as the Book of Tobit, Bell and the Dragon, etc. while some
of the Sacred Canon are wholly left out, etc. Now for the removing this
Exception, you say, We desire that our Governors be not blamed, p. 5. l. 9.
if according to their best discretion they have chosen out such parts of
Scripture to be read in the Congregation, which are most intelligible; and if
they have omitted others, which they thought would not be for the edification
of a vulgar Auditory; and if they have mixed some of Apocrypha, as may be of
wholesome instruction. I answer, Though you would not have your Governors
blamed for this mixture, yet some others will question their zeal and
discretion herein, and think they have just reason so to do: For who shall
presume to be wiser than Christ for the good nurture of his Church? who shall
take on them to determine which is most intelligible, and most edifying to the
people, either the holy Scripture, or any other writings? I am sure he that
knows it, has said, All Scripture (and therefore that part of Scripture also,
which is left out of the Calendar) is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works. There is no such testimony left on Record, concerning any of the
best parts of Apocrypha, though some of those appointed to be read in the
Congregation are far from the best; to say no more: Therefore this appointment
by our Governors may well be scrupled; but then the other appointment upon
this appointment is most highly to be blamed, I mean in their requiring all
Ministers to declare an unfeigned assent and consent to this their appointment,
though in their own hearts (at least many of them) do not approve of this
order, but wish it were otherwise. But is this a reason, say you, p. 5. l. 16.
to break Communion with a Church, let any man judge? To this I have answered
already; for though I would read some Books of Apocrypha, rather than break
Communion with the Church, as possibly not being in it self sinful and
unlawful; yet I would rather break Communion a thousand times over with the
best Church in the world, than be a wilful transgressor; and such should I be
in a notorious manner, if a Lie be a transgression; and I should lie most
egregiously to declare my unfeigned assent and consent, that is, my will and
desire to read the Apocrypha, rather than Scripture in the hearing of the
people; for in the bottom of my Soul, and in the truth of my Reins, I am
utterly against it.

I excepted against the order appointed for the Ministration of Baptism,
because of the strict requiring of Godfathers and Godmothers, to stand as
Sureties and Undertakers for the Child brought to his Christendom, and this
upon several accounts; as,

p. 5. l. 37.
First, Because it is unscriptural: Unto this you say, It cannot be supposed
that this order of Godfathers and Godmothers should be prescribed in Scripture,
the receiving of persons by Baptism there being upon their own actual Faith,
and before there was any National Church wherein this order could be observed;
and it was sufficient that the Children were then admitted to Baptism, as they
were in the Covenant; that is, by the Faith of the Parents. I answer, In these
words there seems to me to be a plain contradiction in themselves, but nothing
of reason, why Godfathers and Godmothers are not mentioned in Scripture for the
baptizing of Infants. There is a contradiction in them; for you say, Persons in
those times were received upon their own actual Faith; and yet you presently
add further, that Children were then admitted to Baptism by the Faith of their
Parents. There is nothing of reason in them for what they are propounded; for
though Parents were received by their own actual Faith, and Children by the
Faith of such Parents, what is this of bar and impediment to Godfathers and
Godmothers at the baptizing of Infants? or why they should not be mentioned and
appointed in Scripture? Surely, in my weak apprehension, nothing at all: But
the Adult, as you truly speak, in Scripture-times were admitted into the Church
by Baptism through their own actual Faith, and their Children were invested
with the same Privilege, by virtue of the Covenant, as being there declared in
that Royal Charter and Patent, Fellow-Inheritors of the same Promise together
with their Parents. And are not Children in our days received by Baptism in the
same way, and upon the same terms and conditions, as from the beginning? Since
therefore (according to your own Concession) their Children then had no
Sureties when they were baptized, neither need ours in the like Circumstances.
You would confute me, and you confute your self. But you say, Abundans cautela
should not be scrupled, p. 5. l. 41.
but rather commended. I answer, Let us not pretend to be more careful than
God, in the receiving of those into his Family, whom he commands us to receive;
but leave him wholly to his own most Sapient Providence, and admit of all such
upon his own conditions, and consult no better.

Secondly, I objected, that the Father of the Child is left out, not mentioned,
nor at all taken notice of at the baptizing. For the vacating of this
Objection, you say, The receiving the Child, supposes the Father concerned in
it, p. 5. l. 45.
because it is through his Faith he is in Covenant. I answer, You speak so much
in the Clouds, that I am utterly at a loss what Arrow you let fly at me, or
what you intend. Every Child I know supposes a Father, and every baptized
Child a believing Parent; yet this believing Parent is left out; who
notwithstanding is and ought to be the main Susceptor and Surety for his Child's
good abearing: on him, I say, it is incumbent, to promise and vow to bring up
his Child in the knowledge and obedience of the Christian Faith, much rather
than upon Godfathers and Godmothers. But you say, p. 5. l. 47.
As to the particular engaging of the Father for the Child's Education, he must
be worse than an Infidel, if he do not take care for those of his own House. I
answer, Though I will not, yet some would be ready to reply, And therefore the
Minister is worse than an Infidel, if he do not mind him of his duty;
especially at such a proper and peculiar season, when this Parent may well be
supposed to bring his Babe to the Minister, desiring him to receive it, and
make it a visible Churchmember: But in the whole Office of Baptism, the Father
is not considered, nor any thing of his duty signified unto him. But you say,
Not to admit Godfathers and Godmothers, p. 5. l. 5
might in some cases be totally to debar the Child of Baptism, because it may
so fall out that the Father may be dead before the Child is born; and then how
shall he be offered to Baptism? I answer, Though the Father of the Child be
dead, yet some one or other at all times, either by Nature, as being next of
Kin, or by Deputation from the Person deceased, or some other way, will appear
as a Propater, a second Father to the Child, to offer him to Baptism: but put
the case that none should appear, yet for want of such a Sponsor, the Babe must
not be debarred of its right, but ought by the care of the Church both to be
baptized, and edoctrinated in the Christian Faith.

Thirdly, I objected, that Godfathers and Godmothers are generally brought to
the Font to a vouch a great untruth, and make themselves obnoxious of lying and
Perjury in the Face of God, and the Church. p. 5 l. 51.
You say, If they be guilty of this, this is their abuse of what is well
intended. I answer, Whatsoever is found by along Quotidian experience to be the
occasion of much sin, (if it be not in it self absolutely necessary to be done
and continued) in prudence and piety also it ought to be disused.

p. 5. l. 54.
But say you, The Child also may not answer the intents and purposes of that
solemn Vow in Baptism, neither the Father make good his promise on the behalf
of him; and therefore if Godfathers and Godmothers shall be detained from
engaging, for fear and danger of falsifying their promises and engagements,
with parity of reason the Child also upon the same account may be detained from
being baptized, and the Father likewise from being a Surety for him. I answer,
What God commands is one thing, and what Man commands is another: Whatsoever
God commands to be observed, must be observed without regarding Consequences
(and such I hope you apprehend at least the Ordinance of Infant Baptism, if not
also of the Father his then being chief Sponsor;) but in all humane commands
and appointments consequences are much to be weighed and considered, either as
a Motive for them, or a Bar against them; and therefore such humane commands
should not be imposed which are never likely to be performed, much less those
which (as such, and such circumstances may and often do arise and occur) are
tantum non, next to an impossibility; now of this nature are those duties
required of Godfathers and Godmothers, with reference to their God-children,
and of this kind is the task imposed upon them, which yet rashly and
inconsiderately enough they undertake to make good and fulfill. You know the
charge then given them by the Minister, and have given it your self, I suppose,
many and many a time, in these words; Forasmuch as this Child has promised by
you, his Sureties, to renounce the Devil, and all his works, to believe in God,
and to serve him: Ye must remember, that is your parts and duties to see that
this Infant be taught, so soon as he shall be able to learn, what a solemn
promise and profession he has here made by you: And that he may know these
things the better, ye shall call upon him to hear Sermons, and chiefly ye shall
provide that he may learn the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments
in the vulgar Tongue, and all other things which a Christian ought to know and
believe to his Souls health, and that this Child may be virtuously brought up,
lead a godly and Christian life. Speak now, Sir, your Consciscience, and let
not prejudice blind you, but tell me, bona fide, do you believe when you give
this charge to Godfathers and Godmothers, that they are ever likely to perform
it? Do you think when you call them to this arduous Province, they can answer
the ends of it according to the trust committed to their hands, or according to
their engagements; and not be found liars? Godfathers and Godmothers, you know
sometimes live far from their God* children in another Hamlet, Village, Town,
City, County, Country* generally they are at a distance in another house, and
in another Street: how therefore is it possible for them to see the said
Children to be taught as soon as they are able to learn? and particularly to be
instructed concerning the nature and quality of those solemn baptismal promises
made on their behalf? How is it possible for them to provide that the said
Children shall learn the Creed, etc. with all other things which a Christian
ought to know and believe to his Souls health? Can these things be brought to
pass, and effected, while God-children are down upon their knees, and ask their
Godfathers blessing? or do they not require continuance of time, with a
continual care and diligence? These words which I command thee this day shall
be in thine heart, Deuteronomy. 6.6.
and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children ( not God-children) and
talk of them, when thou sit in thine house, when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. Parents who are daily and hourly conversant with their Children
by often talking in their hearing concerning the matters of Religion both of
Law and Gospel, and by a frequent catechizing and instructing them in the
Rudiments thereof, may cause the knowledge of Christianity guttatim to instill
into their minds; and so train them up in the right way for their souls health;
but for others to see this diligently prosecuted, and faithfully discharged, it
is scarce feasible, but rather on the contrary utterly impracticable. Therefore
although you say, this Objection cannot bear any weight with considering men,
p. 5. l. 48.
it will be found, to be otherwise.

Before I pass on to what follows, if it might not displease you, I would ask
you one question more about Godfathers and Godmothers, Whether when you give
them the forementioned charge, your self hold them bound to perform the
obligation of it? Did you ever in good earnest, either in the Pulpit; or out of
the Pulpit, mind them of their duty? Did you ever confer with them in private
about the greatness and momentousness of their Font-ingagements? One Mr.
Falkner, I perceive, has written much in the high commendation of the Liturgy;
has he any word of Conviction to chide with Godfathers and Godmothers for their
Quotidian neglect, and to show them the sin and danger of it? has he any word
of Exhortation to stir them up to pay their Vows, and bind their Consciences to
a due care and faithfulness herein? What, are we in earnest, or in jest? what,
is all mere formality without reality? At non ludendum est in sacris; this
Scene is not seemly, and I wish it might not continue.

p. 5. l. 63.
You say, My reasoning against the Cross is so trifling, that you wonder with
what face any can urge it? I answer, Be it so; but withal, pray let us see
what ponderous Reasons you can bring for it? p. 6. l. 11.
They follow in these words, Did the Ancient Fathers plead so much for it in
any other sense than Christ commanded his Disciples, to take up their Cross,
and follow him? Are they to imitate their Master in doing this, in the whole
course of their life, and may they not use so much as a sign of it to express
it to others, or bring them in mind of their duty themselves? Davus sum non
Oedipus: I neither understand the sense nor the scope of these words, much less
how they are urged either against me, or for the good and expediency of the
sign of the Cross in the Ministration of Baptism. If the Ancient Fathers did
plead so much for the Cross in no other sense, but in Christ's sense, then in
your sense they pleaded not for it at all; that is, for the sign of the Cross
to be made in the Forehead by the finger of a Minister: For was this the Cross
Christ commanded his Disciples to take up, and follow him? Are they again, say
you, to imitate their Master in doing this, and may they (his Disciples) not
use so much as a sign of it, to express it to others, (I suppose you mean by
others, the children baptized) or to bring them (these children) in mind of
their duty themselves? I answer, God never ordained the sign of the Cross, to
bring us in mind or remembrance of bearing Christ's Cross, that is of sustaining
(...); Col. 1.24.
and drinking what remains behind of that bitter Cup, which the Lord Jesus did
propine to all his Followers: Neither can I see any aptitude in the sign of the
Cross, as it is there applied in Baptism, to any such purpose. For, first, the
Cross is aerie and transient upon the flesh, and not inured in the flesh; how
therefore shall that that is vanished bring the Child hereafter in mind of his
duty, as to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under
his Banner? etc. Secondly, because the Child baptized is then not a Subject
capable of knowing, regarding, or minding what Crossing imports. Surely
therefore if the sign of the Cross shall be thought at all requisite and
expedient, it would be much better deferred and reserved for the time of
Confirmation; for then Children may well be supposed to have attained and
gained the use of Reason, to know and remark what is said and done unto them:
Yet I confess if many of them be not, yet they may and ought to be confirmed
(though wholly besides the true intent and end of that Church-constitution)
while they are very Children; for this is according to the order in that case,
which runs in these words, Ye (Godfathers and Godmothers) are to take care that
this Child be brought to the Bishop, to be confirmed by him so soon as he can
say the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments in the Vulgar Tongue,
etc. My Children, I thank my God, could say all these as perfectly as my self
before they were four years old, and I assure you too in the Vulgar Tongue; for
I pray tell me, what Protestants now teach them their children in Latin? what
need therefore of that grave Item and Caution? only we must still go on in the
old road, when the customs of things are altered and antiquated, and the reason
of them utterly annihilated: But in the interim, I thought not my Children then
fit for Confirmation, but wish they may be found worthy ten years after.

And now, notwithstanding what has been spoken to the contrary, I will grant
you your Plea, viz. That the sign of the Cross is to bring the children
baptized in mind of their duty, to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, etc.
But then will it not be too too like a Sacrament upon a Sacrament, thus to add
the sign of the Cross unto Baptism; though for me to say so, you style it
frivolous? For what is a Sacrament? Is it not, according to the Catechism, an
outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace? Is not the sign of
the Cross an outward and visible sign? and is not the minding of our duty, or
the practical remembrance of confessing of the Faith of Christ crucified, and
of manfully fighting under Christ's Banner, the inward and spiritual grace? I
leave it to your consideration.

Baptizing it self, I said, ipso facto, does oblige the person baptized, and
withal exhibits a virtue to every worthy Partaker, to confess the Faith, and
to fight against Sin, the World, and the Devil. p. 6. l. 23.
Here you except against me, and say, The expression looks too like the
Sacrament's conserring grace, ex opere operato. I answer, If the expression be
fairly and heartily interpreted, it signifies nothing less in the true sense
and meaning of those words, as they are commonly spoken, and taken among
Divines. You would pick something out of the words ipso facto, which yet there
imply no more than this, when the baptizing is over, or the washing of water in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is done or performed by the
Minister, without any future or further signing with the sign of the Cross. And
yet after all, the Sacraments are not nuda signa, sed signa exhibentia and
obsignantia to every worthy Partaker of them; and who are thus worthy, I will
acquaint you in something which shall be spoken to by and by. But to requite
you for your kindness, I pray Sir, let me know whether my saying, That
baptizing in the Name of the Father, etc. obliges the person, and exhibits the
power, etc. does import and imply the Sacraments conferring grace ex opere
operato, and not your Rubric much more, which says, It is certain by Gods
Word, that children which are baptized, dying before they have committed actual
sin, are undoubtedly saved? Qui alterum accusat probri, ipsum se intueri
oportet.

For the justification of this Rubric I called for Scripture, and you say to
that purpose, What think we of S. Peter's telling us, p. 6. l 44
1 Epist. 3.20, 21. Where speaking of those who were saved in Noah 's Ark by
water, he subjoyns, the like Figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save
us? I answer, I think S. Peter speaks nothing to the justification of the
Rubric; but only thus far in general, That as Noah and his Family in the Ark
were saved from the Deluge, so people by Baptism are saved from the worser
Deep; and these not only Children before actual sin, but even the Adult also
after the perpetration of the same; for such were all they who were housed and
saved in the Ark. If therefore you will frame an argument from hence for the
salvation of Infants baptized before actual sin, the argument is of like force
for men and women baptized, though actually guilty: And then from hence it will
follow, that all persons baptized are undoubtedly saved. Here is opus operatum,
conferring grace with a witness, and without all failure: Though it is far
otherwise, as we may see even in that Type of Baptism; for notwithstanding Cham
was saved in the Ark with an Ark salvation, yet we think him a Castaway; so
thousands may be saved with a Baptism-salvation, and yet perish eternally. But
you add further, p. 6. l. 51.
Christ says of such (i. e. of little children that come unto him, and it is
by Baptism only that they can come) is the Kingdom of Heaven. I answer,
Granting this coming to Christ is intended of Baptism (as I am wholly of your
mind, and glad to find another of mine in this particular) yet this is spoken
indefinitely of all little Children, as well as of the baptized, and before
their baptizing, and not after; for Christ says, Because they are of the
Kingdom of God, let them come unto me; and not, that they may be so; let them
come and be signed and sealed, because they are of such a number and order, who
shall inherit the Kingdom. Again, though Christ says, Of such is the Kingdom
of God; yet of such, does not necessarily include all Children in general,
though coming unto Christ, but may well be understood of some particulars among
them. Your strongest Argument I have reserved to the last, taken out of S.
Mark, Chap. 1.4. Is not Baptism said to be for remission of sins, such it is in
it self, such it cannot cut be to those who rightly partake of it; p. 6. l. 46.
and if Children do this, if by this they are actually brought into the
Covenant of Grace, whilst they break no Law, as it is only by actual
transgression they can do this; is it any question that they are undoubtedly
saved, that is put at least in a salvable condition? He has better learned
Aristotle's Organon than ever I can do, who knows to reduce this confused heap
of both of words and matter into any just Syllogism. I see indeed you are a
very cunning Sophister, if in nothing else, yet in this, that you quote
Scripture by halves (I will not tell you like unto whom) leaving out that part
of it which would destroy your argument, as he those words which would have
overthrown his temptation. You say, Is not Baptism said to be for remission of
sins? whereas the Text is thus; John did baptize in the Wilderness, Mark 1.4.
and preach the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins. The Baptism
therefore here spoken of belongs not properly to Infants; for, first, it is a
Baptism of Repentance, of which Infants are not capable: Secondly, it is for
remission of sins, which therefore imply actual sins, whereas Infants are only
guilty of Original sin, and that is but one. And besides all this, remission of
sins, there spoken of, relates not so much unto Baptism, as unto Repentance;
for John Baptist his great work was to call people to Repentance, In those days
came the Baptist preaching, and saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of God is at
hand; upon this account his baptism is styled, The Baptism of Repentance; and
he himself says, Matthew. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance:
And as a testimony of their true repentance, he called them to his baptism, and
not otherwise; and accordingly if their repentance were unfeigned and sincere,
answerable to the outward sign of it in Baptism, their sins should be remitted
unto them, else abide upon them, notwithstanding that washing. This is the true
intent of the place, as we have it explained from the mouth of Peter, Act.
2.38. Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ,
for the remission of sins. But notwithstanding what I have now answered, I will
yet acknowledge, that true and real Gospel-baptism is for remission of sins:
but then we must well understand and find out, what this true and real
Gospel-baptism is, and wherein it consists; for John Baptist himself says, I
indeed baptize with water unto repentance, but he that comes after me is
mightier than I, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. There
is Baptisma flu^i^^^, and B^^tisma flaminis, an outward and inward Baptism, the
one of Water, and the other of the Spirit; the one to purge away the filth of
the body, the other to purge away the filth of the soul. Now there is a wide
and vast difference between these two, which are not only distinguishable, but
separable, and often separated the one from the other. The Baptism of Water is
often without the Baptism of the Spirit, and the Baptism of the Spirit without
the Baptism of Water. Where these two happily meet together in the same person,
there the blessed result and consequence hereof is sure pardon, and remission
of sins, and the final issue, undoubted salvation; otherwise not. But now who
shall presume to tell, as to hic and nunc (when this and another Child is
baptized) concerning the certain concurrence of both these? who has known the
mind of God herein? who can discover this inscrutable secret? But yet let me
not be mistaken when I said, otherwise not; for it is to be restrained only to
the first Baptism: for though this cannot seal unto us the pardon of sins
without the last, yet the last can do it by it self alone without the first.
All the Ancient Patriarchs, and Prophets, and holy Confessors, and Saints
before Christ's Incarnation, had only the last Baptism; and since that time,
all those Infant-Martyrs under the butchery of Herod, had only this last
Baptism; thousands of the Seed of believing Parents, some of them dying before
they were born, and some of them immediately after, have had only this last
Baptism: that blessed Babe which brake out of the Womb, while the Mother of it
was now sacrificing her Body in the Flames, for a testimony to the Truth
against cursed Papists, (who most cruelly and unnaturally forthwith condemned
this young Heretic to be burnt, together with the old one) had only this last
baptism; notwithstanding the sins of all these (and of all others in the same
circumstances) were undoubtedly remitted, and their souls undoubtedly saved.
Though they were not made partakers of the outward washing, yet the inward
washing was graciously vouchsafed to them unto life everlasting: this therefore
is that which I would call the true and real Gospel-baptism, (...), by way of
Eminency; whereas the outward Baptism of Water, which is only in the power of
man to administer, can never do away sin, neither can it assure us of the
remission of the same. He is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew who is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, and in the spirit, Romans 2.28.
In like manner, he is not a Christian who is one outwardly, neither is that
baptism which is outward on the flesh, but he is a Christian who is one
inwardly, and baptism is that of the heart, and in the spirit: this, this only
is the unerring infallible sign and seal unto us of our interest in the
Covenant of Grace, and the great blessing annexed to it: I will be merciful
unto their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no
more, Heb. 7.12. But now who knows, whether all and every one among the
multitude of young children that have the baptism of the flesh, have also the
baptism of the heart, and in the spirit? This is thick darkness, and we cannot
pierce through it. Since therefore here we are left at uncertainty, though the
said children be baptized, and though they die before they have committed
actual sin, yet never the more can we be certain by Gods Word, that they are
undoubtedly saved.

Yet for all this, the baptism on the flesh, or washing with water, is not an
insignificant Ceremony, but has its weighty and momentous ends, according to
the wise counsel of him that ordained it, handing forth many general, blessings
to all that are baptized; and besides these, more special favors to every
worthy partaker of it; and this signal one among others, Remission of sins. And
now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling
on the Name of the Lord. But then we must carefully single out who are the
worthy partakers; there is therefore a double worthiness, the one external, and
the other internal: now these special blessings are imparted not to those who
are only worthy with an external worthiness, but with an internal also. All
they may be said to be externally worthy, who have an outward call, and are
duly qualified, according to the rules of the Gospel, to participate of that
Ordinance; and among others, the children of Professors, or the children of
believing Parents: All they, and only they have an inward worthiness, who are
the called of God according to his purpose, and chosen in Christ before the
foundation of the world: now unto all these, and only unto these, the Sacrament
does sign, seal, exhibit, and convey the grace of the Gospel. When I say,
exhibit and convey, I mean only in suo genere, according to the nature of the
Ordinance, as an Instrument in the hand of Omnipotency, who works in, and by,
and with whatsoever means he will, and effects all his counsels and
stupendous works, in this way and manner, with never failing success; as when
with the blast of Rams horns he tumbled down the Walls of Jerico, or to come
nearer to the matter in hand, when with the waters of Jordan he healed the
Syrian of his Leprosy. You see therefore, that it is not the Sacrament it
self, as it is opus operatum in the administration of it, but the Omnipotency
and faithfulness of God in the application of it, conferring grace; and yet not
unto all, but only unto the worthy Partakers, and these also with an inward
worthiness. To conclude therefore, as Baptism is for remission of sins, so
likewise the Lords Supper, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, shed for
many for the remission of sins. It was indeed for remission of sins unto the
Eleven, but not unto Judas, though he drank of that Cup as well as his
Colleagues, yea and had a worthiness for it, that is an outward worthiness, and
was rightly admitted unto it, but wanted the inward: To the inwardly worthy the
blessing is communicated, but from all others the blessing is suspended.

Among other things you say, p. 61.48.
Children by Baptism are actually brought into the Covenant of Grace. Here
again I might fasten upon you the opus operatum conferring grace, as well as
you upon me from a lesser cause: but I pass it by to tell you of another
error; for children of believers were actually, i.e. really and truly in the
Covenant of Grace before their Baptism, because it is by virtue of their
interest in that Covenant, that they are admitted to that Ordinance: Baptism is
but an open Declaration of that which before was more latent and implicit; it
strengthens our Claim to the Covenant, but our Title was good and sure before.
In a word, Baptism is as the mutual sealing, when both sides are agreed; the
Articles are drawn up, all things are concluded, and now only to be
consummated, by setting their Hands and Seals.

Children, say you, baptized, and dying before actual sin, p. 6. l. 50.
are undoubtedly saved, that is, put at least in a salvable condition. I
answer, After all your strong Proofs and Arguments, you faint in your great
Assertion and very tamely are contented to come down to lower Terms.
Undoubtedly saved, that is, to be in a Salvable condition. You are like the
wise Steward, who instead of an Hundred Talents willed the Debtor to write down
Fifty. Undoubtedly saved, and to be put into a Salvable condition, are no
Synonyma's; for the last is far short from an Equipolency to the first. There
is a vast difference between a Non posse non vivere, and a posse non mori,
between a necessary enjoyment of life with the utmost security from death, and
the most possible yea probable attainment of life, cum formidine contrarij,
with the hazard of the contrary. Of these two, Undoubtedly saved is the first,
and a Salvable condition is the last. You know the Proverb, A bird in the hand.
Undoubtedly saved is a Ship arrived, put in and safely come to shore, past all
danger; a Salvable condition is a ship far off on the main; Though she be a
stout and strong built Vessel, with all her Tacklings firm and complete, and
in a good and likely way to make a prosperous Voyage yet she may miscarry and
perish in the deep. Your paraphrase therefore is paradox to the Text, though
sound and Orthodox in it self; Children Baptized are indeed in a Salvable
condition, not only before, but also after they have committed actual sin: yea
(according to the Doctrine of the Liturgy, in the order appointed for the
burial of the dead) not only Children, but grown up men, committing actual sins
(sins of the deepest die, most gross immoralities, not to be named among
Christians, Heaven-daring and Hell-deserving sins, all the days of their lives,
unto their last Exit) are still in a Salvable condition: Or else how can they
be thought to be in an hope-able condition? You know what is read over all
such, when they are brought to the Grave. That when we shall depart this life
we may rest in him (in Christ) as our hope is this our Brother does. There is a
Gospel without an hope to rely upon the promise of it, and there is an hope, I
see, without a Gospel to justify the reason of it. But that remains yet to be
discussed: I therefore return to the matter before us. Children Baptized are in
a Salvable condition, that is in a right, hopeful, and probable way of
salvation, according to the Gospel. For though Christ has said it, many are
called, and few are Chosen; and though from hence, even because of the
multitude who are called into Gods Family continually by Baptism, as from
other Objections, some Scruples may arise in our minds, powerful enough to take
off, and hinder the full Assurance, and certain belief of the undoubted
Salvation of all such; yet because the secret things of Election belong wholly
to God, and the revealed things of the outward call only unto us, we according
to what is revealed unto us in that outward call, may and ought to judge
Charitably concerning all Infants Baptized, and hope well of their Eternal
State. In the general, we have good reason to believe, that God will own and
bless his own Ordinances, and grant Salvation to his people in his own ways and
Institutions appointed for such an end. Truth has said it, He that believes
and his Baptized shall be saved. Children, I confess cannot actually believe,
and so perhaps this promise is not properly theirs: yet they cannot wholly be
debarred of it; for even in their infancy, the seed of Grace, and the seed of
Faith, may be sown and Rooted in their Hearts; but however they are actually
Baptized, which leads on directly to the Blessing there mentioned, and has such
a full and fair Aspect upon the same, that I would not be wanting of the
Ordinance of Baptism my self, nor deprive my Children of it for Thousands of
Gold and Silver; and the rather because Wisdom has said again, Except a man be
born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

You have therefore my vote and suffrage, for the Salvable condition Children
Baptized: I leave them in the way of life, while yet they are living: in via
Salutis, dum viatores, but how they can be thought or said to be so in termino,
after they are gone to their long, lasting, Everlasting home; or how you can
apply this for the vindication of the Rubric, is beyond my understanding. It
is certain by Gods Word, that Children which are Baptized, dying before they
commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved; that is, say you, in your
explanation, they are put at least in a Salvable condition, what are they still
but in a Salvable condition after dying? I shall make no remark upon this
remarkable -- but am ready to Trespass another way, even volens nolens. Quis
tale legendo Temperet a risu? Nevertheless this shall be spoken for your
Honor, that you are a more generous Opponent than the former; for you
intrepedly and Heroickly own justify the Truth of the Rubric; when as he most
basely and sneakingly would have shuffled it off by the slight of evasion: not
allowing it any place in his assent and consent, though it has evidently a
place in the Liturgy and is a part of the whole.

But then on the other side, I think him more sober than your self, though he
call a certain query of mine, A raving question: which was this, since
Baptizing gives such an unquestionable Title unto heaven, may a Minister deny
the Ordinance to any infant whatsoever, if he might be permitted to Administer
it? In particular I brought down the question to a True believer, whose Child
had an unquestionable right unto Gospel Baptism according to the Terms and
conditions of the Gospel; Whether, if such a believer should bring his Child to
the Font, and desire the Minister to have it Baptized, but yet either out of
weakness or tenderness of Conscience, Scruples Godfathers and Godmothers, and
the sign of the Cross, and dares not admit of them, the Minister may and ought
upon that score deny his Babe Christendom? He says in such a Case the answer
is plain, that he ought not. p. 19.26.
Though here he speaks without Book, I mean the Common Prayer Book, and against
the Order of it in the Baptizing of Infants. Whereas you say on the contrary in
these words, That odium he (meaning me) would load the Minister with, that
shall deny to Administer Baptism to them, who come not according to the Rule of
the Church -- are (surely it should be, is, referring to odium) besides our
Argument, p. 7. l. 9.
it is sufficient he (the Minister) has no Title (I think you mean has no
right, for I am often at a loss to unriddle you) so to do it, that he is more
serious in his function, than to be knowingly unjust, either to the trust the
Church or God himself, as I may say, has reposed in him. If a Father come to
have his Child Baptized, but not according to the Rules of the Church: The
Minister has no Title so to do it, and therefore in such Circumstances will be
more just to the trust reposed in him than to Baptize the said Child. If this
be not the purport and intention of your words, you speak unintelligibly: but
if they be, you fight against your fellow Soldier, yea and against Truth it
self. Shall we obey God or Man? Christ has said, Go and disciple all Naions,
Baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc. and among others, the Children
of believing professing Parents, simply because they are so: This is the True
Gospel trust put into the hands of Gospel Ministers; well, but the Church or
man commands, to Baptize them with Godfathers and God Mothers, and the sign of
the Cross, mere accidents and accessories, foreign from the Nature and Essence
of Baptism, but only invented and imposed from Humane Tradition; which
therefore some weak and Scrupelous believers, question and fear as a
profanation of that Holy Ordinance, and accordingly dare not so address
themselves with their Children unto Baptism. But now shall their Babes upon
this account be denied their birthright? Shall they be denied a privilege so
excellent and so desirable? Shall a pitiful order of the Church in Comparison
overruled and obtain? Shall it be heeded and observed by the Minister more than
the Regia placita of heaven it self? God forbid.

I Objected against the order for the burial of the dead; because what is there
spoken to God and man, though often at the interment of the worst of sinners,
is spoken of them as if they had been Saints. and most devout Holy persons, and
their Souls then in a safe and happy State. For first the Congregation by the
mouth of the Minister speaks as it were to themselves one to another,
concerning the party deceased, Forasmuch as it has pleased God of his great
mercy to take unto himself the Soul of our dear brother. He is a Brother, a
dear Brother, his Soul is now taken by God, taken in mercy, in great mercy, and
it is taken to himself. And then when Corpse is put into the Grave, he continues
his speech in these words, we therefore commit his body to the ground, in a
sure and certain hope of the Resurrection to Eternal life. Then Secondly the
Congregation, in the close of the Office, by the mouth of the Minister, speaks
unanimously to God, we meekly beseech the O Father, to raise us from the death
of sin to the life of righteousness; that when we shall depart this life we may
rest in him, Christ Jesus, as our hope is this our Brother does. What can be
said more, if the most Holy Martyr, or confessor, if Stephen again were
carried to his Burial? Let him be a Nabal, a Cain, a Judas, yet here is (if I
might use the Word) his Apotheosis, his enthronization among the Crowned in
Celestial glory. You say I have only this to say, ^. 7. l. 15.
That it is in the judgment of Charity we prenounce this of all. I answer,
Charity with judgment, is a gracious Excellency, but without judgment, it is
the greatest absurdity, and nothing else but the vain opinion of an
over-pittiful simplicity. But if Charity be with judgment, then it must have
some Rule of judging: and if the right Golden Rule, then this Rule is the Word,
for I know no other; Now if Charity has this Golden Rule of the Word to judge
by, then Charity can have no hope for some (many) flagitious abominable
sinners, so living and so dying, when they are brought to be buried; as suppose
two Hectors falling out, and fighting for a Miss, and both killing one another
in the place; or let it be one of them: which happens too too often: suppose
some Highway Gentlemen in the very Act of Robbery, shot down stark dead the
same moment by the Honest Traveller, and thus I might instance in many like
Cases. Here, if we will speak soberly and according to Truth, we can have no
hope: nothing being written in the whole Bible, from end to end, to ground the
least of any such hope upon. Here to mention, what happened to the Thief upon
the Cross, and what may be the dealings of God with the most profane wretch at
the last Minute, as you do; and what may befall the most profligate persons,
inter pontem and fontem, as some others; is a vain execuse, and cannot afford
the least show or shadow of a just Apology. As for the Thief upon the Cross, a
wonderful Act of mercy was extended to him at the last, by an extraordinary
privilege, at an extraordinary occasion; but withal we know what a wonderful
extraordinary Testimony he gave of his Faith, and of the Change of his heart
before expiration. The order for the burial of the dead, might have been proper
enough at his interment: but would it also have been as proper at the interment
of the other his Copartner in sin? Had he suffered in England (supposing all
things then as now) he might have then been buried according to Liturgy. For I
see none else excluded, but the unbaptized, Excommunicate, and laying violent
hands upon themselves; and yet even these also upon your grounds may equally be
admitted to Christian burial; I am sure the first of them, the unbaptized, may
upon far better; and as for the worst of the other, who knows how gracious God
may be in his dealings with them in the last Minute? Who knows? None can know:
and because none can know, therefore none can hope: for hope without knowledge
is a mere Nullity. As for what we know concerning such abominable wicked
workers (if we believe the Holy Scripture, which says, Neither Fornicators,
nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
revilers, nor Extortioners shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God; which says,
without regeneration and holiness no man shall see the Lord, and every where to
the like purpose) it speaks their condition desperate and damned; and therefore
with silence, but without hope, we must leave them wholly to the disposition
and determination of God their judge. And this also you seem to to acknowledge
and concede: for in making good those words, since it has pleased God of his
great mercy to take unto himself -- you say, That it is not necessary the Words
in great mercy should refer to the Persons taken away, for it may be mercy, p.
7. l. 17.
and a great mercy, to them who suffered by their injury, or ill Examples,
supposing them to be such in whom no show of goodness did appear. I answer, I
thank you heartily for this new Notion, which never before came upon the
imagination of my thoughts, nor perhaps of any other: so that you may say in a
boast as Zabbarel (if I hit right upon his name) Ego primus hoc inveni. Verily
the Gens Togata, I mean all of the Clergy, are much your Debtors, and I hope in
gratitude will highly extol the acumen of your wit, and the pregnancy of your
invention. For a recompense, I think my self bound to tell you a story, which
this rare piece of Fancy of yours brought fresh into my remembrance. In those
days (when the Book of sports and pastimes, as Lawful and expedient to be
indulged to youth, and fit to be exercised on the Lords day) was commanded to
be published, and accordingly was read in most Congregations; Deus bone! What
are the best of men, the Tribe of Levi, the Sons of the Church themselves, when
they come to be Tried! Yet there were some of them Non-conformists to the rest,
who neither could nor would do what was then required, what ever they suffered.
One of them a most worthy Preacher, was desired by some of his Chief
Parishoners to visit his friends in another County, and to absent himself from
them three weeks or a month together: and in the interim they procured an Old
certain Saint John (a very obscure person, who neglected his dress, but
cherished the Hair of his face and beard at a strange rate) to do this good
turn for him: who by the like Crotchet of an extraordinary fancy was ready at
their service, and made no bones of it. He comes therefore, and appears in the
Desk, after the manner of some Wild Satyr out of a Wood, and for the better
grace of the matter, what he spoke was with a Twanging Tone out of his Nose.
Well; he sets upon the performance of the work, and reads over the Book of
Sports distinctly and audibly: but when he had done, he added as follows;
Beloved Brethren! Here the King gives you liberty to play on Sundays, and to
exercise youth in vain sports and pastimes, which to do is aprofanation of the
Sabbath, and a breach of Gods Holy commandment: but now, brethren! do you
understand the Kings mind, and his true intent and meaning herein? Why, I will
tell you, my brethren! a Father has a stubborn rebellious Child, and he sees
his Temper, and spirit from time to time, awkward and cross to do any thing he
is bidden, but rather more resolved and forward to do the contrary; wherefore
the Father, when he would have anything done by this perverse and froward boy,
forbids him the doing of it: but what indeed he would not have done, he charges
him to do it. Thus in like manner, my brethren! Our good and gracious King has
commanded us to observe the Sabbath in coming to Church, and in a Religious
serving and Worshipping of God, by many good preceding Laws, and Orders for
that end and purpose: but still such is our contumacy and wickedness, that we
drink and play, and have our Dances and Revels on that blessed day, in a
shameful manner: wherefore he seeing our perverse Rebellious carriage, against
his former good Precepts, he speaks unto us by contraries, He bids now play on
Sundays, but his true meaning is, that we should no longer play, as formerly we
have done, but keep God's Sabbath better, and more Religiously; this is all our
good and gracious King (judging of us according to our wonted crosseness)
intended in publishing this book of liberty, and I hope will follow upon the
reading of it. Here was a strange unexpected, and unlooked for enucleation of
the mind of the King, as now yours is of the words of the Liturgy. When I heard
this relation first, I was hugely pleased with it: and said, it was pity some
Courtier had not not acquainted the King with it; who certainly would have
rewarded this rare interpreter with a Dean's or Prebend's place, for his
eminent understanding and service herein: I wish you the same success in your
parallel Achievement. But in the interim we must consider, whether those words
in great mercy can admit of any such avulsion from the words following, which
relate unto the dead, to be an Apostrophe to them that are living? Let us read
them and weigh them, For as much as it has pleased God of his great mercy, to
take to himself the Soul of our dear brother here departed, etc. Therefore the
person here spoken of cannot be (as you would suppose him) a man of an ill
example, an injurious person, p. 7. l. 17.
and in whom no show of goodness did ever appear, for he is a brother, a dear
brother, and his Soul now taken to God and accordingly these words, in great
mercy, must refer unto himself the person taken away, and not unto others; unto
whom this his being taken away, was rather in judgment, and for Correction, by
the loss of such a dear brother. Notwithstanding procure a Rubric to confirm
your interpretation, for until then (according to your own look) I may not
believe it: but when I shall see that once affixed, p. 3. l. 7.
let the turning of these words, in great mercy, from the dead to the living,
be proper or improper, it shall be all one in the Case; for your sense of them
shall be most authentic with me.

You have yet another Salve for the sore place, to justifies is last Office
for the dead, in these words, p. 7. l. 23. l. 27.
Nor have I ever thought the person Officiating, obliged to use this form of
burials entirely in all Cases -- something I conceive may be left to the
discretion of the Priest, especially with the advice of his Ordinary, etc. Your
meaning plainly is this, that you may leave out some part of what is appointed
to be read for the burial of the dead, if the persons buried be not subjects
proper for it, but utterly the contrary. As for Example, if the person to be
buried, has been a notorious flagitious offender from first to last, then after
your own discretion, especially with the advice of your Ordinanry, you may
leave out the words, in great mercy, and to himself dear, and the like, and
read only thus, For as much as it has pleased God to take the Soul of our
brother, we therefore commit his body, etc. Thus likewise in the close, you may
omit those words, as our hope is this our brother does, and read it thus, That
when we shall depart this life, we may rest in him, and at the general
Resurrection be found acceptable in his sight, etc.

I Answer, It would be well, if the Minister might thus be left to his own
discretion, supposing all parties agreed, and that there would be no scandal in
the Case; which I look upon as an impossibility. For put the Case, after you
have declared your unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every thing
contained in the book of Common Prayers, before the face of God, and the
Congregation, one of them should immediately step forth and say, Sir do you
like and approve of all, and every thing contained in, and prescribed by the
order for the burial of the dead? E're long your Office will call you to bury
as cursed, Reprobate wretches as ever breathed; for too too many such are among
us. Do you think it lawful and expedient to style every one of that sort, dear
brother? can you then with a good Conscience say, God in great mercy has taken
his Soul to himself? Or can you express your hope before God, even sure and
certain hope, of his resting in Christ, and eternal happiness? What now will
you answer to his Questions? will you bring in your last mentioned plea, and
think to help and justify your self by it? Will you reply thus, Friend, I
have indeed in your hearing, as in the hearing of the whole Congregation,
declared my unfeigned assent and consent to all, and every thing contained in,
and prescribed by the book of Common Prayer, and by consequence, as you justly
infer, to all and every thing appointed for the burial of the dead; but yet you
must know, I have a mental reservation according to my own discretion; and
besides, my Ordinary, though I have avouched I will do this and that, has given
me a secret License, to leave it undone insuch and such Cases; and in this very
Case in particular about burying the dead; and therefore when I shall judge it
meet and necessary, I will omit several Expressions, when they shall not be
proper nor applicable to the persons to be buried, or at least I will take the
words in a contrary sense, according to what they are usally taken? should this
be your answer? but with what forehead could you utter it? How quickly might
the said person reply upon you, to your shame and confusion, in this or the
like manner? Belike, Sir, though you have declared your unfeigned assent and
consent to all, and every thing contained in and prescribed by the book of
Common Prayer, you have but jugled in all you have declared; you have your
private reservations and exceptions, and your Ordinary has given you a License
to profess one thing, and do another; I see your heart and mouth have not gone
together, but you speak and think two several ways. I took you for a good
Protestant Minister, but I perceive you are a mere Jesuit: an Ireland, a Gavan
can do no more. What way you could devise, to free your self from this
impeachment, is altogether beyond my thoughts.

Sir, You well observed a certain sort of Ministers among your selves, pitied
in their Non conformity, as doing, good men, p. 4. l. 38.
what they would not do, if they were not forced to it, and therefore they
huddle up and curtail the prayers, and show industriously by the manner of
performance how little they like and approve of what they do. This what you
say, I have heard my self spoken in their praise, and themselves much commended
for it; but I have always thought them so far from being worthy of praise, that
I have esteemed them most worthy of censure and condemnation; and my heart has
risen against them beyond all others. This is wretched simulation, and a base
pitiful disguise. Surely after I had declared my unfeigned assent and consent
to all and every thing contained in the Liturgy, before the whole Congregation,
I would be faithful to mine own word, and justify my profession by a consonant
practice: I would not curtail the prayers, but have the Courage before all the
world to read them distinctly and reverently, and do all in a most ample
manner, as the matter did require, scorning aucupare famam, to get the good
opinion of any, by showing my self an Hypocrite. And thus, Sir, it should be
with you in your own concern; after your declaration, it behooves you to be True
unto it in every Iota and Tittle, frankly, roundly, and entirely coming up to
the full performance of it, and of all and every thing required by it, yea even
in the order for the burial of the dead, any word, phrase, expression, or
passage therein in any wise notwithstanding.

Moreover, besides this Scandal (arising from your last contrivance of ^^earing
your self) a worse yet might follow in the event and issue: even sometimes to
the peril and danger of your life, should you indeed do, as you say you have
liberty; that is, should you leave out those words, phrases, and expressions,
wherein the piety and felicity of the party deceased is signified and declared,
it would never be endured: Suppose the person interred, some Lord, Knight, or
Gentleman; a Person, of worth I cannot say, but of wealth and quality, though
in the time of his life, he was never so wicked and ungodly, yet now that he is
dead, he must be reputed a worthy good man in all kinds, and nothing thought or
said amiss of him: a pompous Funeral is prepared for him, and his friends with
much solemnity, follow the Bier, expecting for him the due and accustomed
Honor of Christian burial, and that every word be there spoken over him by the
Minister in the very form and manner as it is prescribed; if therefore you
shall presume to take your liberty, and use your discretion to skip over any
thing in the Sepulture of him, which of others you do not; it will be taken as
an affront, and an unpardonable Trespass by his then present Relations; and so
perhaps some Son, brother, or fellow Hector, shall be ready to tumble you into
the Grave after him, or offer some other abuse, to your great mischief and
evil. Yea the meanest will not endure such a Reproachful Reflection upon their
Relations, but will hate you for it in their hearts. You see therefore this
stratagem of leaving out at discretion will Challenge your discretion, but
never do your work. And consequently as things are now ordered in the Liturgy,
and as you have unfeignedly assented and consented to them in the declaration,
you must be again and again a Transgressour either to God or man, in the
burials of the dead. But,

p. 7 1 22.
You say, The Church must frame her Offices to suit those, who are her real
Members. I answer, Here is the wisdom of the Church to frame all her Offices
and Services in such a manner as may be furthest from all Scandal in one kind
or other; and count that most suitable, that is most conducible to such an end.
To speak therefore about the Office for the burial of the dead, It is known
upon matter of fact, that all men have not Faith, It Is known that most, who are
named Professors, and live in Church Communion, are yet Graceless, Christless
persons; and in this wretched woeful condition go commonly out of the World.
Shall it now notwithstanding be thought suitable and seemly, in the burying of
all these, to speak of them, as if they were Saints, and true sincere approved
Disciples of Christ? Surely, Sir, if you would freely declare your mind from
the unprejudiced sentiments of an unforestalled judgment, you must needs bring
in your Negative, and say, It is far from being suitable, but rather
insufferable. What therefore of help and remedy shall be found in the Case?
Surely methinks some form of words in general, concerning death, and judgment,
and the other World, with good and wholesome prayers corresponding, and to the
same purpose, might be so contrived (for the edification of the hearers,
without intermedling at all with the particular condition of the party
deceased, either to his praise or dispraise) that no just offense might be
either given or taken by any. This is the sudden and extempore effusion of my
Pen in this matter. Until some such Course be taken, I am well pleased that I
have no call to bury the dead, nor can I, p. 2. l. 22.
rebus sic stantibus, ever declare my unfeigned assent and consent unto them.

A POSTSCRIPT.
I Have yet two Queries to propound to mine Opponents, to each of them their
question, and so I shall take my leave of them for the present.

You therefore, Sir, who appeared first against me, highly applaud the writings
of the Apochrypha, and plead much for the verity of them in themselves, and the
usefulness of them as to the reading of them to the people; for you say, Few
Protestant Writers of any note, p. 10. l. 16.
(I would you had named some of those noted men) but have commended, at least
have allowed of the reading of them; that is, in the public Assembly, and
Congregation, as well as other Scripture; and you except against me for stiling
them, Fabulous Legends, and say, many of the ancient Fathers did believe them
to be true stories, (as true as Gospel) and though he (A.B.) is pleased to call
them Fabulous Legends, I never yet saw any Arguments to prove them Fables, but
what would admit of a fair solution, and when this Author produces any, I shall
consider them. And you add, but supposing them Fables, they are nevertheless
fit for all that to be read in the Christian Assemblies: since they may serve
for instruction, or comfort, or reproof, as the Parables of our Savior do.
What, Sir, do you think what you speak? What as the Parables of our Savior do?
What, shall the Fables of Apochrypha beavouched, to serve for instruction,
comfort and reproof as the Parables of our Savior do? Is this as a Conjunction
of equality, or only of aliquality? To my best Remembrance it is Aquinas his
distinction, and it is needful here to free you from an horrid blasphemy: you
might well therefore have affixed some word of rebate to your word as, to have
avoided all imputation of it. Yet this is not the question I have to propound:
but since you declare your mind and judgment, for the truth and goodness of the
Apochryphal writings, I would enquire of you,

Q. What strong convincing, and Cogent Motives of credence wrought you into
this persuasion, and brought you into this mind?

The reading of this Paragraph set me a wondering; but certainly you have (...)
something hidden in your breast beyond vulgar knowledge to justify Apocrypha;
which I would gladly understand for my better information. For I confess unto
this day, I have entertained a quite different, yea utterly a contrary
apprehension of them. Among many others these are two of my reasons: first,
because they contain in them several Doctrines, not only inconsistent with
themselves, but also repugnant to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.
Secondly, because they report and witness many things as really transacted and
done, which sound reason and common sense (if they may beheard to speak) will
unanswerably tell you, can be nothing else but Monstrous and incredible
fiction, impossible in nature, and at as great an Elongation from Faith and
Verity, as whatsoever was Hatched in the brains, or mentioned by the pens of
Hesiod, Homer, or any other of the greatest and most famous of those lying
Poets, I remember very well, when I was but a little young Schoolboy in
reading over the books of the Maccabees, many of those strange stories found as
little belief in me; but that of one Razis, a Jew I judged to be a notorious
untruth, and continue to be of the same mind unto this day. For thus it is
written of him, 2 Maccab. Chap. 14. v. 37. Now there was accused unto Nicanor
one Razis one of the Elders of Jerusalem, a lover of his Country men and a man
of very good report, who for his kindness was called, a Father of the Jews --
so Nicanor willing to declare the hate he bare unto the Jews sent above five
hundred men of war to take him -- now when the multitude would have taken the
Tower, and violently broken into the utter door, and bid the fire should be
brought to burn it, he being ready to be taken on every sde, fell upon his
Sword Choosing rather to die manfully (that is to be guilty of self Murder) then
to come into the hands of the wicked, to be abused otherwise then beseemed his
Noble Birth: but missing his stroke through have, the multitude also rushing
within the doors, he ran boldly up to the wall, and cast himself down manfully
amongst the thickest of them; but they quickly giving place, and a space being
made, he fell down into the midst of the void place. Nevertheless while there
was yet breath within him, being inflamed with anger he rose up, and though his
blood gashed out like spouts of water, and his wounds were grievous; yet he ran
through the midst of the throng, and standing upon a steep Rock, when as his
Blood was now quite gone, he plucked out his bowels, and taking them in both his
hands, he cast them upon the throng, and calling upon the Lord of Life and
Spirit to restore him those again, thus he died. Here is such a Concatenation
of prodigies, in this one Narration, that nothing less than a prodigy of
credulity can assent to any one particular of them. It is mavelous that the
fall of Razis, from the Top of the High wall of the Castle (especially he
casting himself down violently from thence, and falling upon the bare ground or
pavement, for they quickly gave place, and did not bear him up) had not
immediately done his business for him upon the spot; had not immediately beaten
his brains out of his head, his bowels out of his belly, and breath out of his
body; at least put him out of all Capacity of rising and running; and this
through a throng of people, and these a throng of Soldiers and Armed men, and
they also Assayling him on every side; for they were sent to Seize his person,
and to bring him Prisoner. Alas our George, and Arthur are not so much, if
compared with this great Hero Razis, as a Grasshopper with Goliath! The most
renowned of such Knights have lost their Spurs; Ecce homines Homunciones
blancati quasi libia, (...)
as he said merrily in another Case: which will more notoriously appear in the
conclusion of this most astonishing Tragical Exploit: for behold though his
blood gushed out like Spouts of water, yea when his blood was now quite gone,
and not one drop of it left in the veins, (which might befall him, either by
the violence of the aforesaid fall, or from the many wounds he had received
from the Swords of the Soldiers, or othewise; for we are left at
uncertainties.) Yet even then he called upon the Lord of life! It is written
indeed of our Savior, that after he had lost much blood upon the cross, he
cried out with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama-sabachthani, and yielded up
the Ghost. But this was wholly and altogether above the power of nature, and
therefore worthily counted one of his last Miracles; because great Effusion of
blood does necessarily enervate the parts of the body instrumental and
requisite to speech, beyond the possibility of framing or uttering any
articulate voice, or indeed any sound at all. Which therefore (as some have
thought) the Centurion hearing and observing, being (as well he might be) a
Naturalist and a Philosoper, did convince him, that the person then suffering
was not only a just and righteous man, but also much more then, (...), mere
man; for he said, Truly this was the Son of God, Mat. 27. v. 54. Compared with
Luke 23. v. 46. Though it is evident that our Savior had yet much of his blood
remaining within him, when he loudly lowed out (if I may so speak with all due
reverence) that bitter Lamentation; for afterward it is said, one of the
Soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and
water, Joh. 19.34. Wherefore as for our Razis, it may be said, if it could be
without unpardonable blasphemy, Behold a greater than Christ is here; for now
when his blood was quite all gone, he called upon the Lord of life and spirit:
yet this is no great matter, if considered with what is still further reported
of him: For now notwithstanding all his blood was gone, he had not only Power
and vigor to call upon God, but also to pluck out his own bowels, surely they
hung very loose, and take them with both his hands; it is strange that neither
of them was hurt and disabled by his fall; and cast them upon the Throng. If
this be not a Thumper, I never heard one in my life.

But you will object, and say, these books of the Maccabees are not in the
Calendar, neither are they appointed to be read. I answer, though they are not
in the Calendar, yet they are in Apochrypha; of which in the whole Lump you are
a strenuous propugnator, without any Limitation or Exception. Nevertheless to
give you all fair play imaginable, I will return from the Maccabees to the
History of Tobit and his Dog, which has its course in the Desk, and that too
by order, as well as any part of the Holy Bible it self, Tobit, I say, and his
Dog: For though you were pleased to flurt at me for mentioning of his dog, and
say, I suppose this Author does not know that the Fifth Chapter of Tobit is
left out, (that is, out of the Calendar) where Tobit and his dog are found
together; yet how causelessly and weakly you do it, will instantly appear;
insomuch that if Tobit's dog were yet alive he had reason enough to resent the
injury with asnarl, and not only so, p. 7. l. 13.
but also bite you by the heels, for putting such a slight and affront upon
him; for why should you shut him out of the Holy place, as an unclean thing;
since he is admitted and received as well as his Master? Yet suppose I had not
known that the Fifth Chapter was left out, it would have no more challenged my
knowledge or understanding, then if you should be* upbraided with ignorance,
because you know not to handle your needle, nor how to cut out a gown in right
Mode and fashion, as well as any French Taylour in the Town; for what have you
to do with such a knowledge? and so what have I to do with the Curiosity and
intreague of the Calendar in this particular? Yea, I believe your self would be
put to a stand, to give a good and satisfactory account, C. 12.15.
why only that Fifth Chapter of the whole book of Tobit, C. 5. v. 12.
should be left out? Why this rather then any of the rest, which are altogether
Ejusdem farinae of the same leven? And the rather, because if you observe it in
this Fifth Chapter, the main plot and foundation of the whole Tragick-comedy is
brought in and laid, as it is usual upon the stage, in some of the first scens.
For here is Raphael a great Angel of Heaven, if you have Faith to believe,
brought in under the disguise of a servant, and professes himself to be Hoc
autem mendacium est, quo neque deus neque veriipsius Angeli, in Canonicis
libris leguntur usi: quodmendacium, ut excusemus, non magnopere pu^amus esse
laborandum: qui^ ^^ut multae rations ^inc inde comportentur) mendacium est
mendacium, a deo and ab Electis ejus Angelis alienissimum* So a true Expositor
upon the place.
Azarias the Son of Ananias the great; by what latitude of speech, I will not
undertake to resolve, nor yet how decorously: for it is not usual nor slightly,
that the Son of so great a man should need to turn serving-man. Well,
notwithstanding he profers his service to Tobit the Son, v. 6. And is
entertained to wait upon him in his Travail; and so they went forth both and
the young man's dog with him, ver. 16. And it is this Raphael, this servant
which teaches his young Master those unheard of Rarities, and puts him upon the
performing those wonderful exploits in the following Acts. Davus Omnia: Raphael
is all in all, and young Tobit is nothing without him. Why therefore this
necessary scene of introduction, should be left out and omitted, and this busy
Davus and most extraordinary servant should abruptly and suddenly appear, none
understanding from whence or how, is wholly beyond my apprehension. I would
gladly know, whether Mr. Falkner, (unto whom you owe much) in any of his great
labors, and learned Exercitations about the Liturgy, has given us the true
reason of this Chasme and Hiulcan leap in the Calendar? Surely there is some
Mystery in it: but what, Raphael knows for all me. In the interim it may well
purple your Cheeks, that you should rather then not twit me with ignorance,
betray your own; for though the Fifth Chapter is left out, and consequently
Tobit, and his Dog, yet if you had looked forward unto the Eleventh Chapter
(ordered to be read) there you shall find Tobit and his Dog again: for thus it
is recorded, v. 4. So they went their way, and the Dog went after them. And for
the better convincing you of the truth of what I now speak, be pleased, if you
count it worth the while, to go to any of our Cathedral-Churches, next third
day of October, in the forenoon in the year one thousand Six hundred and
eighty, and so quotannis for the future, and you will be satisfied. Saint
Paul's is not yet reedified, therefore that of West-minster is nearest; where
if you will do your devotions in that grave and solemn assembly, graced with
the presence of a great and generous Bishop: together with his Prebends,
Priests, and Deacons, besides a loud Chorus of singing men, and singing boys
alternatly responding; you shall see the reverend reader in due time and place
coming out of his seat, first making his lowly obeisance, with his face to the
earth toward the Holy Altar, though without a sacrifice; and therefore why he
so bows, is not a little Mysterious; and then turning about to show the same
reverence to the presul of the quire, and going into the Pew, you shall hear
him pronounce with a loud voice, these or the like words, The holy lesson
appointed, for this morning service is the Eleventh Chapter of the book of
Tobit; and then he proceeds to his work. After these things Tobias went his
ways praising God, that had given him aprosperous journey, and blessed Raguel
and Edna his Wife, and went on his way till he drew near to Ninive. Then
Rapahel said to Tobias; thou know brother, how thou did leave thy father;
let us have before thy wife, and prepare the house; and take in thine hand the
Gaul of the Fish. So they went their way, and the Dog went after them. I wonder
there is no Asterisk or finger in the margent pointing to the place, for it is
Valde Notabile; and then you could not have so easily over looked it. Give me
leave, for I think it innocent and harmless, and I am sure it is opportune, to
impart unto you a merriment. I once heard a young Lord (now a great and grave
Senator) whose Tongue is excellently well hung, who to exercise his faculty of
speaking, would needs take upon him to preach Extempore (as he said but too
loosly,) and what should be his Text, but this very verse, though not exactly
repeated to a letter, but in this manner, So Tobit went out, and his dog
followed him. I remember his first work was to make inquiry, for he said it was
of great importance, What kind of Dog this might be, whether a Spaniel,
Gray-hound, Water-dog, or some other: for from hence said he, we may very
probably find out the temper and genious of his Master. If this Dog were a
Spaniel, then young Tobit in all likelihood was a Gentleman, and one who
delighted in Hawking; but why then do we not read of an Hawk on his fist, as
well as a dog at his heel? If this dog were a Grayhound, then young Tobit took
his pleasure in Coursing: if this dog were a water-Spaniel, then young Tobit's
recreation was Ducking. But yet perhaps the dog was none of all these, but
rather a mere Pedlars-Cur; for it is said, the dog followed after him, just
like such a Cur; for as for the forementioned they are seen to be more Aerie,
metalsom and sprightly than heavily to follow after, but Range up and down the
fields far from their Masters feet, and hunt after prey; and such a dog might
well suit with his Masters mean condition for the present, because his Mother
was but a kind of Chair-woman, as old Tobit the Father reports of her, Chap. 2.
v. 11. And my Wife Anna did take woman's work to do, by which she earned her
livelihood, v. 14. This and much more was his Oratory, which I list not further
to repeat, and the rather, because what I have said already, is indeed more
than sufficient to convince you of your mistake about Tobit and his dog. But
besides, I have several doubts still remaining concerning old Tobit the Father,
and young Tobit the Son; which how they can be solved, and received by others,
as true and real, do utterly mate and non plus my thoughts.

Concerning old Tobit the Father we read thus, Chap. 2.v. 9. The same night I
returned from the burial, C. 2. v. 4.10
and slept by the Wall of my Courtyard, being polluted, and my face was
uncovered; and I knew not that there were sparrows in the wall, and mine eyes
being open, the sparrows muted warm dung into mine eyes, and a whiteness came
into mine eyes; whereby he became blind. If he slept, how came it to pass that
his eyes were open? I have heard this to be the property of an hare (but I
suppose it a vulgar error) and of nothing else living upon the earth. But
though the good man slept with his eyes open, how could two sparrows join by a
Conspiracy against him to make him blind? One sparrow could not work him this
mischief alone by its single muting; what did they secretly whisper, and soby
consent, in one and the same moment, turn up their tails, and let fall this
into one eye, and that into the other, and put them out together? Oh hateful
unhappy birds! else though such a shrewd mischance had befallen one of his
eyes, yet the other might have been preserved: surely he would have been more
watchful for the future, after he had understood the danger of it.

Concerning young Tobit the Son we read thus, Chap. 6. 1, 2, 3. And as they
went on their journey, they came in the evening to the River Tigris, and they
lodged there, and when the young man went down to wash himself, a fish leaped
out of the River, and would have devoured him; then the Angel (his servant
Raphael) said unto him, take the fish; and the young man laid hold of the fish,
and drew it to land. This was a strangebold fish to forsake its own Element to
devour a man. Forte Hippopotamus, says Grotius upon the place: but it is forty
to one that it was not; since that kind of water-beast (for so it may be called
rather then a fish) is reported to live only in the River Nile, Pliny in his
natural history having spoken of the Crocodile, says further, Major altitudine
in eodem Nilo Bellua hippopotamus editur cauda and dentibus aprorum, tergorisad
scuta galeasque impenetrabilis.
and not in Tigris; and besides it is of greater bigness and fierceness, than
tamely to be laid hold on by the hand of any, and brought to land; only our
young Tobit's excepted; who had the strength and valor to atchive this great
enterprise. Well; drawn this fish is upon the bank, and by the appointment of
the servant (for here the man commands the Master) it is gutted, or rather
unbowelled, the heart, liver, and gaul being taken out, and carefully
preserved, v. 4. And not without cause, for in due time they will be found to
be of an astonishing quality and virtue, working wonders. All the
Tetragammatons, Soleo-terrenos, withal other the terrible hard names boasted
of by your mountebanks, are not to be named the same day with them, as you
shall hear, v. 6. Then the young man said to the Angel, to what use is the
heart, the liver, and Gall of the fish? And he said unto him, Touching the
heart and the liver, if a Devil, or any evil Spirit trouble any, we must make a
smoke thereof before the man or the woman, and the party shall be no more
vexed: as for the Gall it is good to anoint a man that has whiteness in his
eyes, and he shall be healed. This is repeated again, v. 16. When thou shall
come into the marriage Chamber, thou shall take the Ashes of perfume, and shall
lay upon them some of the heart and liver of the fish, and shall make a smoke
with it: and the Devil shall smell it, and and flee away, and never come again
anymore. The reason of this (as you know) was thus; a Match was resolved upon
by the Angel between young Tobit and a young Virgin that was loved by a devil;
C.p. 3. v. 3.
I assure you by all the faith of Apocrypha the devil Asmodoeus, for that is
his name, was desperately in love with her, and as a most jealous lover
impatient of Rivals, had murdered and torn in pieces, no less then seven men
one after another, for pretending unto her; for so her father Raguel like an
honest good man, plainly told this ignorant wooer (as he supposed) when he
first brake his mind to him about the buness. Chap. 7. v. 10. And Raguel said
to Tobias it is meet, that thou should marry my Daughter; nevertheless I
will declare unto thee the truth; I have given my daughter in marriage to seven
men, who dyed that night they came in unto her. For a wicked Spirit loved her.
Chap. 6.14. And whosoever offered to touch her was sure to go to pot for it.
Nevertheless to this frightful, fatal, and deadly bride young Tobit is designed
and resolved to be the bridegroom: but how comes he to be so hardy and
adventrous? because he had the heart and liver of the foresaid fish in a
readiness by him, as a sure and safe amulet to fray away the foul fiend, and
send him packing. I dare be bold to say, the devil of Mascon was not, as he
said himself, more terrified with the Cross and Holy water, then this evil
Spirit with the smoke, arising from the heart and liver of that watery monster.
For so we read it, Chap. 8. v. 1. And when they had supped, they brought Tobias
in unto her; and as he went, he remembered the words of Raphael, and took the
Ashes of the perfumes, and put the heart and the liver of the fish thereupon,
and made a smoke therewith; the which smell, when the evil Spirit had smelled,
he fled into the uttermost parts of Egypt, and the Angel bound him. Surely this
smoke was a most Hellish fogg, darker than ever any from the bottomless pit;
and this smell a most divelish strong smell to out-stink the devil, and put him
thus to flight; no Assa Foetida could be a thousand part near so noisome. It is
commonly reported, that when the devil appears and frights people, at his
departure for a farewell, he leaves an horrible Sulphurous stink behind him,
ready to poison all in the room: but here was a more dreadful damnable breath,
so that old nick the stinker was afraid to be poisoned himself, and forced to
hurry away, and remove farther off at a distance sufficient, as will presently
appear. But in the interim I wonder how the Bride and the Bridegroom could
abide by it? Yet possibly they had the cunning to stop their Noses, until the
smoke and smell was past and vanished; and so might the devil, if he had not
been a stark fool. A silly Devil indeed, to be frighted with smoke, and to be
driven from his Amasia with a smell! could he not (as I have said) have stopped
his nose, and kept out the stink? Could he not have gone and opened the window
for a little while, and relieved himself with the fresh and sweet Air? could he
not have smelled out before hand what was consulted against him? could he not
have provided himself with a counter-charm? could he not have furnished himself
with some rare civet, musk, or other such like perfume on the knob of his
staff: by whose sweet and odoriferous sent, he might easily have secured
himself from those baneful and killing Exhalations, and not received the least
damage from them? Had he not been a mere fungus and dolt of a devil, he would
have set his brains a work, and tried a thousand conclusions before he would
have so meekly and patiently parted with his admired adored Mistress; and left
her in the bosom, and embraces of a stranger before his eyes. Yet possibly
there might be an Antipathy, and a particular aversion in his nature against
this foul fetour and venomous vapor; which therefore no sooner did steam into
his nostrils but presently put him into a cold sweat, and made his face look as
pale as a white cloth. Alas poor Devil! What would you have him to do? he was
ready to have fallen down into a sown; therefore he had no remedy, as soon as
ever he came to himself, but to fly for his life. But whether? the Text says,
6.7. V. ^.
he fled to the uttermost parts of Egypt. From whence? From Ecbatane. Ecbatane
was the place where the great exploit was acted, a City of the Medes: Media is
a country not far from the Caspian Sea; between which and Egypt lies all
Assyria, and all the deserts of Arabia, and the Red Sea, and then the hither
most parts of Egypt, and then over Nilus, and then the uttermost parts of Egypt
-- thither Asmodeus fled and took Sanctuary in montanis illis locis quibus
Aegyptus a Lybia dirimitur, in those vast range of mountains, by which Egypt
and Lybia are divided. This was an huge long post, above a thousand Miles, as I
guess, in a right line; but how many windings and turnings he made, whether he
went by the string or the bow, who knows? Asmodeus certainly wanted his box of
snush; for had he but soundly sneezed, it would have perfectly cleared his nose
of that pestilent whiff, without going the hundred part of such a tedious
journey. But I would gladly be informed how, and in what manner this evil Spirit
fled? whether by any Magical operation he changed himself into the shape of any
Beast, Dromedary, Gray-hound or the like? or whether he changed himself into
the shape of any Fowl, Stork, long winged Hawk or the like? or whether into the
shape of an Ostrich, and so by the help both of wings and heels together ran
faster and swifter then any racehorse, straining out himself to the greatest
speed to beat his fellow? Or if he continued in his old form without
Metamorphosie, whether he went on horseback, or in a Chariot, or made use of
any other vehicle for his more sudden passage? well; though we know not the
manner how, yet the place whether he fled for shelter, is plainly told us, the
uttermost parts of Egypt; so great was his fright, that he durst never stand
still nor look back until he was at that distance, and fully recovered that
Asylum. And yet his peril is not past; for no sooner stood he still, but the
Angel bound him. Alas poor Asmodeus, this was very severe after such sore
Travail! but Asmodeus must patiently endure it: for bound he was, not able to
move hand or foot, not able to stir or turn himself this way or another; but
perhaps continue in the same place and posture unto this day. But it is now
more than high time to be serious; Has therefore a Spirit flesh and bones? our
Savior says, it has not. Has a Spirit corporal parts, and bodily members?
has a devil the Organs of carnal sense? has he eyes to see, as man sees? has
he ears to hear, as man hears? has he fingers to touch, as man touches? has
he a palate to taste, as man tastes? or has he a nose to smell, as man smells?
Thou shall make a smoke with the liver and heart of the fish, and the devil
shall smell it, and flee away, very true: his smelling and fleeing, are both of
the same certainty; no sooner did he one, but he did the other also. But is the
devil capable of smelling? even as much as the great huge stone (in an open
street of the Town, wherein I was born) is capable of hearing: whereof it was
commonly said, as I well remember, to poor little Children, That whenever it
heard the Clock strike twelve it turned thrice round; and it was puzling enough
to them. But is it possible for smoke or any material fume to affect, and
excruciate an immaterial and spiritual being or essence, or put such an
existency under the least consternation? Oh how does the devil laugh behind the
curtain! Oh how is he pleased, that such ludicrous representations, and
ridiculous stories should be given out and credited concerning himself! Here is
the old heathenish Doctrine revived and continued under Gospel light (which
teaches us better things) of the Gods or Daimons their burning in love, their
burning in filthy lust, with young beautiful Virgins and women; as Jupiter was
deeply in love with Danae the daughter of Acrisius, Apollo with Daphne the
daughter of Peneus, and others in like manner: So here this Daimon or Devil is
with Sarah the daughter of Raguel. An evil Spirit loves her, says Tobias unto
Raphael, when he first mentioned the match unto him, Chap. 6. v. 14. But why?
because the maid was fair and witty, v. 12. So here again we have the Doctrine
of binding of Spirits, and of keeping them from walking and haunting our houses
and chambers, with several other Ethnic poetical tales. All which, how they
may admit of a fair solution from being pure fable, and impure imposture and be
reconciled to truth and reality as to matter of fact, you have it in a
readiness; and as for all objections to the contrary you have promised to
consider. In the interim I would gladly learn what profit, and edification can
be propounded to the people in reading, and in hearing the whole Legend of
Tobit, so likewise of Judith, Bell and the Dragon and the rest, which you say
are fit to be read in the Christian Assembly? Shall this Christian assembly
believe what is read unto them, or shall they not believe? If they believe,
their minds are corrupted from the truth, and they believe lies: if they
believe not, what spiritual good and advantage can they reap and receive from
such light, frothy, vain, yea even almost defiling Romances? but that such
stuff (to use your own word in another Case) such paultry pitiful stuff should
be named and avouched to serve for instruction, comfort, and reproof as the
Parables of our Savior do, filles me with wonder and astonishment. What, shall
the fable of the Virgin, sweetheart, and Miss to the Devil, who flew several
innocent persons in the nuptial chamber, lest they should touch her, serve as
much for instruction as the Parable of our Savior, concerning the Ten Virgins,
whereof five were wise and five foolish, and these last shut out, and eternally
repudiated for want of watchfulness and due preparation? Or as the parable of
our Savior, concerning a certain King making a Marriage for his Son, and
inviting many to the wedding, who would not come, but spightfully entreated the
Messengers; and were therefore destroyed and their city burnt up? What, shall
the fable of the smoke, and fuliginous steam from the heart and liver of the
fish frighting, and quite routing the devil, serve for Consolation as the
Parable of our Savior, concerningthe strong man armed and keeping the Palace,
yet overcome and cast out by a stronger than himself? Or like that Parable of
our Savior (for so I think it may be styled) when he said to his Disciples, I
beheld Satan as lightening fall from heaven; behold I give you power to tread
on Serpents, and Scorpions, ^ 12.15.
and over all the power of the enemy. What shall the Condescension of Raphael
one of the seven holy Angels, which present the prayers of the Saints, and
which go in and out before the glory of the Holy one, shall I say his stooping
down to become a serving man to young Tobias; or the humility reported of
Raguel his mother, in taking woman's work to do; serve for reproof to those
proud and haughty ones, who will not stoop down to the lowest and meanest
services, for the good of others, as the infinite abasement of our blessed
Savior, when be made himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a
servant; and when he took a towel and girded himself, poured water into a
basin, washed his disciples feet, and wiped them with the towel wherewith he
was girded? Certainly such comparisons are not only odious, but most execrable
and accursed. Wherefore what you have here spoken and uttered, was only I hope
in a Transport of indiscret zeal to your cause in hand, and that (...) your
second and more considerate thoughts will bring you into a better
understanding. God grant it. Amen.

A word or two more to my last Confuter, and I have done.
Sir, In your large introduction toward the close of it, you tax me as one
guilty of Sacrilege, and who, when time was, according to common fame, would
have greedily swallowed down a Steeple, only I could not do it either with the
spire downward, lest it should have pricked my Conscience, nor with the Tower
downwards, lest the weather Cock should have appeared at the Top, and shown how
the wind blew: a very witty conceit, I promise you. And then you charge the
whole generation of Non-conformists, as making no scruple of swallowing Church
and Church Lands; yea you say, They have already, if they be not belied (that
is well put in) divided the spoil, and taken into their possession the houses
of God, by a Sacrilegious prolepsin. But as for you and your party, ye can wash
you hands in innocence from any thing, every thing of like imputation, and
nothing can tempt you to such an heinous wickedness. Wherefore I would humbly
and peaceably enquire of you, Whether Conformists may not be Sacrilegious as
well as Non-conformists? or rather, let this be the little question, Whether
persons may not be guilty of Sacrilege, that are stamped with a Sacerdotal
Character as well as any other? Sacrilege in the Greek is (...), which
properly signifies a prey or a making of a prey of holy things. The Latin word
Saecrilegium signifies a stealing of sacred things: Sacrilegium, say some, is
quasi sacrilaedium, the violation, the abuse, the hurt of what is hallowed and
devoted. From all; this may be a description of it, viz. Sacrilege is the
alienating and wresting of things devoted, and set apart to holy and sacred
uses and ends, unto other, and contrary purposes. Here therefore we must
enquire, to what uses and ends the wealth, riches and the great revenues of the
Church, were given and granted primarily and principally from God himself, and
secondarily from the piety and charity of bountiful benefactours? and then we
must search again, whether they are piously and punctually appropriated to
those uses, and expended upon those ends, and not misused any other way? Church
riches, I take it pro confesso, were given and granted to carry on Church work.
Now what is Church work, I mean eminently such, but animarum cura, a looking
diligently to the Souls of men, that they may not miscarry and perish
eternally? Church work is to instruct the people, showing them the way they are
to walk in, and the thing they are to do. Church work is by a sedulous study
and endeavor in Word, Doctrine, Example, Prayer, and often renewed Exhortation
to turn people from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among those that are
sanctified by the faith of Christ. Church work is to bring people to the
knowledge and obedience of the truth, to make them a people fitted for the Lord,
to put them in a due capacity to serve him in this world, and to enjoy him in
the world to come. Church men therefore who reap the harvest of these
donations, who possess this wealth, and divide these Revenues among themselves,
ought wholly to give themselves unto this service, and make the saving of
precious Souls, and gaining them to Christ, their main work and business. But
now is this their chief study and intendment? is this their constant employ and
negotiation? do they look upon themselves as entrusted and honored with
Church-Offices, maintained and enriched with Church-goods to prosecute and
expedite this high design, and most important affair with a most watchful and
unwearied solicitude? O Vtinam would to God there were such an heart in them,
but I am afraid it is far otherwise! Do we not see great names in the Church
accumulating living upon living, even the fattest benefices, and some of them
Dean's, and Prebend's places besides to the value of three, four, five, Six
hundred pounds per annum and more, and yet are never satisfied. They run
greedily after the error of Balaam for a reward. O sordid Covetousness utterly
beneath the height, and sublimity of raised winds! but how much abhorrent is it
from the rare and heavenly philosophy of the Gospel, which says, love not the
World, nor the things of this World; feed the flock of God -- not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind -- and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye
shall receive a Crown of glory, which fades not away. True and good Churchmen
should be better versed in these, and in the like Golden sayings of the Spirit,
than basely to covet such an evil covetousness, which casts no little shame
and reproach upon their persons and profession. What shall all your generous
studies, and great acquirements of learning, for which ye are renowned and
dignified, teach you no other lesson, but inhiare pecuniae to quest after money,
quarry upon the dross and dung of this world, and load your selves with thick
clay! Surely you understand higher matters. The Sons of the earth, who never
knew more than the cart and plough, can attain to this excellency, almost as
well as your selves: conformity therefore here is a most debasing deformity,
which ye ought to reject with an holy haughtiness of disdain. And the rather,
because herein also ye are very injurious and grievous Oppressors. Of whom?
Even of your fellow brethren, the Tribe of Levi; not suffering them to have any
lot, share, and portion with you in the good things of the Church, against all
right and equity. Ye grasp and run away with all, and they can get nothing to
their great discouragement. How many sad complaints have these ears of mine
heard against Pluralities, from the mouths of those that are as conforming, and
some of them as meriting as your selves! They wait and wait till their hearts
ache, even as the impotent and lame at the Pool of Bethesda, for the stirring of
the waters, I mean for an opportunity of preferment, but in vain; for no sooner
can the blessed Angel appear, any such place known to be vacant, but another
instantly steppeth in before them, and bereaves them of their hope. Some famed
Doctor or Court-favourite like the sharp eyed Eagle sees the prey afar of,
Job. 39.^9.
trusseth it in his talons, and swiftly hurries it away to his former heap;
while these poor wretches lie languishing with vexing despair in their
continual disappointments. The heart of man is deceitful, yet surely if I can
know any thing by my self, were I in your stead, I would have so much goodness
and kindness, for those of mine own coat and function, as to be willing they
should live by me, yea, and live comfortably upon the altar as well as my self,
according to the mind and appointment of the first Donour in the case. I would
not be an Oppressor but a comforter unto them, seeking by all good ways and
means to keep them up in heart and countenance, and strengthen their hands in
the work before them. But to return to our purpose. What signal service do such
great Doctors, and Pluralists perform unto God and his Church? what use do they
make of their vast incomes and salaries? how do they answer the trust reposed
in them? how good and faithful are they in their Steward-ship? we see them rem
facere purchasing estates, we see them riding up and down with coach and horses
in great pomp and glory. But is nothing more expected from them? is this the
end of the Church's bounty and liberality? their wages plainly point out to
another work, as most necessary incumbent upon them without dispensation; which
yet they can easily obtain to their great ease and content. As for teaching the
people the good knowledge of God, and a constant conscientious instructing them
in the way of Salvation, they can do it by a Proxy. It is enough for some of
them, to eat of the fat and drink of the sweet, while others labor in the word
and doctrine; to fleece the flock, while others feed them. But now who are
their under-shepherds? who their substitutes, and under-feeders? many of them
sorry feeders, God wot! pitiful hirelings, whose salaries are so small, as
utterly to discourage and disenable them, from any cheerful, and vigorous
attending upon sacred things: Alas several of them are necessitated, to turn
petty*scriveners writing bills and bonds, and stoop to such servile offices to
patch up a livelihood. What reverence and honor can be paid to such persons by
the people; which is most absolutely necessary for the success of their
Ministry? Hobb and John the meanest plowman in the Parish, is ready to behave
himself insolently against them, and thinks himself as good a man, as he who
talks to him out of the Pulpit; why! he is but the poor Curate, and not the
principal man; he is but the Usher and the Schoolboys regard him not, for the
Master, whom they only fear and reverence, is absent and elsewhere. A noble
Lord, then lately returned from his long travail, among other things told me,
that the French did wonderfully vilify, and set at naught such substitutes
sent amongst them to officiate from the Lord Abbots, and great Clergymen,
styling them commonly, Poures Diables, Poor Devils, in scorn and derision. But
now shall these be thought worthy to be the Ambassadors of God, and the
Representatives of Christ? can these rule over the house of God? can these be
supposed to have a throne in the hearts of the people, and to speak unto them
with all authority and power? Alas their persons are vile, their preaching
vain, and their oratory contemptible! Oh what disservice, instead of service,
is hereby done unto Christ and his Church! Oh how are the people hereby
prompted to atheism and impenitency, and so sent thronging to Hell, rather than
awfully awakened with fear and repentance, and so brought home unto God! I
wonder conscience flies not in the face of some persons concerned; who cannot
but be sensible, that what I now write in great measure is according to truth.
I would not bring such guilt of the blood of Souls upon mine own Soul, to reap
the whole profit now in the hands of all the Churchmen of England put
together. But in the interim, are not they guilty of Sacrilege? I think, if
any other, these may be arraigned for it with a witness, and stand charged with
it in a most notorious manner. Suppose a Knight, or Gentleman, has a Parsonage
or Living in his gift, of two or three hundred pounds per annum; he puts in a
Parson or Minister, but yet by some clancular pact and condition, reserves a
third of the profits to himself; the Clerk presented is of most approved
abilities for the place, and carries himself worthily in it. Notwithstanding,
if this thing be known, the Patron shall be sharply, and severely censured, as
one that has unpardonably violated the rights of the Church, and bainous
Sacrilege shall be imputed to him; the poor Minister shall be outed for
Simony, and another will quickly force in upon the Premises. But who is the
man? perhaps some great Doctor, who has several Church-promotions already, but
he must, and will have another, since it falls so luckily in his way. Well; he
comes, and according to Law takes full and quiet possession; but then he being
elsewhere richly accommodated, and pleasantly seated, cannot think of removing,
but sends his Curate to do the work for him; and for his Salary allows him not
half so much, as the true Patron did the former Incumbent: he has found out a
Ten pound Levite, and that shall suffice, all the rest must come to his own
purse, to keep up his port, and for other certain uses best known to himself;
nevertheless here is nothing of Sacrilege in the case; who dares to think, or
speak such a word? No, here is nothing but what is right and praiseworthy in
the whole procedure. Fie upon it! How does covetousness blind our eyes? How
does evil custom impose upon our reason and judgment? is it odious and
detestable Sacrilege in one person, and not in another? can merely taking holy
Orders, take away the name and thing of what we call Sacrilege? can the
putting on a canonical habit, put off all guilt and demerit in that kind? then
let the aforesaid Knight, or Gentleman, be made a Clergyman, and immediately
he is rectus in Curia, and no longer Sacrilegious. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked. To conclude, the Curate, or person substituted, who ever he be, that
actually performs the office, and does the duty of the Minister, either he is
worthy or else he is unworthy of the place. If he be unworthy, then much more
unworthy you to thrust such an unable and unmeet man upon the people, to their
apparent ruin and destruction. He said haughtily like himself, Viderit
utilitas, hang gain, I will look to mine honor: and you say in your actions,
not only sordidly but impiously. Viderint animae, let Souls be damned if they
will; I must and will look to my gain, and to have a good income. But if he be
worthy, then the dues and profits arising from the said place, both by the Law
of God, and of the Land (if pure justice and right might not be wrested from
its direct and first intention) do, ipso facto, belong unto the said Minister
or Curate, as in the reward of his service; and I think it both oppression and
sacrilege, by any plea or pretext (though of being legally the Rector or
Parson of the parish) to detain them from him. Thus much in requital, for your
charge of Sacrilege, and my swallowing down a Steeple, when time was, with the
Spire upward or downward, whether you please. Farewell.

FINIS.

