Faithful Souls SHALL BE WITH CHRIST THE Certainty Proved and their
Christianity Described, and Exemplified in the truly-Christian Life and Death
of that excellent amiable Saint, HENRY ASHHURST Esquire Citizen of London.

Briefly and truly Published for the Conviction of Hypocrites and the
Malignant, the Strengthening of Believers, and the Imitation of all; especially
the Masters of Families in London.

By RICHARD BAXTER

Luke 10. 37. Go, and Do thou likewise. LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons, at
the Three Golden Cocks, at the West end of St. Paul's Church, 1681.

To my worthy Friends Mrs. Judith Ashhurst Widow of Henry Ashhurst Esquire. and
Mr. Henry Ashhurst, their Son, with all his Brethren and Sisters, Grace, Mercy
and Peace.
Dear Friends,
I Am persuaded that the Image of so good a Husband and Father cannot but be
deeply printed on your minds; but yet it may not be wholly needless to be told
of the Comfort and the Duty, thence to be inferred. It was you, Sir, his eldest
Son and Executor, who called me to the public performance of that which I have
thought meet to make more public. I have long known you so well, that I am
comfortably persuaded, that your Father had great cause to place that great
affection on you, and confidence in you which he did. Your dear Love to him,
and great Reverence of him, and hearty Love to the good which he loved, and
your singleness and uprightness of Mind and Life, are your amiableness, and
better than the greatest earthly birthright: But I did purposely say little in
the following discourse, of your Fathers example, as consolatory and obligatory
to all his nearest Relations, because I thought that their special interest in
him, did give them right to a special address, which is the intent of this
Epistle. Gods Scripture blessings of the faithful and their seed, does make
this relation honorable and comfortable to you all. How cheerfully may you all
follow the footsteps of one so near you, who sped so well in following Christ?
The greatest comforts and blessings are the greatest obligations to further
duty; and that duty is the way to get greater blessings. It will be some help
to you to Love God and Goodness, good Men and all Men, to remember how much all
these were loved, by one who so tenderly loved your selves. You have not only
heard but seen and felt, that Holiness is not a bare name or dream, and
Religion a mere art or image, but a Divine Nature, a real renovation of Heart
and Life, and that the effects of Gods Spirit in sanctifying Souls, do greatly
difference them from carnal minds. You have seen that Godliness, genuine and
real, is not a wearysom uncomfortable Life. Live as he did, and it will be a
cure of melancholy, passions and discontents, and a constant tranquillity and
delight.

What a help is his Example to you, to live in true Love to one another: to be
of an humble meek and quiet Spirit, neither vexatious to your selves or others:
As also to be absolutely devoted to God, of public minds, and comforts to the
poor and needy, and to use all that you have as his Stewards, daily preparing
for your great account. You have seen how you may live above the World, even
while you prosper in it: and how to expound [Love not the World nor the things
that are in the World: If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not
in him.] 1 Ioh. 2. 15. For where your Treasure is, there will your Hearts be
also, Matthew. 6. 21. The Spaniards have a Proverb [The World is a Carrion, and
they are Dogs that love it, much more that snarle and fight about it.] One
would think that to read and believe, Matthew. 5. and 6. Luke 12. and 16. and
Jam. 4. should affright Men from being deceived by such a shadow, whose speedy
vanishing all foresee.

You have seen what it is to be a Christian indeed, and how your affairs, your
conversations, and your families should be ordered. And you have seen how the
best may suffer and must die, and therefore what need we all have to be
prepared with strong and well exercised Faith, Hope and Patience, and by daily
conversing in the heavenly regions, to get sweeter thoughts of Heaven than of
the most prosperous state on Earth, that we may die like serious believers, and
joyfully commit our departing souls to Christ, when we leave these corruptible
bodies to the grave. O dear Friends, the day is at hand; the change is of
unspeakable importance; the work of Faith and Hope is high and difficult: Set
to it speedily with heart and might, and let not flesh and the world entangle
and deceive you.

The great love which your Father had to me, and much more which he had to
Christ, his Church, and all the Faithful, obliged me to be the larger in
describing his example, for your use and comfort: For as Christ gone to Heaven
has left here his servants, called his Brethren, that men in them may show
their Love and thankfulness to him, which he will reward as done unto himself;
so the way which I must take to express my Love and gratitude to your deceased
Father, is by desiring and endeavoring the true felicity of his Wife and
Children whom he so dearly loved. And that must be, by taking God for your God
and Father, Christ for your Savior, the Holy Spirit for your Sanctifier, the
Holy Scriptures for your Rule, the Church for the Body of which you are
Members; true Pastors for your Teachers, the Faithful for your most beloved
Companions, (especially each other who are by so many bonds obliged to more
than ordinary endearedness and Love) and Christ for your chief pattern, and
such as your Father in following him; Heaven for your felicity, home and hope;
and this short life for the day of your preparation and salvation; and the
world, flesh and Devil so far as they are against any of this, for the Enemies
which with all vigilance and resolution must be overcome.

O how great, how good, and absolutely necessary a work is this, which if any
one of you should miscarry about, you would be more unexcusable than most
persons in the world! But that you will all faithfully imitate such an example
of holiness, humility, meekness, mortification, peace, and dearest Love to one
another, and to all good men, is the comfortable hope, and hearty Prayer, as it
is the present faithful Counsel of

Dec. 7. 1680. Your Servant for such ends Ri. Baxter.

JOHN. 12 26. If any man serve me let him follow me; and where I am, there
shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honor.
IF our Judgments and Wills had been the choosers and disposers of Humane
events, as the affairs of the world would be otherwise managed, than they are;
so the meeting of this day would rather have been for a joyful thanksgiving for
our deceased friends recovery to health, than a mournful solemnizing of his
Funerals: But it is not we that made the world, or our own or others Souls: and
it is not our right to determine of their time and events: It is one prime
Agent, Supreme Ruler and Ultimate End, One that is Infinite in Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness, who is Omnipresent, Immutable, and every way perfect, that must
actuate, order and bless a world of such imperfect and differing individuals;
and not such ignorant understandings, such partial and ill guided wills, and
such impotent powers as ours are: He that makes the Watch determines how many
hours it shall go. The giver of Life and Time, must give us the measures of it:
It is our part to spend it well: It is because the Creator having left us to
some liberty and trust, about our selves, we are the misusers of it, that there
are so many disorders and consequently calamities in the world, and on our
selves and ours as there are: and if the God of Love did not keep the over
ruling determination in his hand, and bring good out of all our evil, and
harmony out of our discords and confusions, what a Chaos or Hell would the
World become? Let us therefore humbly and willingly leave Gods own work to
himself; (he will do all well, and at last we shall understand it,) and let us
mind our own! He has taken up our Brothers soul from earth: it is our part to
think how to improve this; our own are following: Our hour is at hand: Our oil
is wasting apace: Our glass is almost run: every pulse, every breath, every
word leaves us one less of the number appointed us. It is our great concern to
look inwards, and look upwards, and with our utmost diligence to study how to
spend the short time that remains, that we may die in safety peace and hope,
and follow the departed Saints to Glory.

To instruct my self and you herein I have chosen this Text, as giving us both
sure directions, and such great and comfortable promises, as in life and at
death we may boldy trust.

They are spoken by no doubtful Messenger, but by the Mouth of Christ himself:
and that to men who were under our temptations, and earnestly desired to see
Christ glorified on earth, and to partake of outward greatness here: to see
that famous man who had wrought so many miracles and lately raised the Dead:
But he tells them that both he and they must die before they can be glorified,
and that they must overcome the inordinate love of this life, if ever they
would attain a life of Blessedness, verse. 23, 24, 25. And that they might not
by uncertainty of the end or way say as Philip, We know not whither thou go,
and how shall we know the way, he Summarily tells them both: The way is to
Serve him and follow him: The end that is promised is, To be where he is, and to
be honored of his Father.

As if he should say [ I know that your weakness and remaining Carnality is
such, that you would fain see me Reign as an universal King on Earth, that you
might be advanced by me in the flesh, and it is a hard Lesson to you to learn
to lay down this life, which is so dear to you, and to pass into a World which
you never saw, and know so little of; But have I not by my Doctrine, Life, and
frequent Miracles, and newly by raising Lazarus from the dead, convinced you
that I am the true Messiah, sent of God, to whom you may boldly trust the
conduct and disposal of your Lives and Souls? If so, then see that you
absolutely trust me, Learn of me, Serve me, and follow me: and let this
satisfy you living and dying that you shall speed as I my self do, and be with
me where I am, though the place and state be yet unseen to you; and there you
shall by my Father be advanced to far greater dignity and honor, than in this
sinful life and world you are capable of: And of all this I give here my
promise, which you must believe and trust, if you will be saved by me.]

This is the plain Exposition of the Text: But let us more distinctly inquire.
I. What is here meant by Serving Christ; II. What it is to Follow him: And
afterward III. What it is to be where he is? IV. And what to be Honored by
his Father.

I. Some that by false and narrow notions have received a wrong opinion of
Saving Faith may be puzzled at this, that Serving Christ and following him are
made the necessary terms or conditions of being where he is. And some say that
Justifying faith and ^^^ing Faith are two different things; And some say that
Christ himself did not clearly preach the doctrine of Justification by Faith,
but left it for Saint Paul. But the plain truth is, that in the Gospel it is
all one, To be a Believer, a Christian, and a Disciple of Christ in Covenant
with him as the true Messiah. And in those times the Disciples of any great and
famous Teachers were taken into their Families, and were their Servants: Not in
a Worldly common work, but in order to the ends of their Office and
Instructions: It is the same word which we often translate Deacons: And as it
was then usual with Jews and Heathens, at their great feasts, for the
Servitours to give every Guest his part by the appointment of the ruler of the
Feast; so the Spirit by the Apostles did institute Church Deacons to be
servants to distribute the provisions made at their love Feasts, and the
proportions allowed for each ones relief, to look to the poor, and to execute
such Church Orders as the present Bishop or Elders did appoint (By which you
may see how big the Bishops Church then was.) And so Christ calls all
Christians his Deacons, Ministers or Servants, and some above others peculiarly
in office, as those that were to serve him as the Savior of the World, for
their own and other men's salvation, As his Relation to us partaketh by Analogy
of many, so is our service to him. It is as the service of a Scholar in
obedient and diligent humble learning: As the obedience of a Patient to his
Physician: As the obedience of a Beggar in asking, and thankfully accepting: As
the obedience of a Malefactor who thankfully takes a pardon; and if a Rebel
promises to lay down Arms, and live in true subjection to his Prince: As the
service of a Child that lives dependently in dutiful gratitude and love. It is
not to give Christ any thing that he needs; but to be readier to Hear him,
than to offer him the sacrifice of fools, who by thinking to oblige him by
their gifts, do but offend him.

The matter of our required service is,

1. To confess with grief our sin, our misery, and our need of him, his grace
and mercy. 2. To learn, understand and believe his Word. 3. There by to know
God, from whom we were revolted; and to return to him in the hand of our
Mediator, by absolute resignation, devotion and subjection, to Obey, and Trust,
and Love him, and joyfully to hope for everlasting happiness in his Love. 4. To
give up our selves to Christ as our Savior, by his Sacrifice, Merits,
Teaching, Government and Intercession; to bring us home to God, by Justifying,
Sanctifying and finally Glorifying us. 5. To obey the motions of his Spirit to
that end, which are but to bring us to a Conformity to his Word. 6. To Love God
in his Saints and Creatures, and do all the good to one another that we can,
and cherish a holy Unity and Peace, and to do wrong to none. 7. To watch
against and resist all the Temptations of the Flesh, the World and the Devil,
which would draw us from any of this duty. 8. To bear our Medicinal corrections
patiently and profitably, and pray, seek and wait for blessed Immortality. 9.
To pray long and labor for the public good, the Churches welfare, and the
Conversion of the dark unbelieving World. 10. To do all this for the glorifying
of God, and our Redeemer, and the pleasing of his holy Will, as the End and
only Rest of Souls.
This is the service which Christ requires; and is there any thing in all
this, which is not safe, delightful, honorable, profitable and exceeding
desirable, to every one that knows what it is to hope for happiness, and to
live like a Christian or a Man?

II. And what is it that is meant by following Christ? Disciples then were wont
to dwell with their Master, that they might be always at hand to do what he bid
them.

To follow Christ includes, 1. The absolute taking him for the Guide and
Savior to whom we Trust our Bodies and Souls. 2. The obedient following of his
Instruction and Commands. 3. The following of his Example, in all the imitable
parts of his Life. 4. The submissive following him through all the sufferings
wherewith God tries us, and by what death he chooses for us, into the heavenly
mansions, whether he is ascended. This is the following of Christ, which the
streights of this hour allow me but to name.

Use. Before we proceed let us consider how to improve what is said, and open
the two promises after in our application.

I. And first it is hence evident, what it is to be indeed a Christian: It is
to serve and follow Christ in Trust, as the Procurer, the Captain, the Giver of
Salvation: Our relation to him by a sacred Covenant and Vow, is the thing from
which we are named Christians. Deceitful Covenanting may give us the name among
Men that cannot see the Heart, and may deceive our selves and others: But if
the Soul consent not, God does not consent to justify or save us: O Sirs! try
quickly, try faithfully, before death say, It is row too late, whether you are
such as God as well as Men will judge to be Christians indeed. O be not
self-deceivers, for God will not be mocked with names and shaddows, and
heartless words, and the false pretenses of a worldly, fleshly, unsanctified
mind. You will find one day, that Christ came not to be a shadow, nor a
stepping stone to worldly ends, nor a patron of pride and fleshly lusts: you
will find ear long that to be a Christian is a great and serious business, on
which lies the everlasting saving of our Souls: Greater than Life or Death,
Crowns and Kingdoms, or any concerns of this corruptible flesh. A business
which will not be done a sleep, nor with a careless mind, nor with a slothful
unresolved Soul, nor with the thoughts and hours, which pride and vanity can
spare, and which are the leavings of fleshly lusts and pleasures. To be a
Christian is to turn our backs on all these deceitful vanities and sinful
pleasures, and to place our absolute Trust in Christ, and serve and follow him
to the death in hope of everlasting glory obtained by his manifold Grace. Have
you no careful thoughts of another Life? And no fear what will become of your
departing Souls at death? If not, your reason is asleep: If you have, what is
it that quieteth and comfort you? Is it only a careless venture, because God
is merciful? As if his mercy saved all? God forbid that your Souls should go
out of your bodies, without a better preparation than this! But if finding your
selves undone by sin, and liable to Gods destroying justice, and believing that
Christ is the only sufficient and faithful Savior, you give up Soul and Body
in Trust to him, resolvedly consenting to serve and follow him, who has
purchased and promised you blessedness with himself. This is true Christianity,
and this is a Trust which will not deceive. Sirs! You send for us in sickness,
and perhaps we cannot come, or we find men overwhelmed with pain and fear, and
with a feeble Body and fainting Spirits, unfit to try and judge themselves, and
to do so great a work, as is here described, if not unable to hear much
discourse of it: O what a sad time is that for a Minister to give you that
instruction, which a long time of strength was too little to improve! What a
dreadful thing is it for a Soul then to have all the work that you lived for,
to begin and do, and for to have but a sick and fainting hour or day, to do
that which you could not do in all your Lives, and which turns the Key for
Heaven or Hell! The Lord give you awakened reason and wisdom, before it be too
late. The name of Christians is not to be used to deceive fleshly men into
damning presumption, but to signify a Soul that trusts in Christ and
follows him in obedience and patience to Salvation.

O that you all feelingly knew, how much it concerns you, presently to set
home and resolve this question, Do I trust, serve and follow Christ? Let us now
a little look to his footsteps, that we may know.

1. Christ lived in the World to do his Fathers work and will, to glorify and
please him: See Ioh. 4. 34. and 17. 4. and 9. 4. and 8. 29. and 12. 27, 28. and
17. 4. Is it Gods work that you live for, and his will that you chiefly study
to please in your inferior degree and place?

2. Christ was the greatest lover of Souls; his business on Earth was to seek
and save them, and he is still about that work in Heaven: He thought not his
strange condiscending Incarnation, his sufferings and Heart Blood, his Labor
and Life, too dear to save them. Are your own and others Souls, thus precious
in your Eyes? Do you think no labor, loss, no cost or suffering too dear to
save your selves and others? Do your prayers and your practices prove this to
be true?

3. Christ's great work was to gather a Church on Earth which should be his
peculiar Kingdom, Spouse and Body to glorify God and be glorified with him,
Ephesians. 4. to 17. and 5. 25. to 32. and 3. 21. Act. 20. 28. If you are Christians
indeed, Christ's Church is to you, as your Body to the Members, that are all
ready to serve it, abhorring abscission and separation from it, and every
painful perilous Disease.

You love, you long, you pray for the true Enlargement, Concord and Holy
prosperity of the Church: That Gods Name may be Hallowed, his Kingdom come, and
his Will done on Earth as it is in Heaven, is the first and and chief of your
desires. See 1 Cor. 12. Col. 1. 18. 24. Are you thus followers of Christ?

4. Love to God and Man was the very Nature and Life and Work of Christ;
manifested in constant doing Good and Praying for his Persecutors, and
reconciling Enemies to God; Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. 2 Cor. 5 19* 20. Ioh. 15 13. Mark
10. 21. Ioh. 15. 9. Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 2. 4. And if you follow Christ, Love will
be your Nature, Life and Work, and you will walk in Love as Christ loved us,
Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 Ioh. 4. 11. Even as he has loved us he requires that we love one
another, Ioh. 13. 34. and 15. 9. 12. which is not with a barren unprofitable
Love, Iam. 2. 14. etc. Ioh. 13. 35.

5. In order to these ends, Christ lived quite above all the pomps and vanities
of the World and above the Love of Worldly dominion and fleshly pleasure, and
Life it self; and refused not to dye a shameful Death, as reputed a Malefactor,
to redeem us, Making himself of no reputation, enduring the Cross and despising
the shame; Phil. 2. 7. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 18. and 4. 1. And if you follow Christ,
though you must not be Cross makers, you must be Cross bearers, and above the
Love of worldly Vanity, and Life it self in comparison of eternal Life. For
Christ suffered for us leaving us an example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. and will have us
take up our Cross and follow him, forsaking all that stands against him, Luke
14. 29. 32, 33. and submit to be in our flesh partakers of his sufferings, 1
Pet. 4. 13. we cannot equal him in patience, but we must so far imitate him, as
not to sin and forsake the Truth for fear of suffering, nor to account our
Lives dear that we may finish our course with joy, Matthew. 5. 11, 12. Act. 20.
24.

6. Christ though he were the Lord of all the World, did condescend to a
humbled low condition, and chose not a Princes Court for converse, but the poor
and men of low degree. And he has commanded us to learn of him to be meek and
lowly, Matthew. 11. 29. and to be the servants of all as that which is above
worldly greatness, Mar. 9. 35. and 10. 44. And he blesses the meek, and the
poor in Spirit, Matthew. 5. Do we follow him in this? And condescend to Men of
low estate, Romans 12. 16. remembering that not many great and noble are called, 1
Cor 1. 26. and that God has chosen the poor of the World, that are rich in
Faith, to be heirs of his Kingdom, Iam. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. or do you not
as those reproved, Iam. 4. show a worldly carnal mind, by too much valuing the
high and rich, and too much vilifying the poor? Our flesh and health is nearer
us far than our cloths and riches! And yet how far is flesh and strength from
making a bad Man more valuable and amiable than a weak and sickly Saint?

7. Though Christ was the greatest lover of Souls, yet was he the greatest
hater of Sin: so great that he came into the World to destroy it, as the Devils
work: and would rather die than Sin should not be condemned and die, 1 Ioh. 3.
7, 8. Matthew. 1. 21. and to save Men from it was his Office: And for all his
meekness, he forbeareth not to call Herod Fox, and sharply reprove the Scribes
and Pharisees, Matthew. 23. yea, and to give Peter the rebuke which he gave the
Devil, when he did his work, by dissuading him from his sufferings: Get thee
behind me Satan, Matthew. 16.

And if we look on Sin as a harmless thing, and the profit, honor or pleasures
reconcileth us to it, and we are indifferent toward it on pretense of
moderation and avoiding rash zeal and indiscretion; this is not to be followers
but enemies of Christ, reproaching his Office and Cross, as if he had needlessly
been born and died.

8. A heavenly mind and life is the chief imitation of Christ: His Kingdom was
not of this World: His Glory is at the right Hand of the Father: And our glory
must be in seeing his Glory, John 17. 22, 24. It is in Heaven that he promises
his followers a reward, Matthew. 5. 12. Hebr. 11. 16. and 12. 22. Luke 16. 9. and
23. 43. And it is in heaven that our Treasure must be laid up, and our hearts,
affections, and hopes must be set, and our conversation must be Matthew. 6. 19,
20, 21. Col. 3. 1, 3, 4. Phil. 3. 19, 20.

You see now what it is to be followers of Christ: Is this your case? I mean
not in degree, but in sincere imitation, O try and judge!

Use. 2. Whatever it has been, shall it be so for the time to come? O that
this might be a day of effectual resolution and engagement to us all! Do I need
to tell you that it is not Christ that leads men to gluttony or drunkenness,
or chambering and wantonness, to idleness and pride and worldly vanity and
fleshly lust? Romans 13. 13. Gal. 5. 21, 22. Romans 8. 1, etc. It is not Christ
that teaches men to doubt of the immortality of the Soul, and of the life to
come, and of the truth of the Gospel: Nor is it Christ that teaches them to
play the hypocrites, and scorn and hate and persecute the serious practice of
that Religion which their tongues profess: These are the works of the Devil
which Christ came to destroy. O bethink you whom you follow, and whether you
go, before you come to your journeys end. The World Flesh and Devil have undone
all that ever followed them to the end. But if you will serve Christ and follow
him, I Will tell you what encouragements you have.

1. You have the greatest and most honorable Master in all the World, that is
able to make good all his undertakings.

2. You have the surest infallible Leader, that never was deceived nor did
deceive, nor has he need of deceit to govern us.

3. You have Love it self to lead you; one that has done more than all the
world besides can do, to show you that he loves you, and therefore does all
for your good.

4. You have a humbled condescending Leader; God in flesh, that has spoken
face to face with man, and came near us to bring us up to God.

5. You have a plain familiar Teacher, who has not set your wits on Artificial
Logical tricks, like the undoing of a pair of Tarrying irons, but has brought
light and immortality to light, and taught us to know God and our everlasting
hopes, and a safe and joyful way thereto.

6. And yet you have a complete perfect Teacher, who teaches you by words and
works and inspiration, and can make you what he bids you be, and leaves out
nothing that is necessary to your salvation.

7. And you have the only sufficient Guide to happiness. He is the Way, the
Truth and the Life; and no man comes to the Father but by him. No man but he
has revealed the God and Glory which he has fully seen and known. All men are
liers and deceivers, not to be trusted, further than some way they have learnt
of him, by the teaching of his Works, or Word, or Spirit.

And now shall we need to say more to men, that are already vowed to Christ in
their Baptism, who profess themselves Christians, who know that they must die,
and who know that there is no other hope or way, to persuade them to be what
they profess, that they may not miss of what they hope for? But the following
Promises if believed will persuade you.

III. [ Where I am there shall my servant be] They that Serve and follow
Christ, shall in their measure speed as he does, and be with him where he is.
Quest. And where is that? Ans. It is certainly in no ill place: Though it be a
controversy, whether Christ descerded to Hell, it is certain that now he is
not there; And therefore his members shall not be there. He is certainly in
Paradise, for there he promised the converted thief to be that day with him. He
is in Heaven, Acts 1. 11. [ This same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. Acts
3. 21. Whom the heaven must receive till the time of restitution of all things.
John 17. And now O Father glorify me with thine own self. Verse. 13. And now I
come to thee. It is in the Glorious presence of God that Christ now abides in
our nature: Even at the Right hand of God, Matthew. 26. 64. Mark 14. 62. and 16.
19. Luke 22. 6. 9. Act. 7. 55. 56. Romans 8. 34. Ephesians. 1. 20, Col. 3. 1. Heb. 1.
3, 13. and 8. 1. and 12. 2. and 10. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 22.

Therefore though many Texts do seem to intimate that he will return to earth
again, and that the New Jerusalem shall come down from Heaven, and that we look
for a new Heaven and Earth in which righteousness shall dwell, yet these Texts
do fully prove that faithful Souls go presently to Christ who is in Heaven, and
that there will be no such descent to earth as shall be any diminution of the
Glory of the Saints; For it shall be no diminution of the Glory of Christ: And
we shall be where Christ will be. If Heaven come down to Earth, and the Vail be
drawn it will be no loss.

2. That departed faithful Souls go to him, the Scripture elsewhere also tells
us. Ioh. 17. 24. Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with
me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me. Luke 23.
43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke 16. 9. When we fail here we
shall be received into the everlasting habitations. Verse. 22. The beggar died
and was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, Verse. 25. Now he is comforted.
2 Cor. 5. 1, 8. We know that if our earthly house of this (...) were dissolved,
we have a building of God, (...) not made with hands eternal in the Heavens.
For in this we groan earnestly desiring to (...) upon with our house which is
from heaven that (...) might be swallowed up of life. Verse. ^. We are confident
and willing rather to be (...) from the body and present with the Lord. Phil.
1. 21* 22. To me to live in Christ, and (...) gain -- having a desire to depart
to be with (...) Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. We are come to Mount Sion, and to the
City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of Angels, to the General Assembly, and Church of the first born, which are
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men
made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new Covenant. Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the
Spirit that they may rest from their labors and their works do follow them.

I heap all these Texts together for my self as well as you, that we may see
that as the faithful shall certainly have a blessed resurrection, so their
departing souls at death shall certainly be with Christ in glory. For I take
the assurance of the Souls immortality, and felicity at death, to be a point
that deserves as much of our thoughtful diligence, as any one that we have to
think of. He is mad that doubts whether there be a God, if he live with his
eyes open in the world: And as for Christianity, it is Life and Immortality
which Christ came to secure us of and bring to light. And he that by the light
of Nature does but believe the Souls immortality and a life of retribution, is
much prepared to be a Christian; so suitable will he find Christianity to our
everlasting interest.

But yet all will be dark to men, and seem uncertain till Christ be their
Teacher, and they truly believe in him, and take it on his certain word.

Truly believe that Jesus is the Christ, and his Gospel true, and there is no
room for a doubt of the Immortality of Souls, and future blessedness, so
plainly is it expressed in all the Gospel. The Socinians that look for nothing
till the Resurrection, dream of a dreaming sleep of Souls, but dare not talk of
any cessation or annihilation of them, For then a Resurrection is a
Contradiction, Another soul may be created, but it cannot be the same that was
annihilated

And as no man can believe that Christ speaks truth and is Christ indeed, but
he must needs believe his promise that the faithful Soul shall be where he is.
So no man can truly believe that all faithful Souls, and only such shall be
with Christ and partake of blessedness, but it will constrain him to a life of
serious holiness at least, if it feast him not with the foretast of heavenly
joys. Can you imagine that any man can firmly believe that all and only holy
souls go to Christ in glory when they leave the body, and yet not seek first
the Kingdom of God, and make the securing of this his chiefest care and
business in the World? It cannot be: every man loves himself: And no man can
be indifferent whether his Soul be in Heaven or Hell for ever. Dullness and
present diverting things, may make a man negligent and inconsiderate about
lesser matters, where the loss seems tolerable; But I cannot believe, that if
a man be awake and in his wits, any thing but secret unbelief and doubting can
make one so dull or inconsiderate about his everlasting joy or misery, as not
to make it his chiefest care. For I see that if a man have but a Lawsuit, on
which all his estate depends, or a trial on which his life depends, he cannot
forget it or make light of it: He will not drink (...) or play away the little
time in which his bu^^^^ must be done. And can any one soundly believe that his
Soul at death shall go to Christ in glory, and not set more by such a hope than
by all the riches, and sport, and pleasure, and vainglory of so short a life
as this? or can any man soundly believe that the wicked and unholy shall go to
everlasting punishment, and yet not make it his chief care to escape it? sure
as mad and bad as man's corrupted mind is, this will scarce stand with Humane
nature. I judge of others by my self: If I had never had at the worst a secret
uncertainty whether the Gospel be true, and Souls immortal, I might have been
surprised indeed to a sudden temptation to some sin, but I could never have
thought that a man in his wits should choose any life but resolved holiness;
Nor could I have chosen any other.

If I see a man a careless neglecter of his soul, that makes no great matter
of sin or duty, or makes not God and Christ and Heaven the subject of his most
serious ruling thoughts and his greatest business in the World; but shows us
that his health and wealth and honor and pleasure, are better loved and more
earnestly sought, and faster held; I will not believe that this man takes the
Gospel and the Souls future state therein described, to be a cettain truth; let
him say what he will, he doubts of it at his heart: And such men use to say
when they speak out, I know what I have here, but I know not what I shall have
hereafter: Could I keep what I have, I would let others take what is promised
in Heaven.

But O man thou know thou can not keep what thou have! shortly thy Soul
must be required and called away, and then whose are the things which thou have
loved? Luke 12. 19, 20.

I will therefore say more. Though men had no certainty of dwelling with
Christ, and doubted whether his word be true, yet it were worse than madness
not to prefer the bare probability (that I say not possibility) of a future
endless glory, (when endless misery is probable to the refusers) before all
here that can be set against it. O what is this transitory dream of worldly
fleshly pleasure to everlasting joy or misery! Verily every man at his best
estate (in worldy respects) is altogether Vanity* Psalm 39. 5. O mark how
Emphatical every word is. Verily (it is no doubt) every man (high and low, good
and bad in bodily and worldly respects only) at his best or settled estate (not
only in pain, and poverty, and age, but in his strength and wit and wealth and
honor, on the throne as well as on the dunghill) is vanity] that is an
untrusty lie and shadow, that seems something and is next to nothing, and
this [ altogether] (in mere worldly corporal respects, in all that he has to
glory or take pleasure in) What need we more to prove all this, than to foresee
how the Dream and Tragedy ends? A little while we run up and down and eat and
drink and talk and sport, and sometime laugh, and sometime weep, and then
change our pomp and pride for a Shroud and Coffin, and are laid to rot in a
grave of earth, where these idol pampered bodies, be turned themselves into the
quality of their darksome habitation. And if these were our best, were not
every man at his best estate altogether vanity?

And if a mere probability of the life to come, in reason should resolve all
men for serious holiness, how can we think that a certain or firm belief would
not do it?

By this then it is past doubt that Hypocrisy reigns in all mere nominal
Christians, and in all that live not a holy life, and indeed in most men in the
world. They are false in professing to believe that Christ is true, and his
Gospel certain truth, and that at death they must go to Heaven or Hell, if
their lives show not that Heaven and Hell are greater and more prevailing
matters with them, than all the fleshly provisions, pleasures and glory of this
world.

Hypocrites are distinguished from professed Infidels: but if they were not
unbelievers at the heart, they were not Hypocrites in professing Faith. The
Scripture gives these titles or attributes therefore to saving Faith, 1 Timothy
1. 5. It is called Faith unfeigned or not hypocritical or dissembled; and
Philem. 6. it is called Effectual; and Gal. 5. 6. Faith that works by Love; and
Iam. 2. Faith that is not dead, but working to perfection; it is not unseigned
if it be not effectual. You cannot make a Man believe that a Bear pursues him,
or his House is on Fire, or his Life in danger; but he will accordingly bestir
him. You cannot draw a Man to other business from the care of his Life if he
believe that it lies on his present care.

O Sirs, the Hypocrites belief of another World, and his lifeless opinion
conquered by secret unbelief, will shortly fall as an house built on the sand,
Matthew. 7. 23. and no Heart can now fully conceive how terrible to him the fall
will be. When you see that there is no more tarrying here, and that death and
an endless life are come, a dead profession and secret unbelief, will leave you
then to despair and horror. It is not the name of a Christian that will then
serve to comfort or to save your Souls. I do do not say that no Man shall be
saved that has any doubting, even of the Gospel and the life to come. But, I
say, you cannot be saved if your belief of it prevail not to engage you in a
holy Life, and conquer not the Flesh, the World and the Devil. It must be a
prevailing Faith.

But I suppose you are convinced that a sound and firm belief of the passage of
departing Souls to Christ or unto misery, would certainly resolve Men for a
holy Life; But some say, If we be uncertain how can we help it, we are out of
sight, and we have not the command of our own understandings: we would be sure
what becomes of Souls with all our Hearts, but we cannot attain it.

Ans. Christ came into the World to teach it us: such knowledge is too high and
precious to be attained with a slothful wish, or to be had without the use of
the means which Christ has appointed us. Have you learned of Christ with a
humble and teachable willing mind? Have you not been diverted and blinded by
the things which you knew were but deceitful vanity? Have you set your
understandings awork with such serious consideration, and so long as the trial
of so great a matter does require? Have you sought to able and faithful
Ministers of Christ to help you where you found your self insufficient? Have
you daily begged the help of the Spirit of God, as knowing that heavenly things
must be discerned by a heavenly light? Have you honestly obeyed so much as you
did know? If you have done this which reason requires, I do not think that
thus waiting on God, he will leave you to any damnable unbelief or to an unholy
sensual life.

But because the strengthening of our belief herein is the most needful thing
even to the best, both for their hope and joy and duty, and all that understand
themselves must earnestly desire, that their belief of the Gospel, and the Life
to come, did reach to a satisfying certainty. I will shortly repeat the proofs
that must ascertain us, Though I have largely done it in my Books called, The
Life of Faith, and The Reasons of the Christian Religion, and The
Unreasonableness of Infidelity, I care not how often (when necessary) I repeat
them, and wish that they were more of the daily study of those that now study
Controversies or only Superstructures.

I. And first Nature gives us these Arguments to prove Man's future State.

1. God has made Man with an essential capacity to think and care, as his
greatest concern, what shall become of his Soul when he dies: And God makes
none of his Works in vain, much less so noble a one as Man.

2. A bare probability of the life to come as now revealed, with our certainty
of the brevity and vanity of this Life, makes it the interest and certain duty
of all Men in the World, to be far more careful for their future state than for
the Body, and this present Life. He lives against Reason that does not this.

3. And can a wise Man believe that God binds all Men by their essential
Reason, to make the care of a thing that is not, or ever shall be, to be the
chief business of their lives, and that deceit and falsehood should be the guide
of all our greatest actions, and Man should be made to follow a lie, to his
everlasting disappointment? Judge reasonably whether this be like to be the
work of the most Great and Wise and Holy God.

4. History and experience assures us that it is the expectation of a Life to
come, the hope of Reward there, and the fear of punishment, which are Gods
means for the actual government of mankind: And though many Atheists are in the
World, and more Saduces and Unbelievers, yet few, if any, are wholly such, but
have Consciences that keep them in some awe: And Laws and professed Religion
tell you that it is hopes and fears of another life, which are the ruling
principles; which as they reign in the best, so few of the worst will directly
contradict: And were it not for such fears of punishment hereafter, the Lives
of no Princes or Enemies would be safe, from destroying Malice, Policy or
Power. And is it likely that this World is governed by a Lie, by that God who
wants no Power, Wisdom or Love, to govern it by Truth; and who makes the best
Men the greatest haters of Lying, that they may be like Him?

5. And how comes the belief of the Souls immortality to be so common a
principle in the nature of Man, if it be not true?

II. But seeing it is the Gospel that must give us the full and satisfying
certainty, keep these few evidences of its Truth continually Printed on your
Minds.

1. Remember that Promises, Types and Prophesies, foretold Christ's coming long
before; even Prophesies sealed with Miracles and fulfilled.

2. Remember that Christ's own Person and Doctrine, did bear that Image of God,
which is unimitable; and had that Power, Wisdom and Love, which prove them to
be of God: Gods Image and Superscription discernable by holy minds, does
difference the Gospel from all the words of fallible Men.

3. Remember that it was proved to be of God, by multitudes of open and
uncontrolled Miracles: And God will not work Miracles remedilesly to deceive
mankind: especially the great Miracle of Christ's Resurrection (long by him
foretold) and his visible ascending up to Heaven.

4. The sending down the promised Spirit on the Apostles and on other believers
then, for Languages, Miracles, Prophesyings, etc. And the long exercise of
these Tongues and Miracles by many and in many parts of the World, and the
gathering of the Churches by them.

5. The full and certain Historical conveyance of these matters of fact to us
in and by the sacred Scriptures, Church Ordinances and Tradition (as the
Statutes of the Land are delivered us) without any weakening contradiction of
the said History or fact.

6. Above all the continued Testimony of Gods Spirit in all true believers;
that is, the same Spirit which indicted the Scripture, writes it out on all
holy Souls, or forms, renews and disposes them, to answerable holiness:
even to the Image of God, in holy Light, and Love, and Life, and to a heavenly
Mind, and Conversation, and to be sober, ^^st and loving to all. And God would
never bless a Lie, to do the greatest work in this World to make Men good and
like himself: And remember that the whole frame and tendency of the Spirits
sanctifying work on Souls, is to prepair them for a Life to come, by causing
them to believe it, desire it, hope for it, and seek it, and hate sin, and part
with any thing to obtain it. All sound believers have this work upon them, and
are of such a Mind and Spirit: And this Spirit or holy nature in them, is
Christ's witness and theirs. They have the witness in themselves, 1* Ioh. 5. 10.

7. And remember that even the Malice of Satan affords us much help to
confirm our Faith. It is notorious that he keeps up through all the World a
war against Christ, and against our hopes of future glory. How he follows Men
with inward importunate temptations against their own interest and reason, and
what proof of his malice we have in Humane wickedness, and in Witches,
Witchrafts or operations on Bodies, Apparitions, etc. I have so often proved to
you that I will now forbear the repetition: And does not all this contain
assuring evidence of the Truth of Christ, his Gospel and our future hopes?

Use, Come then fellow Christians! Let us pray Lord increase our Faith; Let us
detest all suggestions which tend to Unbelief, and so would bring us to the
rank of Bruits and to despair; Let us live according to our most holy Faith,
and show our selves and others that we heartily believe, that [ the Servants of
Christ that follow him, shall be with him where he is: O pray for Faith!
Meditate for Faith; Lament your Unbelief! O fools that we are, and slow of
Heart to believe a Gospel so revealed and confirmed! Why are we so fearful of
dying, O we of little Faith! Were but this one Text written on our Hearts, and
turned into Faith and Hope; yea did we believe Christ speaking it, but as
confidently as we believe and trust a parent, or a tried friend, for any thing
promised which is in their power, yea or but as confidently as we can trust
their Love without a Promise, O how joyfully should we live and die! O bend
your prayers and best endeavors against the unbelief and doubtings of the
Gospel, and the unseen World; were your Faith here strong it would bring you to
that Holiness which would much end your doubts of your own sincerity and part
in Christ.

Had we nothing else to prove the sinful weakness of our Faith, but our
uncomfortable thoughts of the Life to come, and the State of our departing
Souls, alas, how sad an evidence is it! Come on then Christians. Think further
what this Text contains, and beg of God that you and I may believe it as we
need and as Christ deserves to be believed. Think what it is to be with
Christ: We shall be with our compassionate great High Priest: with him that
came down in flesh to us: with him that loved us to the death and redeemed us
by his blood to God, and will make us Kings and Priests for ever: We shall be
with him, that is gone to prepair a place for us, in his Fathers house he has
many mansions, Ioh. 14. 3. It was not a mere man; it was not an Angel that made
us this promise; but the Son of God; who has confirmed it by four Seals, his
Blood, his Miracles and Resurrection, his Sacraments, and his Spirit.

Are you afraid that your Souls shall die with your Bodies? Christ is not dead,
and we shall be with him: It is his promise, Because I live ye shall live also,
Ioh. 14. 19. The Article of his descending to Hades called Hell, is to tell us
that Christ's Soul died not with his Body: yea it went that day to Paradise. Our
Head and we shall not be separated: Are you afraid of going to Hell? Christ is
not there: Are you afraid lest God forsake you? He forsakes not Christ; though
for our sakes he once in part forsook him, that we might not be forsaken.

Can you fear Devils or any Enemies? Where Christ is glorified there come no
Devils, Enemies or Fears. We are here with him as Chickens under the wings of
the Hen, Matthew. 23. 37. How safely and how joyfully then shall we be lodged in
the bosom of eternal Love!

But we see not the place, nor what our depated friends enjoy. But Christ sees
it, who is there.

But we see not Christ. But firm Belief will make us Love him, and rejoice with
unspeakable glorying joy, 1 Pet. 6. 8, 9.

But we cannot conceive of the state, and operations of a separated Soul, nor
where it is, nor how God is there enjoyed.

But is it not enough to believe that we shall be with Christ, and fare (in our
measure) no worse than he? If you are afraid lest Christ be deceived or deceive
you, that is a sinful fear indeed: But if you only fear lest you have no part
in him, Consent to his Covenant; do but give up your selves in Obedience and
Trust, though not in perfection, yet in sincere desire and resolution, and then
you have no just cause to fear it.

O Sirs, why do not our Hearts rejoice, when we think that we shall shortly be
with Christ? Here we have ill company too often; implacable enemies, unsuitable
and sinful Friends, and worst of all a foolish and perverted Heart, that is in
effect our greatest Enemy: But where Christ is, none of this is so: With him we
shall have the company of our holy departed Friends; even all of them that we
conversed with in the Flesh, whom we lamented and wept over as if they had been
lost: We shall with Christ have the company of innumerable Angels, and all the
faithful from the days of Adam.

And O how much better will Christ's own glorious presence be, than his presence
in humbled Flesh was to his followers on Earth? Here Christ was a despised
crucified Man; There even his Body is more glorious than the Sun; and the
Heaven or holy City needs no Sun, because God and the Lamb is the light
thereof. Spirits are there in confirmed Holiness, and not left to that
imperfect Liberty of Will, which lets in by abuse all sin and misery on the
World. They strive not in the dark in ignorant Zeal, or mixtures of Error and
selfish partiality as we do here. There are no silencers of the holy Ministers
that continually sing Iehovahs praises. There is no malignant calumny or
persecution, no envious reproach of one another, or striving who shall have his
will, or be the Master of the rest. But holy Love uniteth, animateth and
delights all: For it is God that they Love in one another. There is no
selfish foolish fear, lest individuation cease, and Saints shall be too much
one, and all be one common Soul. In a word to be with Christ is to be perfect
in Holiness and Glory, in God, in the Heavenly society, in the Joys of Sight
and Love and Praise, delivered from the bondage of corruption, from sin and
fear, and from temptation and troubles of all our Enemies.

IV. But yet the promise here says more, [ If any man serve Me, him will my
Father honor.] The Fathers Love did give us the Redeemer, and the Fathers Love
shall Glorify us with him. What is the Honor that is here meant? Honor some
time signifies Advancement in General; making one Great and Happy, Numb. 22.
17. 37. and 24. 11. and 27. 20. 1 King. 3. 13. 1 Chronicles. 16. 27. Psalm. 8. 5. 1 Samuel 2. 30. And sometime it signifies the provision and maintenance which is
due to deserving superiors, which is half the double honor due to the Elders
that rule well, especially that labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
And sometime it is taken for a magnified praised State: God will honor
faithful Christians all these ways: He will advance them to the highest dignity
they are meet for: He will give them the most bounteous provisions of his
household: even more than they can now desire or believe. He will make them
Kings and Priests to God, and coheirs with Christ in the glorious Inheritance:
Romans 8. 17. Rev. 1. 6. and 5. 1^. and 20. 6. They shall Judge the World, and
Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. They shall see God, Matthew. 5. and be called his
Children; and all together the spouse and Body of Christ, Ephesians. 5. Rev. 21. and
22. etc. They shall at Christ's appearing (who is their Life) appear with him in
Glory, Col. 3. 4. When he comes to be admired in his Saints and glorified in
all them that Believe, 2 These. 1. 10. etc. We shall see face to face, and shall
see him as he is, 1. Ioh. 3. 2. We shall behold the Glory that God has given
him, Ioh. 17. 24. The Righteous shall have dominion in that Morning: And shall
shine as Stars, Dan. 12. 13. yea as the Sun in the firmament of the Father,
Matthew. 13. 34. God will put his Name upon them, and they shall be Pillars in
his Temple and go out no more, Rev. 2. and 3. Yea they shall be equal with the
Angels, Luke 20. 36. Thus shall it be done to them whom God delights to
honor* even to all in their several degrees who faithfully serve and follow
Christ.

And yet, Christians, are we afraid of dying? I even hate my own Heart for the
remnant of its unbelief, which no more rejoiceth, and no more longs to be
with Christ, while I read and speak of all this to you. I know that clear and
full apprehensions are proper to possessors, and therefore not to be here
expected: But Lord give us such a Light of Faith, as may let in some such
tastes of Glory, as are needful to us in our hoping State! How can we
cheerfully labor, and suffer, and overcome without them? How shall we go
through a tempting and troubling World? And entertain with joy the sentence of
Death, and lay down the Body in the dust without the Joy of the Lord, which is
our strength? Had our Hearts this one promise deeply written in them, we should
live in Holiness and die in Joy.

I Have spoken of my Text to my self and you: I have now a Copy of it to
describe: Let none think that the praise of the Dead is a needless or
inconvenient work: Christ himself praises them, and will praise them whom he
justifies them before all the World: Well done good and faithful Servant, etc.
Matthew. 25. He will be admired and glorified in them, 2 These. 1. 2. The 11th of
the Hebrews is the praise of many of them, of whom the World was not worthy;
(this wicked world which know neither how to value them or to use them*) Christ
will have the tears and costly love of a poor penitent Woman, who anointed him,
to be spoken of wherever the Gospel is read. The Orations of excellent Gregory
Nazianzen (Greater than Gregory the Great) with many such, show us that the
Ancients thought this a needful work. Many live in times and places where few
such men are known: And they have need to know from others that there are and
have been such. Had not I known such, I had wanted one of the greatest
arguments for my Faith. I should the hardlier have believed that Christ is a
Savior, if I had not known such as he has begun to save; nor that there is a
Heaven for Souls, if I had not known some disposed and prepared for it, by a
holy mind and life. I thank God, I have known Many, Many, Many such, of several
ranks, some High, more Low: O how many such (though not all of the same degree
of holiness) have I lived with who are gone before me! Holy Gentlemen! Holy
Ministers of Christ; and holy poor men! I love Heaven much the better when I
think that they are there. And while I am so near them, and daily wait for my
remove, though I here yet breath and speak in flesh, why may I not think that I
am nearlier related to that Congregation than to this. The saying is, A friend
is half our Soul! If so, sure the greater half of mine is gone thither long
ago. It is but a little of me that is yet in painful weary flesh. And now one
part of me more is gone; the Holy and Excellent Henry Ashhurst: And God will
have me to live so long after him, as to tell you what he was, to his Fathers
and Redeemers praise, and to provoke you to imitation.

God says The memory of the Just shall be blessed, while the Wickeds name
shall rot. Methinks even the natural pride of Princes, who would not be the
scorn of future ages but the praise, should accidentally incline them to do
good, and seem good at the least, while the Common experience of all the world
tells us, that God does wonderfully show himself the Governor of the world, by
ruling fame, to the perpetual honor of good, and the shame and scorn of evil.

Even among Heathens, what a name is left of Titus, Trajan, Adrian, and above
all the Roman Emperors of Antonine the Philosopher, and Alexander Severus. And
who names a Nero, Domitian, Commodus, Heliogabalus, etc. without reproach?
Yea, I have observed that though Malefactors hate the Prince that punishes
them, and ungodly men hate piety and the persons that condemn and trouble them
in their sins, yet such a testimony for goodness is left in common nature, that
even the generality of the profane and vicious world, speak well of a Wise,
Just, Godly Prince, even living, and much more when he is dead: And so they do
of other public persons: Magistrates and Ministers of the Gospel; and they
will praise goodness in others that will not practice it, especially that which
brings sensible good to men's bodies or to the Common wealth.

And therefore Great men should hate that Counsel which cries down Popularity,
as a trick to make them contemn the sense of those below them: For usually it
is the best Rulers that are most praised by the Vulgar, by reason of the self
glorifying Light, by which true goodness shines in the world, and by reason of
the experience of mankind, that good men will do good to others. How commonly
will even drunkards, whoremongers, and unjust men, reproach a Magistrate, or
Teacher, that is a Drunkard, Whoremonger, or Unjust, and praise the contrary?
Much more will the Wise and Good do it, who indeed are as the Soul of Kingdoms
and other Societies, and the chief in propagating fame; Its true that the
bellua multorum capitum is liable to disorders, and unfit for secrets, or
uniting Government; and its hypocrisy to affect Popular applause as our
folicity or reward, or to be moved by it against God and duty. But many men see
more and hear more than one, and single men are apter to be perverted and Judge
falsely by personal interests and prejudice, than the multitude are. Vox populi
is often times Vox Dei, I have Read Dr. Heylin villifying A Bishop, Abbot, and
saying, the Church has no greater a plague than a Popular Prelate (or to that
sense) And I have heard some reproach the late Judge Hale as a Popular man: But
as my intimacy with the last assured me, that he set very little by the opinion
of high or low, in comparison of Justice and Conscience; so while God keeps up
a testimony for goodness in Humane nature, men will not think ill of a man,
because his goodness has constrained even the most to praise him; Nor will it
prove the way to please God or profit themselves or others, to make themselves
odious by cruelty or wickedness, and then to despise their judgments that
dispraise them, and to cry down Popularity. Woe to you when all men speak well
of you, means when either you do the evil that the wicked praise, or forsake
truth and duty lest they dispraise you; or as hypocrites make men's praise your
end.

It is not solow a matter, as great birth, or riches, or any other worldly
honor, which I am to remember of our deceased friend: Multitudes that are now
in misery did once excel him in all these. But yet as a touch of the History of
his life, is fit to go before his exemplary Character, (which is my work) and
because it it is a great honor and blessing to be the seed of the faithful, I
shall premise a little first of his Parentage, and then of that part of his
life which I knew not, but give you on the unquestionable credit of others.

He was the third Son of Henry Ashhurst of Ashhurst in Lancashire, Esquire, by
Cassandra his wife, daughter of John Bradshaw of Bradshaw, of the same County,
Esquire. His Father was a Gentleman of great Wisdom and Piety, and zealous for
the true Reformed Religion in a Country where Papists much abounded: And when
King James (the more to win them) was prevailed with to sign the Book for
dancing and other such sports on the Lords days, he being then a Justice of
Peace* (as his Ancestors had been) and the Papists thus embolded sent a Piper
not far from the Chapel to draw the People from the public worship, he sent
him to the house of correction: And being for this misrepresented to the King
and Council, he was put to justify the legality of what he did, at the
Assizes: which he so well performed that the Judge was forced to acquit him,
(though he was much contrary to him) and an occasion being offered to put the
Oath of Allegiance on his Prosecutors, their refusal showed them Papists, as
was before suspected.

God blessed this Gentleman in his three Sons: The eldest was a man eminent for
his Wisdom, Integrity and Courage, a Member of the Long Parliament called 1640.
(though all such by interested partial men are accounted and called what their
prejudice and enmity does suggest; and though with many more such, he was by
the Conquering Army abused and cast out.) The second Son was a Colonel; and
Henry the youngest, about Fifteen years old was sent to London, and bound
Apprentice to a Master somewhat severe. And whereas such severity tempts many
proud and graceless young men to be impatient and weary of their Masters, and
to break out to seek forbidden pleasure, at Play Houses, Taverns, and perhaps
with Harlots, and to rob their Masters to maintain these lusts, til they are
hardened in sin, and break their own hopes, and their Parents hearts, (alas how
many such wretches has this City!) Gods grace in our friend did teach him to
make a clean contrary use of it: This affection did help to drive him to hear
good Preachers for his comfort, and to betake himself to God in prayer, and to
search the Scripture for direction, In which way he found the teaching and
blessing of his heavenly Master, which helped him to bear all harshness and
hardness in his place.

And having no place of retirement but a cold hole in the Cellar, in the
coldest nights he spent much time in prayer and meditation: and his good Father
allowing him a yearly pension for his expenses, he spent it mostly in
furnishing his poor closet with good Books: Not Play-books or Romances and idle
Tales, but such as taught him how to please God and to live for ever.

From his childhood he had a humble meekness, and sweetness of temper, which
made his life easy to himself and others, and made him so acceptable to godly
Ministers and People, that their acquaintance and converse and love became to
him a great confirmation and help to his growth in grace: especially good Mr.
Simeon Ash; a man of his plainness, and of the Primitive strein of Christianity:

His Master (I need not tell how) so wasted his Estate, that he shut up shop
when Mr. Ashhurst was gone from him, whose great fidelity had helped to keep him
up; And he took care of his indigent children afterward.

His Portion was but 500 l. and a small Annuity, and one Mr. Hyet a Minister
lent him 300 l. more, with which stock he set up in partnership with one Mr.
Row a Draper, and so continued three years: Mr. Row took up his stock and was a
Major in the Earl of Essex's Army, and left Mr. Ashhurst to the whole Trade:
narrowly escaping the misery of an unsuitable match, he married (on Mr. Ash's
motion) the daughter of one Mr. Risby, who is now his sorrowful widow; having
with her about 1500 l. He began his Trade at the beginning of the Wars when
others left off theirs. He dedicated yearly a good part of his gain to God in
works of Charity; and it increased greatly: And as his known trustiness made
men desirous to deal with him; so God strangely kept those men that he trusted
from breaking, when the most noted Tradesmen in the same Towns broke, to the
undoing of those that trusted them. And though his Trading was great about
thirty years, he managed it with ease and calmness of mind, and was not by it
diverted from duties of Religion, He usually was at one word in his Trading.

His body being healthful he rose about four a clock or five, and in secret
usually spent about two hours in Reading, Meditation and Prayer; and then went
to his Family duties, as is afterward described: He was a great improver of his
time, or else he could never have done what he did for so many persons; usually
saying, He desired to live no longer than he might be serviceable to God and
men. But he was most regardful to lose no part of the Lords day, in which he
did all toward God and his Family with great reverence and humble seriousness;
And as he much desired godly trusty servants, he had much of his desire, and
his house was as a school of piety, meekness, and as a Church.

When his faithful Pastor Mr. Simeon Ash was buried (the very day before the
new Act of Uniformity would have silenced him, being an old Nonconformist) he
used to go at the end of the week to Hackney to his Country house, and there
spend the Lords day.

In the Common fire his house was burnt as well as others, but is rebuilded
with advantage: And all Gods corrections, and the hurt which by his permission
we undergo from bad men will turn to our gain, if we believe and patiently
expect the end.

Thus far I have given you for the most part but what his best knowing friends
have most credibly given me, of the history of his Pilgrimage; But I will next
tell you what I knew my self in above twenty years familiarity with him: And
that shall be more descriptive than Historical, though in what is already said
from others, you may much know what he was.

Mr. Ash's praise and his own free love, first brought on our acquaintance: And
indeed my many restraining hindrances, have kept me from so much familiarity
with many.

Those that knew him need little of my description. Those that have been much
in his house, and seen his children and servants carry themselves as reverently
and respectfully to him, as if he had been a Lord, when yet he was so lovingly
familiar with them, will think there was some cause for this. Those that hear
it the common speech of Magistrates, godly Ministers and people, that [ we have
lost the most excellent pattern of Piety, Charity, and all virtue that this
City has bred in our times] will think that there is some reason for this
praise; Some of us seem to shine to strangers, who are cloudy and contemptible
to those that are near us. And many excellent obscure poor Christians are taken
little notice of, in a low retired or unobserved station: But his esteem and
honor and love was at home and abroad, by his Children, Servants, Neighbors,
Fellow-citizens, that I say not even by some that loved not his Religiousness,
or that took him to be too much a friend to those whom their opinions and
interest engaged them against.

And if you would truly know what was the meritorious cause of all this Love
and Honor, I will tell you, It was the Image of Christ, and the fruits of his
holy Doctrine and his Spirit: No man believes that there is a God, who does
not believe, that the liker any man is to God, the better and the more
honorable he is. All is Glorious that is Holy, that is, of God, and for God,
separated to him from all that is common and unclean. Base fools may more
admire and reverence a proud Man, or gilded Idol: but all that know God, and
the almost nothingness of vain Man, do value all things and persons in the
measure, as they are dispositively, actively and relatively Divine. The Spirit
of God by David begins the Psalms with describing such blessed Men as these.
And Christ next after his preaching Repentance, begins with such Men's
characters and blessedness, Matthew. 5. I shall therefore now truly tell you what
our deceased Brother was, and what of God so shined in him as commanded all
this Love and Praise: While far greater Men by their filth and folly, their sin
and hurtful cruelty, have made themselves the Plague and burden of their Times,
as the Children of him whose name is but the contract of Do-evil.

I. His Religion was only the Bible, as the Rule: He was a mere Scipture
Christian; of the Primitive Spirit and strein. No Learning signified much with
him, but what helped him to understand the Scripture: The Bible was his constant
Book, and in it he had great delight: And he loved no Preaching so well as that
which made much and pertinent use of Scripture, by clear exposition and
suitable application. He liked not that which worthy Dr. Man^^n was wont to
call Gentleman Preaching, set out with fine things, and laced and gilded,
plainly speaking self-preaching, man-pleasing and pride: For when Pride
chooses the Text, the method, and the style, the Devil chooses it, though the
Matter be of God* Therefore he also highly valued those Books which are much in
such wise and seasonable use of Scripture; of which he commended above all the
Lectures of Mr. Arthur Hildersham.

II. He neither much studied books of Controversy, nor delighted in discourse
of any of our late differences: I scarce ever heard him engage in any of them;
But his constant talk was of practical matter, of God, of Christ, of Heaven, of
the Heart and Life, of Grace and Duty, or of the sense of some practical Text
of Scripture. He so little (...) and minded the quarrels, that many lay out
their greatest zeal on, and find matter in them to condemn and backbite one
another, that he either carried it as a stranger or an adversary to such (...).

III. Accordingly while Men were guilty of no (...) Heresy or Sin, but held
all great and necessary Truths in love and holiness and righteousness of Life,
he made little difference in his Respects and Love: A serious godly
Independent, Presbyterian* or Episcopal Christian, was truly Loved and Honored
by him: Indeed he Loved not Church Tyranny nor Hypocritical Images of Religion
on one hand, nor confusion on the other; But the Primitive Spirit, of
Seriousness, Purity and Charity, he valued in all. A differing tolerable
opinion never clouded the glory of sincere Christianity in his Eyes. He was of
no Sect* and he was against Sects as such; being of a truly Catholic Spirit:
but he could see true godliness and honesty in many whose weakness made them
culpable in too much adhering to a Side or Sect.

IV. He greatly hated backbiting, and obloquy: Speak evil of no man] was a Text
which he often had in his Mouth: I never knew any noted Men so free from that
vice, as Judge Hale and Mr. Ashhurst: If a Man had begun to speak ill of any
Man behind his back, either they would say nothing* or divert him to something
else, or show their distaste of it: Sin he would speak against, but very little
of the Person. Only one sort of Men he would take the liberty to express his
great dislike of; and that was The Hinderers of the Gospel, and Silencers of
faithful Preachers of it, and Persecutors of Godly Christians, and Oppressors
of the Poor: and their pretenses of Government, and Order, and talk against
Schism, could never reconcile him to that sort of Men: But his distaste was
never signified by scurrility, nor any thing that savoured of an unruly or
Seditious Spirit.

V. His Heart was set on the hallowing of Gods Name, the coming of his Kingdom,
and the doing of his Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven: on the propagating
of Religion, and encouraging all able faithful Preachers, and Practicers of it
to his power. Ever since I knew him, it seemed much more of his serious
business in the World than his Trade or worldly gain was: He was a right hand
to his faithful Pastor good old Mr. Simeon Ash: How seldom did I visit Mr. Ash
at any time, but I ^ound or left them together: And now they are together with
Christ: He did not Love with barren words, nor serve God of that which cost him
nothing: Few, but I knew from his own mouth, that he gave these 18 years (since
August 24. 1662.) an hundred pound a year to the ejected Ministers of
Lancashire and some Schools there, and in the neighbor parts, and many Bibles,
Catechisms and other good Books to diverse places besides the said 100l. a year.
And a friend of his and mine tell me, that it was to him that he yearly
delivered it to be distributed, save that lately twenty pound a year of it went
to Northumberland.

VI. Indeed Charity was his Life and business: Another mean man that was often
with him says, that he has had of him many score pounds to give away, which
few ever knew of. I do not think that there are many that can say that ever
they were denied when they asked him for money to a Charitable use: I am sure I
never was.

About 1662 and 1663 he endeavored hard to have got the pious Citizens of
London to contribute yearly to the relief of the poor ejected Ministers of the
several Counties where they were born; and I was employed to the Lord
Chancellor Hide to acquaint him with it and get his consent, that it might not
be taken for a fomenting of faction: But though he said ( God forbid that he
should be against Men's charity) yet most durst not trust him, and so it fell.

Since then he and others set up a Conventicle, which methinks might be
tolerated by Bishops themselves: They met often to consult and contribute for
the relief of poor Housekeepers; and they chose an ancient active godly Man,
fit for that work, to be as a Deacon, I mean to go about the City and find out
such Housekeepers as were very poor, sick, or impotent, or any way in want,
and to bring in a Catalogue of their names, places and degrees of need: always
preferring the pious honest poor: And they made Mr. Tho. Gouge their Treasurer
(one of the same Trade, whose Hands could not be tied from doing good when his
Tongue was tied by the silencers) And the foresaid messenger brought them their
contributions, with good instructions and prayer when there was need: for which
use sometime they procured a Minister for the ignorant.

Indeed he was the common comforter and reliever of distressed Ministers and
others: I know of none in London that they so commonly resorted to as him.

VII. And so large was his desire of doing good, that not only England,
Scotland and Ireland knew it, but it specially extended to the Natives in
America; of whose conversion to Christianity he had a fervent desire. In Oliver
Cromwells time, a public Collection was made all over England for the
educating of Scholars and defraying other charges in New England for that
Work, of which good old Mr. Fliots, the Indians Evangelist, was the chief
operator: with that money Lands were purchased to the value of about 800l. a
year, and settled on a Corporation of Citizens in Trust, and Mr. Ashhurst must
be the Treasurer on whom lay the main care and work. When the King was
restored, the Corporation was dead in Law, and one that sold most of the Lands
which were settled for that use (Colonel Bedingfield a Papist) seized on his
sold Land, and yet refused to repay the money: The care of the recovery and of
restoring the Corporation and all the work, was the business of Mr. Ashhurst:
for which he desired my solicitation of the Lord Chancellor Hide, who did
readily own the justness of the cause and goodness of the Work, and first gave
us leave to nominate the new Corporation, and Mr. Boil for President, and Mr.
Ashhurst for Treasurer; and afterward when it came to Suite before him, did
justly determine it for the Corporation.

And so these nineteen years last past, it was he by the help of Mr. Boil and
the rest, who has had the main care of the New England assistance, by which a
Printing press has been there set up, and the Bible translated into the
Indians Tongue, and other Books also for their instruction, and the Agents
encouraged to help them, till the late unhappy War there interrupted much of
their endeavors; And of their Victory in that War the converted Indians were
not the least cause.

O how sad will the news of his death be to old Mr. Eliots, if he live to hear
it, and to his American Converts? And he has left by his Will an hundred pound
to the College there, and fifty pound to their Corporation.

IX. Some may think that he wanted a public Spirit because he avoided being a
Magistrate and paid his Fine rather than take an Aldermans place, But it was
only to keep the peace of his Conscience, which could not digest, 1. The
Corporation Declaration and Oath; Nor 2. The execution of the Laws against
Nonconforming Ministers and People* I never heard him plead that the solemn
Oath, called the National Covenant, was not unlawfully imposed or taken: His
thoughts of that I know not: But he was not ignorant that the words showed that
it was a Promise or Vow to God, and that a Vow made sinfully binds,
notwithstanding to the Lawful and necessary part of the Matter: And he thought
that to oppose in our places Profaneness, Popery and Schism, and to Repent of
Sin and amend, were lawful and necessary things: And therefore to say that [
there is no obligation by that Oath on me or any other person] without
excepting any of these aforesaid, was a thing that he would rather, I believe,
have suffered death than do: He would not do that which he thought Perjury
himself, much less justify it in thousands whom he never knew: And he feared
lest he should become guilty of constituting all the Cities and Corporations of
England by Perjury, and stigmatizing the front of the Nation with such a
fearful brand. Some men think that the Mark of the beast in Rev. without which
none might buy or sell, was PERJURY and PERSECUTION; finding that the Laterane
Council sub Innoc. 3. and others which are of their Religion, do absolve
Subjects of their Temporal Lords, whom the Pope Excommunicateth from their
Oaths of Allegiance, which was ordinarily practiced against Emperors and Kings;
and finding that these Lords or Princes themselves were to swear to exterminate
all called Heretics, on pain of Excommunication, Deposition and Damnation, and
that every such Ruler that professes himself a Papist knowingly, binds
himself to destroy all Protestants, or exterminate them, if he can do it
without danger to the Papal Church: and also finding that all their Clergy must
swear the Trent Oath, by which they cannot but be Perjured: And they say that
they never heard or read that ever such a thing was done by Heathens, Infidels
or Mahometans: And Mr. Ashhurst was afraid of any thing that seemed to him such
a brand. Yet I never heard him speak uncharitably of those worthy Men who do
what he refused, supposing that they in words or writing, declared as openly as
they swear and took the Declaration, that they took it but in such or such a
lawful sense: Though he could not do so himself.

IX. He had an earnest desire of the welfair of the City, that it might
flourish in Piety, Sobriety, Justice and Charity, and that good men might be in
power; believing that the welfair of the World lies not so much in the forms
of Government as in the goodness of the Men; and that that is the best form
which best secureth us from bad Men: And all such service as he could do, no
Man was readier to do; As when he was Master of the Merchant Tailors company,
and on many other occasions he showed. His Relations tell me that he then gave
them about 300 l. of his own moneys, and greatly promoted the improvement of
their Stock, to the rebuilding of their Hall and abatement of their debts.

X. He never was a Soldier, even when London was a Garrison, but always for
the ways and works of Peace: He was ever against Tumults, Sedition and
Rebellion; And I never heard a word from him, injurious to the King and higher
Powers: He was greatly troubled at the late resistance made by the Assemblies
in Scotland, and glad when his Letters thence told him that they were but a few
hotheaded Men, whom the generality of the godly Presbyterians disclaimed and
would oppose. Peace was his temper, and peace with all Men to his power he kept
and promoted, and I never knew Man that lived in more Peace with his
Conscience, and with all Men good and bad. I never heard that he was an Enemy,
or had an Enemy, save Sin, the Devil, the World and the Flesh, as all good Men
renounce them. Nay I never heard of any one Man that ever spoke evil of him, so
strange a reconciling power has such a Mind and such a Life.

XII. He excelled all that ever I knew in the Grace of Meekness; and Christ
says, That such shall inherit even the Earth. For Men know not how to fall out
with such, while no public employment does by cross interest cause it: They
that were nearer him than I, say that they never saw him in any undecent
passion; He knew not how to show himself angry, no nor displeased otherwise
than by mild and gentle words. His countenance was still serene, and his voice
still calm and quiet, never fierce or loud, no not to a Servant. He often used to
women the words of Saint Peter 1. 3. 4, 5. A meek and a quiet Spirit is in the
sight of God of great price, which is the ornament there commended instead of
gold and gaudiness (which now are grown into so common and excessive use, as if
it were the design to avoid the imputation of hypocrisy, by wearing the open
badges of folly and pride, lest they should seem wise and humble, as some will
rant and scorn lest they should be thought religious hypocrites.)

God sitted him for his place: Had he been a Magistrate or a Preacher, a little
more sharpness had been needful. And though I once knew one that for want of
just anger was too like Eli, and could not sufficiently reprove or correct a
child, yet it pleased God that his mildness had no such ill effect; but his
Family loved and reverenced him the more.

XII. I never observed a Father carry himself to his Children (as well as to
his wife) with more constant expressions of Love, and with a greater desire of
their holiness and salvation. He spoke to his Children with that endeared
kindness as men use to do to a bosom friend in whom is their delight. And
indeed Love is the Vital Spirit, which must make all Education and Counsel
effectual, which without it usually is dead, both to children and all others;
Though there are seasons when we must be angry and not sin.

XIII. Indeed he was so made of Love and Gentleness, that I may say, that Love
was his new Nature and his Temper, his Religion and his Life, and that he dwelt
in Love, and therefore in God and God in him: His looks, his smiles, his
speech, his deeds, were all the constant significations of Love.

XIV. And no less eminent was his Humility: His Speech, Company, Garb,
Behavior, and all his carriage, did declare it. He was a great disliker of
proud vain attire, boasting speech, and pomp, and inordinate worldly splendour,
especially that which was chargeable, while so many thousands were in want: He
was poor in Spirit, suited to a low condition, though he was rich, and
condescended to men of low estate. The poor were his pleasing friends: He loved
the Rich that were rich to God, but he hated ambition, and flattering great men.

XV. Indeed he was a plain Christian of the Primitive stamp, strange to
hypocrisy and affectation, and all that is called the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and pride of life: and the sins of Sodom, Pride, Idleness and
fullness: His Habit, his Furniture, his Provisions were all plain: Nothing for
excess, as provision for the flesh to satisfy the lust thereof; yet all that
was needful for right ends. No nigardly parsimony, but sparing to do good:
sparing from all the ways of Pride and Pomp, but never sparing from decency or
good works.

XVI. The Government of his Family and the worship of God there performed, was
wise, cheerful, grave, and constant. He worshipped God as other good Christians
use to do: Besides his secret Devotions, reading the Scriptures, (after the
craving of Gods help) and giving some plain short notes which were suited to
his Families use, Catechizing and taking an account of their profiting, singing
Psalms, and Prayer: And on the Lords day hearing, and repeating the Sermons, A
Nonconformist preaching an early Sermon to many in his house, which so ended
that none might be hindered from the further work of the day: The whole day
seemed not too long to him for the delightful employment of his Soul toward
God: O how far was he from being weary, or needing any vain recreation! In his
Family Worship, he played not the Orator, nor was very tedious; but in
conference of good things, and in his Counsels plain and short; much like the
Style of Mr. Greenhams writings.

XVII. He had a special care to place his Children in a way of Employment and
with good relations; out of the way both of idleness and ill company, and
worldly vanity and temptations; And God has so blessed him in his wise and
holy endeavors for them, that of four Sons and two Daughters, there is not one
whom we have not good cause to hope well of, that they will in piety and
welfare answer his endeavors.

XVIII. Others can tell you more than I of his management of his Trade: Only
this I will say, that God greatly blessed his honesty and liberality: and men
knew that they might Trade with him without any danger of deceit; so that he
grew up to a very considerable estate: And yet was never so intent on his
Trade, but he was ready for any service of God, and help to others or public
work.

And those that say, they shall lose their custom, except they tipple and make
their bargains in Alehouses, Coffee-houses, or Taverns, or use much prating and
enticing words, may see here that one has thriven more than most have done,
that yet took a quite contrary course.

XIX. He was a stranger to vain talk and frothy jests, and also to a sour
morose converse: But good short cheerful discourse was his ordinary
entertainment.

XX. It is no wonder if in such a life so absolutely devoted to God, he lived
in a constant serenity of mind: He that had peace with God and men, had peace
of Conscience. I never heard him speak one word which savoured of any doubt of
his salvation, or discouraging thoughts of the life to come: He lived not in
bondage to tormenting fears, or sad apprehensions: But studied fully to please
God, and joyfully trusted him, rejoiced in his love and hoped for his Kingdom:
But without any overvaluing of his own worth or works; having much in his mouth
those words of St. Paul, [I have nothing to glory of] and [ I am nothing.]

XXI. The last part of his example which I have to commend to you, and
specially to my self, is his mavelous Patience, as through all his life, so
specially in his last and sharp affliction. It was a providence which posed
many of us, that God should so smartly handle such a man as this; till Gods
Oracles told our Faith enough to silence all murmuring thoughts of God. For God
had given him before the blessings of Job, a healthful body and constant
prosperity, and shall Sinners taste no correction, and receive nothing of God
but pleasant things? All Gods graces must have their exercise and trial: And
Faith and Patience are most tried and exercised in a suffering state; God
loves not Martyrs less than others: 2. And he had served God before by Action,
and usually our last service is by Patience: And Lazarus in sores and wants,
was in a safer way to Abraham's bosom, than Dives in his silks and sumptuous
fare: 3. And we are naturally so loath to leave this world and flesh, that God
sees it meet to help our willingness, by making us weary of it. And affliction
though grievous for the present tends to the quiet fruit of righteousness;
And making us partakers of Gods holiness, certainly tends to make us
partakers of his Glory: Cross-bearing and partaking of the sufferings of
Christ, is an indispenable Christian duty: We must be conformed to him in his
sufferings, if we will reign with him and be partakers of our Masters joy. And
in heaven all tears are wiped away, and there are no groans nor moans, no
sorrows, nor repining or accusing God, for any of our former sufferings. What
need have I, yea what need have you all to remember this.

Flesh will feel, and Faith will not avoid pain and present torment, no more
than death; but it fortified our dear Brothers Soul that it should not too much
suffer with his Body.

Several years he was molested most with some cloudy trouble of his head, which
Tunbridge waters eased for a time; And next with Acrimony of Urine; And next it
too painfully appeared to be the Stone in the Bladder; He long resolved to
endure it to the death, but at last extremity of torment and despair of any
other ease, did suddenly cause him to choose to be cut: Two stones were found,
and one of them in the operation was broken into pieces; many of which were
taken out, by very terrible search, and about thirty pieces after came away
through the wound. Physicians and all present admired at his patience. No word,
no action, signified any distressing sense: And though he was about 65 years
old, God did recover him and heal the wound: But we were too unthankful, and
his pains returned: Gently at first, but afterward as terribly as before. And
after that a strong Fever, of which unexpectedly he recovered: And then often
inflammations, and at last a dangerous one: And finally so great torment, that
a French Lithotomist being here, he was overperswaded to be searched and cut
again, and a third stone was taken away with competent speed and ease, and
diverse big fragments of it, which had been broken off in the first operation.
Thus was he cut twiee in about a years space; and the wound seemed marvellously
to heal for diverse months; and when we had prayed hard for him, we turned it to
thanksgiving, and thought the danger of death was past. But after his strength
failed, and he died in peace. God gave him those months of ease and calmness,
the better to bear his approaching change.

In all this none heard him express any querulous impatience: Most of his words
were telling men how tolerable his pain was, and how good God was, and
thankfully acknowledging his mercy. The last words which I had from him were of
the goodness of God, concluding [ O that we could love God more.] And when he
thought he should recover, he was very solicitous in his enquiry, what God
would have him do in gratitude. And one of the chief things which he resolved
on to one of his old friends was, that he would set upon as many Parliament Men
as he could speak with, to repeal all the Laws which hinder good men from
preaching Christ's Gospel. Adding moreover [ And Country man, says he, you and
I will take care for Lancashire, that the Gospel may be more preached among
them.] (It being their Native Country, and abounding with Papists, and many
parts have scarcity of Preachers.)

But suddenly he past from the Exercise of Faith and Patience, unto sight and
rest.

His last words (save his farewell, and Come Lord Jesus) were to an old friend
(Mr. Nathaniel Hulton) [to walk in the way of God will be comfort at death,]
being not of their mind, who for fear of fetching too much comfort from our own
duty (which they call works) do think Christ's merits injured by such thoughts
and words as these: as if the Cure were a disgrace to our Physician, or Christ,
Matthew. 25. had misdescribed the last judgment; or God were no rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, and laying up our treasure and hearts in heaven, were
no means to be received into the everlasting habitation.

And thus passed this faithful Soul to Christ.

And now, Reader, have I not showed thee a true Copy of the first part of my
Text? One that indeed served Christ and followed him? Is not this his Image and
Imitation? And is it not sure then that he is where Christ is? and that God
that makes it our duty to honor his memory on earth, has given him another
kind of honor in the heavens.

And to what other end have I said all this of him?

In General, [ Go and do thou likewise.

I. I do it much for the use of the Magistrates and People of this City? I
commend this example to them all: O what an honorable and happy City would
this be, if you were all such as our deceased Brother was? We joyfully thank
God for so much goodness as flourished among you? The Lord make London still
the glory of the Cities on earth! But were all Families used as his Family was,
and all men here lived as this man lived, we should suspect we had the new
earth wherein dwelt righteousness. And were Princes and Nobles such, the World
such, or but the Christian Church such, what a taste of Heaven should we have
on earth, But should we not then be too loath to die? and too little difference
earth from heaven? But O that London, who know that I do not overpraise this
holy man, would but imitate his example!

II. I do it much for his Childrens use. Their Honor, their Comfort, but
especially their everlasting good. Will they ever forget the instructions, the
Love, and the life of such a Father?

III. I do it partly for the use of the Clergy and their Agents that have
judged such men as this, to be worthy of all the reproach and sufferings which
some Canons, and late Laws have laid on such: I write not to cast reproach back
upon them. But Reverend Fathers and brethren, as you believe a God, a Christ, a
Judgment and a Life to come, be think you whether such men as this should be
sined, or Excommunicated ipso sacto as your Canon does it? And when Christ has
promised that if they serve him they shall be where he is, and his Father will
honor them, dare you make your Church-doors too narrow to receive them? when
Dr. Heylin tells us how far Bishop Laud would have had it widened to receive
the Papists, if they would come in: Do not such men as this serve and follow
Christ? And are they yet excommunicate Schismatics if they will not serve and
follow you, in the things that neither Christ nor his Apostles commanded or
practiced? yea, which they forbid, (as I have proved in my first Plea and my
Treat of Episcopacy) I am in great hope that if you knew but the tenth part of
the now silenced Ministers, and prosecuted People, that I do, your consciences
would constrain you to publish your repentance, and petition King and
Parliament for better terms of Unity and Peace. For I will hope that most
silencers and afflicters do it more through ignorance and unacquantedness with
the men than in Diabolical malignity.

IV. And I have done this for my own use! To discharge my duty. To set before
me this pattern of Sincerity, Love, and Patience, for my reproof and imitation.
We were of the same year for age; and of the same judgment* and desire and aim;
But I have not attained to his degree of goodness and patience. Being not
unlikely to be exercised with some like afflictions, after a life of wonderful
mercy, and quickly to follow my departed Friend: I beg of God that he will not
try me beyond the strength which he will give me, but so increase my faith and
patience that I may finish my course with joy.

V. Lastly, I have written this for the comfort of all serious suffering
Believers. Christians, let us not think that we serve Christ for naught, or
that our labor for Holiness and Heaven is in vain? Nor let us faint when we
are tried and chastised. Labor and Sorrow will quickly have an end: Angels are
ready to convoy us home: How low soever you are here in your Bodies, Estates,
Employment, or Reputation, you have Christ's promise that his Father will honor
you! Look then to Jesus the Author and Perfecter of your Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame, lest you be
weary and faint in your minds; And comfort one one another with these words
[that we shall be ever with the Lord.]

Amen.
FINIS.

