THE JUDGMENT OF Non-conformists, OF THE INTEREST OF REASON, IN MATTERS OF
RELIGION.

IN WHICH It is proved against Make-bates, that both Conformists, and
Non-conformists, and all Parties of true Protestants are herein really agreed,
though unskilful Speakers differ in Words.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1676.

AMong the other Church-troubling Controversies of these times, we find it is
one, and not the least, How far Man's Reason has to do in matters of Religion:
And deep accusations we find brought against each other on this account; some
suspecting others of Socinianisme, as over-magnifying Reason, and others
insimulating such as they seem to differ from, as guilty of making Religion
seem unreasonable; and some (who go over the Hedge where it is low) do lay this
charge of unreasonableness, in special, on the Non-conformists.

We, who do verily believe that this scandalous Contention arises from Men's
unskilfulness in the Art of framing, and expressing the notions of that same
matter which they commonly hold, and that really not only Conformists, and
Non-conformists, but also all Protestant Parties are herein of one mind, though
some think otherwise, who neither understand their Brethren, nor are understood
themselves, do therefore take it, as Peacemakers, to be our duty to give our
Reasons of this our Judgment, that if it may be the Preachers of Truth, and
Peace may not tempt the People into unchristian disaffection, by persuading
them that we so widely differ, when really we are all, or generally agreed.

Qu. Whether understanding Charity can see any real difference between
Conformists, and Non-conformists, or any other Partiss of true Protestants,
about the interest and use of Reason in Religion; that is, about Gods Doctrine
of Faith, and his Laws for Men's Desires, and their Practice, Neg.

For the due handling of this, it is requisite that we first explain our words,
and then truly state the Question, and then prove the Negative; and lastly, add
some applicatory Consectaries.

I. By [ understanding Charity] we mean [a Person endued with Understanding,
and Charity so far as he uses them in this Judgment.

By [a Real difference] we mean not real misunderstanding of one another, or
real contending about words; but a difference in Judgment about the very
matter of Doctrine it self, when intelligibly opened, and each Party is
understood.

By [ Religion] we mean only that which is truly Divine, and not about what Man
may superadd, (though on the by we may speak somewhat of that;) and as the
Church has ever summed it up in the Sacramental Covenant, and explained the
parts of it according to the three summaries, the Creed, Lords Prayer, and
Christian Decalogue, so do we here mean. 1. The Articles of Faith. 2. The
matter of Holy Love, or Desire. 3. And of Practice.

By [ Conformists, and Non-conformists] we mean qua tales, whether this be any
part of the Controversies which denominate them; And ex abundante even Qui
tales, whether they that are Merely Non-conformists, differ from the
Conformists herein, the question not extending to Quakers, Seekers, Papists,
Antinomians, or any such Sect which are more than Mere Non-conformists.

By [ Protestants] we mean those that make Christianity as delivered in the
Scriptures, their Religion, protesting against the Corruptions, and Additions
of Popery; who are now commonly known by that Name, and distinguished unhappily
by their By-opinions, into Lutherans, Calvinists, and other Names.

1. We deny not that all Protestants differ greatly from the Socinians, who
reject the Doctrine of the Trinity, though found in Scripture, because they
think that it is against Reason, (though in that they err.)

2. We deny not that Protestants herein differ from Enthusiasts, or true
Fanatics, who pretend Revelations which Reason cannot prove to be what they
pretend them to be, and are contrary to true Reason, and Scripture it self; and
who think that the secret impulses of their diseased Fantasies, and Passions,
are such motions of Gods Spirit as Reason must give place to.

3. We deny not but Protestants differ from the great Fanaticisme of Popery;
which both builds Faith, and exercises Religion upon the most stupendous
Fiction of Miracles, against Reason, and Common sense, that ever (to our
knowledge) was entertained by any Sect, or Heresy in the World, viz. 1. In
their holding that a Pope, and his Council (called General) are the Infallible
Judges of the Churches Faith, from whose Authority it must be received, though
the Pope should be himself an ignorant Lad, or a Heretic, and most of the
Bishops in Council should not before understand the matter which they vote for:
As if God by Miracles taught the ignorant, and erroneous to vote contrary to
their former Opinions, or above their understanding; and their miraculous
Enthusiasm, and Infallibility were the Foundation of the Common Faith. As if
God would enable a Pope, and Council that understood not Greek, or Hebrew,
Infallibly to Translate the Bible out of Greek, and Hebrew into their Native
Tongues.

2. And they pretend that all the Priests in their Church (perhaps many score
thousands) can work Miracles at their pleasure, and do so in every Mass which
they Celebrate, even to the making Bread to be no Bread, and Wine to be no
Wine, nor any sensible Substance; and all the Senses of the World, that see,
taste, touch them to be utterly deceived; which is far greater Miracle-working
than ever Christ, or his Apostles wrought! And to the Belief of this, and this
renunciation of all common Sense, all Christians on pain of damnation must
submit; and Princes must exterminate those that will not, or else their
Dominions must be given to another by the Pope. We say not that Protestants do
either exalt Reason as the Socinians, or renounce it as either of these two
Sects of true Fanatics.

By [ Judging] we mean, 1. Discerning our selves. 2. Proving to others.

By [ Reason] We mean, I Ex part objecti; such evidence of Truth which humane
Reason may discern.

This is threefold, I. Evidence of the Thing it self, which is either, 1.
Sensible Evidence, as the very thing is objected to the Senses, and so as
Sensate represented to the Intellect. 2. Evidence immediately intelligible, by
which the thing it self is objected to the Intuition of the Mind; so some say,
with Ockam, that the Intellect knows its own Acts, and Spirits, see Spirits.
II. Evidence of the Medium, from whence, by Reason, we may infer the Verity of
the Thing. And this is, 1. Of an ordinary Natural Medium, (as a Natural Cause
is known by the Effects, and the Effects by the Cause: e. g. There is a Sun,
ergo there is Motion, Light, and Heat:] or [ There is Motion, Light, and Heat;
ergo there is Fire.] 2. Or of a Supernatural Medium, such as is Divine
Revelation by Vision, Inspiration, miraculous Attestation. III. There is
Evidence of Consequence, that the Conclusion certainly follows the Premises.
Of Reason, in these Senses we may have occasion to speak.

II. Ex part subjecti vel Agentis; And so Reason is taken, 1. For the
reasoning Faculty. 2. For the mental Exercise, or Act in the actual Reasoning
of the Mind. 3. For a Habit of Facility, and Promptitude in Reasoning. 4. For
expressive Reasoning by argumentation, or discourse, by Word, or Writing.

The reasoning Faculty is considered in Man, I. As in statu informato vel
instituto. II. In statu def^^mato seu destituto. III. As in statu reformato seu
restituto.

In the state of Created Integrity, the state of lapsed Pravity; and the state
of Sanctification, or Recovery.

I. In the state of Nature, or Innocence, Man's Reason was, 1. Sound in Faculty,
before its Acts. 2. Acted by degrees as Objects were presented to him: And so
as Christ himself increased in Wisdom, as to Acts, or Exercise (for his Infant
state was not capable of such Action as his Adult) so did Adam. 3. Habitually
more prompt to Act upon such Acting.

II. In the state of Sin, Reason was (and still is in the unregenerate,) 1.
Privatively blind, or undisposed to the right, and saving discerning of things
Spiritual, Holy, and Heavenly; partly through its own corruption, and partly by
the Wills unhappy inclination, which is the exercitij principium: And also
disposed (by both) to false judging, especially to practical error. 2. It is
actually ignorant, and erroneous, and prejudiced against saving Faith, and
spiritual Good, and holy Practice.

3. It is by Custom in such sinful Acts, habitually more, and more depraved,
in its Privative, and Positive Disposition.

III. Reason repaired is Illuminated by Gods Word and Spirit to, 1. Common. 2.
Special saving. 3. Special extraordinary Operations.

1. The Common are, 1. That Light, or Common Knowledge and Belief, which is
preparatory to saving Light. 2. That Light of edifying benefits, by which Men
are made useful to others.

2. The Light of special saving Grace is, 1. Initial in Vocation for the first
saving Faith, and Repentance. 2. Increased in Sanctification, by such a degree
as kindles in the Soul predominant Love. 3. More increased in Growth unto the
end.

All this is considered, 1. In the first Disposition. 2. In the Exercise. 3. In
the Habit.

3. The Extraordinary Illuminations are, by Prophetical Inspiration, Visions,
and Gifts of Infallibility proper to some few.

The perfection of all in Glory we may pretermit.

These things premised, the Question is not whether Socinians, Papists,
Antinomians, Quakers, etc. differ from us? nor whether any odd Person, or
Persons, called Protestants, have Ignorace enough to entangle them in an error
in this Point? nor whether any hasty Judges, that are not skilled in discussing
the ambiguity of words, or for want of well digested Studies, can neither
understand others, nor speak distinctly, and intelligibly themselves; or in
uncharitable Factious, passionate humor, are disposed to misunderstand their
Brethren, or to put a sinister Interpretation on their words; we say, it is not
whether such ignorant contenders do think that Men differ farther than they do?
nor whether any have used unmeet expressions justly blameable? nor whether
there are any that Write against, or accuse each other on this account, and
would make the World believe that we are of contrary minds? nor is it whether
our Reasons really differ about the sense of some Texts of Scripture, or Points
of Religion? nor is it whether Protestants differ about the extent of Humane
Authority, and the Obligation of their Wills, or Canons.

But the sense of the Question is, Whether it be a distance between Conformists
and Non-conformists, Lutherans and Calvinists, or any other by-named Parties of
Protestants; whether, and how far we must have, or give Reason for all our
Religion, or Exercise Reason in discerning it; and in propagating, and
defending it by Proof.

And we shall prove the Negative, I. By those Confessions of the several
Churches, and Parties, which notify their Judgments. In all the Corpus
Confessionum there is no Article on this Subject which is not commonly
consented to by the rest of the Protestant Churches. And as for the
Conformists, and Non-conformists, they consent to Subscribe to all the same
Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, (though they differ about some
other Subscriptions, Declarations, Covenants, or Promises of Conformity; and
some Oaths, and Modes of Discipline, and Worship.) Besides that, we all
Subscribe to the same Creed, and the same Canonical Scriptures. And either the
Point about the Interest of Reason in Religion is in the Creed, Bible, or
Articles of Religion, or not. If not, it is no part of our Religion, nor
necessary. If it be, then we Subscribe our agreement in it.

There is no Profession, no Writing of either Party, Conformists, or
Non-conformists, ( Consented to by the Party) which signifies any disagreement
in this Point, or contradiction of what both sides consent in. Let them that
will prove a difference, cite any such Book, or Profession of either Party, if
they can.

We deny not but some Non-conformists, and Conformists did cast out their
suspicions of two very Learned rational Men, Mr. Hales, and Mr. Chillingworth,
as if they had favored Socinianisme, because they so much used, and Ascribed
to Reason, in Judging of matters of Religion; And Knot the Jesuit would have
Chillingworth therefore taken to be a Socinian. But it was but particular Men,
and not a Party that was suspected: and it was but particular Men that did
suspect them: Dr. Heylins aspersion of Mr. Hales, was not the Churches
Judgment: And in all Parties there will be some suspicious uncharitable Men,
and some that will speak evil of what they understand not; and take it as a
near way to get the reputation of being Wise, and Orthodox, by accusing others
of Ignorance, and error, than by long, and diligent well ordered Studies.

Object. 1. But though they all Subscribe the same Bible, and Articles; they
all understand them not alike.

Ans. 1. No, nor any two Persons in the World; It is as probable that any two
Men have spoken none but the very same words, as that they have had none but
the very same thoughts. 2. Let any difference be shown, as to the Point in
question, And such as is not equally managed by Conformists against
Conformists, as by them against any particular Non-conformists.

Object. 2. You agree not whether the Reason of the Rulers, or Bishops may
make, and impose any Form of Churches, National, Patriarchal, or Provincial,
which Christ never made; or any new Offices, or Ceremonies of Worship.

Ans. 1. This is nothing to the Point in question, but of another thing. 2. We
are all agreed that circa sacra there are many undetermined Particulars, and
Circumstances, which some call Ceremonies; for which, Scripture gives only a
general Command, and Rule, (as, Let all be done decently, in order, to
edification, in Unity, etc.) which humane Reason (in Rulers where it is their
part, and in Consenters where it is left to consent) may, and must determine:
And that they that have Power de rebus extrinsecis circa sacra, may make humane
Offices for such humane Works, (as Door-keepers, Churchwardens, Magistrates,
to keep Church-peace, and Order, etc.) And if they will call any Lawful
Assemblies of Pastors, or orderly Associations, by the Name of (humane)
Churches, so they will but distinguish them from Churches of proper Divine
Institution, and take away none of those Rights from such as Christ has given
them in Scripture; we know no Party of Protestants that differ de re against
them, though many wish that the Name [ Churches] were not made common to those
of Divine, and of Humane Institution, lest it obscure the great difference of
the things named; and lest, as in the Papacy, Societies and Matters of Divine
Institution should be thought to stand in a direct Subordination to those of
Humane Institution; and the Churches which Christ has Instituted should be
thought to be but as Parishes to a County, Streets, or Houses to a City, Cities
to a Kingdom, mere similar parts of the Churches of Man's making; which conceit
is the strength of the whole Roman Kingdom, called a Church.

Object. 3. But some say that only the Spirit can assure us that the Scriptures
are the Word of God.

Ans. So we say all; not excluding, but including the Means and Evidence, and
Use of Reason, That is, 1. The Spirit in Christ, and his Apostles, and Prophets
has Imprinted Gods Image of Power, Wisdom, and Love on the Sacred Scriptures;
which is their intrinsic Evidence. 2. And the same Spirit by that Word does
Powerfully, Wisely, and Graciously Imprint an answerable Image on our Hearts.
3. And he helps us by this effect, and impulse, to discern that it is Gods
Word that did it; And gives us (as the new born Babe to his Milk) a discerning
of, and Appetite to this holy Word, as Connatural, or suitable to our Souls:
The Spirit gives us such Reasons for our Religion, as else we should not have;
and also helps our Reason actually to understand it; and also makes us
Habitually more Rational herein. And do not all agree in this?

Object. 4. But some say that the Scripture is known propria luce.

Ans. So say all, but not by that alone: Reason must discern the Divinity of
Scripture partly by the evident Impulses of Divinity which are in it, which are
its proper Light; and partly by extrinsick attestations, in the due use of the
means which God has appointed Reason to make use of,

II. Our second Proof of our Common Agreement shall be by an Induction of the
particular Points which we are all agreed in, where if the enumeration be
sufficient, our Proof will be clear. And if we seem to over-do, in naming more
than needs; it is to avoid the charge of an insufficient enumeration.

1. We are all agreed that all true Religion, objectively taken, is the effect
of Gods Wisdom; and, subjectively taken, also is the Gift of the Father of
Lights.

2. We are agreed, that as Gods Wisdom is the first efficient, so the Impress
of Divine Wisdom, by which it is eminently wise and reasonable, is its very
Constitutive Cause; its Form, and the proper Light, by which it is to be known.

3. We are agreed that objective Religion is to be received by Man's Reasonable
Intellect, and is, when so received, the light and guide, the advancement and
perfecting of our Reason. And the most Religious, are the most truly, and nobly
rational.

4. We are agreed that it has Intelligible evidence, which shows it to be of
God, and true. And that Man's Reason must by discerning this evidence, know its
Divinity and truth. Seeing nothing is an Object of the Intellect, but by
Intelligible evidence; as nothing is an Object of sight, but Light; and things
by Light, made visible.

5. And as our own receiving it, is by receiving the said evidence, and knowing
its Divinity, and truth thereby; so our Teaching it to others, and proving it
against Gainsayers by defense, must be by our manifesting the same evidence.

6. The Reason, or Intellect of Man in Innocence, was apt to understand both
the natural, and supernatural manifestations of Gods governing Will, and so to
be Actively Religious, and to increase herein by exercise, and Divine help.

7. The Reason of fallen Man before gracious Illumination, is still the same
essentially in the Faculty; but is dispositively depraved (called Blindness)
disposed to Judge carnally, falsely, and malignantly of things spiritual, and
holy; and undisposed to discern, savingly, the truth, and goodness of Religion.

8. There are found in all Mankind, at Age, some Natural notices, which are an
advantage to the Reception of Religion, and make Men more capable of it, than
otherwise they would be: And Grace gives Men usually a common sort of
external, aad internal Light, which is preparatory to that which is specially
saving.

9. The Christian Religion consisting of things partly naturally, and partly
supernaturally revealed; the natural part of it has its natural evidence
(either Rei ipsius, or Medij naturalis,) by which, without supernatural
Revelation, it may be known; but is not without Gods illuminating Grace,
effectually, and savingly known.

10. The natural part of Revelation, or objective Religion is in order of Time
before the supernatural part; and natural evidence and Religion is more common
than supernatural: We are Men before we are Christians in order of Nature at
least.

11. There is no Contradiction between the natural, and supernatural
Revelation, or parts of Religion; for God contradicts not himself. He
therefore that thinks that he finds a Contradiction, is deceived; and must
Correct the error of his own understanding, and not accuse the Word of God.

12. Things equally true are not equally evident, and revealed, and sure to us:
some things in Nature are much clearer than others; and some parts of Scripture
far more intelligible than some others, and so more evident to us.

13. Ceteris paribus, things sensible, and the Common Natural notices have
greater evidence to us; and are of easier belief than Prophetical Revelations:
But some supernatural Revelations have extrinsecally, and intrinsecally, more
ascertaining evidence than many Natural Revelations, or Verities; no small
Number of these are very obscure.

14. When the Understanding once discerns a thing to be a Divine Revelation,
it has therein a certain Medium, from which it may infer the thing revealed to
be true: All known Divine Revelations are so far ascertaining, as they are
known; For God cannot Lie: Divine Veracity is the formal Object of Divine
Belief.

15. If we doubt of the evidence of any Revelation, Natural, or Supernatural,
whether it be indeed Divine; we must hold that with the strongest affiance, or
belief, which has the clearest assuring evidence that it is Divine.

16. Prophets, and Inspired Seers had such Internal satisfying evidence,
(whether by Intuition, or abstract Species, or internal Sense) which no Man can
formally, and clearly conceive of, but he that has it; But the Reason of
others may know it by the effects, and concomitant, or consequent Proofs.

17. Those that heard the Voice, and saw the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles, had sensible evidence thereof: And those at distance of place, or
time that saw them not, may have certain infallible evidences of the Historical
truth, or report de facto that such things, indeed, were said, and done.

18. There are (as is aforesaid) Characters of Divine Authority in Religion,
and in the Sacred Scriptures; which are their Inherent evidence, or propria
Lux, even the Impress of Gods Power, Wisdom, and Love.

19. There are evident unimitable effects of the Christian Faith, which prove
it to be of God; even the Spirits sanctifying Work, on Man; which may, by those
that have it not, be partly discerned in the holy Lives of Believers;
especially in the Sanctity of the Church, that it should be holy, in Comparison
of the unholy World, (that is, all sound Believers which are the real spiritual
living Church;) for, if one Letter might be made without Reason by chance, yet
so cannot a Learned Book: And if an individual Christian might by chance be
holier than Infidels, yet so could not all true Believers. But he that has
this Sanctification, or Spirit in himself, has clearer, and more assuring
evidence; and those most that have the greatest degree of holiness: These all
have the Witness in themselves.

20. The Spirit of Christ thus sent from him, as his Agent, and Advocate in
Men's Souls, is the Author, both of Common preparatory, and of Special saving
Illumination, inlightening the Mind to understand the things of God; and (as is
aforesaid) giving the sanctified Will a new Relish to them, as congruous and
good: And this Knowledge, and Faith objectively, and subjectively is the gift
of God, or a Beam from Christ, the Light of the redeemed World.

But to some the same Spirit gives far greater measures of Knowledge and
Faith, than to others; and those are likest to receive most of that Grace, who
are most sincere, and diligent in the Study of Gods Word, and the use of all
other holy means; and not the idle, negligent presumers.

21. Neither corrupted, no, nor sound Reason can discern things without
Supernatural evidence, which Natural evidence does not declare: Therefore those
that never hear the Gospel cannot know the Mysteries of Christianity (without a
Miracle) though they may know much of God as merciful and just, by his Mercies,
and Government of the World.

22. The Spirit is not given to ordinary Christians (though it be to Prophets)
to bring them, from God, new Doctrines, or Laws; nor to make any supplements to
the Gospel already revealed, as if it was not sufficient in its kind; nor yet
to reveal the matter of Christ's Gospel, immediately, to the Intellect, or
fantasy within, by way of Inspiration, Visions, or Intuitions, without an
external Word, or Revelation; nor yet to cause them to work Miracles
themselves, But he is given to enable, dispose, and help us to understand,
believe, love, and practice the Doctrine, and Law, already, by the same Spirit
given to the Church, by sanctifying our Power, our Reason, and our Wills, by
holy Life, and Light, and Love. And as Christ is the Intercessor without us, by
whom we must receive all Mercies from God, and send up all our duties to God;
so his Spirit is the Intercessour within us, on Christ's part, as his Advocate,
and Witness, pleading his Cause against our unbelief, and other sin, and
working all Gods Graces in us; and on our part, teaching, inclining, and
quickening us in all the Prayers, and Praises which we send up to God, in the
Name of Christ.

Illuminating, and sanctifying, is not making us Prophets, or Apostles; nor
equal to them, as not being called to their Works.

23. We must use our best Reason in diligent Meditation, and Judgment, to
search the Works of God in Nature, to know which are the true Canonical
Scriptures, to discern true Copies, and Readings where the Copies differ, to
expound the Text, to Translate it truly, to discern the Order of sacred
Verities that are dispersed through all the Scriptures, to gather them into
Catechismes, and Professions of Faith, discerning things more necessary from
the less needful, and the more clear from the more obscure; to Compose our
Sermons, Prayers, and Praises of God, according to his Word: To gather just,
and certain Inferences from Scripture Assertions: To apply general Rules to
particular Cases, in matters of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and ordinary
Practice, prudently to discern those Duties, which are but generally commanded
in the Scripture, and left to be discerned by us, in particular, according to
determining Accidents, Circumstances, and Occurrences, which must be
considered, and compared. And when Parents, Magistrates, Pastors, Tutors, or
Masters, shall so determine of such particulars in the Government of their
Inferiors, which belong to their several Relations, or Offices to determine
of, according to Gods general Laws, or Rules, Inferiors must obey them in such
determinations; and in so doing, they do obey Gods General Laws, and obey God
consequentially, in obeying such Laws of his Officers as he authorizeth them to
make.

For we are all agreed, that there are some parts of Scripture which contain
more necessary Doctrine, than other parts; and some great Duties of Prime
necessity, which are the end of many lower Duties; and consequently, a Rule to
them as means, and as subordinate; and Actions otherwise Good, become Evil when
they cross these great final regulating Duties: such a Canon is the Interest of
the New Creature, and Unity therein, as to Circumcision, or Uncircumcision,
Gal. 5.6. and 6.15. And such a Canon is the Love, Peace, and Concord of
Christians, in so much as they have attained, while they seek after more, Phil,
3.16. such a Canon is Edification (and order) as to several Modes of Worship,
and Ministerial Acts, and Discipline, 1. Cor. 14.5.12.26. 2. Cor. 10.8. and
12.19. and 13.10. Ephesians. 4.16. And the right ordering of a Christian Conversation
does much consist in discerning by true Reason when circumstantiated Actions
are subservient, or cross to these final regulating ( Canonical) Duties, that
we may know whether pro hic and nunc, they are Duties, or Sins; Because
affirmative Precepts bind not, ad semper (though no Sin must at any time be
done) lesser Duties when inconsistent with the greater (at that time) are no
Duties, but Sins: And means are no means, when they lose their tendency to the
end, or are against it. So did Christ teach Men to difference between Tything
Mint, Anise, and Cumine, and the great things of the Law; and between the
least, and the great Commandments; and to judge of observing the Sabbath Rest,
and Conversing with Publicans, and Sinners, by this Rule, I will have mercy and
not Sacrifice, Mat. 9.13. and 12.7. And to leave our gift at the Altar, and go
first and be reconciled to our Brother, and then come and offer our gift, Mat.
5. And to cast first the Beam out of our own Eyes, before we take the Mote out
of our Brothers, Mat. 6. Thus to try circumstantiated Actions, by their ends,
and greater Canon-duties; and to try what Accidents do preponderate for the
time and place, is the great and hourly Work of Prudent Reason; and of
exceeding great use to our daily innocence, and peace.

24. The more the Understanding of a Christian discerns the Evidences, and
true Reasons of all things in Religion, the far greater advantage his Will has
for the Love of it, and fixed Resolution never to forsake it; and for
seriousness, and constancy in a holy self-denying Life; and for patience in
sufferings, and joyful hopes of Heavenly Glory: for Grace works on Man, as
Man; that is, as a Rational free Agent, whose Will must be guided by the light
of his Understanding. And he must needs be the lowest and loosest Christian,
that has least Knowledge, and Intellectual apprehension (explicit, or
implicit) why he is a Christian.

25. It is a great cause of the slight superficial Religion, and weakness of
all Grace which abounds among us, that too many taking the Essentials of their
Religion too much on the trust of those that educate them, or with whom they
live, do labor only to build upward on such an ill-laid Foundation; when ( as
Trees grow downward in the Roots as well as upward) they should be all their
days still growing downward in the confirmation of their Faith, and in the
clearer and more orderly discerning of their Fundamentals, and the Evidences of
them; It being an increased sight of Evidence of Truth, intensively, and
extensively (in depth and clearness of perception, as well as material
Evidences) which is indeed the true increase of Knowledge, and Belief: And the
ablest Christians should be (not questioning, but) as long as they live,
growing clearer, and stronger in the Knowledge of God, the Immortality of the
Soul, and reality of the future Life, and Mysteries of Redemption, and
Sanctification; where holy Reason will find the most necessary, great and
fruitful Work.

26. Objective Religion being the thing which Reason must discern, it is as
vain to ask, whether Religion, or Reason should be preferred, as to ask whether
we should, in seeing, prefer the Eye, or the Light, or the material Objects;
which must all Concur to make one Act? And they that ask, Whether Reason, and
Religion be contray? must know, 1. That the Faculty of Reason, as such, is no
more contrary to Religion, than the visive Faculty to the Light, or Object. 2.
That so far as Reason has any pravity in Disposition or Act, privative, or
positive, ignorance or error in the matters of Religion; so far it is contrary
to Religion. 3. That so far as Reason is sound in Act, and Habit, it is
agreeable to Religion. 4. Therefore the worse any Man's Understanding is, the
more it is against Religion. And not only the Learned, and Wisest* but also
the Holiest, and best, having but an imperfect Illumination in this Life, has
still some remnants, in him, of that which is contrary to Religion; and every
Man so far as his blindness, and pravity, is yet uncured. 5. But as to the
Objective parts themselves, it is said before, that none of them are contrary:
The Common Principles, or Notices of Nature, have nothing contrary to them in
the Scripture. There is nothing in the Doctrine of the Trinity, Incarnation, or
Resurrection, contrary to any Natural Verity; nor any thing which true
illuminated Reason, by true Divine Revelation, cannot prove.

27. The blessed in Glory, whose Intellects are perfected, will see, for ever,
such Reasons for all the parts of Religion; even the Trinity, Incarnation, and
Resurrection, as will delight them everlastingly, as seeing the admirable
Harmony of all the sacred Truths, and Works of God; and the transcendant
Wisdom of God manifested in all: And Christ, who is now both essentially in
himself, and o^jectively to Believers, the Wisdom of God will, as such, be
admired by Believers; as he is now by Principalities, and Powers in Heavenly
places, who know the manifold Wisdom of God by the Church, Ephesians. 3.9, 10. Even
that Misterious Wisdom of God which seems Foolishness to the Worldly Wisdom
of foolish Men, 1. Cor. 1, 2. And must be spiritually discerned.

28. As the Devils believe, and tremble, so it is probable that the Judge of
all the World will convince the wicked, and Infidels, at last, that it was a
Reasonable Gospel which they rejected, and a Reasonable Faith, and Service
which God required of them; and that they lived against Reason in their
unbelief, and sinning against God: For the Spirit does reprove the World of
sin, because they believed not in Christ, John, 16.8. And he that will come, in
flaming Fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and will punish them with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the Glory of his Power; and will
come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, in
that day, even because they believed, 2. These. 1.9, 10. Will sure convince Men,
that Faith was a reasonable, and Infidelity an unreasonable thing.

In all these particulars we have reason to believe that not only Conformists
and Non-conformists, but all true Protestants are agreed.

And they agree in the Renunciation of these contrary Opinions, (though we
cannot say that any Man living is so perfect, as to hold nothing that has some
remote Contrariety to the Truths which he does profess, not discerning the
Contrariety.)

I. They all reject the Infidels Opinions, who think that the Mysteries of
Christianity, and the Gospel are not to be believed, at least, as certain;
because Reason without supernatural Revelation cannot know them: or who hold
that the Gospel has no Evidence of certain truth.

II. They all reject their error, who take some part of Gods supernatural
Revelation to be false; and will judge what is true, and what is false, by the
Conjectures of their Reason, which ought to see the Truth and Concord of all:
And that supposing falsely a Contradiction, do set up one part of Gods own Word
against the rest.

III. They all reject their error, who will not believe the difficulties of
Faith, upon the Reason, or Proof of Gods Veracity, and Revelation; unless the
thing revealed be evident in it self, and may be proved by Natural Proof alone.

IV. They reject the proud conceits of those, who when they find passages in
Gods Word, which they cannot reconcile, or think not probable, are readier to
accuse, or suspect Gods Word, than their dark, and erring understandings.

V. We all reject their impudent error, who feign Miracles where there was
none, or put false Constructions on the Text, yea, on the Articles of Faith;
and charge their own errors by misunderstanding on Gods Word, even when those
errors are contrary to the common Notices of Nature, or the greatest,
clearest, and most evident Doctrines; and then tell Men that they must either
deny those great Doctrines, as cross to Gods Word, or else that both must be
believed, as of God, even the Canon Verities, and these Men's inconsistent
errors: And we reject their Method that will try many plain, great, certain
truths, and Texts, by such as are more rare, and more obscure, and of smaller
moment. Much more their scandalous abuses, who persuade Men that we can be no
surer of the truth of Christianity it self, than we are of every Lection,
Translation, or Exposition, when they are doubtful, various, or contrary; And
who tempt Men to Infidelity by obtruding their own Forgeries, and
Contradictions to be believed, as the Word of God, and of equal Verity with the
essentials of our Faith.

VI. We all reject their error, who make every Circumstance of Religion
unlawful, which has not a particular Command in Scripture; as if Reason might
not regulate such by the General Command; As if Reason might not without
express particular Precept, choose a Text, Method, Words, and Notes for
remembrance in Preaching; or might not Translate the Scriptures, or turn the
Psalms into Meter, and put Tunes on each; and many such things.

VII. We all reject the Fanatic, or Enhusiastical Opinion of them that pretend
a necessity of immediate inspiration, instead of Scriptures, to teach Men
inwardly, Doctrines which they never outwardly heard, or more than is before
revealed in the Word; And who thus equal their Revelations to those of the
Apostles, or feign this Immediate Light, or Revelation to be the chief Rule to
all Men of their Religion; As if objectively there wereas many Religions in the
World, as there are Men of different degrees of Light within! that is* as there
are Men. And that pretend that none are farther bound to believe the Gospel
than they either see Miracles themselves to confirm it, or else have this
immediate Inspiration before described, to attest it.

VIII. We all agree in rejecting the fore-described Papal Fanatiticisme, which
makes the Pope and Council, though never so ignorant, or erroneous, to be
secured of the gift of Infallibility, as if it were by Miracle, in judging of
that which their Reasons are unmeet for, and they do not understand; especially
their foresaid feigned World of Miracles by the (sottishest) Priests in
Transubstantiation. And especially their persecuting all that are not as
unreasonable renouncers of common Sense and Reason, and deposing Temporal Lords
that will not exterminate them. And their requiring all Christians to resolve
their Faith into the Authority of this Fanatic Church, as being bound to take
that, and only that, for the Articles of their Faith, and Word of God, which
they assert to be so; and as needing no other Proof than the Pope, and his
Councils assertion. (And on whose Authority then does the Pope, and Council,
themselves believe it?)

IX. All Protestants disclaim that inhumane, atheistical assertion, that in
Religion, Inferiors must believe all that their Superiors assert, and do all
that they shall command, and avoid all that they shall forbid them, without
using their own Reason to discern judicio privato whether it be agreeable, or
contrary to the Laws of God: As if all Subjects must be of the Sovereigns
Religion, be it Heathen, Mohammedan, Jewish, or Christian, Popish, Socinian, or
what ever: Or as if Man were above God, from whom he receives all his power,
and might Command Men to blaspheme him, or sin against him; or forbid all to
confess, and worship him; and God must ask Men leave whether he shall be God,
or be obeyed, or worshipped! And as if it were in the Rulers power whether any
of the Subjects shall be Religious, or be saved? or as if Subjects were not
reasonable Creatures, or could obey without the use of Reason discerning whom*
and how far to obey? If they have not a judicium discretionis how shall they
know their King whom they must obey, honor, and protect, from an Usurper, or
Traitor, whom they must disown, and oppose.

X. And we hope all true Protestants are agrreed against that impious Opinion,
that if an Inferior be uncertain, or doubtful, whether the matter be Lawful,
or Sinful, he must do it if his Governor Command it, and forbear it if his
Governor forbid it; because an uncertainty must give place to a certainty: and
we are certain that the Ruler is to be obeyed, but not that the thing forbidden
is duty, nor that the thing commanded is sin. 1. For we suppose all agreed that
it must go with a caeteris paribus. 2. And that we are certain that no Ruler
can oblige us to sin; and therefore we are not certain that he is to be obeyed,
where we fear, upon good reason, that it is sin which he Commands; For if I
am justly fearful that it is sin that is Commanded, I must be fearful that it
is sin to obey by sinning: And to be certain that I should obey, and fearful
that I sin in obeying, are contradictory. 3. And we doubt not but all
Protestants are agreed, that if all the Subjects (or any) can but be ignorant
enough as to be uncertain whether there be a God, a Christ, or a Life to come;
or that it is a duty to relieve the Poor, etc. it will not therefore, by any
Man's prohibition, cease to be all their duty to love, or obey God, or worship
him, or to relieve the Poor? Or if Men be so sottish as to be uncertain whether
Blasphemies, Idolatry, Persecution, Murder, Adultery, Perjury, etc. be sins, we
all agree that no Man's Command can make it the duty of those uncertain Persons
to commit them, nor make them to be no sin; (whatever any Man, of violence, may
say to the contrary, in passion.)

We conclude upon this Induction, that till some omitted instance be produced,
this Enumeration of our Agreements will prove that, not only, Conformists, and
Non-conformists, but all true Protestants are agreed really of the Interest,
and use of Reason in matters of Faith, or of Religion.

Consectaries.
I. HEnce we see then that Divines have great cause to take heed of setting
Christians together by the Ears, by feigned differences where there are none;
and so destroying Love and Concord, and tempting the ignorant to hate and
falsely accuse their Brethren, to the trouble of the Church, and the hazard of
their Salvation: And therefore that while Men have not attained a through
acquaintance with the matter, and in discussing ambiguities of Speech, and
distinguishing Verbal Controversies, from real, if they forbear not their
Censures, and public Controversies, till they attain a more ripe distinct
understanding, they may greatly serve Satan, while they think that they are
serving Christ. And how little the Church is beholden to those Men, that either
through factious worldly designs, or ignorant Zeal against error, have made the
World believe by Pulpit invectives and voluminous Controversies, that
Christians differ really, when it is but verbally, experience might have
satisfied us long ere this.

II. Those that have been guilty of such feigning of difficulties, and wronging
the Church, should make repairation by open repentance, and all Christians
should study the difference between matter and expressive art, and words; and
be desirous and skilful for the narrowing of differences, as others are in
widening them.

We are not in Love with the Spirit and Practice of Incendiaries, Love-killers,
or Dividers: We find too many contending in this case, as if they thought the
difference real; but not any Party against another, (many Conformists, as well
as Non-conformists, being jealous of giving too much to humane Reason.) But we
suppose we have fully proved a real Concord among us all, though unskilful,
word-warriours discern it not. If any will be a dissenter, he must be a
stragler from all the Protestant Churches. His Majesty in his Declaration of
Ecclesiastical Affairs expressed his displeasure of such as pretended that the
Church-doctrine needed reformation, as if in Doctrine we were not agreed.
Seeing we all Subscribe the same Scripture, and Articles of Religion, and all
agree in the twenty eight Conclusions, and ten Rejections before expressed; if
any yet proceed in their Accusations, we desire them, for our Conviction, to
state the Case in which, they suppose, the difference is, and prove their
Charge; and to remember what it is to strive about words, and what have been,
and yet are, the effects; and that the Wisdom from above is first pure, then
peaceable, and without partiallity and hypocrisy; and that the Fruit of
Righteousness is sown in peace, and that blessed are the peacemakers, for
theirs is the Kingdom of God.

We, whose Names are Subscribed, (not undertaking that no Individual Person is
otherwise minded,) do, our selves, believe the real Concord of Protestants, as
it is here expressed.

Th. Manton, W. Bates, Tho. Case, Gabriel Sangar, Rich. Baxter, Math.
Pemberton, Mat. Silvester, Henry Hurst, Roger Morice, Edw. Lawrence, Benjam.
Agas, James Bedford, Sam. Fairclough, John Turner, Joseph Read.


ERRATA.
PAge, 5. line last, for distance, read difference. P. 5. l. penult. for
theirs, r. Men. P. 6. l. penult. for near, r. nearer. P. 6. l. 23. for
Impulses, r. Impresses. l. 13. r. Impress. P. 11. l. 26. for to, r. of. P. 12.
l. 5. for be, r. was..

FINIS.

