HOW FAR HOLINESS IS THE DESIGN OF CHRISTIANITY.

Where the Nature of Holiness and Morality is opened, and the Doctrine of
Justification, Imputation of Sin and Righteousness, etc. partly cleared, and
Vindicated from Abuse.

In certain Propositions, returned to an unknown Person, referring to Mr.
Fowlers TREATISE on this SUBJECT.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for NEVILL SIMONS, at the three Crowns at Holborn Conduit.
1671.

Qu. Whether Holiness be the only Design of Christianity?
SIR,
THe Sum of your Letter is, [That Mr. Fowler and many others of late, by crying
up Holiness as the Only Design of Christianity, do 1. give us a description of
such a Holiness as is but the mere morality of a Heathen, [A sound complexion
of soul, etc.] 2. And that they greatly obscure or drown the whole Doctrine of
our Justification, and Adoption, and of Christ's Satisfaction and imputed
Righteousness; and make the Glory of this to be none of the Design of
Christianity. 3. That, by this they tempt men, that can but imagine that
Seneca, Antonine, Epictetus, Plutarck or Cicero do give as wise and wholesome
Precepts of Virtue and good living as Christ, to think as highly of them as of
Christ. 4. That hence they secretly reproach both the Imposers of Conformity,
and the Non-conformists, and magnify the stretching conscience of the Passive
Latitudinarian Conformist as the only wise man that cares for none of these
little things: And that they secretly undermine all Instituted Ordinances. 5.
That because my Aphorisms and other Writings have had some hand in breeding
such opinions, I am doubly guilty in being silent now they spread and prosper.]
This being the sum of your Complaint, I shall answer to all this in that manner
as the nature of the thing requires.

In General, I must tell you, that I am responsible for no man's Writings but my
own; Neither shall you hereby tempt me to become an Aristarchus, and arrogant
Censurer of other men's. This is all that I need to say of the Book you mention,
that it is of very much worth and use, to call men more seriously to consider
of the Design of man's Redemption, and of the nature of true Religion and
Felicity: And though I will not defend every word in my own writings, much less
in other men's, when I am not concerned, yet I may say that I had rather
persuade the Licencious of this age to the careful reading of that Book, than
turn it into matter of strife.

But it is only my own judgment about the things in question which you can
reasonably expect; which I think the brevity requisite in a Letter directs me
to give you in certain self-evidencing coherent Propositions.

Prop. 1. GOD is the Beginning, the Ruler and the End of all: Of him, and
through him, and to him are all things.

2. The word [ Design] does signify, sometime the act of Intention; sometime
the End intended. In the Question it must needs signify the later,: Therefore
instead of it I shall henceforth use that common word.

3. By the End of Christianity I doubt not is meant, 1. The End of God and our
Redeemer in the framing and imposing Christianity on mankind. 2. The end which
man is bound to intend in receiving and using Christianity. (These two are
called Finis operantis.) 3. And the end to which the frame of the Christian
Religion is adapted (which is called Finis operis.)

4. Holiness in Creatures, is their separation from common uses unto God: Omne
sanctum Deo sanctum est.

5. Holiness in Rational free-agents, is such a separation to God, as is
agreeable to their Natures.

6. Holiness is to be described with distinct respects. 1. To the subject, 2.
To the object. And 1. s to the whole subject, 2. as to the distinct faculties.

7. Holiness in the whole subject is 1. Active, 2. Dispositive or Habitual. 3.
Relative: or is In our Acts, Habits and Relations.

8. Active Holiness is our Active Dedication, devotion or adherence unto God,
begun in our Conversion to him, and Christian Covenant with him, and exercised
after in the practice of our lives.

9. Habitual Holiness, is that fixed Inclination or Disposition of the soul, by
which it is fitted to perform the aforesaid Active adherence and devotion with
strength, facility, and constancy.

10. Relative Holiness is the Relation of Man (or Angel) thus actively and
dispositively devoted to God: which is particularly to be considered with the
Object.

11. Besides the commoner Holiness of all Saints, there is also an
Office-Holiness of Magistrates (though some deny it) and of Christ's Ministers:
which contains their Active Dedication to their proper work, their
Dispositive Aptitude for it, and their Relation to God in it. And accordingly
the anointing to such office, and the giving of the Holy Ghost for its
performance, signify somewhat else than the common sanctification of all
Saints. As the work to which they are anointed is more.

12. Holiness in respect of the distinct faculties is, 1. In the vital and
executive Power (for such a distinct faculty there is) and then it is called
Spiritual Quickening, Life, and Strength. 2. In the Understanding, where it is
called Spiritual Illumination or Light, (Knowledge and faith.) 3. In the will,
where it is called, Spiritual Love, and Holiness in an eminent narrower sense.

13. Holiness is not to be described or understood without its proper Object,
which does essentially Constitute it. Its no true description which omitteth it.

14. The Object of Holiness, Primary, Immediate and proper is GOD himself. The
secondary and remoter Object, is the Impressions, Image or Glory of God in his
works.

15. GOD is the object and terminus of our Holiness, as in his Divine
Per^ections, so in his three grand Relations, as he is our Efficient, Dirigen^
and Finial Cause; And in his three great Relations to his Intellectual
Creatures, as he is our Owner our Ruler, and our Lover or Benefactor, All
comprised in the word [ Father:] And this on the Fundamental Relation and work,
of his being our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier.

16. Our Holiness therefore is our answerable threefold Relation to God, that
we be, sui, subditi, amatores, his Own, his Subjects and his Lovers; All
comprehended in the word [ Children] that we be peculiarly the children of God.

17. From all this the true description of Holiness is obvious and sure, viz.
that it is the Active Habitual and consequently relative, Separation,
Dedication, and Devotion, of Intellectual free-agents, by Life, Light and Love,
to God our Father as his Children; or to God our Absolute Owner, Ruler and
Benefactor, our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, as his own peculiars, his
Subjects and his Lovers.

18. Though every one that is Holy has not this distinct and orderly
conception of the nature of Holiness, yet every one that is Holy, has really
all this in himself. And its pity that so useful a part of knowledge as is that
of the pourtraicture of the new Creature, or the Image of God on man, should
not be found in all that have the thing. Though it is to be no more wondered at,
than that Men who have Intellects, and Wills, and Vital Power, are so much
perplexed with difficulties and disputes about the nature of them, as the
greatest Philosophers are.

19. The secondary Objects of our Holiness ( Active and dispositive,) being
Gods Image and Appearance in all his works, it is this that is often called [
His Glory,] that is, as his Glory is made man's object and his end; even the
glorious communication, and reflections, and appearance of God in his
perfections, on our selves and on all his works (and not only the praise that
we give him for them, by our thoughts or words..)

20. As more or less of God is found in any thing or person, so we are more or
less to Love and Honor them, because we do it for God appearing in them.

21. There are not only different degrees therefore, but also different sorts
of Love and Honor due to different Things and Persons, as God has
communicated different gifts to them. (As Virtue, Office, Magistracy, Ministry,
Parentage, etc.)

22. When any of these is Loved and Honored truly for Gods Image or Glory
appearing in them, it is ultimately GOD himself that is Loved and Honored in
and through them: And so even this Love of God appearing in his Creatures
(animate or inanimate, intellectual, or his Word and Ordinances) is a Holy
Love; when as the Love of all the same things, on another account, and not as
God is glorious and beloved in them, is but a common and unholy Love.

23. Accordingly it is a real secondary part of our Holiness, to Love our
neighbor as our selves, for that of God which equally appears in him; and to
do justly unto all, and to Love our selves on the same account, and to keep our
selves in temperance, chastity, sobriety, etc. And so the duties of the second
Table, are a secondary Holiness, as they are chained to the first, by the
relation that the Creature has to God, and as God is the Beginning and End in
all; that is, 1. As all things are of Him; And as he is the Maker and Owner of
us and them. 2. As all things are Through Him, and as he is the Ruler of Man,
and commands him this duty. 3. As all things are To Him; and as he is the End
of us and all things; and thus all things are said to be sanctified to
Believers.

24. So also when Parents, Magistrates and Pastors, are Loved, Honored and
Obeyed in their pure subordination to God, ( viz. 1. As they have their Power
and Office from God. 2. And as this is commanded us by God. 3. And as they
Honor God, and as our duty honors or glorifieth Him, and as he is pleased
in it) this also is a secondary Part of our Holiness: But when they are
honored and obeyed, merely for fear, or for our own ends, or on any humane
account, not subordinate and referred as a means to the glory and pleasing of
God, it is a common and unholy Honor and Obedience.

25. As all mankind are falln by him, from God to themselves and other
Creatures, so Holiness is their contrary adherence to God upon their return.
And so when we say all the world is distinguished into two sorts, the Unholy
and the Holy, or the Ungodly and the Godly, we mean that one part adhere to
carnal self and creatures as serviceable to carnal self, and the other part are
converted from self to God, and use the Creatures as a means to God, as he is
their End.

26. The word Morality is made ambiguous by the loose and various use of men,
not used to any accurateness of speech: But the first, famous and most notable
acception of the word, is to signify all Virtue and Vice, or conformity and
disconformity to the ruling Will or Law of God; as Ethics or Morals as
distinct from Physics, and other Sciences. And in this usual sense, All things
commanded by God are directly, and all things forbidden, reductively, the parts
of Morality: That is all Moral Good and Evil: and so faith in Christ is a great
part of our true Morality. And they that will needs take the word in any
narrower private sense, prepare for quarrels; and are obliged to explain
themselves, before they censure others or dispute about an ambiguous word.

27. The sum of Holiness and Morality (which is all one) is, the Love of God as
God (including absolute Resignation and Subjection,) and the Love of man and
all things for God appearing in them, and served by them.

28. If either Heathens or wicked nominal Christians do take Holiness or
Morality to be only the Love of our selves, and our neighbors, and a
disposition of mind, and course of life, in which we live orderly, justly and
charitably to all, and soberly to our own minds and bodies, and all this only
for the maintaining of the temporal prosperity of our selves and others, or for
the meriting of a prosperity in the life to come; not at all referring all this
to GOD, as the Beginning, the Guide and the ultimate End of all; It is but
Analogically called either Holiness or Morality, and not in a proper or
univocal sense; because the End is left out which must give being to all true
Holiness and Morality. (Of which see my Agreement with Dr. Barlow in my small
Tractate of saving Faith.)

29. The meaning of those Divines of my acquaintance, that speak against
preaching mere morality, is indeed against these that preach no morality, but
the Ethics or analogical Morality of Atheists, who leave out the End; or else
a Piece of Morality, which we call the Natural part, leaving out Christianity
as if that were no part of Holiness or Morality: or treat lightly and loosly of
it, as if it were a ceremony or thing indifferent, as needless if not
troublesome to the world, as their things called Indifferent are. And what
Christian can excuse that sort of preaching.

30. As elsewhere I have often said, we must carefully distinguish between the
Primitive or Primary and Natural part of Holiness; which is GODLINESS or our
LOVE to God as such; and the mediate remedying, subservient Part, which is
Faith in Christ, or Christianity as such. The first is as our Health, the
second as our Medicine.

31. This distinction is it which is intended by the Apostles, when they so
often tell us, that we are sanctified or receive the spirit of holiness, by
believing in Christ; Faith kindling Love, and Love kindled by Faith, being the
two parts, and whole of our Religion.

32. Gods only End in this and all his works, (so far as he may be said to
intend an end) is ultimately Himself (for he can have no other ultimate end.)

33. When we say GOD is his own End, we mean not that his Essence or Existence,
is his End (for of that there cannot be a means:) But formally it is the
fulfilling and complacency of his Will. For his Will is the Beginning and End
of all things caused by him.

34. Materially Gods highest end (or the summary of all means) in order to this
complacency of his will, which is the formal ultimate End, is his Glory; that
is, The foresaid glorious impress or appearance of himself communicated to his
Creatures, and found in his works. And this is not only the Image or Glory of
his Holiness, (though that be the most eminent part) but also of his
Omnipotence and Omniscience: (unless any will take the the word [Holiness] in
God so largely as to comprehend all his perfections.)

35. And here his Glory resplendent in the universe (as comprehending Christ
and the whole Creation) being the Total, comprehending all the parts, must
needs have the pre-eminence before each part.

36. And among the Parts the Glory of God shining forth in the whole heavenly
Society (Christ, Angels and Men) must needs have the pre-eminence.

37. And if you come down to Individuals, his Glory shining in the Person of
Christ is greater (and so nearest to the ultimate end) than his Glory in Angels
or Men: because Christ in his created nature is the Best and Highest of Gods
works; And therefore as God is more glorified in the Sun, than in a Star, so is
he more glorified in Christ, than in any Man or Angel.

38. Gods Wisdom, Love and Power, were wonderfully glorious in the person of
Christ, and in all his works performed for our Redemption, when he was on
Earth; much more in his Person and Intercession in the Heavens.

39. And as to the Effects of Redemption upon Man, the Glory of Gods Wisdom,
Love, and Holiness, Justice and Mercy, do shine forth wonderfully in our Union
with Christ, and Membership of his Political Body, in our free Pardon and
Justification, Reconciliation and Adoption, through the Sacrifice, Merit, and
Intercession of Christ, and not in our Sanctification only.

40. The same I may say of all Gods mercies, which as immediate demonstrations
of his Goodness do glorify him; and also of his judgments now, and of the
great and glorious final judgment, in which Gods Wisdom and Goodness, Truth,
Justice and Mercy will be immediately glorified, and not only as the judgment
makes man Holy, nor only as it declares us to be so.

41. The Holiness of God is wonderfully glorified in that he will have no
immediate Communion with any soul that is defiled with the smallest sin; But
after they have once sinned, and till they are perfected, be they never so
sincerely Holy, their whole Communion with him (as to receiving from him, and
Returning to him) must be only by a Mediator that has no sin. All mercy must
be given by him, (ev^n the spirit it self) and all our sacrifices and duty
offered to God by him. Only the sinless can have immediate Communion with God,
at least as to moral Communication (For of Physical I will not here dispute.)

42. The Wisdom, and Goodness of God are wonderfully glorified, in providing
this incomprehensible way of our Redemption, that by it Justice and Holiness
may be as fully glorified, the Truth of God vindicated, the Honor and
Authority of the Law and Lawgiver preserved, and sin disgraced and confounded,
by the Sacrifice, Merit and Intercession of Christ, as if all sinners
themselves had been condemned. (All which and much more Mr. Truman in his Great
Propitiation has fullier opened, than I can now stay to do, and therefore to
him I must refer you.)

43. In this Aptitude of it to attain these ends of God our Ruler and
Benefactor, better than man's damnation could have done, consists the
satisfactoriness and meritoriousness of the Death or Sacrifice of Christ, and
not in the Identity in kind, or in the equal proportion of the Degree of
Christ's sufferings, as compared with that which man deserved.

44. By all this it is evident, that our Personal Holiness is not the only end
(or design) of God in man's Redemption, nor in instituting the Christian
Religion. But if God must be said to have no End, which is also a means, (but
only the ultimate End, the complacency of his blessed will, which is no means,
but all are means to it) then our Holiness is none of Gods end, but one means
to it. But if the means themselves, as the end of lower means, may be called
Gods End, after the manner of imperfect man, than our Holiness is one of his
inferior ends, among many others; It being one Part of that universal frame, in
which conjoined his Glory most appears, in which his blessed will takes
complacency.

45. And all this being so evident to all that receive the Christian faith,
when this Learned worthy Man, and such others, do say that Holiness is the only
Design of the Promises, etc. you mud not interpret them too severely, nor
suppose them to speak properly or accurately; but [ only] is an hyperbolical
expression, (as many use the word Infinite as an attribute of created things,
instead of Great,) Doubtless he intended it not as exclusive of all other ends
(either of God or Man,) And the mode of the age having turned accurate
School-language, into figurative and such as Rhetoricians use, may teach you to
expect some such, even in the severest sort of Writers.

46. But though it be not true that our Holiness is the only End or design of
the Promises, or of Christianity, it is true that it is the end of all our
Christianity, that is one of its very great and noble ends.

47. The same Graces or Gifts of God to man do usually circularly promote each
other, and so each is as to other, both an end and means in several instances
and respects. See what I have said in my Treatise of the Life of Faith, to the
question, Whether the Precept be for the Promise, or the Promise for the
Precept? Whether the Reward be the end of Obedience, or Obedience the end of
the Reward? page 237.

48. When we say that Holiness is the end of Christianity or faith in Christ,
we take Holiness narrowly for that Primary and most immediate part of Holiness,
which is our Resignation, Subjection and Love to God as God; And not so largely
as to include our faith in Christ it self. And we take not Christianity for the
whole Christian Religion, but for the remedying part, or faith in Christ as
such. Otherwise we could but say that the remedying part of our Religion or
Holiness, is the means to the Primary part which is its end. When we understand
each other, let us not needlessly quarrel about words.

49. If any say too much in making our Holiness Gods only End, it ill beseems
those to be their censurers, who have tempted them to it, by erring more on the
contrary extreme. And it is not to be denied or hid, that more than downright
Antinomians, have so ill expounded the points of Christ's suretiship, and of the
Imputation of our sin to him, and of the Imputation of his Righteousness to us,
as has proved the great occasion of some men's running into the contrary
error; yea, and as would exclude all pardon of sin, and all true Religion, had
their notions been practically and prevalently held. But their opinions are
confuted by so many ( Olevian, Ursine, Piscator, Paraeus, Wendeline, Camero,
and many other Foreigners; and by Wotton, Gataker, and others at home; and
plainliest in Mr. Trumans foresaid Treatise, Mr. Bradshaw of Justif. and Mr.
Hotchkis of Pardon, and Le Blank in his Theses) that I will not here stay to
deal with those Points. And it is not an easy or a common thing, for men that
write against any dangerous error and extreme, to keep up large impartial
thoughts, and see the danger on the contrary side; For man's mind is limited
and narrow, and cannot think with equal seriousness and clearness of many
things at once. And the wisest man alive, when he is earnestly pleading against
any error, is in great danger of forgetting what is on the other side the way,
and of thinking so eagerly what to say against the opinion he opposes, as to
forget both what may be said for it, and what worse his own arguings may infer.

50. Nothing is more sure in Christianity, than that Christ came into the world
to seek and to save that which was lost; and to bring home straying prodigals
to God, and to destroy the works of the Flesh and Devil; and to bring man back
to the love and obedience of his Maker, and to cure him of his worldly love.
And so that Holiness or the love of God, is the end of our Redemption, and our
Faith.

51. It is most certainly that he is the best man that has the least need of
pardon of sin, that is, that is most Holy and least sinful; And that all men
must rather desire to be kept from sin, (and pardoned when they do sin) then to
sin and then be pardoned: nor may we desire Pardon alone, if we could have it.
So that we are pardoned what is past, that Love may make us sin so no more; and
Justification is an antecedent means to our fuller Holiness and obedience to
God (which I have largely opened in my Confession of faith.)

52. It is certain that Justification and Sanctification go on hand in hand
together (of which see Mr. George Hopkins, Salvation from sin;) And that it is
a notorious error of such as say that Justification is perfect as soon as it
begins (though it be true that all sin is then forgiven.)

53. And it is certain that Sanctification as it is the work of God, is an
executive part, or one part of the executive pardon of our sins; Because it is
the taking off of a very great penalty, which is the privation of the spirit of
grace.

54. Nothing is more injurious to Christ than to feign that he is a patron of
sin, or came to excuse men by free justification from obedience to their
Creators law of nature, or to make sin less odious to mankind: seeing he dyed
to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works.

55. And it is an intolerable blasphemy against God, to imagine that Christ
came to make the Divine nature more friendly or reconcilable to sin, or to
love complacencially an ungodly person as if he were godly, as being such by
the imputation of Christ's righteousness to him, and to repute any man to be
what he is not; to take a wicked man for a Saint, because that Christ was holy
for him: what ever malicious Papists say, the Protestants abhor such doctrine.

56. And as far are we from believing that Christ was a sinner, or that God
ever supposed him to be a sinner, or hated or punished him as a sinner: or that
ever our sin did really become his sin, or that God reputed it so to have been.
For no false judgment can belong to God.

57. But we believe that Christ dyed for our sins, as a sacrifice, ransom,
propitiation, atonement. And that his own voluntary sponsion and his Fathers
will were his obligation; and that our sins were the occasion, and the evil to
be done away; And that (for the holy ends forementioned) he suffered for our
sakes and in our stead, such a kind and measure of suffering, as was fit to
attain the ends of our Creator, better than our damnation could have done. And
thus far our sins may be said to be imputed to him, in that he dyed for them;
Though properly he undertook the punishment only; but never the sin it self:
His nature and holy will abhorring such an undertaking. The Reatus facti, or
Reatus culpae were never upon Christ; nor the primary proper Reatus ad poenam;
but only an improper assumed Reatus ad poenam, or obligation to punishment for
our sins. Nor can an Accident remove from one subject to another, but its
removing is its perishing.

58. And though we believe not that God does judge us to have done all the
righteousness that Christ did, nor to have possessed the same individual
Righteousness as Christ had (for God never erreth) nor accounts us as
Righteous as Christ himself; nor yet uses us in all respects as he would have
done, if we had been as righteous as Christ himself; nor do we think it a thing
possible that the same individual righteousness that was in Christ (being an
accident) can be in it self and really given to us, and made ours; Yet do we
believe that his Habitual perfection, with his Active Righteousness and his
Sacrifice or Sufferings, all set together, and advanced in value, by their
conjunction with his Divine Righteousness, were the true meritorious procuring
cause of our pardon, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification and Salvation. Not
one part imputed to this effect, and another to that; but all thus making up
one meritorious cause of all these effects; even of the Covenant and all its
benefits. And thus Christ's Righteousness is imputed and given to us; not
immediately in it self, but in the effects and fruits: As a Ransom is said to
be given to a Captive, because it is given for him; though strictly the Ransom
is given to another, and only the fruits of it to him.

59. Those ignorant, self conceited contentious teachers, that seek the
reputation of Orthodox zeal in the things which they never understood, and
instead of clear apprehending sound Scripture-doctrine, and plain expounding it
to the Church, do take on trust and for company, false or insignificant
confounding notions, and proudly make them the instruments of their furious
censures and revilings, and of dividing the Church by raising slanders against
those that presume to be wiser than they; and so by backbiting tell their
hearers, how erroneous and dangerous this and that man's doctrine is, because
they never had the wisdom, study and patience to understand it; such I say are
the men that in all ages have been the firebrands in the Church, and zealously
promoted Christ's Kingdom by dividing it, and will hardly ever have peace here
themselves, nor endure their brethrens or the Churches peace.

60. It is not possible for God to hate a holy soul, that loves him as God,
and bears his holy Image.

61. Yet is his Holiness no satisfaction to Gods Justice, for the sins of his
unholy state, or for his imperfections.

62. If you ask, what then would God have done with one thus converted, if he
had no Savior, to ransom him from Justice for his sin? I answer; it is a
supposition that is not to be put; Because no man is converted and sanctified
that has not a Savior, and the Pardon of his sins, For none but Christ could
first Merit, and then Give, the Spirit of sanctification which we had lost; and
so without Christ and his Spirit we should have been equally unsanctified and
unpardoned.

63. It is vain therefore to dream that Cicero or Seneca, Augustine or
Chrysostom, Luther or Calvin, are as much Saviors as Christ, so far as their
doctrine makes men holy: For neither Philosophers nor Divines preach any good
doctrine, but what Christ as the Mediator and Light of the world, did some way
or other communicate to them: so that their doctrine that is good, is not their
own but his, (even theirs that know him not.) It is not they but He, that
merited all grace, and that preserved the sinning world from being used as it
deserved, and that ascending up on high gave gifts (both common and special)
unto men. Their light is as the Moons derived from the Sun; Which of them but
Christ, has purchased and given a Covenant of Grace to the condemned world?
And which of them but Christ, sends forth with their doctrine, a Quickening,
Illuminating and sanctifying Spirit, to overcome the Devil, the World and the
Flesh?

64. While all sober Divines thus plead for Holiness, and censure one another
doctrines as unholy and countenancing sin, it plainly shows that they are
very much at unity in the main; but that they have not the skill to word and
methodize their notions rightly, and to make all fall right with the ends and
main matter which they are agreed in. And when we hear men accuse each other of
unholy, and sinful opinions and practices, though we must hate the ignorance,
pride and uncharitableness which is in it, yet it is a comfort to us, to hear
and read that they all agree to cry down sin in the general and to disgrace it;
and that they all bear so conjunct a testimony for the excellency and necessity
of Holiness; what hope is there then that if we could set all our tacklings
together, and see truths fall right in their several places, we might unite our
force against the Kingdom of the Devil, and ungodliness; and might give over
destroying Holiness by crying down the things we understand not as unholy; and
might be healed of that antique frenzy, which makes so many Divines and
other Christians, by ill managing their zeal for holiness, to divide the
Churches, and hinder the Gospel, and be the instruments of Satan, to keep and
cast down Holiness in the world.

65. Those Churches especially that lament the lapse of Discipline, and the
confounding of the Holy and profane; and those that are constituted by
unwarrantable scrutinies after the Holiness of Members, beyond the test that
was appointed by Christ, should not dishonor themselves, nor bring their
doctrine or persons in^o suspicion, by being the hasty censurers and condemners
of such Writings, as drive harder for the promoting of Holiness than themselves.

66. There is so clear a tendency in all Gods instituted Ordinances to further
Holiness, that he knows not what he talks of, who slighteth them, on
pretense of natural Evidences and Helps to the same end: seeing natural and
supernatural evidences and helps, are so far from being opposite, that they are
both necessary, and do in admirable suitableness and harmony concur.

67. He knows not the hurtful miscarriages of our times, who knows not what
the mistaken notions about free grace, have done against free grace it self;
and how the Gospel has been supplanted, by an erroneous crying up the Gospel,
and crying down the Law; and how Justification has been abused, by men's
seeming to extol it, and sanctification injured by such pretexts: And he that
with one eye looks on that disease and its effects, and with the other looks on
the Book you tell me of, and such like, will quickly see what Sore this Plaster
was provided for, and how much excellent matter there is in it, which the
foresaid persons and diseases need.

68. And as to your mention of my former writings, and my interest in the
business questioned; I shall say but this, 1. That either you have read my
former Writings, or you have not; If not, I will not write more to satisfy
you, who read not what is already written: For why should I think that you will
rather read the later than the former? If you have read them, (especially my
Confession, my Disputations of Justification, and my Life of Faith,) either
they satisfy you or not: If they do, you need no more; If not, I cannot
satisfy you. The question is whether it be truth and clearly opened which is
there written? If it be, I will not avoid it, lest men abuse it; nor will I
hope to write that which none shall misunderstand, or turn to an occasion of
some extreme. 2. And these few pages tell you my sense; the same which I have
formerly published: If wrong, confute it: If right, my former writings, fullier
opening the same things are so far right. 3. And my Life of Faith is so late
and large in opening the same points (where I have named no less than fifty
eight errors on the Antinomian side and their fautors in the point of
Justification and Imputation) that me thinks you should not so quickly call for
more.

69. And as to Mr. Fowlers Consectaries; chapter 20.22, 23. what would you wish
more accommodate to an honest concord (which is our strength and beauty) and to
the healing of deforming and destroying divisions, than the practicing of the
motion, that our union be placed in things necessary to Holiness* And whereas
you think our Church-controversies concerned, I know not your own mind, because
I know not you; But as for my self, you are not I hope so unreasonable as to
expect that I plead the cause of the Imposers of Conformity; And as for the
Non-conformists, I think they have no dislike to his rule, chapter 23. how far we
may comply with Rulers or Customs, but highly approve it: whether they are in
the right or the wrong, I suppose you will not allow me to be judge: But you
cannot sure be ignorant that they are so far from taking the things for
indifferent which they refuse, that they think it would make them guilty,
should they do them, of sins so many and so very great, and for peace and the
reverence of Superiors, I will not now so much as name. And they take nothing
to be more suitable to their principles about such things than Mr. Fowlers
doctrine.

70. To conclude, undoubtedly Holiness is the life and beauty of the soul; The
spirit of Holiness is Christ's Agent to do his work in us, and our pledge and
earnest and first fruit of Heaven: It is Christ's work, and subordinately ours,
to cleanse us from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting Holiness in
the fear of God. Christ, the Spirit, the Word, the Ministry, Mercies,
afflictions, and all things are to bring home, our hearts to God, and to work
together for our good, by making us partakers of his Holiness. Our Holiness is
our love of God who is most Holy: And our love of God, and Reception of his
love* is our Heaven and everlasting Happiness; where having no more sin to be
forgiven, but being presented without spot or wrinkle unto God, we shall for
ever both magnify the Lamb that has redeemed us, and washed us from all our
sins in his blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God, and also shall with
all the holy Society, sing Holy, Holy, Holy to the blessed Jehovah, who is, and
was, and is to come; to whom all the Heavenly Host shall give this special part
of praise for ever.

And as all real Saints desire nothing more than holy Hearts and Holy Lives,
Holy M^gistrates and Holy Pastors, Holy Churches and a Holy State, Holy
Doctrine, Holy Worship, and Holy Discipline, and that all the People may indeed
be Holy; that true Reformation may make all the Churches of the world more
Holy, and their Holiness may win home the Infidels and Idolaters to a Holy
conformity to them, and that the Kingdoms of the world may become all the
Kingdoms of God and of his Christ; so all those Hypocrites that place their
Holiness in Superstition, and vain singularities in a Love-killing proud
dividing zeal; in bittern^ss against those that are wiser and better than
themselves, in making things to be sins* and duties which God never made so, in
new opinions, for which they think highly of themselves, and contemptuously of
those that are not of their mind; in dead imagery and cold formalities, or
hurtful pomp, in names, and words, and shows, and sidings; in reproaching,
silencing, and cruel handling, all that dislike their carnal interest and way;
and will not sell their innocence and salvation to humor them in their pride,
and comply with all their interests and conceits, That think their Places,
their Parties, their high professions, do make those sins to be small and
tolerable in them, which God abhors in all others; All these counterfeits,
Images or carcasses of Holiness, are but the powerful cheats of the unholy; and
the portion of Hypocrites and Unbelievers shall be the same, (though not
perhaps in the same degree.)

Aug. 24. (the fatal day) 1671.

What Happiness is?
Augustine. de Morib. Eccles. cap. 3. Fol. 1. page 320. Beatus, quantum e(...)o,
neque ille dici potest qui non habet quod amat, qualecunque^^^; neque qui habet
quod amat si noxium sit; neque qui non amat, quod habet etiamsi optimum sit;
Nam and qui appetit quod adipisci non potest, cruciatur, and qui adeptus est
quod appetendum non est, fallitur; and qui non appetit quod adipiscendum esset,
aegrotat: (He might have added, Et qui non habet quod amet; quia neque objectum
habet beatificans nec actum) Quartum restat -- ubi beata vita inveniri queat
cum id quod est Hominis optimum (viz. Deus) and amatur and habetur.

I take not him to be Blessed, who has not that which he loves, whatsoever it
be; nor him that has what he loves, if it be hurtful; nor him that loves not
that which he has, though it be the Best; For he that desires that which he
cannot get is tormented; And he that gets that which is not Desirable, is
deceived; And he that desires not that which should be gotten, is sick. It
remains therefore fourthly, that a truly Blessed Life consists in this,
when that which is Best for a Man is both loved and enjoyed (which he proves
at large to be God alone.)

What Holiness or Virtue is?
Id* ib. cap. 15. Quod si Virtus ad Beatam Vitam nos ducit, nihil omnino esse
virtuiem affirmav^rim, nisi summum Amorem Dei -- and sic definire quatuor
virtutes non dubitem; ut Temperantia sit Amor integrum se prebens ei quod
amatur: Justitia, Amor soli amato serviens, and propterea recte dominans;
Prudentia, Amor est, ea quibus adjuvatur ab eis quibus impeditur sagaciter
seligens.

That is, [But if Virtue be the way to a Blessed life, I will affirm that
Virtue is nothing else, but the chiefest Love of God -- And I make no doubt
thus to define the four Virtues, Temperance is Love, delivering our selves
entirely to our Beloved; Fortitude is Love, easil^ ^nduring all things for the
sake of our Beloved; Justice is Love, serving our Beloved alone, and therefore
rightly governing our inferiors; Prudence is Love, skilfully differencing our
helps from our hindrances.]

Holiness not Fanatically proud or aspiring.
Id. ib. cap. 12. Fit Deo similis quantum datum est, dum illustrandum illi
atque illuminandum se subjicit: Et si maxim ei propinquat subjectione ista qua
similis fit long ab eo fiat necesse est audacia, qua vult esse similior. That
is,

A man is made like to God, in that degree that is granted him, when he
subjects himself to him, to be illustrated and illuminated by him: And let him
come never so near Him by this subjection, to whom he is made like, it must
needs be that the Arrogance, of desiring to be liker to him (than is meet) will
be far from him.

FINIS.

