DIRECTIONS AND PERSUASIONS TO A Sound CONVERSION: For Prevention of that
Deceit and Damnation of Souls, and of those Scandals, Heresies, and desperate
Apostasies, that are the Consequents of a Counterfeit, or Superficial Change.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster, and
are to be sold by him there, and by N. Ekins, at the Gun in Paul's Churchyard,
1658.

The Preface.
IT is weight so unconceivable, that depends on the soundness of our
Conversion and Sanctification, that our care and diligence cannot be too great
to make it sure. As the professed Atheist, Heathens, and Infidels without; so
the self-deceiving Hypocrites within the Church, do wilfully cast away
themselves for ever, by neglecting such a business of everlasting consequence;
when they have time, and warnings, and assistance to dispatch it. Multitudes
live like bruits or Atheists, forgetting that they are born in sin and
misery, and settled in it by wilful custom, and must be Converted or Condemned.
These know not (many of them) what need they have of a Conversion, nor what
Conversion or Sanctification is. And some that have been Preachers of the
Gospel, have been so lamentably ignorant in so great a matter, that they have
persuaded the poor deluded people, that it is only the gross and heinous
sinners, that need Conversion; branding them with the name of Puritans, that
will not take a dead Profession joined with Civility, for true Sanctification;
and promise Salvation to those, that Christ has with many asseverations
professed, shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. Others that confess that a
through Sanctification is a necessary thing, do delude their souls with
something that is like it. Hence is the misery and dishonor of the Church.
Holiness it self is disgraced, by the sins of them that are unholy, because
they pretend to that which they have not. Hence it is, that we have thousands,
that call themselves Christians, that live a worldly, fleshly life, and some of
them hating the way of Godliness, and yet think they are Converted, because
they are sorry when they have sinned, and wish when it is past that they had
not done it, and cry God mercy for it, and confess that they are sinners; and
this they take for true Repentance: When sin was never mortified in their
souls, nor their hearts ever brought to hate it, and forsake it: But when they
have had the profit and pleasure of sin, they are sorry for the danger, but
never regenerate and made New Creatures, by the Spirit of Christ. Hence also it
is, that we have such abundance of mere Opinionists, that take themselves for
Religious people. Because they have changed their Opinions, and their parties,
and can prate contentiously against those that are not of their mind, and join
themselves with those that seem to be the strictest, they take themselves to be
truly Sanctified! And this makes such gadding from one opinion to another, and
such censuring, reviling, and divisions upon that account, because their
Religion is most in their Opinions, and has not mortified their carnal,
selfish inclinations and Passions, nor brought them to a holy, heavenly mind.
Hence also it is that we have so many sensual, scandalous Professors, that
seem to be Religious, but bridle not their tongues, their appetites, or their
lusts, but are railers, or backbiters, or tipplers, or gluttons, or filthy and
lascivious, or some way scandalous to their holy Profession; because they are
strangers to a through-Conversion, but take up with the counterfeit of a
superficial change. Hence also we have so many worldlings, that think
themselves Religious men; that make Christ but a servant to their worldly
interest, and seek Heaven but for a reserve, when Earth forsakes them, and have
something in this world that is so dear to them, that they cannot forsake it
for the hopes of Glory; but give up themselves to Christ, with secret
exceptions and reserves, for their prosperity in the world: And all, because
they never knew a sound Conversion, which should have rooted out of their
Hearts this worldly interest, and delivered them up entirely, and absolutely to
Christ. Hence also it is that we have so few Professors, that can lay by their
Pride, and bear disesteem or injury, and love their enemies, and bless them
that curse them, yea, or love their godly friends that cross them, or dishonor
them. And so few that can deny themselves, in their honor, or any considerable
thing, for the sake of Christ, and in obedience, and conformity to his will.
And all because they never had that saving change, that takes down Self, and
sets up Christ, as Sovereign in the soul. And hence also it is that we have in
this age so many dreadful instances of Apostasy: So many reproaching the
Scripture, that once they thought had Converted them, and the way of Holiness,
that once they did profess; and denying the Lord himself that bought them; and
all because they formerly took up, with a superficial counterfeit Conversion. O
how commonly, and how lamentably does this misery appear among Professors in
their unsavory discourse, their strife and envy, on Religious pretenses, their
dead formality, their passionate divisions, or their selfish, Proud, and
earthly minds! A through Conversion would have cured all this, at least as to
the dominion of it.

Having therefore in my call to the unconverted, endeavored to awaken careless
souls, and persuade the obstinate to Turn and Live, I have here spoken to them
that seem to be about the work, and given them some Directions and Persuasions,
to prevent their perishing in the birth, and so to prevent that Hypocrisy,
which else they are like to be formed into, and the deceit of their hearts, the
Error of their Lives, and the Misery at their Death, which is like to follow.
That they live not as those that flatter God with their mouth, and lie unto him
with their tongues, because their heart is not right with him, neither are they
steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78. 36, 37 Lest denying deep entertainment, and
rooting to the seed of Life, or choking it by the radicated predominant Love,
and cares of the world, they wither when the heat of persecution shall break
forth, Matthew. 13. 20, 21, 22. And lest building on the sands, they fall when
the winds and storms arise, and their fall be great, Matthew. 7. 26, 27. And so
they go out from us, that they may be made manifest that they were not of us:
For if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, 1 John
2. 19. Look therefore to this great important business, and give all diligence
to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. And trust not your hearts
too easily, or too confidently. But turn to the Lord with all your hearts,
(Joel 2. 12.) Cleave to him Resolvedly, or with Purpose of heart, (Acts 11.
23.) And see that you sell all, and buy the Pearl, (Matthew. 13. 46.) And stick
not at the price, but absolutely resign your selves to Christ, and turn to him,
as Zacheus and other primitive Converts did, surrendering all that you have
unto his Will (Luke 19. 8, 9.) Leave not any root of bitterness behind; Make no
exceptions, or reserves: but Deny yonr selves; Forsake all; and follow him that
has led you this self-denying way; and trust to his Blood, and Merits, and
Promise, for a Treasure in Heaven, and then you are his Disciples, and true
Christians indeed, Luke 14. 33. Luke 18. 24, 25. Reader, if thou heartily make
this Covenant and keep it, thou shall find that Christ will not deceive thee,
when the world deceives them that chose it, in their greatest extremity. But
if thou draw back, and think these terms too hard, remember that Everlasting
Life was offered thee, and remember why and for what thou did reject it. And
if in this lifetime, thou will have thy good things, expect to be tormented,
when the believing, self-denying Souls are comforted, Luke 16. 25.

May 29. 1658. R. B.

THE CONTENTS.
COnsiderations to provoke men to take heed of sticking in a half-Conversion.
page 1 Direct. 1. Labor for a right understanding of the true Nature of
Christianity, and meaning of the Gospel that must convert. 32 Direct. 2. When
you understand that which you are called to, search the Scripture, and see
whether it be so. 41 Direct. 3. Be much in the serious Consideration of the
Truths which you understand and believe. 51 Seven things to be considered. 56
The manner of this Consideration. 79 Twelve Motives to Consideration. 86
Direct. 4. See that the work of Humiliation be thoroughly done, and break not
away from the Spirit of Contrition before he have done with you: And yet see
that you mistake not the Nature and Ends of the work, and that you drive it not
on further then God requires. 119 Preparatory Humiliation what. ibid. Sound
Humiliation how known 120. etc. The Ends and Use of Humiliation. 130 Mistakes
about Humiliation to be avoided. 154 Whether it be possible to be too much
humbled. 160 How to know when sorrow should be restrained. 163 And when sorrow
must be increased. 167 Motives for submission to a through-Humiliation. 182
Direct. 5. Close with the Lord Jesus understandingly, heartily and entirely, as
he is revealed and offered in the Gospel. 191 What must be understood of the
person of Christ. 192 The Ends of Redemption, to be understood. 195 The
Demonstrations of the glory of God in Christ, and to whom. 221 What are the
works of Redemption that Christ has done. 232 The Benefits by Christ procured.
The general Benefits. 241 The Benefits proper to Believers. 247 The several
terms on which the several Benefits are conveyed. 263 The certainty of all
this. 270 How Christ must be received heartily and with the will. 272 Christ
must be entirely received, and how. 283 Direct. 6. See that the flesh be
thoroughly mortified, and your hearts taken off the pleasures, profits and
honors of the world, and think not of reconciling God and the world, as if you
might secure your interest in both. 299 Direct. 7. Be sure that you make an
absolute Resignation of your selves and all that you have to God. 306 Direct.
8. See that you mistake not a mere change of your opinions, and profession and
behavior, for a saving change. 324 The Marks by which a sound Conversion may
be known from a mere opinionative change. 330 Directions to get beyond an
opinionative Conversion. 347 Direct. 9. Acquaint your souls by faith with the
glory of the everlasting Kingdom, and see that you take it for your portion,
and your end, and from thence let the rest of your actions be animated. 353
Wherein this Blessedness does consist. 359 Direct. 10. Rest not, and count not
your selves converted, till God and holiness have your very Love, Desire and
Delight: and take it not for a saving change, when you had rather live a
worldly and ungodly life, if it were not for the fears of punishment. 363
Direct. 11. If you would not have the work miscarry, Turn then this present day
and hour without any more delay: where fifty Considerations are given to shame
men out of their delays. 381 Direct. 12. Stop not in weak and wavering
purposes, and faint attempts: but see that you be groundedly, unreservedly, and
fi mly, (or habitually) Resolved. 441 What Resolution is, and by what
Deliberations it is caused. The Preparatory c^mmon Acts, and the special Acts:
Illumination, and the wills Determination how wrought. 442 etc. The unresolved
are unconverted. 450 What Resolution it is that is necessary. 455 Twenty
Motives to Resolution 461 Hindrances of Resolution. 505 Two Directions for
prosecuting Resolution, that it may hold. 513 The Conclusion. 521
ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 15. for you r. the. p. 41. l. 29. r. it a. p. 15. l. 15. r. as if
it. p. 99. l. 5. for Mal. r. Math. p. 51. l. 5. for your r. our. p. 56. l. 8.
for say r. lay. p. 72. l. 17. blot out and. p. 98. l. 14. r. portends. p. 181.
l. 1. r. this be? p. 126. l. 13. for confesses r. consents. p. 143. l. 19.
for work r. worth. p. 144. l. 6. blot out that. p. 157. l. 8. for reproachers
r. reprovers. p 167. l. 21. for the r. then. p. 170. l. 14. for you r. your. p.
171. l. 10. for so r. to. p 174. l. 10. for Judas r. Judges with a. p. 176. l.
1, 2. for your selves r. yours. l. 6. r. vein. l. 15. for once r. over. p.
177. l. 23. r. you are. p. 205. l. 3. for begin a r. beginning. p. 210. l. 3.
dele. has. p. 215. l. 9. for Premises r. Praises. p. 218. l. 25. dele purpose.
p. 220. l. 20. for of r. so. p. 229. l. 21. for manage r. marriage. p. 242. l.
21. for discern r deserve. p. 247. l. 13. for charging r. changing. p. 279. l.
7. r. you. p. 294. l. 27. for sanctification r. satisfaction. p. 298. l. 24.
dele to. p. 307. l. 12. for or r. our. p. 309. l. 4. r. pure, and. p. 314. l.
12. dele I. p. 319. l. 21. r. it, it is. p. 326. l. 4. and. 7. r. opinionative.
p. 338. l. 3. r. life and. l. 27. for is r. it. p. 339. l. 27. r. party. p.
341. l. 19. for to r. made. p. 362. l. 7. for 1. r. 10. p. 432. l. 5. r. learn.
p. 446. l. 28. for the r. that. p. 469. l. 1. for any r. and. p. 494. l. 7. r.
till then. p. 500. l. 3. 4. for handful r. housefull. p. 513. l. 5. for offer
r. office. p. 517. l. 16. r. so I. p. 524. l. 18. for mystery r. misery.

Directions to Sinners that are purposed to Turn, and are under the Work of
Conversion; that it miscarry not.
THe first and greatest matter in the seeking after the salvation of our souls,
is to be sure that we lay the foundation well, and that the work of Conversion
be thoroughly wrought. To this end I have already used many persuasions with you
unconverted to return, as thinking all further Directions vain, till we have
persuaded men to a consent and willingness to practice them. And in the end of
that Discourse, I added a few Directions for the use of such as are willing to
be converted. But because I know that this is a matter of exceeding
consequence, I dare not thus leave it, before I have added some further
Directions, to prevent the miscarrying of this work where it is begun. And
least I should lose my labor, through the unpreparedness of the Reader; I
shall first give you some preparing Considerations, which may awaken you to the
practice of the Directions which I shall give you.

Consider first, That half-Conversions are the undoing of many thousand souls.
If you are but like Agrippa, Act. 26. 28. almost persuaded to be Christians,
you will be but almost saved. Many a thousand that are now past help, have had
the Word come near them, and cast them into a fear, and make some stir and
trouble in their souls, awakening their consciences, and forcing them to some
good purposes and promises; `yea, and bringing them to the performance of a
half-reformation; But this is not it that will serve your turn. Many have been
so much changed, as not to be far from the Kingdom of God, that yet came
short of it, Mark. 12. 34. There is no promise in Scripture that you shall be
pardoned if you almost repent and believe; or be saved, if you be almost
sanctified and obedient: But on the contrary the Lord has plainly resolved,
that you must turn or die, though you almost turn: and repent, or perish though
you almost repent: and that you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
without conversion and a new birth, though you come never so near it. God has
resolved upon the terms of your salvation: and it is in vain to hope for
salvation upon any other terms. God will not change nor come down to your
terms; It is you that must change and come quite over to his terms, or you
are lost for ever. If you come never so near them, you are but lost men if you
come not up to them. The Lord well knew what he did, when he made his Covenant
and Law, and he imposed nothing on the sons of men, but what his infinite
wisdom told him, it was fit for him to impose: and he will not now compound
with sinners, and take less then he requires; that is, less then the
preheminency in their hearts; nor will he ever come down to any lower terms
with you, then those which he propounds to you in his Gospel. And therefore
poor sinners as you love your souls, do not stand dodging and halving with God;
but give up your selves entirely to him: and do not stop at the beginnings of a
conversion, but go through with it, till you are become new creatures indeed,
or you are undone when you have done all. A half unsound Convert will as
certainly perish as a Drunkard or a Whoremonger; though his torment may not be
so great.

2. Consider also, That if you do not go through with the work when you are
upon it, you may perhaps make it more difficult then it was before ever you
meddled with it, and make it a very doubtful case whether ever it will be done.
As it is with a wound or other sore; if you tamper with it with salves that are
not agreeable to it, or are disorderly applied; or if you skin it over before
it be searched to the bottom, it must be opened again, and will cost you double
pain before it be cured. Or as I have seen it with some that have had a bone
broken, or out of joint, and it has been set amiss at first; O what torments
were the poor creatures fain to undergo, in having it broken or stretched and
set again! which might have been spared, if it had been thoroughly done at
first. So, if you will be shrinking, and drawing back, and favoring your
flesh, and will not go to the quick, you will make your Conversion much more
difficult; you must be brought to it again, and fetch your groans yet deeper
then before; and weep over all your former tears: your doubts will be
multiplied: your fears and sorrows will be increased: and all will go sorer
with you then at first. O what a case will you be in, when your sores must be
lanced a second time, and your bones as it were broken again! Then you will
wish you had gone through with it at the first.

Yea, perhaps you may put God to it to fetch you in by some sharp affliction,
and send out so boisterous and churlish a Messenger to call you home, as may
make you wish you had hearkened to a more gentle call: When the Sheep will
straggle, the Dog must be sent to affright them home. Many a foolish sinner
makes light of the gentle invitations of grace, and they stand hovering between
their sins and Christ, and sometimes they have a mind to turn, and the next
temptation they are off again, and then they come on again coldly and with half
a heart; and thus they stand trifling with the God of Heaven, till he is fain
to take another course with them, and resolves to use some sharper means: And
when he lays them under his rod, and they can neither fly from him, nor
resist him, but see that their lives and souls are at his mercy, then they
begin to look about them, and see their folly and change their minds. You can
tarry, and delay, and dally with the dreadful God, in the time of your
prosperity, and we may ask you over and over whether you will turn, before we
can have a hearty answer: But what will you do when God shall begin to frown,
and when he takes you in hand by his unresistible power, and lets loose upon
you the terrors of his wrath? Will you then make as light of his mercy as you
do now? Have you not read Dan. 5. 6. how small an apparition of his anger, did
make a carouzing King look pale, and his joints to tremble, in the midst of his
jovialty? A Manasseth will bethink himself and come in when he is laid in
irons, though he could set light by God before, 2 Chronicles. 33. 13. If Jonah will
run away from God, he can send a boisterous Messenger to arrest him, and cast
him as it were into the belly of Hell, and make him cry for mercy to him that
he disobeyed. So, if you will stand trifling with God, and will not by fair
means be persuaded to yield and come away, you may shortly look to hear from
him in another manner: for he has a voice that will make the proudest face
look pale, and the stubbornest heart that is to tremble. If an idle stubborn
Child will not learn nor be ruled, the Master or Parent will teach him with the
rod, and give him a lash, and ask him, Will you yet learn? and another lash and
ask him, What say you now, will you yet obey? So will God do by you, if he love
you, and mean to save you: When he has taken away your wealth, your friends,
your children, will you then hearken to him, or will you not? When you lie
groaning on your couch, and all your parts are overwhelmed with pains, and
death begins to lay hands upon you, and bids you now come and answer for your
rebellions and delays before the living God, What will you do then? Will you
turn or not? O the lamentable folly of sinners, that put themselves to so much
sorrow, and create calamity for themselves! When sickness comes, and death
draws near, you beg, and cry, and groan, and promise: When you feel the rod,
what Christians will you then be? And why not without so much ado? You then
think God deals somewhat hardly with you: And why will you not turn then by
gentler means? You might spare your selves much of this misery if you would;
and you will not. Is it a seemly thing for a man to be driven to Heaven by
scourges? Is God so bad a Master, and Heaven so bad a place, that you will not
turn to them, and mind them, and seek them, till there be no remedy, and you
are as it were driven to it against your wills? Is the world such an
Inheritance, and sin so good a thing, and the flesh or devil so good a
Master, that you will not leave them till you are whipped away? What a shameful
unreasonable course is this?

Well sirs, the case is plain before you. Turn you must at one time or other,
or be the firebrands of Hell. And seeing it is a thing that must be done, were
it not best for you to take the easiest and the surest way to do it? Why this
is the easiest and the surest way; even to strike while the iron is hot, before
it cool again; and to go through with it when God does move you and persuade
you; If you love your flesh it self, do not put him to take up the rod, and
fetch you home by stripes and terrors.

But that is not the worst: For it will sorely hazard the work it self, and
consequently your salvation, if you do not go through with it, at the first
attempt. I know there is many a one that has been converted and saved, after
many purposes and promises and half-conversions. But yet I must tell you, that
this is a very dangerous course. For you do not know when you grieve the Spirit
of grace, and set so light by mercy when it is offered you, whether that Spirit
may not utterly forsake you, and leave you to your own ungodly wills, and let
you take your lusts and pleasures, and say, [Let this wretch be filthy still:
let him keep his drunkenness, his companions, his worldliness, and the curse of
God with them, till he have tried what it is that they will do for him: Let him
follow his own conceits, and the pride and obstinacy of his own heart, till he
find whether they will bring him: Let him serve the flesh and the world, till
he understand whether God or they be the better master. Seeing he will not be
wise on earth, let him learn in hell, and let torments teach him, seeing mercy
might not teach him.] O poor soul! what a case art thou in, if this should once
be the resolution of God?

Moreover, you may easily know that the longer you stay, the more leisure you
give the devil to assault you, and to try one way when he cannot prevail by
another, and to strengthen his temptations: Like a foolish Soldier, that will
stand still to be shot at, rather then assault the enemy.

And the longer you delay, the more your sin gets strength and rooting. If you
cannot bend a twig, how will you be able to bend it when it is a Tree? If you
cannot pluck up a tender plant, are you likely to pluck up a sturdy Oak. Custom
gives strength and root to vices. A Blackmoor may as well change his skin, or a
Leopard his spots, as those that are accustomed to do evil, can learn to do
well, Jer. 13. 23.

If you stick at Conversion as a difficult matter to day, it will be more
difficult to morrow, or the next month, and the next year, then it is now.

Yea, the very resistance of the Spirit does harden the heart, and the delays
and triflings of the soul, do bring it to an insensibility, and boldness in
sin, and drive away the fear of God from the heart. Now it may be you are
somewhat awakened, and begin to see that you must turn or die: but if you
trifle and delay, this light may be gone, and leave you in greater darkness
then before: and the voice that now awakeneth you may be silent, and leave you
to fall asleep again.

Moreover, you know that you are uncertain of the continuance of the Gospel.
You know not whether you shall have such lively serious Preachers, as you have
now: Nor you know not whether you shall have such godly neighbors, and company
to encourage you, and help you in the work. God will remove them one after
another to himself, and then you will have fewer Prayers for you, and fewer
warnings, and good examples, and perhaps be left wholly to the company of
deceived ungodly fools, that will do nothing but hinder and discourage you from
Conversion. And you are not sure that Religion will continue in that
reputation, as now it is in. The Times may turn, before you turn: and godliness
may become a scorn again, and it may be a matter of suffering, and may cost you
your lives to live as the servants of Christ must do. And therefore if you stop
at it now as a difficult thing, when you have all the helps and encouragements
that you can expect, and the way to Heaven is made so fair; and when
Magistrates, and Ministers, and Neighbors, are ready to encourage and help
you; what will you do in times of persecutions and discouragement? If you
cannot turn when you have all these helps and means, what will you do when they
are taken from you? If you cannot row with the stream, how will you row against
it? If you dare not set to Sea, when you have wind, and tide, and sunshine;
what will you do in storms and tempests, when all is against you! O what would
some of your forefathers have given to have seen the days that you see! How
glad would many a thousand in other Countries of the world be, to have but the
helps to Heaven that you have? Never look to have the way fairer and easier
while you live. If you think Heaven is offered you at too deer a rate now, you
may even let it go, and try whether Hell be better: for the next offer is like
to be upon harder terms rather then easier. If you cannot now find in your
hearts to turn and live a holy life; What would you have done in the days of
the Apostles, or ancient Christians? and, What would you have done in Spain or
Italy, where it would cost you your lives? He that will not be Converted now,
but thinks the terms of grace too hard, is so impious a despiser of Christ and
Heaven, that it is no wonder if God resolve that he shall never taste of the
salvation that was offered him, Luk 14. 24.

Moreover, you know upon what uncertainties you hold your lives, you have no
assurance of them for an hour: but you are sure that they are passing away
while you delay. And will you trifle then in a work that must be done? What a
case are you in, if death find you unconverted? The heart of man is not able
now to conceive the misery of your case. How dare you venture to live another
day in an unconverted state, least death should find you so? Are you not afraid
when you lie down at night, and afraid when you go out of your doors in the
morning, least death surprise you before you are converted? If you be not, it is
long of your deadness and presumption.

And I would fain hear what it is that should thus stop you. What are you
afraid of? Is God an Enemy, that you are loath to come to him? Is the devil a
Friend that you are so loath to leave him? Is sin a Paradise? Is Holiness a
Misery? Is it pleasanter life to love your money, or your lands, or your meat
and drink, and lusts, then to love the most blessed God, the Creator of the
World, the life of our Souls, and our Eternal Felicity? Is it better to pamper
a carcass that must shortly stink as the dung, then to provide for a living
immortal soul? Whether do you think that Earth or Heaven will be the more
glorious and durable felicity?

What is it sirs that you stick at, that you make so many delays before you will
turn? Is there any difficulty in the point? Do you think it a hard question
whether you should turn or not? Why how can you be so blind? Do you stand
pausing upon the business, as it were a doubt, whether God or the world were
better, and whether sin or holiness, Christ or death, Heaven or Hell, were to
be preferred? I pray you Consider; Can you reasonably think that Conversion
will do you any harm? Can it bring you into a worse condition then you are in?
Sure you cannot fear such a thing: You are in your blood; you are dead in
sin; you are children of wrath, while you are unconverted: you are under the
curse of the Law of God; you are the slaves of the devil, you are the heirs of
hell, and under the guilt of all your sins; your life is a continued
rebellion against God; you are employed every day in the destroying of your
selves, in kindling the flames that must everlastingly torment you, and laying
in fuel for the perpetuating of your misery; and fighting against your
friends that would deliver you, and unthankfully abusing Christ and grace, and
Ministers, and Friends that would save your souls. This is the condition that
every one of you is in till you are converted. And can you fear least
Conversion would bring you into a worse condition then this? Sirs, these Truths
are sure and plain: and if yet you stick at it, your error is so palpably
gross, that unless you are mad men, I may be bold to say, it is a wilful
error. And if you love to be deceived, and wilfully choose a lie, you must
take that you get by it.

3. Consider further, That half-Conversions do often prove an occasion of
deluding men's souls, and making them quiet in a miserable state, and so of
keeping them from being converted to the last. If you had never done any thing
in it, you would more easily be persuaded that your case is bad, and that there
is still a necessity of your change. But when you have had some convictions,
and troubles of mind, and fears and sorrows, and so have fallen into an outside
partial reformation, and now are persuaded that you are truly converted, when
it is no such matter; What a dangerous impediment to your Conversion may this
prove? And all because you slubber over the work, and cut it off before it
reaches to sincerity, and strive against the workings of the Spirit, and break
away from your Physic^in before he has done the cure, and would not follow it
on to the end. I know that a half-Conversion, if it be known to be no more, is
much better then none; and does often prepare men for a saving work. But when
this half-Conversion is taken to be a true and saving change, as ^oo commonly
it is, it proves one of the greatest impediments of salvation. When ever Christ
shall afterward knock at your door, you will not know him, as thinking that he
dwells with you already. If you read any Books that call on you to be
converted, or hear any Preachers that call on you to turn, you have this at
hand to cosen your selves with, and frustrate all: You Will think, This is not
spoken to me: For I am Converted already. O how quietly do such poor deluded
sinners, daily read and hear their own doom and misery; and never once dream
that they are the men that are meant, and therefore are never dismayed at the
matter. This forms you into a state of hypocrisy, and makes the course of
your duties and your lives to be hypocritical. If another man that knows
himself to be still unconverted, do but read the threatenings of the Word
against such, or hear of the terrors of the Lord from a Minister, he may be
brought to confess that this is his own case, and so to perceive the misery of
his condition. But when such as you do read and hear these things, they never
trouble you, for you think that they do not touch you: You are Scripture Proof,
and Sermon-proof; and all by the delusion of your half-Conversion. O how
zealously will such a man cry out against the sins of others! and tell them
of their misery, and persuade them to turn, and show them the danger that is
near them if they do not; and in the mean time little thinks that this is his
own case, and that he speaks all this against his own soul. How will such men
applaud a Sermon that drives at the Conversion of a sinner, and that tells them
their misery while they are unconverted? O thinks he, this touched such and
such: I am glad that such a man and such a man heard it: And he little thinks
that it as nearly touched himself. How smoo^hly will he go on in any discourse
against wicked unregenerate men, as David heard the Parable of Nathan, and it
never once enters into their thoughts that they speak all this against
themselves; till the Judge shall tell them when it is too late, Thou art the
man. It will turn not only the stream of your thoughts into hypocrisy and
self-deceit, but also the stream of your speeches to others; yea, and the
current of your prayers, and all the rest of your religious performances. When
in confession, you should acknowledge and la^ent an unregenerate carnal state,
you will only confess that you have the infirmities of the Saints, and that you
have this or that sin, which yet you think is mortified. When you should
importunately beg for Renewing grace, you will beg only for strengthening grace,
or assurance: When you should be laboring to break your hearts, you will be
studying to heal them: and will be harkening after present comforts, when you
have more need of godly sorrow. It will fill your mouths in prayer with
Pharisaicall thanksgivings for the mercies of Regeneration, Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, which you never received. Little does many a soul
know what sanctification, and the feverall graces of the Spirit are, that use
to give God thanks for them: There Is many and many a one that must for ever be
in hell, that were used in their prayers to give God thanks for their hopes of
glory. And the common cause of all this deceit and misery is, that men do run
from under the hands of their Physician before he ever went to the bottom of
their sore, and go away with a half-conversion, and so spend all the rest of
their lives in a mere delusion, as verily thinking they are converted, when
they are not. How confidently will such receive the Lords Supper, and thrust
themselves into the communion of the Saints, as if they had as good right as
any to be there? till the Lord of the Feast shall take them to task, and say,
Friend, how come thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment? and then
they will be speechless, Mat. 22. 12. How many false deceiving comforts, and
perhaps even seeming raptures and assurance, may these have in themselves; as
verily thinking their case is good, when alas, they never yet laid the
foundation? Yea, and it is to be observed, that Satan is a friend to the
comforts of this kind of men, and therefore will do all that he can to promote
them. For he would willingly keep his Garrison in peace, Luke 11. 21. And
therefore he may possibly be a comforting spirit to them himself, and imitate
the Holy Ghost the Comforter of the Saints: And it may be give them such
raptures as seem higher then those which the Spirit of holiness does give. He
envieth the Saints their peace and comfort, because he foresees how durable
they will prove: But he can be content that deluded hypocrites may have joy,
because their comforts do not weaken but strengthen his Kingdom within them,
and he knows they are like to endure but for a while.

And thus you may perceive, how hard it is to convert one of these
half-converted men, that have strangled the New Creature as it were in the
birth, and that are fortified against all the means of grace, by a false
conceit that they are sanctified already. See therefore that you make sure
work, and take not up in the middle, and with halves, but take your present
time, and give up your souls to a total change.

4. Consider; If you take up short of a through Conversion, you lose all your
labor, and sufferings, and hopes, as to the matter of your salvation.

And what pity is it that so much should be lost? Alas, to see many of our
hearers touched at a Sermon, and come to a Minister and bewail their sin, and
seem to be humbled, and promise to be new men, and yet all this to be lost; How
sad a case is this to think of? To see them leave their company and former
course of life, and come among the professors of holiness, and all men take
them for real Converts; and yet all this to be lost, and their souls lost
after all: How sad a case is this? If you grow up to the greatest parts for
outward duty, and be able to discourse, or pray, or preach, even to the
admiration of the hea^ers; yet if you do not ground this on a through
Conversion, all is but lost, as to your own salvation. If you keep up the
highest strain of profession, and get the highest esteem in the Church, so that
others depend upon you as Oracles; yea, if the Pope with all his infallibility
should cannonize you for Saints; it were all but loss. If you should keep up
the most confident persuasions of your salvation, and hope to go to Heaven to
the last hour of your lives; it were all but lost if you build not all on a
through Conversion. Yea, if you should be taken by persecutors for one of the
party to which you join, and should suffer for the cause of Religion among
them; all were but lost, without a sound Conversion, 1 Cor. 13* 1, 2, 3.

It is a pitiful case to see some poor unsanctified souls, how they wander
and change from one opinion to another, and from party to party, to find out
that which they want within. They turn to this party first, and that party
next, and then to another, and then think they are sure in the way to Heaven:
when they never thoroughly turned to God by Jesus Christ; and therefore are
certainly out of the way, whatever party it be that they join with. Some go to
the giddy Sects that make the highest pretenses to strictness: And some go to
Rome, because they think that there they shall have more company, and hear the
deluding sound of Unity, Universality, Antiquity, Succession, Miracles and such
like: And then they think they have hit the way. Alas poor souls! If God were
but nearest and dearest to your hearts, and Christ and his Righteousness exalted
within you, and your souls unfeignedly turned from your sins, you would be
in the certain way to Heaven, in what Country or company, or Church soever you
were; supposing that you believe and do nothing there, which is inconsistent
with this life of Grace. (Though yet every Christian should choose that
particular Society, if he can, where he may not only be saved, but most
certainly saved, and find the greatest helps and least hindrances, or else
where he may do God the greatest service.) But choose what company you will in
all the world, the strictest, the most reformed, the most splendid in outward
pomp and glory, or of whatever excellency else you can imagine, you will never
be saved in it your selves, as long as your hearts are unconverted. I know the
Papists have found out many devices, by Sacraments, and Ceremonies, and the
Merits of the Saints, to patch up the defect of a through Conversion; but all
are mere delusions that pretend to such a thing.

O then think of this poor sinner: Have thou gone so far, and done so much,
and shall all be lost, because thou will not follow it to the end? Have thou
groaned, and wept, and confessed and bemoaned thine own condition? Have thou
prayed, and read, and heard, and fasted, and changed thy company, and much of
thy course of life? and shall all this be lost, for want of going to the
bottom, and making a through work of it? What a loss will this be?

5. Consider also, What an admirable help and advantage it will be to you
through the whole course of your lives, if the work of Conversion be once
thoroughly wrought. I will show you this in some Particulars.

First, It will be an excellent help to your understandings, against the
grosser Errors of the world, and will stablish you in the truth much more then
mere Arguments can do: For you will be able to speak for the truth from
feelling and experience: He that has the Law written both in his Bible and in
his heart, is likely to hold it faster then he that has it in his Bible alore.
But of this I have spoken already in my Treatise against Infidelity, Part 2.

Secondly, If you be but thoroughly Converted, you will have that within you
which will be a a continual help against temptations: You have not only
experience of the mischief of sinning, and the folly of those Reasons that are
brought for its defense; but you have also a new nature, which is against the
temptation, as life is against poison; and as it is a great disadvantage to the
Law of Christ, that it speaks against the nature of the ungodly; so is it a
disadvantage to the temptations of the Devil, that they would draw a Christian
against his new nature. You have that within you that will plead more
effectually against sensuality, uncharitableness, pride, or worldliness, or any
the like sin, then reason or learning alone can do. (As in the forecited Book
I have further manifested.)

Thirdly, If Conversion be thoroughly wrought, you will have within you a
continual helper of your graces, and a Remembrancer to put you in mind of
duty, and a spur to put you on to the performance, and a furtherer of your
souls in the performance it self: It is out of this spark and principle within
you that the Holy Ghost does raise the acts of grace. This is it that the Word,
and Prayer, and Conference, and Sacraments, and all the Means of Grace must
work upon. If we see you do amiss, we have hopes that you will hear us: If we
plainly reprove you, we may look you should take it in good part: For you have
that within you that says as we say, and is at deadly enmity with the sin
which we reprove. If we provoke you to Love and to good Works, we dare almost
promise our selves that you will obey: For you have that within you that
disposes you to the duty, and preaches our Sermons to you over again. O what
an advantage it is to our teaching, when you are all taught of God within, as
well as by his Messengers without! But when we speak to the unconverted, we
have little to work upon: We give Physic to the dead; We speak all against the
bent of their souls; and every reproof, and exhortation to holiness, goes
against their very natures: And therefore what wonder if we have the smaller
hopes to prevail.

Fourthly, If the work be thoroughly done at first, it will help to resolve many
doubts that may be afterward cast into your minds. You need not be still at a
loss, and looking behind you, and questioning your foundation, but may go
cheerfully and boldly on. O what an excellent encouragement is this! to know
that you have hitherto made good your ground, and left all safe and sure behind
you, and have nothing to do, but to look before you, and press on toward the
mark, till you lay hold upon the prize: Whereas, if you be in any great doubt
of your Conversion, it will be stopping you and discouraging you in all your
work: you will be still looking behind you, and saying, What if I should yet be
unconverted? When you should cheerfully address your selves to Prayer or
Sacraments, how sadly will you go, as being utterly uncertain whether you have
a saving right to them, or whether God will accept a Sacrifice at your hand?
When you should grow and go forward, you will have little heart to it, because
you know not whether you are yet in the way; and this will damp your life and
comfort in every duty, when you must say [I know not whether yet I be thoroughly
Converted] O therefore stop not the work at first.

Fifthly and lastly, if the work be thoroughly done at first, you will
persevere, when others fall away. You will have rooting in your selves,
entertaining the seed as into depth of earth; and you will have the Holy Ghost
within you, and (more then so) engaged for your preservation, and the
perfecting of your salvation. When they that received the Word as seed upon a
rock, and never give it deep entertainment, will wither and fall away in the
time of trial; and from them that have not saving grace, shall be taken away
even that which they seemed to have, Mat. 13. 12. and 25. 19.

6. And Lastly Consider, If you fall short of a true Conversion at the first,
the Devil will take occasion by it, to tempt you at last to utter despair. When
you have made many essaies and trials, and been about the work again and again,
he will persuade you that there is no possibility of accomplishing it. If we
convince an open profane person that is unconverted, he may easier see that
yet there is hopes of it: But if a man have been half-converted, and lived long
in a formal self-deceiving profession of Religion, and been taken by himself
and others for a godly man, as it is very hard to convince this man that he is
unconverted, so when he is convinced of it, he will easily fall into
desperation. For Satan will tell him [If thou be yet unconverted after so many
Confessions, and Prayers, and after so long a course of Religion, what hope
can thou have that yet it should be done. Thou will never have better
opportunities then thou have had? If such Sermons as thou have heard could not
do it, what hope is there of it? If such Books, and such Company, and such
Mercies, and such Afflictions have not done it, what hope can thou have?
Can thou hear any livelyer Teaching then thou have heard? or speak any holyer
words then thou have spoken? If yet the work be quite undone, it is not
forsaking another sin, nor going a step further, that will do it: and
therefore never think of it; for there is no hope: Do thou not know how often
thou have tried in vain? and, What can thou do more?] And thus you give
advantage to the Tempter by your first delays, and taking up in mere
Preparatories, And therefore I beseech you, as you love your souls, take heed
of resisting the Spirit of grace, and breaking off the work before it is
thoroughly done, but go the bottom, and follow it on, til it be accomplished in
sincerity. And now hoping that upon these Considerations you are resolved to do
your best, I shall come to the thing which I principally intended; which is, to
give you certain Directions, which if you will obey, you may be Converts and
Saints indeed.

DIRECTION I. Lest the Work of Conversion should miscarry where it seems to
be begun, or in a hopeful way, I first advise you, to [Labour after a right
Understanding of the True Nature of Christianity, and the Meaning of the Gospel
which is sent for to Convert you.] You are naturally slaves to the Prince of
darkness; and live in a state of darkness, and do the works of darkness, and
are hasting apase to utter darkness. And it is the light of saving knowledge
that must recover you, or there is no recovery. God is the Father of Light, and
dwells in Light; Christ is the Light of the world; His Ministers are also the
Lights of the world, as under him; and are sent to turn men from Darkness to
light, by the Gospel which is the light to our feet: and this is to make us
Children of Light, that we may no more do the works of darknses, but may be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, 2 Cor. 4 3, 4. 1 John 1. 5
1 John 1. 5, 9. Jam. 1. 17 Mat. 5. 14 Act. 26. 18. Joh. 8. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Ephesians 5 8, 13. Col 1 12. Believe it Darkness is not the way to the Celestial
Glory. Ignorance is your Disease and Knowledge must be your Cure. I know the
ignorant have many excuses, and are apt to think that the case is not so bad
with them as we make it to be; and that there is no such need of Knowledge, but
a man may be saved without it. But this is because they want that Knowledge
that should show them the misery of their Ignorance, and the worth of
Knowledge. Has not the Scripture plainly told you, that If the Gospel be hid,
it is hid to them that are lost, whose minds the God of this world has
blinded, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of
God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 3. 4. I know that many that have much
knowledge are ungodly. But what of that? Can any man therefore be godly or be
saved, without Knowledge. You may have a bad servant that yet is skillful
enough in his work; but yet you will not mend the matter, by taking one that
has no skill at all. You may send a man on your errand that knows the way and
yet will not go it, but loiter and deceive you: But what of that? Will you
therefore think to mend the matter, by sending one that knows not a step of
the way, nor will not learn it? Though a man of knowledge may be the servant of
the devil, yet no man without knowledge (that has the use of his Reason) can
be the servant of God. A man may go to Hell with knowledge: but he certainly
shall go to Hell without it. I do not say that you must all be men of learning,
and skilled in the Arts, and Sciencies, and Languages: But you must have the
Knowledge of a Christian, though not of a Scholar. Can you love or serve a God
that you Know not? Can you let go friends, and goods, and life, for a Glory
which you have no Knowledge of? Can you make it the principal business of your
lives to seek for a Heaven whose Excellencies you know not of? Can you lament
your sin and misery, when you are unacquainted with it? Or will you strive
against sin as the greatest evil, when you know not the evil of it? Will you
believe in a Christ whom you do not know, and trust your souls and all upon
him? Will you rest upon a Promise, or fear a Threatening, or be ruled by a Law,
which you do not understand? It is not possible to be Christians without
knowing the substance of Christianity: Nor is it possible for you to be saved
without knowing the way of salvation.

Labor therefore to be well acquainted with the Grounds and Reasons, and
Nature of your Religion. The clearer your Light is, the warmer and livelier
your hearts will be. Illumination is the first part of Sanctification. The head
is the passage to the heart. O if you did but thoroughly know what sin is, and
what a life it is to serve the flesh, and what the end of this will prove, with
what detestation would you cast it away? If you did thoroughly know what a life
of holiness is, how speedily would you choose it? If you did truly know what
God is, how infinitely powerful, and wise, and good; how holy, and just, and
true, and what title he has to you, and authority over you, and what and
Eternal Portion he would be to you, how is it possible that you could prefer
the dirt of the world before him, or delay any longer to return unto him? If
you did but truly know, what Christ is, and what he has done and suffered for
you, and what that pardon, and grace, and glory are which he has purchased for
you, and offers to you, and how sure his Promise is by which it is offered;
it is not possible that you should refuse to entertain him, or delay to give up
your souls unto him. Do you think a man that truly knows what Heaven is, and
what Hell is, can still be in doubt whether he should turn or not? Alas sirs,
if God would but open your eyes, to to see where you are, and what you are
doing, you would run as for your lives; and quickly change your minds and
ways. You would no more stay in your carnal state, then you would stay in a
house that were falling down on your heads, or in a ship that you perceived
sinking under you; or on the sands when you see the tide coming toward you. If
you did but see your Chamber full of Devils this night; you would not stand to
ask whether you should be gone: And sure then if you knew how the Devils are
about you, how they deceive you, and rule you, and wait to drag you away to
Hell, you would never stay a night longer willingly in such a state. While men
understand not what the Gospel means, nor what a Minister says to them, no
wonder if they regard them not, but continue in their sin. If you see a Bear
or a mad Dog making toward a man, and tell him of it, and call to him to be
gone, if he be a man of another language and do not understand you, he will
make never the more have: but if he understand and believe you, he will away.
If people think that Ministers are in jest with them, or that they are
uncertain of what they say, no marvel if they hear us in jest, or as men that
believe not what they hear: But if you knew that your lives lay on it, yea your
everlasting life, would you not regard it and look about you? Now you stand
deliberating and questioning the business whether you should turn, and let go
sin, or no: But if you knew that you must certainly have Hell with it if you
keep it, methinks your doubt should quickly be resolved, and you should be
loath to give another nights lodging to so chargeable and dangerous a guest.
Now when we persuade you to holiness of life, you will demurre on it, as if
there were some doubtfullness in the matter: But if you knew the nature and end
of holiness, you would soon be out of doubt; and if you knew but how much
happier you might be with God, you would never stick at the parting with your
most delightful sins. As the Jews rejected Christ, and preferred a murderer
before him, and cried out, Crucify him, and all because they did not know him,
1 Cor. 2. 8. Joh. 8. 9. and 1. 10. Act. 13. 27. So you let Christ knock, and
call, and offer you salvation, and you stand questioning whether you should
obey his call, and whether you should not prefer your lusts before him; and
all because you know him not, nor the Grace and Glory which he tendereth to
you. When men understand not the Reasons of God, that should prevail with them,
no wonder if they part not with that which is as dear to them as their lives.
But when once they know the Reasons of Christianity, those moving, weighty,
undeniable Reasons, that are* fetched from God, and Heaven, and Hell, they will
then stand questioning the matter no longer; but they will resign up all even
life it self. All this I speak of a spiritual, powerful, and a practical
Knowledge; and not of every swimming opinion and conceit.

Study therefore what God is, and what he is to you, and what he would be to
you. Study what sin is, and what the damnation is which it deserves. Study
what Christ is, and has done and suffered for you, and what he is willing to
do if you neglect him not. Study what the world is, and what is the utmost that
sin will do for you. Study what the everlasting Glory is, which you may have
with God, if you lose it not by your folly. And study what Faith is, and what
Repentance is, and what Love, and Joy, and a holy and heavenly life, and how
little reason you have to be afraid of them. If this understanding have but
deeply possessed you, it will byas your hearts, and make you resolved settled
Converts.

Whereas if you seem to turn, and scarce know why, and seem to take up a
Christian life, before you are thoroughly possessed with the Nature, Grounds,
and Reasons of it, no marvel if you are quickly l^st again in the dark, and if
every Caviller that you meet with can nonplus you, and make you stagger, and
call in question all that you have done, and ravell all your work: Or if you do
but run from one party to another, and follow every one that tells you a fair
tale, and never know what to fix upon, nor when you are in the way, and when
you are out.

The Apprehensions of the mind do move the whole man: Wisdom is the guide and
stay of the Soul. Sinning is doing foolishly, 2 Samuel 24. 10. And sinners are
fools, Prove. 1. 22. Psalm. 75. 4. Their mirth is but the mirth of fools, and
their song the song of fools, Eccl* 7. 4. 5. Yea, the best of their services,
while they refuse to hear and obey, is but the Sacrifice of fools, Eccl. 5. 1.
And such are not fit for the House of God: For God has no pleasure in fools,
Eccl. 5. 4. He has need to have his wits about him and know what he does, that
will be the servant of the God of Heaven, and will escape the deceits of a
subtle Devil, and get to Heaven through so many d^fficulties, as are before
him. Above all getting therefore get Wisdom.

DIRECT. II. If you would not have the work of your Conversion miscarry, when
you understand what is offered you, then Search the Scripture daily to see
whether those things be so or not.

So did the Bereans, Act. 17. 11. and the Text says, that therefore they
believed. We come not to cheat and deceive you; and therefore we desire not
that you should take any thing from us, but what we can prove to you from the
Word of God, to be certainly true. We desire not to lead you in the dark, but
by the light to lead you out of darkness: and therefore we refuse not to submit
all our Doctrine to an equal trial. Though we would not have you wrong your
souls by an unjust distrust of us; yet would we not desire you to take these
great and weighty things, merely upon our words: For then your Faith will be in
man; and then no marvel if it be weak, and uneffectual, and quickly shaken: If
you trust a man to day, you may distrust him to morrow; and if one man be of
greatest credit with you this year, perhaps another of a contrary mind may be
of more credit with you the next year. And therefore we desire no further to be
believed by you, then is necessary to lead you up to God, and to help you to
understand that Word which you must believe: Our desire therefore is that you
search the Scripture, and try whether the things that we tell you be the truth.
The Word will never work on you to purpose, till you see and hear God in it,
and perceive that it is he and not man only that speaks to you. When you hear
none speaking to you but the Minister, no marvel if you dare despise him: for
he is a frail and silly man like your selves: When you think that the Doctrine
which we preach to you, is merely of our own devising, and the conjecture of
our own brain, no marvel if you set light by it, and will not let go all that
you have, at the persuasion of a Preacher. But when you have searched the
Scripture, and find that it is the Word of the God of Heaven, dare you despise
it then? When you there find that we said no more then we were commanded, and
God that has spoken this Word will stand to it; then sure it will go nearer
you, and you will consider of it, and make light of it no more. If we offered
you bad wares, we should desire a dark shop; and if our gold were light or bad,
we would not call for the Balance and the Touchstone. But when we are sure the
things that we speak are true, we desire nothing more then trial. Beauty and
comeliness have no advantage of loathsome deformity, when they are both together
in the dark: but the light will show the difference, Error may be a loser by
the light, and therefore shunnes it, Joh. 3. 19, 20, 21. But truth is a gainer
by it, and therefore seeks it. Let Papists hide the Scripture from the people,
and forbid the reading of them in a tongue which they understand, and teach
them to speak to God they know not what; we dare not do so, nor do we desire
it: Our Doctrine will not go off well in the dark; and therefore we call you,
to the Law and to the Testimony, and desire you to take our words into the
light, and see whether they be according to the Word of the Lord. Nothing
troubles us more then that we cannot persuade our hearers to this trial. Some
of them are so hardened in their sin and misery, that they will not be at so
much labor as to open their Bibles, and try whether we say true or not. Some
of them will not trouble their minds with the thoughts of it; Psalm. 10 4. God
is not in all their thoughts. And some are already too wise to learn; they will
not so long abate their confidence of their former opinions; though, poor
souls, their ignorance does threaten their damnation. And some are so engaged
in a sinful party, that their companions will not give them leave, to make so
much question of the way that they are in: And some will scarce take the
Scripture for the Rule by which they must try and be tried; but look more to
custom, and the will of those in power over them. And most are unwilling to
try, because they are unwilling to know the truth, and cannot endure to find
themselves miserable, nor see the sin which they would not leave, nor see the
duty which they love not to practice. And thus we cannot get them to try
whether the things that we teach them be so.

For want of this it is that men deceive themselves, and think their case to be
safe when it is miserable, because they will not try it by the Word. This makes
them rage and be confident in their folly, Prove. 14. 16. and laugh, and sing,
at the brink of Hell, and swim as merrily down the stream to the devouring
gulf, as if no evil were near them. This makes them in the depth of misery to
have no pity on themselves, and to do so little to escape it: Though they have
time, and means and helps at hand, yet there are not hearts in them to make use
of them; yea, they run themselves daily further on the score: and all because
we cannot get them to search the Scripture, and try whether sin be so small a
matter, and whether this will not be bitterness in the end. Hence it is that
they are so easily drawn by a temptation; and that they dislike a holy life,
and have base thoughts of them that are most diligent for salvation, and are
most precious in the eyes of God, and that they can even deride the way that
they should walk in, Prove. 1* 22. Psalm. 1. 2. because they will not search the
Scripture to see what it says to these matters. The Word is a Light, and would
do much to open their eyes, and win them over to God, if they would but come
to it with a desire to know the truth. You think that the ungodly that are rich
and great, are in a better condition then a godly man that is poor and
despised. And why is this? but because you will not go into the Sanctuary, and
see in what a slippery place they stand, and what will be the end of these men,
Psalm. 73. 16, 17, 22. In a word, this is the undoing of millions of souls. They
are all their life time out of the way to Heaven, and yet will not be persuaded
to ask the way; but they run on and wink, and put it to the venture. Many a
thousand are gone out of the world, before they ever spent the quantity of one
day in trying by the Scripture whether their state were good, and their way
were right. Nay, let their Teachers tell them that they must be sanctified and
take another course, they will differ from their Teachers, though they be never
so wise or Learned; and they will contradict them, and not believe or regard
them. And yet we cannot get them to come to us, and put the case to the trial,
and let the Scripture be the jndge. Would they but do this, they could never
sure have such hard thoughts of their Teachers, and be offended at their
plainest closest dealing. You would then say [I see now the Minister says not
this of himself; he speaks but that which God commands him: And if he would
not deliver the Message of the Lord, he were unworthy and unfit to be his
Ambassador: He were cruel to me if he would not pull me out of the fire, by
the plainest closest means, Jud. 23. He hated me, if he would not rebuke me,
but suffer sin upon me, Lev. 19. 17. If he would please men, he should not be
the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. I know it is no pleasure to him to trouble
me, or to provoke me: but it would be his own destruction if he tell me not of
my danger, Ezekiel. 3. 18. And I have no reason to wish him to damn his own soul,
and suffer me to do the like by mine, and all for fear of displeasing me in my
sin.] These would be your thoughts if you would but try our words by the
Scripture, and see whether we speak not the mind of God.

And sure it would go somewhat deeper in your hearts, and it would stick by
you, and be more before your eyes, when you once understood that it is the Word
of God.

This then is my request to you, sirs, that the work of your Conversion may not
miscarry, that you would carry all that you hear to the Scripture, and search
there, and see whether it be so or not: that so you may be put out of doubt,
and may be at a certainty, and not stand wavering; and that your Faith may be
resolved into the Authority of God; and so the work may be Divine, and
consequently powerful and prevailing, when the Ground and Motive is Divine. If
you be not satisfied in the Doctrine which the Minister delivers to you,
first search the Scripture your selves, and if that will not do, go to him, and
desire him, to show you his grounds for it in the Word of God, and join with
you in Prayer for a right understanding of it. Do you question whether there be
so severe a judgment, and a Heaven and a Hell, as Ministers tell you: Search
the Scripture, in Mat. 25. and 2 These. 1. 8, 9, 10. Joh. 5. 29 Matthew. 13. Do
you question whether a man may not be saved, without conversion, regeneration,
and holiness? Open your Bibles, and see what God says, John 3. 3, 6. Mal. 18.
3. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Romans 8. 9. Heb. 12. 14. Do you think a man may be saved
without Knowledge. Let Scripture judge, 2 Cor. 4, 3, 4. Joh. 17. 3. Hos. 4. 6.
Do you think a man may be saved that does as the most do? and goes in the
common way of the world. Search the Scripture and see, Mat. 7. 13. and 20. 16.
and 22. 14. Luke 12. 32. Do you think an unhumbled Soul may be saved? that
never was contrite, and broken hearted for sin? Try by Isa. 57. 15. and 66. 2.
Psalm. 51. 17. Luke 4. 18. Mat. 11. 28. Do you think a man can be the Servant of
God, that lives a fleshly life, and will keep his sin? Try by Romans 8. 13. Joh.
3. 19. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. 1 John 3. 9, 10. Do you doubt whether it be necessary to
make so much ado to be saved, and to be so strict, and make Religion our
chiefest business? Try by Psalm. 1. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 4. 18. Heb. 12. 14. Luke 10.
42. Luke 13. 24. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. Do you think a man can be saved that is a
worldling? whose heart is more on Earth then heaven. Try by 1 John 2, 15. Phil.
3. 19. Col. 3. 1. Luke. 14. 26, 33. Do you doubt whether you should serve God
with your families? and instruct them, and pray with them. Try by Jos. 24. 15.
Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Dan. 6. 10. 11. Exodus 20. 10.

Thus if you will in all these weighty matters, but go to the Scriptures, and
see whether it say as your Teachers say, you might soon be resolved, and that
by the surest authority in the world. If you think that your Ministers may be
deceived, I hope you will confess that God cannot be deceived, If you think
that your Ministers are passionate, or felf-conceited, or speak out of ill will
to you, I hope you dare not say so by the Lord: he owes you no ill will, nor
speaks a word but what is most sure. If you think us partial, sure God is
impartial, what better judge can you have now, then he that is infallible, and
must judge you all at the last? If any Papist put it into your head to ask [who
shall be judge of the sense of Scripture] I answer, who shall be judge of the
judge of all the world? The Law is made to judge you, and not to be judged by
you. None can be the proper judges of the sense of a Law, but the maker of it:
Though others must judge their cases by the Law. Your work is to discern it,
and understand and obey it, and your work is to help you to understand it, but
it is neither our work nor yours to be the proper, or absolute judges of it. At
least where it speaks plain, it needs no judge.

Come then to the word in meekness and humility, with a teachable frame of
Spirit, and a willingness to know the truth, and a resolution to stand to it,
and yield to what shall be revealed to you, and beg of God to show you his
will, and lead you into the truth, and you will find that he will be found of
them that seek him.

DIRECT. III. If you would not have the work of your Conversion miscarry, my
next advice is this;

See that you be much in the serious Consideration, of the Truths which you
understand, betwixt God and you in secret.

I have often spoken of this heretofore; But because I apprehend it to be a
point of exceeding great concernment, I shall be longer on it again, then on
the rest.

The greatest matters in the world will not work much upon him that will not
think of them. Consideration opens the ear that was stopped, and the heart that
was shut up: It sets the powers of the Soul awork, and wakeneth it from the
sleep of incogitancy and security. The Thoughts are the first actings of the
Soul, that set a work the rest. Thinking on the matters that must make us wise,
and do the work of God on the heart, is that which lies on us to do in order
to our Conversion. By Consideration a sinner makes use of the Truth, which
before lay by, and therefore could do nothing. By Consideration he takes in
the Medicine to his Soul; which before stood by, and could not work. By
Consideration a man makes use of his Reason, which before was laid asleep, and
therefore could not do it is work. When the Master's from home the Scholars
will be at play. When the Coachman is asleep, the Horses may miss the way, and
possibly break his neck and their own. If the plowman go his way, the Oxen
will stand still, or make but bad unhandsome work. So when Reason is laid
asleep, and out of the way, what may not the Appetite do? and what may not the
Passions do? and what may not Temptations do with the Soul? A wise man when he
is asleep, has as little use of his wisdom as a fool. A Learned man when he
is asleep, can hardly dispute with an unlearnd man that is awake. A strong man
that is never so skillfull at his weapons, is scarce able in his sleep to deal
with the weakest child that is awake. Why all the powers of your Soul are, as
it were asleep, till Consideration awake them, and set them on work. And what
the better are you for being men and having Reason, if you have not the Use of
your Reason, when you need it? As men are Inconsiderate because they are
wicked, so they are the more wicked because they are inconsiderate. The keenest
sword, the greatest Cannon will do no execution against an enemy, while they
lie by and are not used. There is a mighty power in the Word of God, and the
example of Christ, to pull down strong holds, and conquer the strongest lusts
and corruptions. But they will not do this while they are forgotten and
neglected. Will Heaven entice the man that thinks not of it? Will Hell deter
the man that thinks not of it? Why is it that all the reasoning in the world,
will do no more good on a man that is deaf, then if you said nothing? But
because the passage to his Thoughts and understanding is stopped up. And if you
have eyes and see not, and ears and hear not, and wilfully cast it out of
your thoughts, what good can any thing do to you that is spoken. It is not
holding your meat in your mouth that will nourish you if you will not let it
down: nor taking it into your stomach, if you will not keep it but presently
cast it up again: But it must be kept till it be disgested and distributed. So
it is not the most excellent Truths in the world that will change your hearts,
if you let them not down to your hearts, and keep them not there by Meditation
till they are digested and turned into sprituall life. The plaster must be
laid upon the sore if you would be cured. The wound and sickness is at your
Heart: and if you will not take in the word to your heart, where the sickness
is, I know not how you should expect a cure. The Soul will not be charmed into
Holiness, by the bare hearing or saying over a few good words; as wizzards use
to cure diseases, or seem to cure them. It must be Truth at the Heart that
must change the Heart. And if you will not Think on it, and think on it again,
how can you expect it should come at your Hearts.

You say you would gladly have Christ and grace, and are ready to lay the blame
on God, because he does not give it you, and say, We cannot convert our selves.
But would you have the Spirit come in, while you hold the door against him? He
knocks and desires you to open and let him in, and you wish him to come in,
but you bolt the door, and no entreaty will procure you to open it. It is
Consideration of the saving doctrine of the Gospel, that opens the heart and
gives it entertainment. Set you selves therefore on purpose to this work, and
open the doors of your heart which are now shut, and let the King of Glory
come in. Who will believe that you love the Light, when you shut the windows,
and draw the curtains? If you will set your selves to consider of the Truth,
the windows of your Soul will be set open, and then the light will certainly
come in. Now you read over whole Chapters, and hear Sermon after Sermon, and
either they never stir you, or at least, it is but a little for a fit, like a
man that has a little warmd him at the fire in the winter, and when he goes
from it is colder then before: But if you would but set your selves to consider
of what you hear or read, one line of a Chapter, or one sentence of a Sermon
would say you in tears, or make you groan, or at least do more then now is
done. Satan has garrisond the heart of every carnal man: And consideration is
the principal means to cast him out. If by considering of the terrible
threatenings of the word, you would discharge these Canons of God against them,
what a battery would it make in the corruptions of your Souls. Our God is a
consuming fire, and the fire of hell is threatened in his Law, as the wages of
sin: By serious Consideration you may as it were, fetch fire from God and from
his word, and set to the very gates of Satan's garrison, and fire him out of
many of his holds.

But because this is so needful a point, I shall be so large upon it as 1o to
tell you some of those things that you should consider of, 2o. to tell you in
what manner you should do it, and 3o. to give you some Motives to put you on.

I. The first thing that I would have you often to think on, is, The Nature of
that God with whom you have to do. Consider that if he be the most wise, it is
all the reason in the world that he should rule you. If he be Good, and
infinitely Good, there is all the reason in the world that you should Love him:
and there is no show of reason, that you should love the world or sin before
him. If he be faithful and true, his threatenings must be feared, and his
promises must not be distrusted; and there is no reason that you should make
any question of his Word. If he be Holy, then Holiness must needs be most
excellent, and those that are the Holiest must needs be the best; because they
are most like to God: And then he must be an enemy to sin, and to all that are
unholy, because they are contrary to his nature. Consider that he is Almighty,
and there is no resisting him, or standing out against him: In the twink of an
eye can he snatch thy guilty Soul from thy body, and cast it where sin is
better known. A word of his Mouth can set all the world against thee; and set
thine own conscience against thee too: A frown of his face can turn thee into
Hell. And if he be thine enemy, it is no matter who is thy friend: For all the
world cannot save thee, if he do but condemn thee. They are blessed whom he
blesses, and they are cursed indeed whom he curses. He was from Eternity, and
thou art but as it were, of yesterday: Thy being is from him: thy life is
always in his hands, Thou can not live an hour without him: thou can not
fetch a breath without him: nor think a thought, nor speak a word, nor stir a
foot or hand without him: Thou may better live without bread, or drink, or
fire, or air, or earth, or water, then without him. All the world is before
him but as the drop of a bucket, or a little sand of dust that should be laid
in balance with all the earth: Had thou but compassed about this lower
world, and seen all the Nations of it, and its wonderful furniture, and seen
the great deeps of of the mighty Ocean, and the abundance of Creatures that be
in all? O what thoughts then would thou have of God! But if thou had been
above the Stars, and seen the Sun in all its glory, and seen the frame and
course of those higher Orbs, and seen the blessed glorious Angels, and all the
inhabitants of the higher world, O then what thoughts of God would thou
entertain? O but if it were possible that thou had seen his Glory, or seen
but his back-parts as Moses did, or seen him in Christ the now glofied
Redeemer, what apprehensions would thou have of him then. Then how would
thou abhor the name of sin: and how weary would thou be of the pleasantest
life that sensuality could afford thee? Then thou would quickly know, that no
Love can be great enough, and no praises can be high enough, and no service can
be holy and good enough, for such a God: Then you would soon know, that this
is not a God to be neglected, or dallyed with: nor a God to be resisted, nor
provoked by the wilful breaking of his Laws. It is Eternal Life to know this
God, Joh. 17. 3. and for want of knowing him, it is that sin abounds in the
world. This makes Holiness so scarce and lean: Men worship they care not how,
because they worship they know not whom. O therefore dwell on the Meditations
of the Almighty. So far as he does possess thy mind, there will be no place for
sin and vanity. One would think, if I should set you no further task, and tell
you of no other matter for your Meditation, this one, should be enough: For
this one is in a manner all. What will not the due knowledge of God do upon the
Soul. That Is the best Christian, and the most happy man that knows most of
him: And that is the most vile and miserable wretch, that is furthest from him,
and strangest to him: It is the Character of the fool of fools, to have a
heart whose disposition and practice says, There is no God, Psalm, 14. 1. That
is, To be so affected and employed in their hearts, as if there were no God:
and when God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. It was better with man
when he had less knowledge for himself, and fewer thoughts for himself, and
more of God. And there is no way to restore us to sound understanding, and to
perfect our knowledge, but to turn our eye upon God again: For in knowing him,
we know all, that is worth the knowing. Take hold then of the blessed God in thy
Meditations, and fill thy thougts with him, and dwell upon those thoughts.
Remember he is always with thee: and where ever thou art, or what ever thou
art doing, most certainly he sees thee* As sure as thou are there, the Lord is
there. He knows thy thoughts: he hears thy words, he sees all thy ways. And
is such a God as this to be provoked or despised! Were it not better provok and
despise all the world? Is his favor to be slighted.? Were it not better to
lose the favor of all the world? Consider of this.

2o Another thing that I would have you often Think of, is, what end you were
made for, and what business it is, that you came for into the world. You may
well think that God made you not in vain: and that he made you for no lower
end, then for himself: And that he would never have made you, nor so long
preserved you, if he had not cared what you do. He would never have endued you
with a Reasonable and immortal Soul, but for some high, and noble, and immortal
end. Surely it was that you might be happy in Knowing him, that he made you
capable of Knowing him: for he made nothing in vain. It is useful to a horse
to know his pasture, and provender, and work, and perhaps his master; but he
needs not know whether there be a God: And accordingly he is qualified. But it
is sure man's chief concernment to know that there is a God, and what he is, and
how to serve him, and what he is and will be to us: Or else we should never
have been capable of such things. And he would never have made you capable of
loving him, but that you should be exercised and made happy in that Love. The
frame and faculties, and capacity of your Souls; and the scope of Scripture, do
all declare, that you were sent into this world, to seek after God, and to Love
him, and obey him, and rejoice in him in your measure; and to prepare for a
life of nearer Communion, where you may Enjoy him and please him in the highest
perfection. Consider with your selves, whether a life of sin be that which you
were made for? Or whether God sent you hither to break his Laws, and follow
your own lusts. And whether the satisfying of your flesh, and the gathering of
a little worldly wealth, and the feathering of a nest which you must so quickly
leave, be like to be the business that you were sent about into the world.

3o. The next thing that I would have you consider of is, How you have answered
the Ends of your Creation, and how you have done the business that you came
into the world to do. Look back upon the drift of your hearts and lives: read
over the most ancient records of your consciences: and see, what you have been,
and what you have been doing in the world till now. Have you spent you days in
seeking after God? and your estates and strength in faithful serving him. Have
you lived all this time in the admirations of his excellencies, and the servent
Love of him, and delightful remembrance of him, and the zealous worship of
him? If you had done this, you had not need of a Conversion. But consider; have
you not forgotten what business you had in the world, and little minded the
world that you should have prepared for, and lived as if you knew not him that
made you, or why he made you? was sport and merryment the end that you were
created for? was ease and idleness, or eating, or drinking, or vain
discourses, or recreation, the business that you came into the world about? was
living to the flesh, and scraping up riches, or gapeing after the esteem of
men, the work that God sent you hither to do. Was this it that he preserved you
for, and daily gave you in provision for? what was it to forget him and slight
him, and turn him out of your hearts, and rob him of his service and honor;
and to set up your flesh in his stead, and give that to it that was due to him?
Bethink you what you have done, and whether you have done the work that you
were sent to do, or not?

4o The next thing you should use to Consider of is, How grievously you have
sinned, and what a case it is that your sin has brought you into. If you take
but an impartial view of your lives, you may see how far you have mist your
marks, and how far you have been from what you should have been; and how little
you have done of that which was your business: And O what abundance of
aggravations have your sins, which I shall pass over now, because I must
mention them under another head. It is not only some actual out-breakings
against the bent of your heart and life; but your very heart was false, and
gone from God, and set in you to do evil.

O the time that you have lost; the means and helps that you have neglected;
the motions that you have resisted; the swarms of evil thoughts that have
filled your imaginations; the streams of vain and evil words that have flowed
from your mouth! the works of darkness, in publik and in secret that God has
seen you in! And all this while, how empty were you of inwad holiness, and how
barren of good works, to God or men. What have you done with all your talents?
and how little or nothing has God had of all?

And now consider what a case you are in, while you remain unconverted? you
have made your selves the sinks of sin, the slaves of Satan, and the flesh;
and are skillful in nothing but doing evil: If you be called to prayer or holy
meditation, your hearts are against it, and you are not used to it, and
therefore you know not how to do it, to any purpose: But to think the thoughts
of lust or coveteousness, or hatred, or malice, or revenge; this you can do
without any toil: To speak of the world, or of your sports and pleasures, or
against those that you bare ill will to, this you can do without any study. You
are such as are spoken of, Jer. 4. 22. My people is foolish: they have not
known me: they are sottish children, and they have no understanding: they are
wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.] You are grown
strangers to the God that made you, in whose love and service you should live
and find your chief delights. Your hearts are hardened, and you are dead in your
sins: The guilt of the sins of your lives are still upon you: You can neither
look into your hearts or lives, no not on one day of your lives, or the best
hour that you have spent, but you must see the ugly face of sin, which
deserves condemnation. You have made God your Enemy that should have been your
only felicity: And yet you are always at his mercy and in his hands. Little do
you know how long his patience will yet endure you; or what hour he will call
away your Souls; And if death come, alas, what a case will it find you in! how
lamentably unready are you to meet him! how unready to appear before the
dreadful God whom you have offended; and what a terrible appearance do you
think that will be to you? most certainly if you die before you are converted,
you will not be from among the Devils and damned souls an hour. The Law has
cursed you already: and the execution will be answerable, if you die in your
sins. And thus you may see the gain of sin, and what it is that you have been
doing all this while, for your own Souls; and what a case it is that you have
brought you selves into; and what need you have speedily to look about you.

5. The next step of your Consideration should be this. Bethink your selves
what a blessed Condition you might be in, if by Conversion you were but
recovered from this misery, and brought home to God. This moved the heart of
the Prodigal son to return, Luke 15. 16, 17. [When he came to himself he said,
How many hired servants of my fathers have bread enough, and to spare, and I
perish with hunger.] He that had not husks to feed on with the swine,
considered the plenty that he had for saken at home. The poorest member of the
household of Christ, is in a better condition then the greatest King on earth,
that is unconverted. You might have lived another kind of life, then you have
done, for safety, and benefit, and true content, if you would have turned your
minds and life to God. Were you but Converted, you would be the living members
of Christ, and his precious benefits would be yours: His blood would cleanse you
from all your sins; and they would be all freely forgiven you: God would be
Reconciled to to you, and become your friend, yea your Father and your God; and
will take you for his household servants, and adopted children: The Holy Ghost
would dwell in you, and guide your understandings, and show you that which
flesh and blood connot reveal, and bring you into acquaintance with the
mysteries of God: He will be a Spirit of Light and Life within you, and work
your hearts yet more to God, and give you yet stronger inclinations and
affections to the things above. He will help you when you are weak, and quicken
you where you are dull, and be your remembrancer when you are forgetful of
necessary things. He will help you in prayer, both for matter and for manner,
and help you in Meditation, and conference and other duties: He will warn you
of your danger, and strengthen you against temptations, and cause you to
overcome; and if you fall, he will cause you to rise again: he will be an
in-dwelling comforter to you, and so effectually speak peace to you in the
midst of your disquietness, that by speaking it, he will create it in you: And
in the multitude of your thoughts within you, his comforts will delight your
Souls. O what a life might you live, if Christ by his Spirit did once live in
you! you may easily conjecture how tender Christ would be of his own members,
how dearly he would love them, how constantly he would watch over them, how
plentifully he would provide for them, and how safely he would preserve them.
And if you should come into a rougher way, he would lead you out: Afflictions
should never be laid on you but for your good; and continue no longer then your
need continues them; and be taken off at last to your satisfaction and
contentment. Indeed your life would be a life of mercies: and that which is but
a common Mercy to common men, would be a special Mercy to you, as coming from
your Fathers love, and furthering you salvation, and hinting out to you, your
everlasting Mercies. You could not open your eyes, but you would see that which
may encourage and comfort you: all the works of God which you behold, would
show you his Majesty, his love and power, and lead you to himself. You could
not open your Bible, but you would find in it the blessed lines of Love: O what
good it would do you, to read there the blessed Attributes of your God! to look
upon his Name; to peruse the description of his most perfect nature! what good
would it do you to read of the nature, and incarnation, and life, and death,
and resurrection, and assension, and intercession, and return of your blessed
Redeemer? what good would it do you to find those holy Rules which your new
nature is agreeable to, and to read over the Law, that is written in your
hearts, and read the curse from which you are delivered? what life and joy
would your Souls receive from the many, and full, and free promises of grace!
were you once but truly sanctified and made new, your condition would be often
comfortable, but always safe: and when you were in the greatest fears and
perplexities, you would still be fast in the arms of Christ: And what a life
would that be, to have daily access to God in prayer: to have leave in all your
wants and dangers, to seek to him with a promise of hearing and success; that
you may be sure of much more from him, then a child can from the tenderest
father, or a wife from the most loving husband upon earth. What a life would it
be, when you may always think on God as your felicity, and fetch your higehest
delights from him, from whom the ungodly have their greatest terrors? And it
is no contemptible part of your benefits, that you may live among his people,
and in their special love, and have a special Communion with them, and
interest in their prayers, and may possess among them the privileges of the
Saints, and the Ordinances of God: That in stead of idle talk, and the
unprofitable fellowship of the children and works of darkness, you may join
with the Church of God in his Praises, and feed with them at his table on the
body and blood of Christ, and then have conveyances of renewed grace, and a
renewed pardon sealed to your Souls: But how long should I stay. if I should
tell you but one half the blessings of a Sanctified and spiritual state? In a
word, God would be yours, Christ would be yours, the Holy Ghost would be yours,
all things would be yours; the whole world would have some relation to your
welfare: Devils would be subdued to you, and cast out of your Souls; sin
would be both pardoned and overcome; Angels would be ministering spirits unto
you for your good: The promises of Scripture would be yours; and everlasting
Glory would at last be yours; and while you staid on earth, you might comfort
your selves as often as you would, with the believing foresight of that
unconceiveable, unspeakable, endless felicity.

O sirs, what a treasure have I here expressed in a few words! what hearts
would you have, if they were but possessed and lively and sensible of all that
is contained in this leaf or two! you would not envy the greatest Prince on
earth his glory, nor change states with any man that were a stranger to these
things. Did you but use to consider of the state of the Saints, how could you
keep off, and stay with sin, and make so many delays in turning unto God!
Sure this consideration might turn the scales.

6o. The next part of your Meditation should be, Of the gracious and wonderful
work of our Redemption, and the means and remedies which are provided for your
Souls, and the terms on which Salvation may be obtained.

For all the sins that you have committed, you are not given over to despair:
the Lord has not left you without a reremedie. Your Conversion and Salvation
is not a thing impossible. Nay so much is done by Christ already, that it is
brought upon reasonable terms even to your hands. A new and living way is
consecrated for us by Christ through the veil of his flesh, and by his blood
we may have boldness to enter into the Holiest, Heb. 10. 19, 20. He has borne
your burden; and offere^h you in stead of it his burden which is light, Matthew.
11. 28. He has removed the Impossibility, and nailed to his Cross the hand
writing that was against you, Col 2. 14, 15. And in stead of it offers you
his easy yoke. He has spoiled the Principalities and Powers that had
captivated you, and openly triumphed over them on the Cross. You are not left
under the care of making satisfaction to God for your own sins, but only of
accepting the Redeemer that has satisfied. This much I dare confidently say to
you all, without extending his benefits too far. It will be for want of faith
in you, and not for want of satisfaction by the Redeemer, if any of you perish.
And how free are his offers? How full are his promises? you are conditionally
all pardoned and justified already, as is legible under the hand of God. And
the Condition which is imposed on you, is not some meritorious or mercenary
work, but the Accepting of the benefit freely given, according to its nature,
use and ends. This is the Faith by which you must be justified. These are the
terms on which you may be saved. And which is more, the Lord has provided
means, even excellent, and plentiful, and powerful means, for the furthering
of your Souls in the performance of this Condition, and helping you to Believe,
and Repent that you may live: And if the Spirit make not these Means
effectual, and adjoyn not his special grace, and after this you remain
unconverted, it will not be long of him, but of your selves. So that you may
perceive how hopeful acase you are yet in, by the blood of your Redeemer, if
you destroy not your own hopes, and make not your case desperate by wilful
Impenitency, and refusal of free grace. How fair are you yet for Heaven? and
what happy advantages have you for Salvation? It Is brought even to your doors;
It Is thrust as it were into your hands: The Redeemer has done so much for you
all, as to bring your Salvation to the choice of you own wills; and if you be
his chosen ones, he will also make you willing. You have precepts to Believe,
you are threatened if you will not Believe, you have promise upon promise, and
Christ himself offered you pardon, and life, and Salvation with him, if you are
but truly and heartily willing. You have God himself, condescending to beseech
you to accept them: and Ambassadors entreating you in his name and stead: 2
Cor. 5. 19, 20. You have Ordinances fitted to your necessities: both Reading,
and Preaching, and Sacraments, and Prayer. You have store of plain and
powerful Books: you have the Godly about you, most desirous to assist you,
that would be glad to see or hear of your Conversion: You have the sight of
the wicked, that are wallowing in their own dung, and the dirt of the world, to
make you hate such beastly ways. You have Reason and Conscience within you to
consider of these matters, and set them home, and apply them to your selves:
You have time and strength to do all this, if you will not abuse it, and
provoak God to take it from you for your negligence. You have Mercies of many
sorts, outward and inward, to win upon you, and encourage you in the work! And
sometime Afflictions to remember you, and awaken you, and spur you on; The
Devil and all your Enemies are so far disabled, that they cannot destroy you
against your wills, nor keep you from Christ, but by your own Consents. The
Angels of Heaven are ready to help you, and would even rejoice at your
Conversion. This is your case, and these are your helps, and encouragements:
You are not shut up under desperation. God never told you, It is in vain to
think of Conversion; It is too late; If any have told you so, it was the Devil,
and not God: And one would think that such Considerations as these should drive
the nail to the head, and be effectual to move you to Resolve, and Turn.

7o. The last thing that I would set before you to be Considered, is, What Is
like to be the end of it, if after all this you should die unconverted?

O sirs, your hearts are not able now to conceive of it, nor the tongue of any
mortal man to utter it. But so much of it we can certainly utter, as one would
think should make your hearts to tremble. You have seen it may be, a dying man,
in what pangs and agonies he parts with his Soul: and you have seen it is
like, the corpse that was left there behind; and seen it laid in the common
Earth. But you see not what became of the Soul, nor what an appearance it made
in another world, nor what compani^ did attend it, nor what a place or state it
past into. O sirs, when the hour is at hand that this must be your own case, it
will awaken you to other kind of affections then you have or can have at the
reading of these words. It Is wonderful that a little distance should make us
so insensible of that change which we are all certain will come to pass: And
yet through the folly and deadness of our hearts, it is so: But they are other
kind of thoughts of these weighty matters, which we shall have the next hour
after death, then the liveliest affections beforehand can afford us.

The misery was great that the Redeemer did find you in, and which you deserved
by your sin against the Law of the Creator. But if you be found unconverted
at last, your punishment will be much sorer, and your case far worss then it
was before. The Redeemers Law or Gospel, has it is peculiar Threatening, which
differs from the Law of the mere Creator in several respects: Even 1o. in
the nature of the punishment, which will be torments of Conscience for the
neglect of a Redeemer, and recovering Grace, which you should never have felt
if you had never been Redeemed: 2o. And in the Degree of the punishment, which
will be far sorer, Heb. 10. 29. And 3o. in the Remedilesness of it, the
Sentence being irreversible and peremtory: The first Law indeed provided no
Remedy, but it did not Exclude Remedy, nor make it impossible: But the Law of
Christ does positively and expressly exclude all Remedy, and leave the Soul that
goes unconverted out of the body, to utter Desperation, and Misery without
Help or Hope of End. But I shall not stand now to describe to you the terrors
of Judgment or of Hell, because I have done it already in other Books, which I
desire you to fetch the rest of this Meditation from; that is, My Treatise of
Judgment, and the beginning of my third Part of my Book of Rest.

II. Having told you what should be the Matter of your Consideration, I shall
next tell you (but briefly) in what Manner you should perform it. And here I
shall not stand to prescribe you any long or exact Method for Meditation, both
because it agrees not with my present resolved brevity, and because the
Persons that now I deal with are not capable of observing such Rules; and if
any desire such Helps they may transfer the Directions which are given on
another Subject in my Book of Rest, to the Subject now in hand.

1. Do not stay till such thoughts will come of them selves into your minds, but
set your selves purposely to Consider of these matters. Take some time to call
your Souls to an account concerning their present state, and their preparations
for Eternity. If a Heathen Seneca, could call himself every night to an account
for the evil committed, and the good omitted in the day past, as he professes
that he ordinarily did, why may not even an Unconverted man, that has the
helps which are now among us, bethink himself of the state of his Soul? But I
know that a Carnal heart is exceeding backward to serious Consideration, and is
loath to be troubled with such thoughts as these; and the Devil will do what he
can to hinder it, by himself, and others: but yet if men would but do what they
may do, it might be better with them then it is. Will you but now and then
purposely withdraw you selves from company into some secret place, and there set
the Lord before your eyes, and call your Souls to a strict account about the
matters that I have mentioned even now, and make it your business to exercise
your Reason upon them; and as you Purposely go to Church to hear, so Purposely
set your selves to this duty of Consideration, as a necessary thing

2. When you are upon it, labor to waken your Souls, and to be very Serious in
all your Thoughts; and do not think of the Matters of Salvation, as you would
do of an ordinary trivial business, which you do not much regard, or care how
it goes. But remember that your Life lies on it, even your everlasting Life:
And therefore call up the most earnest of your thoughts, and rouse up all the
powers of your Souls, and suffer them not to draw back, but command them to the
work: And then set the seven Points that I mentioned even now before you: And
as you think of them, lobour to be Affected with them, in some measure
according to their exceeding weight. As Moses said to Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. 46. Set
your Hearts to all the words which I testify among you this day; which ye
shall command your children to do, etc. For it is not a vain thing for you;
because it is your life. And as Christ said. Luke 9. 44. Let these sayings sink
into your ears. So I say to you, Let the Matters which you think of, go to your
hearts, and sink down to the quick of your affections.

And if your hearts would slip away from the work, and other thoughts would
creep into your mind, and you are aweary of these Considerations before they
have done their worcester, see that you give not way to this laziness, or
unwillingness, but remember it is a work that Must be done, and therefore hold
your Thoughts upon it, till your hearts are stirred, and warmed within you.

And if after all, you cannot awake them to Seriousness and Sensibility, put
two or three such wakening Questions as these to your selves.

1. Quest. What if it were but the case of my body, or state, or name, should I
not earnestly consider of it? If one do but wrong me, how easily can I think of
it, and how tenderly do I feel it; and can scarce forget it: If my good name be
blemished, and I be but disgraced, I can think of it night and day: If I lose
but a beast, or have any Cross in the world, or decay in my Estate, I can think
of it with sensibility: If I lose a child or a friend, I can feel it as well as
think on it. If my health be decayed, and my Life in danger, I am in good
earnest in thinking of this. And should I not be as serious, in the Matters of
Everlasting Life? Should I not think of it, and soberly, and earnestly think on
it, when body and Soul do lie at the stake, and when it concerns my
everlasting Joy or Torment?

2. Quest. What if I had but heard the Son of God himself calling on me to
Repent, and be Converted, and seconding his Commands with those earnest
expression, (He that has an ear to hear let him hear) would it not have
brought me to some serious Thoughts of my state? Why this he has done in his
Word, and does it by his Ambassadors, and why then should I not consider it?

3. Quest. If I did but know that death were at my back, and ready to arrest
me, and that I should be in another world before this day sevennight, I should
then begin to bethink me in good sadness: And why do I not so now, when I have
no hold of my life an hour, and when I am sure that shortly that time will come?

4. Quest. If my eyes were but open to see that which I pretend to believe, and
which is certainly true; even to see a glimpse of the Majesty of the Lord? to
see the Saints in Joy and Glory, to see the damned Souls in Misery; and if I
heard their lamentations; would not this even force my heart to Consideration?
O then how earnestly should I think of these things? And why should I not do so
now, when they are as sure as if I saw them, and when I must see them ere it be
long?

Many more such awakening Questions are at hand, but I give you but these brief
touches on the things that are most common and obvious, that the most ignorant
may be able to make some use of them. With such thoughts as these, you must
bring on your backward hearts, and shake them out of their insensibility, and
awaken them to the work.

III When you have brought your hearts to be serious, be sure that you drive on
your Considerations to a Resolution. Break not off in the middle, or before you
bring the matter to an issue; But let all be done in order to Practice. When
you have been Thinking of the excellencies of God, and the world to come, and
comparing them with all the delights on earth; put the question then to your
hearts, and say, What say thou now, O my Soul? which of these is the better
for thee? which is the more desirable? and which of them should thou
prefer? Resolve then, and make thy choice according to the light, and
convictions which thou have received. When you are thinking of the Reasons that
should move you to be Converted, ask your selves? Whether these Reasons be not
clear, and what you have to say against them? and whether any thing that can
be said to the contrary, can prove it better for you to be as you are, and to
remain unconverted? Ask your selves, Is my Judgment Resolved, or is it not?
And if it be (as sure it must be, if you be not besides your selves) then write
it down under your hands, or at least in your hearts. I do here confess before
the Lord, that his Commands are just, his motions are Reasonable, his offers
are exceeding Merciful: I am satisfied that it is best for me to Turn to him
speedily, and with all my heart? I confess before him that I have no Reason to
the contrary that deserves to be owned, and called Reason; This is my own
Judgment; of this I am Convinced: If I Turn not after this, the Light that is
in me, and the Judgment that I now possess, must needs be a witness against my
Soul. If you would but thus drive on the case to a Resolution of your
Judgments, you would have a great advantage for the resolving of your wills,
which is the next thing that you must proceed to. And therefore next ask your
selves, Why should I not now Resolve and fixedly Resolve, to Turn without any
more delay? Is not the case plain before me? What Reason have I to stand
questioning the matter any longer, and to be unwilling to be happy? shall I
provoke God by dallying with him, and hazard my Soul by lingering out my time,
in such a miserable state? No; by the Grace of God I will Return; Even this
hour, without any more delay. Thus drive on all your Consideration to
Resolution (But of this, I have more to say anon.)

By this time you may see of what necessity this duty of Consideration is, and
how it must be performed, that it may further your Conversion: But because it
is a matter of so great Necessity, I am loath to leave it thus, till I have
done what I can to persuade you to the practice of it. To which end I entreat
you to think of these following Motives.

1. Consideration is a duty that you may perform if you will. You cannot say
that it is wholly out of your power; So that you are left unexcusable, if you
will not be persuaded to it. You say, you cannot Convert your selves: But
cannot you set your selves to Consider of your ways, and bethink you of those
Truths that must be the Instruments of your Conversion? Your Thoughts are
partly at the command of your will: You can turn them up and down from one
thing to another. Even an unsanctified Minister that has no saving relish of
Spiritual things, can think of them, and spend most of his time in thinking of
them, that he may preach them to others: And why cannot you then turn your
thoughts to them for your selves? You can think of House, and Land, and
Friends, and Trading, and of any thing that ayleth you, or any thing that you
want, or any thing that you love, or think would do you good; And why cannot
you think, of your sin, and danger, of God, and of his Word and Works, of the
state of your Souls, and of Everlasting Life? Are you not able to go sometimes
by your selves, and Consider of these matters? Are you not able when you are
alone in your beds, or as you travail in the way, or at your labor, to bethink
you how things stand with your Souls? Why are you not able? what is it that
could hinder you, if you were but willing.

2. Yea further Consideration is so cheap a Remedy, that if you will not use
this, you despise your Souls: yea and you despise the Lord himself, and the
Everlasting things which you are called to Consider of. A man that is in danger
of losing his estate, or health, or life, and will not so much as bethink him
of a Remedy, does sure set light by them, and lose them by his contempt. A man
that had but his house on fire, and would not so much as Think how to quench
it, does deserve that it should be burnt. If your Parents, or Children, or
Friends were in distress, if you would not so much as Think of them, it were a
sign you did not set much by them. Why Sirs, are not your Souls worth the
Thinking on? Is not God, is not your Redeemer worth the Thinking on? And yet
you will hypocritically pretend that you love God above all, when you will not
so much as seriously Think of him? How can you show greater contempt of any
thing, then to cast it out of your minds, as unworthy to be thought on? And how
can you more plainly show that you despise God, and Heaven, then by such a
course as this? If it be not worth the Thinking on, it is worth nothing.

3. Consider that God does not set so light by your Salvation. He thought it
worth a great deal more: Must Christ think it worth his bloody sufferings and
worth such a life of labor and sorrow, and will not you judge it worth your
serious Consideration? If he had not Thought on it, and Thought again, how
miserable shoud we have remained? Ministers also must Think on it, and Study
how to save your Souls. And should you not Study how to save your own? Must
another man make it the business of his life, to Think how to do you good, that
you may be saved? and are you not as much bound to do good to your selves? Yea,
all that fear God about you are bound to Study to do you good? and should you
not bethink you then, of the things that concern your own good?

4. Moreover, what have you your Reason for, but to Consider. And wherein do
you differ from the beasts, so much as in your Reason? If you have Reason, and
will not use it, you bruitifie your selves? You live like mad men: for what is
Madness, but a loss of the use of Reason? And do you think it a small thing, to
deface so noble a Creature as man, and to turn your selves into beasts, and
madmen? Do you think that God will not call you to account for your Reason,
how you have used it? Doubtless he gave it you for a higher employment, then to
enable you to plow, and sow, and follow your trades, and provide for your
flesh. If this were all that a man did exceed a beast in, what a silly wretched
wight were man? Yea so much more miserable then beasts, as his knowledge begets
more care, and sorrow, and fear, then theirs. What matter is it for having
Reason at all, if it be not that we may use it for the matters of God, and
Eternal life?

5. Moreover, your Soul is an Active Principle, which will be working one way
or other: Your Thoughts will be going on one thing or other; And therefore the
bare Consideration is no great labor to you. And if you must lay out your
thoughts on some thing, is it not better lay them out on these things, then on
any other? Have you any Better matters to think on then these? Have you any
Greater matters? or matters of greater Necessity to think of; You cannot sure
imagine it; At least you will not say so for shame. This makes your
inconsiderateness an unexcusable sin. If Thinking were a toil to you, it
were another matter. But when you must Think of something, why not of God, and
your Eternal state, and the way to Heaven, as well as of other matters. Will
you rather throw away your Thoughts then God shall have them? If a man command
his servant that is lame, to go on his business, the refuser has a good
excuse: I cannot go, or not without great pain, and danger: But if he have a
son or a servant, that is so wanton that he cannot stand on his legs, but
spends his time in running up and down and dancing, and leaping, this person
has no excuse, if he will refuse to go on his Masters or his Fathers Errand;
but will gadd about on his pleasure all day, and will not go a few steps when
he is bidden; especially if it were for his own life, or welfare. So when you
have Thoughts that will not be kept idle, but will be gadding abroad through
the world, and yet you will not think of God, and the matters of your peace,
what wilfullness is this. If you should ask one that has it not, for meat, or
drink, or money, they might well deny you. But if you ask these of one that
has abundance, and knows not what to do with them, but would throw them down
the channel, rather then you should have them, what would you think of such a
one? Especially, if it were your servant, or your child that owed you much
more? Thus do you by God, and your own Souls. You have Thoughts enough and to
spare, you know not what to do with them; and yet rather then you will spend
one hour in a day or a week in serious Thoughts of the state of your Souls, and
the life to come, you will cast them away upon news, and tales, and other folks
business that do not concern you; yea, you will cast them down the sink of
Covetousness, and Malice, and Lust, and Wantonness, and make them servants to
the Devil and the flesh. If you have a brook running by your Land, you will
endeavor to turn it over your ground, that seeing it must run, it may as well
run that way where it may do good, as run in vain. So when your thoughts must
run, is it not better that you turn them to your own hearts, and states, to
prepare for the world that you are ready to step into, then to let them run in
vain. If you see a man go into a wine-seller, (though it be his own) and pull
out all the spigots, and let all the wine run about the seller, and suffer no
body to catch it, or be the better for it, what would you conceive of the
wisdom or charity of that man? Your Thoughts are a thing more precious then
wine, and such a thing as should not be spilt. And yet is not this your
everie-daies practice? You are before him that knows your Thoughts: Deny it if
you can. What hours of the day, can a man come to you, and find your Thoughts
altogether idle? What minute of an hour can a man come and ask you, What are
you now Thinking on? and you can truly say, Nothing! I know as long as you are
awake you are always thinking of somewhat, (and perhaps when you are asleep) And
what is it on? This body shall have a Thought: and that body a Thought: every
word you hear, and every wrong that is done you, and almost every thing you look
upon, shall have a Thought: and God and your own Salvation shall have none:
that is; you will lose them, and let them run in wast; but you will do no good
with them, nor take in any profit by them, to your selves.

6. Have you any Thing that better deserves your Consideration, then God, and
your Salvation? Certainly God has more right to your Thoughts then any thing
else that you can place them on. Your flesh, your Friends, your worldly
business are neither so honorable, so necessary, or so profitable Subjects,
as God, and Heaven are. As there is more profit to be got by the tillage of
fruitful Land, then barren Heath; or by digging in a Mine of Gold, then in a
Clay-pit. So is there more pleasure and profit to be gotten, in one hours
serious Thoughts of your Salvation, then in thinking all your life time of the
world.

7. At least methinks you should Consider, how disproportionably and unequally
you lay out your Thoughts. Cannot you spare God the Tenths; no nor the
hundreth-part of them? Look back upon your lives, and trace your Thoughts from
day to day, and tell me how many hours in a week, in a month, in a year, you
have spent, in serious Thoughts of the state of your Souls, and of the life to
come? Is it one hour of a hundred, of a thousand, of ten thousand, with some of
you, that is thus spent? Nay I have very great cause to fear, that there are
some, yea that there are many, yea that there is far the greatest number, that
never spent one hour since they were born, in withdrawing themselves purposely
from all other business, and soberly, and in good sadness bethinking themselves
what case they are in, what Evidence they have of their Title to Salvation, or
how they must be justified at the Bar of God; no nor what business they have
in the world, and to what end they were made, and how they have done the work,
that they were made for. Ah Sirs, does Conscience justify you in this? Or
rather will it not torment you one day to remember it? What? did thy Land, and
Livings, worldly matters deserve all thy Thoughts, and did not the saving of
the Soul deserve some of them? Did thy lusts, and sports, and wantoness deserve
all; and did not God deserve some of them? Was it not worth now and then an
hours time, no nor one hours study in all thy life, to bethink thee in good
sadness how to make sure of a life of endless Joy and Glory, and how to escape
the flames of Hell? This is not an equal distribution of thy Thoughts, As thou will confess at last in the horror of thy Soul.

8. It is the end of your present Time and warnings, that you may Consider, and
prepare for your Everlasting state. What have you to do on Earth but to
Consider how to get well to Heaven? O that you did but know what a Mercy it is,
before you enter upon an Endless Life, to have but Time to bethink you of it,
and to make your Election sure! If you were to be called away suddenly this
night, and the Angel of the Lord should say to any of you, Prepare; for within
this hour thou must die, and appear before the living God. Then would you not
cryout, O not so suddenly Lord! Let me have a little more time to Consider of
my Condition: Let me have one month longer, to bethink me of the case of my
Soul, and to make sure that I am Justified from the guilt of my sins: Let me
have one day more at least to prepare for my Everlasting state: for alas, I am
yet unready. Would not these be your cries, if God should call you presently
away? And yet now you have time you will not Consider of these matters and
prepare.

9. Moreover, is it not time for you to Consider your ways, when God does
Consider them: If he would forget them or did not regard them, you might regard
them the less your selves: But be sure of it, he does observe them whether you
do or not, and he Remembers them though you forget them. Do thou not know
that all the sins of thy life are still on record before the Lord; says Job
14. 16, 17. Thou numbrest my steps: do thou not watch over my sin? My
transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquity. Do you
think that God forgets your sins, as you forget them? says the Lord by the
Prophet Hosea, 7. 2. They Consider not in their hearts, that I remember all
their wickedness; Now their doings have beset them about, they are before my
face: But, you will say, what if God do Consider our ways? why surely then it is
not for nothing, but evil is near if nor prevented, As the Lord says in Deuteronomy.
32. 34, 35. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
Treasures? To me belongs vengeance, and recompense: their foot shall slide in
due time: For the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall
come upon them make have. If God be registring up thy sins, thou have cause to
tremble to think what that pretends: For in this hardness and impenitency of
thy heart, thou art treasuring up wrath, against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous Judgments of God, Romans 2. 5. As Grace is the seed
of Glory, so sin is the seed of shame, and trouble, and everlasting Torment:
and though it may seem long before the Harvest, you will taste the bitter fruit
at last; and whatsoever you have sowed, that shall you reap.

10. Moreover; if any thing ailed you, you look that God should presently
Consider you: Or if you want any thing, you think he should Consider your
wants: And yet will you not Consider of him, and of your own wants? When you
are in trouble you will cry to God, Have Mercy upon me O Lord, Consider my
Trouble, Psalm. 9 33. Consider and hear me O God, Psalm. 13. 3. When you lie in
pain and sickness, you will then cry to God; Consider mine affliction, and deliver
me, Psalm. 119. 153. If you be oppressed or abused, you will groan as the
Israelites under their Taskmasters, and perhaps cry to God, as the captived
people, Lam. 1. 11. See O Lord, and Consider; for I am become vile: Remember O
Lord, what is come upon us; Consider and behold our reproach: chapter 5. 1. and 2.
20. And must God Consider of you, that will not Consider of him, or your own
Souls? Or may you not rather expect that dreadful answer, which he gives to
such regardless sinners. Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. And hear your
cries, as you hear his Counsel, and think of you, as you thought of him.

Nay more then so; even while you forget him, the Lord does daily Consider you,
and supply your wants, and save you from dangers; and should you then cast him
out of your Thought? If he did not think on you, you would quickly feel it to
your cost and sorrow.

11. Moreover the Nature of the Matter is such, as one would think, should
for^e a Reasonable creature to consider of it, and often and earnestly to
consider. When all these things concur in the matter, he must be a block or a
mad man, that will not Consider. 1. When they are the most excellent, or the
greatest things in all the world: 2. When they are our own matters; or nearly
concern us. 3. When they are the most necessary, and profitable, and
delightful things. And 4. When there is much difficulty in getting them, and
danger of losing them, And all these go together in the matter of your
Salvation.

1. If you will not think of God, and your Souls, of Heaven, and Hell, what
then will you think of? All other things in the world are but toys, and
jesting matters to these. Crowns, and Kingdoms, Lands, and Lordships are but
chaff, and bawbles, dirt and dung, to these Everlasting things. The acts of
renowned Kings and Conquerors, are but as Popet-plaies, in Comparison of the
working out of your Salvation. And yet will you not be drawn to the
Consideration of such astonishing things as these? One would think that the
exceeding Greatness of the matter, should force you to Consider it whether you
will or no: when smaller Objects affect not the Senses, yet Greater will even
force their way. He that has so hard a skin that he cannot feel a feather,
methinks should feel the weight of a mil-stone: And if he feel not the prick of
a pin, methinks he should feel a dagger. He that cannot hear one whisper,
methinks should hear a Cannon, or a clap of Thunder, if he have any such thing
as hearing left him. He has bad eyes that cannot see the Sun. One would think
that so Glorious an Object as God, should so entice the eyes of men, that they
should not look off him. One would think that such matters as Heaven and Hell
should follow thy thoughts which way ever thou go, so that thou should
not be able to look besides them, or to think almost of any thing else, unless
with great neglect, and disesteem. O what a thing is a stony heart, that can
forget not only the God that he lives by, but also the place where he must
live for ever? Yea that will not be persuaded to the Sober Consideration of it
for one hour.

2. And as these are the Greatest matters, so they are your Own matters, and
therefore one would think you should not need so much ado to bring you to
Consider them. If it were only other men's matters, I should not wonder at it.
But self-love should make you regard your Own. In outward matters, all seek
their Own things, Phil. 2. 21. And have they not more Reason to seek their Own
Salvation? It is your Own Souls, your Own danger, your Own sin, your Own duty,
that I persuade you to Consider of. It is that God, that Christ, that would be
your Own: it is that Heaven, that blessedness that may be your Own, if you lose
it not by neglect: It is that Hell, and torment, that will certainly be your
Own if you prevent it not. And should not these be thought on? You will think
of your Own goods, or lands, or riches; of your Own families, your Own
business, your Own lives, and why not also of your Own Salvation?

3. Especially, when it is not only your Own, but it is the One thing needful,
Luke 10. 42. It is that which your life, or death, your Everlasting Joy or
Torment lies on: and therefore must be Considered of, or you are utterly
undone for ever. Necessity lies upon you; and woe be to you, if you Consider
not of these things. It is not so necessary that you eat, or drink, or sleep,
or live, as it is Necessary that you make sure your Everlasting life. And the
Profit also does answer the necessity. Buy but this one Pearl, and you will be
infinite gainers, though you sell all that you have in the world to buy it.
Matthew. 13. 44, 45, 46. Get God, and get all: make sure of Heaven, and then fear
no loss, nor want, nor sorrow. If you count not all the world as dung, for the
winning of Christ, that you may be found in him, possessed of his
righteousness, it is because you know neither the world, nor Christ, Phil. 3.
7, 8, 9. Yea the Delight also will answer the Commodity: For in the presence of
God is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm
16. 11. And the fore-thoughts of them may well make glad our hearts, and cause
our Glory to rejoice, Psalm. 16. 8, 9. For Goodness and Mercy shall follow us
all the days of our lives, and we shall dwell in the House of the Lord for
ever: Psalm. 23. 6. He shall guide us with his Counsel, and afterward receive
us into Glory: Psalm. 73. 24. And lest yet you should suspect any lack of
Comfort, he tells you, you shall enter into the Joy of your Lord, Matthew. 25.
23. And that you shall be with him where he is, to behold his Glory, Joh. 17.
24.

4. And yet if all this might be had with a wet finger, If Heaven were the
portion of worldlings, and sluggards, that trouble not their Thoughts much
about it, then you might have some excuse for your Inconsiderateness. But it is
not so: there are difficulties, in your way; and they are many and great: what
a dark understanding have you to inform, what a dull and backward nature to
spur on? What an unreasonable appetite? What rageing passions? What violent
rebellious senses to contend with, to Master and to rule? Abundance of
adversaries on every hand: A subtle Devil, and as malicious as subtle: and as
furious and able to do you a mischief, if God restrain him not. A world of
wicked men about you: each one more stiff in Error, then you in the Truth; and
more fast to the Devil then you are to God, (if his grace do not hold you
faster, then you will hold your selves:) and therefore they are abler to
deceive you, then you are to undeceive them: Many of them are crafty, and can
puzzle such ignorant beginners as you; and can put a face of reverence and
truth upon damnable Errors, and pernicious ways: And those that have not wit,
have foolish violence, and scorn and passion; and can drive you toward Hell,
if they cannot draw you. All these Enemies you must Conquer, or you are lost.
And is it not time for a man in so much danger to Consider of them, that he may
know how to escape? And for one that is compassed about with such difficulties,
to Consider how he may well get through them. What abundance of things have you
to Consider of? of all your life past; of the Relations you have born; and how
you have performed the duties of those relations? Of the time you have had; and
how you have spent it? Of the means you have had; and what you have received by
them: Of the present state of your Souls, your sins, your miseries, your hopes,
and the duties that are incumbent on you, in order to your recovery. Of the
temptations to be encountered with; and the graces that are daily to be
exercised and confirmed: should not a man bethink himself with all possible
care, and Consider, and an hundred times Consider, that has all this to do, or
be undone for ever? You have much to Know that will not easily be known, and
yet must be known: and much to do, receive, and suffer, that has difficulty
joined with Necessity: Were it Necessary and not hard, the facility might draw
you to make light of it. And were it hard, and not Necessary, the difficulty
might more discourage you then the matter would excite you: But when it Must be
done, or you must be shut out of Heaven, and lie in Hell for it world without
end; and yet there are so many difficulties in the way, I think it is time to
look about you, and seriously Consider.

12. To conclude; Consideration would prevent a world of misery, which else
will make you Consider when it is too late. It must be a principal means of
your Salvation if ever you be saved. If God have so much Mercy for you, he will
make you Consider; and set your sins in order before you, Psalm. 50. 21. And set
Hell fire before your face, and hold your Thoughts on it, that you cannot look
off. He will set before you a Crucified Christ, and tell you, that this your
sins have done, and make you think of the Reason of his sufferings; and what
there is in sin that could require it; and what it is to rebel against the
Lord, and run your selves into the Consuming fire. Now your Thoughts are
gadding abroad the world, and straggling after every trifle, and going away from
God: But if ever God will save you, he will overtake your hearts, and fetch
them home, and show them that they have somewhat else to think on. If Commands
will not serve, he will send out his threatenings, and terrors shall come upon
you, and pursue your Soul as the wind, Job 30. 15. He Will fetch you out of the
Alehouse, and the Gaming-house, and take you off the merry pin; and lay that
upon your heart, that you shall not easily shake off. If you are taken up with
the Cares of the world, he will show you that you have somewhat else to care for,
and drown those Cares in greater Cares. If you have such giddy, unsettled,
vagrant minds, that you cannot call in your Thoughts to God, nor hold them with
him; he will lay those clogs and bolts upon them at first, that shall restrain
them from their idle vagaries: and then he will set upon them such a bias, as
shall better order them, and fix them for the time to come. Men do not use to
go to Heaven, and never think of it. And to escape Hell fire, and the plague of
sin, and the curse of the Law, and the Wrath of God, and the rage of Satan,
and never think on it: Nor do they use to mind other matters, and find
themselves in Heaven, before they ever dreamd of it, or before their hearts
were set upon it. No Sirs, if ever God will save you, he will make you
Consider, and again Consider, and perhaps with many a sigh and groan; and bring
these things so near your hearts, that you shall not only Think on them, but
feel them: According to that Command, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. and 11. 18, 19, 20. They
shall be as written before your eyes: You shall think of them when you lie
down, and when your rise up, as if they were written upon the testure of your
beds: you shall think of them when you sit at home, when you go abroad, as
carrying them still with you, which way soever you go. As before God was not in
all your Thoughts, so now he will be the sum and end of them all.

And if by your Resistance you escape these Considerations, believe it, God will
bring you to Consideration, by a severer and more dreadful way. If he do but
give your Conscience a Commission, it will follow you, and bring you to such a
Consideration, as Judas was brought to. If he lay you under his Judgments, and
speak to you by his Rod, and give you a lash with every word, and ask you
whether yet you will Consider of it? It may bring such things to your Thoughts,
as you were little troubled with before. If he say but the word, how soon will
your Soul be required of you; and when you lie in Hell and feel the smart you
will then Consider of it. Now we cannot beg of you to bestow one hour in sober
Consideration; but then you shall do it without entreaty: Then you will be as a
man that has the Stone, or Gout, or Toothake, that cannot forget it, if he
would never so feign. Forget your folly, your obstinacy, and unthankfullness,
then if you can, Forget Gods wrath, and the torment which you feel, then if you
can. Now you were so busy that you could not have while to think of the
matters of the world to come; but then God will give you leisure; you shall
have little else to do; You shall have time enough: When you have thought of
these things ten thousand years, you shall still have time enough before you,
to think of them again. You will not Consider now, but, when God has
performed the intents of his heart, in the latter days you shall perfectly
Consider it, Jer, 23. 20. and 30. 24. O that you were wise, that you understood
this; that you would Consider your latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.

What brings so many thousand Souls to Hell, but because they would not
Consider in time? If you could speak with any of those hopeless Souls, and ask
them, How came you to this place of torment? they would tell you, because we
did not Consider of our case in time: we little thought of this day, though we
were told of it: We had a load of sin upon us, and did not Consider how we
might be relieved: We had Christ, and Mercy set before us, but we did not
Consider the worth of them, nor how to be made partakers of them: We had time,
but we Considered not how to make the best of it. We had the work of our
Salvation lay upon our hands; but we did not Consider how we might accomplish
it: O had we but Considered what now we feel, we might have escaped all this,
and have lived with God! These would be the answers of those miserable Souls,
if you could but ask them the cause of their misery, There Is scarce a Thief or
Murderer hanged at the Gallows, but will cry out, O if I had but had the wit,
and grace to have Considered this in time, I need not to have come to this.
There Is scarce an unthrift that falls into beggary; no nor a man, that comes to
any mischance, but will say, If I had Considered it before hand, I might have
prevented it. Most of the Calamities of the world might have been prevented, by
timely and sober Consideration. God himself does place men's wickedness much in
their Inconsiderateness, and lays the cause of their destruction upon it.
Whence is it that Israel was rebellious to astonishment, Isa. 1. 3. Why, Israel
does not know, my people does not Consider. Job 34 25, 26, 27. He shall break
in pieces mighty men without number, and set others in their stead: therefore
he knows their works, and he overturneth them in the night, so that they are
destroyed, He strikes them as wicked men in the open sight of others: because
they turned back from him, and would not Consider any of his ways. Why do men
live so wilfully in sin, but because They Consider not that they do evil,
Ecel. 5. 1. How many such has the world that God pronounces a Woe to? Isa 5.
11, 12. that drink, and play, and give themselves to their merriments, but they
regard not the work of the Lord; neither Consider the Operation of his hands.
They Consider not in their heart, the folly of their ways, Isa. 44. 18, 19,
20. When they see Gods Judgments, they Consider not the meaning of them, and
therefore lay them not to heart, Isa. 57. 1. 2.

And when God calls men to Conversion, or Reformation, he uses to call them
to Consideration as the way to it. Hag. 1. 5. Thus says the Lord of Hosts,
Consider your ways. The Son that shall escape the misery of his Fathers, is
he that Considers, and turns away from his transgressions, and Considers,
and does not his Forefathers works; Ezekiel. 18. 14, 20. And when he sends the
Prophet to them, Ezekiel. 12. 3. It is but with this encouragement; Though they
are a rebellious house, it may be they will Consider. And David professes,
that Consideration was the beginning of his Conversion, Psalm. 119. 59. I
thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. I made have and
delayed not to keep thy Statutes.

I know that it is the Lord, that must renew and revive a sinful Soul: But yet
under God, Consideration must do much. O could we but persuade our people to
Consider, it is not sure possible that they could be as they are, or do as they
do. Would so many thousands live in ease, and quietness under the guilt of so
many sins, and the wrath of God, if they did, but well Consider of it? Durst
they live so peaceably in a state of death, and in the slavery of the Devil,
if they did but well Consider of it? Would they do no more to prepare for their
speedy appearing before God, and for the scaping of Hell fire, if they did but
Consider of it? Would th^^ swallow down their cups so greedily, and give up
themselves to the world so eagerly, if they did but well Consider what they do?
Methinks they should not. The cause of sin, and the Devil is so naught, that
I should hope to shame it with most of the ungodly, if I could but bring them
to a serious Consideration of it. O how the Kingdom of Satan would down, if we
could but tell how to make men Considerate: How fast the Devil would lose his
servants? What abundance Christ would gain? And how many would be saved, if we
could but tell how to make men Consider^te? And one would think that this
should be easily done, seeing man is a self-loving, and reasonable creature:
But yet to our grief, and great admiration, we cannot bring them to it. I
should not doubt, but one Sermon, or one Sentence of a Sermon, might do more
good then a hundred do now, If I were but able to persuade the hearers, when
they come home, to follow it by serious Consideration. But we cannot bring them
to it: If our lives lay on it, we could not bring them to it: Though we knew
that their own lives and Salvation lies on it, yet can we nor bring them to
it. They think, and talk of other matters, almost as soon as the Sermon's done:
and they turn loose their Thoughts; or if they do read, or hear, or repeat a
little; yet cannot we get them to one half hours secret, and sober
Consideration of their case. This is the Reason, why it is so rare a thing to
see men thoroughly turn to God. This is much of the use of all Gods teachings,
and afflictions too, but to bring men to sober Consideration. God knows that
sin has unmanned us, and lost us the use of our Reason, where we have most
use for it: and therefore the means, and Works of God, are to recover us to our
Reason, and to make us men again. The very graces of his Spirit, are to make
us to be more Reasonable.

And now before I dismiss this Direction, I have a Question, and a Request, to
make to thee, whoever thou art, that Read these lines. My Question is this;
Have thou ever s^berly Considered of thy ways, and laid th^se greatest matters
to heart, or have thou not? Do thou ever use to retire into thy self, and
spend any time in this need^ull work? If thou do not, my Request to thee is,
that now at last thou would do it without delay. Shall I beg this of thee;
shall the Lord that made thee, that bought thee, that preserves thee, Request
this of thee; that thou would sometimes betake thy self into some secret
place, and set thy self purposely to this work of Consideration, and follow it
earnestly, and close with thy heart, till thou have made something of it, and
brought it to a Resolution. Will thou then spend a little time, in reasoning
the case with thy self, and calling thy heart to a strict account, and ask thy
self, What is it that I was made for? And what business was I sent into the
world about? And how have I dispatched it? How have I spent my time, my
thoughts, my words; and how shall I answer for them? Am I ready to die, if it
were this hour? Am I sure of my Salvation? Is my Soul Converted, and truly
Sanctified by the Holy Ghost? If not, what Reason have I to delay? Why do I not
set about it, and speedily resolve? Shall I linger till death come, and find me
unconverted? O then what a sad appearance shall I make, before the Lord. And
thus follow on the discourse with your hearts? What say you, Sirs? Will you
here promise me to bestow but some few hours, if it be but on the Lords Day, or
when you are private on the way, or in your beds, or in your shops, in these
Considerations? I beseech you, as ever you will do any thing at my Request,
deny me not this Request. It is nothing that is unreasonable. If I desired one
of you to spend an hour in talking with me, you would grant it; yea, or if it
were to ride, or go for me: And will you not be entreated to spend now and then
a little time in Thinking of the matters of your own Salvation? Deny not this
much to your selves, deny it not to God, if you will deny it me. Should you not
bethink you a few hours, of the place, and state that you must live in for
ever? Men will build strong where they think to live long: But a tent, or a hut
will serve a Soldier for a few nights. O, Sirs, Everlasting is a long day. In
the Name of God let not Conscience have such a charge as this against you
hereafter; Thou art come to thy long home^, to thy Endless state, before eve^
thou spentest the space of an hour, in deep and sad, and serious Considerations
of it, or in trying thy title to it. O what a Confounding charge would this? I
am confident I have the witness of your Conscienses going along with me, and
telling you it is but reasonable, yea, and needful which I say. If yet you
will not do it, and I cannot beg one hours sober discourse in secret, between
you and your hearts, about these things, then what remedy, but even to leave
you to your misery. But I shall tell you in the Conclusion, that I have no hope
of that Soul, that will not be persuaded to this duty of Consideration: But if
I could persuade you to this reasonable, this cheap, this necessary work, and
to follow it close, I should have exceeding great hopes of the Salvation of you
all. I have told you the truth: Consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding: 2 Timothy 2. 7. Or if you put me to conclude in harsher terms, they
shall be still the Oracles of God; Now Consider this ye that forget God, lest
I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50. 22.

And so much for the third Direction, about Consideration; on which I have
staid somewhat long, because I apprehend it of exceeding necessity.

DIRECT. IV. The fourth Direction which I shall give you, that the work of your
Conversion may not miscary is this: See that the work of Humiliation be
thoroughly done, and break not away from the Spirit of Contrition before he have
done with you: and yet see that you mistake not the Nature, and the Ends of the
work, and that you drive it not on further then God requires you.

Here I shall first show you the true Nature of Humiliation: and 2o. the use
and ends of it, and 3o. the mistakes about it, that you must avoid, and 4o. I
shall press on the Substance of the Direction, and show you the necessity of it.

I. There is a Preparatory Humiliation that goes before a saving change, which
yet is not to be despised, because it is a drawing somewhat nearer unto God,
though it be not a faithful closure with him. This Preparatory Humiliation,
which many have that perish, does chiefly consist in these things following. 1o
It lies most in the Fear of being damned: As it is most in the Passions, so
most in this of Fear. 2o. It consists also in some apprehension of the
greatness of our sins, and the wrath of God, that hangs over our heads, and
the danger that we are in of being damned for ever. 3o. It consists also in
some apprehensions of the folly, that we are guilty of in sinning, and of some
Repentings that ever we did it, and some remorse of Conscience for it. 4o.
Hereto may be joined some Passions of Sorrow, and this expressed by groans and
tears. 5o. And all this may be accompanied with Confessions of sin to God and
man, and Lamentations for our misery, and in some it preceedeth to desperation
it self. 6o. And lastly it may proceed to an indignation against our selves,
and to the taking of a severe revenge on our selves, yea, more then God would
have men take; as Judas did by self-destroying. This desparation, and
self-execution are no parts of the Preparatory Humiliation; but the excess, and
error of it, and the entrance upon Hell.

2. But there is also a Humiliation that is proper to the Converted, and which
accompanies Salvation; and this con^eineth in it, all that is in the former,
and much more: Even as the Rational Soul contains the sensitive, and
vegetative, and much more. And this Saving Humilation consists in these
following particulars.

1. It begins in the Understanding; 2o It is rooted in the Will; 3o It
works in the Affections; and 4o. When there is opportunity it shows it self
in outward expressions, and actions.

1. Humiliation in the Understanding, consists in a low esteem of our selves,
and in a self-abasing, self-condemning Judgment on our selves. And that in
these Particulars.

1o. It consists in a deep, and solid apprehension, of the odiousness of our
own sins habitual; and actual, and of our selves for our sins: and that
because they are contrary to the blessed Nature and Law of God, and so contrary
to our own perfection, and chief Good. 2o. It consists also in a solid, and
fixed apprehension, of our own ill-deserving, because of these sins: So that
our Judgments do subscribe to the equity of the condemning sentence of the Law;
and we Judge our selves unworthy of the smalest mercy ^ and worthy of Hell
fire. 3o. It consists in an apprehension of our undone, and miserable
Condition in our selves: not only as we are the Heirs of Torment, but as we are
void of the Image and Spirit of God, and have lost his favor, and are under
his displeasure, and enmity by our sin, and have forfeited our part in
Everlasting Glory, and how unable we are to help our selves.

And 1o. This is in such a measure, that we truly judge our sin, and our
selves for sin, to be more odious then any thing else could have made us, and
our misery by sin in the foresaid particulars, to be greater then any outward
Calamity in the flesh, and then any worldly loss could have procured us. And
this we apprehend by a Practical Judgment, and not only by a bare uneffectual
speculation. 2o. And the spring of this is some Knowledge of God himself, whose
Majesty is so Glorious, and whose Wisdom is so Infinite; who is so Good in
himself, and unto us, and whose Holy Nature is contrary to sin; and who has
an absolute Propriety in us, and Sovereignty over us. 3o. And also it
proceeds from a Knowledge of the true state of man's felicity, which by sin he
has cast away, that it consists in the Pleasing and Glorifying, and Enjoying
of God, in Loving, and Delighting in him, and Praising him for ever, and having
a Nature Perfectedly Holy, and sitted hereunto. To see that sin is contrary
to this felicity, and has deprived us of it, is one of the springs of true
Humiliation. And 4o It proceeds also from a believing Knowledge of Christ
Crucified, whom our sins did put to death, who has declared in the most
lively manner to the world by his Cross, and sufferings, what sin is, and
what it had done, and what a case we had brought our selves into. Thus much of
saving Humiliation consists in the Understanding.

2o. The Principal seat of this Humiliation is in the Will, and there it
consists in these following Acts. 1o. As we think basely of our selves, so
the Will has a fixed Displacency against our selves for our sins, and a kind
of Loathing of our selves, for all our abominations: as you may read, Ezekiel. 36.
31. and 20. 43. and 6. 9. A humble sinner is allen out with himself, and as he
is Evil, his heart is against himself.

2o. There is also in the will a deep Repenting that ever we sinned, and
wronged God, and abused Grace^, and have brought our selves to this as we have
done; so that the humbled Soul could wish that he had spent his days in
prison, in beggary, or in bodily misery, so that he had not spent them in
sin; and if it were to do again, he would rather choose such a life of shame
and calamity in the world, then a life of sin, and would be glad of the
exchange.

3o. A humbled Soul is truly willing, to grieve for the sins which he has
committed, and to be as deeply sensible of them, and afflicted for them, as God
would have him. Even when he cannot shed a tear, yet his will is to shed them.
When he cannot feel any deep afflicting of his Soul for sin, his hearty
Desire is, that he might feel it. He does an hundred times weep in Desire, when
he does it not in Act.

4o. A humbled Soul is truly willing to Humble the flesh it self, by the use of
those appointed means by which God would have him bring it in subjection: As by
fasting, or abstinence, or mean attire, hard labor, and denying it unnecessary
delights. It Is a Doubt worth the Considering, whether any such Humbling act
must be used, purposely in Revenge on our selves for sin, To which I answer,
that we may do nothing in such Revenge that God does not allow, or that makes
our body less fit for his service: for that were to be Revenged of God, and our
Souls: But those Humbling means which are needful to Tame the body, may well
be used with this double intention: First and Chiefly, as a Means for our
safety, and duty for the time to come; that the flesh may not prevail, and then
Collaterally we should be the more content that the flesh is put to so much
suffering, because it has been, and still is so great an Enemy to God, and us,
and the cause of all our sin, and misery: And this is the Revenge that is
warrantable in the Penitent, and some think is meant 2 Cor. 7. 11.

5o. As the Humbled Soul has base thoughts of himself, so he is willing that
others should esteem, and think of him accordingly, even as a vile, unworthy
sinner; so far as his disgrace may be no wrong to the Gospel, or to others, or
dishonor to God. His Pride is so far taken down, that he can endure to be
vilified, with some Consent: not approving of the sin of any man that does it
maliciously, but consenting to the Judgment, and Rebukes of those that do it
truly, and to the Judgment of God, even by them that do it maliciously. The
Humbled Soul does not stand defending, and unjustly extenuating his sin, and
excusing himself, and swelling against the Reprover: Whatever he may do in a
temptation, if this temper were predominant, his Pride, and not Humility, must
be predominant. But he judges himself, as much as others can justly judge him,
and humbly confesses, to be Base in men's eyes, till God shall think it meet to
raise him, and recover his esteem.

And the Root of all this in the will is, 1o. A Love to God, whom we have
offended, 2o. A hatred of sin, that has offended him, and that has made us
vile, and 3o. A believing sense of the Love, and Sufferings of Christ, that in
his flesh has condemned sin, (Romans 8. 2, 3.) And thus you see what
Humiliation is in the Will, which is the very Life and Soul of true Humiliation.

3o. Humiliation also consists in the Affections: In an unfeigned sorrow for
the sin which we have committed, and the corruption that is in us; and a
shame for these sins; and a holy fear of God whom we have offended, and of
his Judgments which we have deserved; and a hatred of our sins, by which we
have deserved them. But (as I must further show you anon) it is not the
Measure, but the sincerity of these Passions, by which you must make a Judgment
of your state: And that will be hardly discerned by the Passions themselves,
but only by so much of the Will, as is in them: and therefore the Will is the
safest to Judge by.

4o. Humiliation also consists expressively in the outward actions, when
opportunity is offered: And it is not true in the Heart, if it refuse to
appear without, when God requires it, in your ordinary course. The outward
acts of Humiliation are these: 1o. A voluntary Confession of sin to God, and
to men, when God requires it, and that is, when it is necessary to his Honor,
to the healing of them that we have endangered, and satisfying the offended: At
least in the hearing of men, in such cases as these to Confess them openly to
God; An unhumbled Soul will refuse this for the shame: but the Humble will
freely take shame to themselves, and warn their brethren, and justify God,
and give him the Glory. 1. Joh. 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us: Read, Mark 3. 6. Levit. 5. 5. and 16. 21, and 26. 40.
Number. 5. 6, 7. Jam 5. 16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for
another, that ye may be healed. Prove. 28. 13. He that hides his sins, shall
not prosper: but who so confesses, and forsakes them, shall have mercy* Not
that any man is to confess his secret sins to others, except in case that he
cannot otherwise find relief: Nor that a man is to publish those offenses of
his own, by which he may further dishonor God, and hinder the Gospel: But
when the sin is open already, and specially when the offense of others, the
hardening of the wicked, the satisfaction of the Church concerning our
Repentance, do require our Confession, and open Lamentation, the Humble Soul
both must, and will submit to it: But the rotten hearted, unhumbled Hypocrite
will Confess but in these cases: 1o. When the secrecy of the Confession, or the
smalness of the fault, or the Customariness of such Confessing, does make it to
be a matter of no great disgrace: 2o. Or when it is so open, that it is in vain
to attempt to hide it, and his Confession will do nothing to increase the
disgrace. 3o. Or when Conscience is awakened, or they see they must die, or are
forced by some terrible Judgment of God; In all these cases the wicked may
Confess. And so Judas will Confess, I have sinned in b^traying the innocent
blood: And Pharaoh will Confess, I and my people have sinned. And a Thief on
the Gallows will Confess: and the vilest wretches on their death bed will
Confess: But we have more deathbed Confessions, then voluntary Confessions
before the Church. Nay so far has Pride and Hypocrisy prevailed, and the
ancient discipline of the Church been neglected, that I think in most Countries
in England, there are many more that make Confessions on the Gallows, then
personally in the Congregation.

2o. Humiliation must be also expressed, by all those external means, and
signs which God by Scripture, or Nature calls us to. As by tears, and
groans, so far as we can seasonably procure them. And by Fasting, and laying by
our worldly pomp and bravery, and using mean, (though decent) attire: and by
condescending to men of the lower sort, and stooping to the meanest: By humble
Language, and Carriage: and by forgiving others, on this account, that we are
sensible of the greatness of our Debts to God. And thus I have briefly showed
you the true Nature of Humiliation, that you may know what it is that I am
persuading you to, and which you must submit your hearts unto.

II. When I have told you the Use and Ends of Humiliation, you will see more of
the Reason of it is Necessity to your selves. And first, it is one Use of
Humiliation, to help on the Mortification of the flesh, or Carnal self, and to
annihilate it as it is the Idol of the Soul. The nature of man's sinful, and
miserable estate is, that he is fallen from God, to Himself; and lives now to
Himself, studying, and loving, and pleasing Himself, his Natural self, above
God. And a sinner will let go many outward sins, and be driven from the
outworks, before he will let go Carnal self, and be driven from the Castle and
strength of sin. There is no part of Mortification so Necessary, and so Hard
as Self-denial: Indeed this does virtually comprehend all the rest, and if this
be done, all is done. If it were but his Friend, his Superfluities, his House,
his Lands, perhaps a Carnal heart might part with it: But to part with his
life, his All, his Self, this is a hard saying to him, and enough to make him
go away sorrowful, as Luke 18. 22, 23, 24. And therefore here appears the
Necessity of Humiliation: This lays all the Load on Self, and breaks the
heart of the old man, and makes a man loath himself, that formerly doted on
himself. It lays this Tower of Babel in the dust, and makes us abhor our
selves in dust and ashes: It sets the house on fire about our ears, which
we both Trusted and Delighted in. And makes us not only see, but feel, that
it is time for us to be gone. Pride is the Master Vice in the unsanctified: and
it is the part of Humiliation to cast it down. Self-seeking is the business of
their Lives; till Humiliation help to turn the stream: And then if you did but
see their thoughts, you should see them think most vilely of themselves: And if
you do but over-heare their Prayers, or Complaints, you shall hear them still
cry out upon themselves, and beg help against themselves, as their greatest
Enemies.

2. The next Use of Humiliation (and employed in this) is, to Mortify those
sins, which Carnal self does live upon, and is maintained by; and to stop all
the avenues, or passages of it is provision. Sin is sweet and dear, to all
that are unsanctified: But Humiliation makes it bitter and base. As the Indians
cured the Spanish Captain of his Thirst after Gold, by pouring melted God down
his throat; or as Children are persuaded from playing with a Bee-hive, when
they are once or twice stung by them; or from playing with snappish dogs, when
they are bitten by them. So God will teach his Children to know what it is to
play with sin, when they have smarted by it. They will know a nettle from a
harmless herb, when they feel the sting: we are so apt to live by sense, that
God sees it needful, that our Faith have something of sense to help it. When
the Conscience does accuse, and the heart is smarting, and groaning in pain,
and we feel that no shifting, or striving will deliver us, then we begin to be
wiser then before, and to know what sin is, and what it will do for us. When
that which was our delight, is become our burden, and a burden too heavy for us
to bear, it cures our delighting in it. When David was watering his couch with
his tears, and made them his drink, his sin was not the same thing to him, as
it was in the committing. Humiliation washes away the painting of this harlot,
and shows her in her deformity. It unmasketh sin, which had got the vizard
of Virtue, or of a small matter, or harmless thing. It unmasketh Satan, who was
transformed into a Friend, or an Angel of light, and shows him, as we say,
with his cloven feet and horns. How hard is it to cure a worldling of the love
of money? But when God has laid such a load of it on his Conscience, that
makes him groan, and cry for help, he has then enough of it: When he feels
those words in Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. And he begins to weep, and howl for the
Miseries that are coming on him, and he feels the stink of his corrupted
Riches, and the Canker of his Gold and Silver do begin to eat his flesh as
fire, and his Idol is but a witness against him, then he is better able to
judge of it, then he was before. The wanton thinks he has a happy life, when
the harlots lips do drop as the honey-combe: But when he perceives her end is
bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a two-edged sword, and that her feet go down
to death, and her steps take hold on Hell, and he lies in sorrow complaining
of his folly, Prove 5. 3, 4, 5, 11, 12. he is then of a more rectified judgment
then he was. Manasseh humbled in irons, is not the same as he was upon the
Throne: Though Grace did more to it then his fetters, yet were they some way
serviceable to that end, Humiliation opens the door of the heart, and
tells you what sin is to the quick; and lets in the words of life, which
passed no further then the care or brain. It is a tireing work to talk to dead
men, that have lost their feeling; especially when it is an affective* and
practical doctrine, which we must deliver to them, which is lost if it be not
felt and practiced: Till Humiliation comes, we speak to dead men, or at least
to men that are fast asleep. How many Sermons have I heard that one would
think, should have turned men's hearts within them, and made them cry out
against their sins, with sorrow and shame in the face of the Congregation,
and never meddle with them more: When yet the hearers have scarce been moved by
them, but gone away as they came, as if they knew not what the Preacher said;
because their hearts were all the while asleep within them. But a Humbled Soul,
is an awakened Soul: It will regard what is said to it: especially when they
perceive that it comes from the Lord, and concerns their Salvation. It is a
great encouragment to us, to speak to a man that has ears, and life, and
feeling; that will meet the word with an appetite, and take it with some
relish, and let down the food that is put into their mouths. The will is the
chiefest fort of sin. If we can there get in upon it, we may do something:
But if it keep the heart, and we can get no nearer it then the ear or brain,
there will no good be done. Now Humiliation opens us a passage to the heart,
that we may assault s^nne in it is strength. When I tell you of the abominable
nature of sin, that caused the death of Christ, and causes Hell, and tell
you that it is better to run into the fire, then to commit the least sin
wilfully; though it be such as the world makes nothing of, another man may hear
all this, and superficially believe it, and say it is true: but it is the
humbled Soul that feels what I say. What a stir have we with a drunkard, or
worldling, or any other sensual sinner, in persuading him to cast away his
sins with detestation: and all to little purpose: sometime he will, and
sometime he must needs be tasting them again; and thus he stands dallying*
because the word has not mastered his heart. But when God comes in upon the
Soul as with a ^empest, and throws open the doors, and as it were
thundereth, and lighteneth in the Conscience, and lays hold upon the sinner,
and shakes him all in pieces by his terrors, and asks him, Is sinning good
for thee? Is a fleshly careless life so good? Thou wretched worm. Thou foolish
piece of clay. Dare thou thus abuse me to my face? Do thou not know that I
look on? Is this the work that I made thee for, and that I feed and preserve
thee, and continue thee alive for? Away with thy sin, without any more ado,
or I Will have thy Soul away, and deliver thee to the tormentors. This wakeneth
him out of his dalliance, and delays; and makes him see, that God is in good
earnest with him, and therefore he must be so with God. If a Physician have a
patient that is addicted to his appetite, who has the Gout, or S^one, or other
disease, and he forbid him wine, or strong drink, or such meats as he desires;
as long as he feels himself at ease, he will be venturing on them, and will
not be curbed by the words of the Physion: But when the fit is on him, and he
feels the torment, then he will be ruled: Pain will teach him more effectually
then words could do. When he feels what is hurtful to him; and feels that
it always makes him sick, it will restrain him more then hearing of it could
do. So when Humiliation does break your hearts and make you feel that you are
sick of sin, and fills your Soul with smart, and sorrow, then you will be
the more willing that God should destroy it in you. When it lies so heavy on
you, that you are unable to look up, and makes you go to God with groans and
tears, and cry, O Lord be merciful to me a sinner: When you are feign to go
to Ministers for ease to your Consciences, and fill their ears with
accusations of your selves, and open even your odious shameful sins, then
you will be content to let them go. Now there is no talking to you of
Mortification, and the resolute rejecting of your sins: The Precepts of the
Gospel are too strict for you to submit to. But a broken heart would change
your minds. The healthful Plowman says, Give me that which I love: these
Physicians would bring us all to their Rules, that they may get money by us: I
never mean to follow their directions? But when sickness is upon him, and he
has tried all his own skill in vain, and pain gives him no rest, then send
for the Physician: and then he will do any thing, and take any thing whatever
he will give him; so that he may but he eased, and recovered. So when your
hearts are whole, and unhumbled, these Preachers, and Scriptures are too strict
for you: You must have that which you love: self-conceited precise Ministers
must have leave to talk; but you will never believe that God is of their mind,
or will damn men for taking that which they have a mind of. O but when these
sins are as swords in your hearts, and you begin to feel what Ministers told
you of, then you will be of another mind: Away then with this sin: There Is
nothing so odious, so hurtful, so intolerable. O that you could be rid of it,
what ever it cost you! Then he will be your best Friend, that can tell you how
to kill it, and be free from it; and he that would draw you to it, would be as
Satan himself to you; Matthew. 16. 22, 23. Gal. 1. 8, 9. Humiliation diggeth so
deep, that it undermineth sin, and the fortress of the Devil; and when the
foundation is rooted up, it will soon be over thrown. When the Murderers of
Christ were pricked to the heart, they will then cry out for counsel to the
Apostles. Acts 2. 37. When a murderer of the Saints is stricken blindfold to
the earth, and the Spirit withal does humble his Soul, he will then cry out,
Lord what would thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6. When a cruel Jaylour that
scourged the Servants of Christ, is by an Earthquake brought to a heart-quake,
he will then cry out, What shall I do to be saved? Acts 16. 30.

And here comes in the usefulness of Afflictions; even because they are so
great advantages to Humiliation. Men will be brought to some Reason by
extreamities. When they lie a dying, a man may talk to them, and they will not
so proudly fly in his face, nor make a scorn of the word of the Lord, as in
their prosperity they did. God will be more regarded when he pleads with
them, with the rod in his hand: stripes are the best Logic, and Rhetoric for
a fool. When sin has captivated their Reason to their flesh, the Arguments
to convince them must be such, as the flesh is capable of perceiving. We may
long tell a beast of dangers, and discommodities, before we can persuade him
from that which he loves. Sensuality does brutifie men in too great a measure:
And so far as they are brutish, it is not the clearest Reasons that will
prevail: And if God did not maintain in corrupted man, some remnants of free
Reason, we migh preach to beasts as hopefully as to men. But Afflictions tend
to weaken the Enemy that does captivate them; as prosperity by accident tends
to strengthen him. The flesh understands the language of the rod, better then
the language of Reason, or of the Word of God.

And as the sensible part of our Humiliation promoteth Mortification, so the
rational and voluntary Humiliation, which is proper to the Sanctified, is a
principal part of Mortification it self. And thus you may see that it is
necessary that we be thoroughly humbled, that sin may be thoroughly killed in us.

3. Another use of Humiliation is, to fit the Soul for a meet entertainment of
further Grace, and that both for the honor of Christ and Grace, and for our
own welfare.

1. In respect of Christ, it is equal, that he should dwell in such Souls only
as are fit to entertain him. Neither his person, nor his business, are such as
can suit with the unhumbled heart. Till Humiliation make a sinner feel, his
sin, and misery, it is not possible that Christ, as Christ, should be
heartily welcome to him, or received in that sort as his honor does expect.
Who cares for the Physician that feels no sickness, and fears not death? He
may pass by the doors of such a man, and he will not call him in: But when
pain and fears of death are on him, ^e will send, and seek, and bid him
welcome. Will any man fly to Christ for succor, that feels not his wants,
and danger: Will they lay hold on him, as the only refuge of their Souls, and
cleave to him as their only hope, that feel no great need of him? Will they
lie at his feet, and beg for mercy, that feel themselves well enough without
him? When men do but hear of sin, and misery, and superficially believe it,
they may coldly look after Christ, and Grace; and feel the worth of the later,
in such a manner as they feel the weight of the former. But never is Christ
valued and sought after as Christ, till sorrow have taught us how to value him:
Nor is he entertained in the necessary honor of a Redeemer, till Humiliation
throw open all the doors: No man can seek him with his whole heart, that seeks
him not with a broken heart.

And it is certain that Christ will come on no lower terms into the Soul. Though
he come to do us good, yet he will have the honor of doing it: Though he come
to he^l us, and not for any need he has of us, yet he will have the welcome
that is due to a Physician. He comes to save us, but he will be honored in our
Salvation. He inviteth all to the Marriage supper, and even compels them to
come in: but he expects that they bring a wedding garment, and come not in a
garb that shall dishonor his house. Though his Grace be free, yet he will not
expose it to contempt, but will have the fullness and freeness of it glorified.
Though he came not to Redeem himself but us, yet he came to be glorified in the
work of our Redemption. He has no Grace so free, as to save them that will not
esteem it, and give him thanks for it. And therefore though Faith is enough to
accept the gift, yet must it be a thankful faith, that will magnify the
giver, and a humble faith that will feel the work of it, and an obediential
faith that will answer the ends of it. And therefore that faith which is the
Condition of our Justification, is fitted as well to the honor of the Giver,
as the commodity of the receiver. And as Reason tells us that it should be
so, so Christian ingenuity consents that it be so. The Soul that is truly
united to Christ, and partaketh of his nature, does think it is own Receiving
greatest, where the honor of Christ is greatest: And it cannot take pleasure
in the thoughts of such a kind of Grace, as should dishonor the Lord of Grace
himself. As Christ is solicitous for the saving of the Soul, so that he makes
the Soul solicitous of the right entertainment of him that saves it. And
therefore though his Blood, and not his Teaching or his Government was the
Ranson of our Souls, yet he is resolved to Justify none by his Blood, but on
the Condition of that Faith, which is a hearty Consent to his Teaching and
Dominion. It is not in the Application, or bestowing of Christ's benefits, as
it was in the purchasing of them. When he came to Ransom us, he consented to be
a sufferer, and gave his cheeks to the smiter, and submitted to reproach; he
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and being reviled, he reviled not, but
prayed for his persecutors: But when he comes by his saving Grace into the
Soul, he will not there be entertained with contempt: For in the flesh he came
on purpose to be humbled: but in the Spirit he comes to be exalted: In the
flesh he came to condemn the sin that reigned in our* flesh, (Romans 8. 3.) and
so was made sin for us (that is, a Sacrifice for sin) (2 Cor. 5. 21.) But
in the Spirit he comes to conquer our flesh, and by the Law of his quickening
Spirit, to free us from the Law of sin and death: both that the Righteousness
of the Law might be fullfilled in us, and also that there might be no
Condemnation to us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Romans 8.
1, 2, 4. The Kingdom of Christ was not worldly; for if it had been worldly, he
would have sought to establish it by strength of arms, and fighting, which are
worldly means, Joh. 18. 36. But his Kingdom is within us: It is a Spiritual
Kingdom: and therefore though in the world he was used with contempt, as a
fool, and as a Sinner, and a man of sorrows; yet within us he will be used with
honor, and reverence, as a King and absolute Lord. It was the hour of the
executioner, and the power of darkness, when he was in his suffering: but it is
the hour of his triumph, and marriage, and the prevailing Power of the
Heavenly Light, when he comes by Saving Grace into the Soul. On the Cross he
was as a sinner, and stood in our place, and bore what was our due, and not his
own. But in the Soul he is the Conqueror of sin, and comes to take
possession of his own, and does the work that belongs to him in his dignity;
and therefore he will there be acknowledged, and honored. On the Cross he was
pulling down the Kingdom of Satan, and setting up his own, but in the
preparatory purchase: But in the Soul he does both by immediate execution. On
the Cross sin and Satan had their full blow at him: But when he entered the
Soul, he has his blow at them, and cease not till he have destroyed them. In
purchasing he expended his own: But in Converting he takes possession of that
which he purchased. In a word; he came into the world in flesh for his
undertaken Humiliation: but he comes into the Soul, by his Spirit, for his
deserved exaltation: And therefore though he endured to be spit upon in the
flesh, he will not endure to be slighted in the Soul: And as in the world he
was scorned with the Title of a King, and crowned with thorns, and clothed in
such Kingly robes, as might make him the fitter object for their reproach: So
when his Spirit enters into the Soul, he will be there inthroned in our most
reverent, subjective, and deepest esteem, and crowned with our highest Love,
and Thankfullnes, and bowed to with the tenders of Obedience, and our praise.
The Cross shall there be the portion of his enemies, and the Crown and Scepter
shall be his: and as all were preferred before him on Earth, even Barrabas
himself; so all things shall be put under him in the Sanctified Soul, and he
shall be preferred before all.

This is the end of Humiliation, to make ready the heart for a fuller
entertainment of the Lord that bought it: and to prepare the way before him,
and fit the Soul to be the Temple of his Spirit. A humbled Soul would never
have put him off with excuses from Oxen, and Farms, and Wives; As Luke 14. and
Matthew. 22. But the unhumbled will make light of him.

And 2. As Christ himself will be honorably recieved, or not at all, so must
the Mercies, and Graces which he offers: He will not apply his blood, and
righteousness to them that care not for it: He will not pardon such a mass of
iniquity, and remove such mountains as lie upon the Soul; for them that feel
not the Necessity of such a Mercy. He will not take men from the power of the
Devil, and the drudgery of sin, and the suburbs of Hell, and make them his
Members, and the Sons of God, and the Heirs of Heaven, that have not learned
the value of these benefits, but set more by their very sin, and misery, and
the trifles of the world. Christ does not despise his Blood, his Spirit, his
Covenant, his Pardon, nor his Heavenly Inheritance: and therefore he will give
them to none that do despise them, till he teaches them better to know their
worth. Do you think it would stand with the Wisdom of Christ, to give such
unspeakable blessings as these, to men that have not hearts to value them? Why,
it is more to give a man Justification, and Adoption, then to give him all this
visible world; the Sun, the Moon, the Firmament, and the Earth. And should
these be given to one that cares not for them. Why by this means God should
miss of his ends: He should not have the Love, the Honor, or the thanks, that
he intended by his gift. It is necessary therefore that the Soul be thoroughly
humbled, that pardon may be received as pardon, and Grace as Grace, and not set
light by.

And 2. as this is necessary for the honor both of Christ and Grace, so also
it is necessary for our own benefit and consolation. The Mercy cannot indeed be
ours, if Humiliation do no make us capable of it. These Cordials must be taken
into an empty Stomach, and not be drowned in ^legm, and filth. A man on the
Gallows will be glad of a pardon: but a stander by that thinks he is innocent,
would not regard it, but take it for an accusation. There is no great sweetness
in the name of a Redeemer, to an unhumbled Soul. It sets not by the Spirit: the
Gospel is no Gospel to it, the tidings of Salvation are not so glad, to such a
one, as the tidings of riches, or worldly delights would be. As it is the
preparation of the Stomach that makes our meat sweet to us; and the coursest
fare is pleasanter to the sound, then sweetmeats to the sick: so if we were not
emptied of our selves, and vile, and lost in our own apprehensions, and if
Contrition did not quicken our appetites, the Lord himself, and all the
miracles of his Saving Grace, would be but as a thing of naught in our eyes;
and we should be but weary to hear or think of them, But O what an inestimable
Treasure is Christ to the Humbled Soul. What life is in his promises? What
sweetness in every passage of his grace; and what a feast in his unmeasurable
Love?

4. Another Use of Humiliation, employed in the former, is, that it is necessary
to bring men to yield to the terms of the Covenant of Grace: Nature holds fast
it is fleshly pleasures, and lives by feeling and upon present things, and knows
not how to live upon invisibles, by a life of Faith. And this is the life that
all must live, that will live in Christ: And therefore he calls them to the
forsaking of all, the crucifying the world and flesh, the denying of
themselves, if they will be his Disciples. But O how loath is nature to part
with all, and make a full resignation unto Christ: but fain it would make sure
of present things, for fear le^t the promises of Heaven should but deceive
them; and then they would have Heaven at last as a reserve. And on these terms
it is that Hypocrites are Religions, and thus it is that they deceive their
Souls. But when the heart is truly broken, it will then stand no longer on such
terms with Christ, but yield up all. It will then no longer Condition with him,
but stand to his Conditions, and thankfully accept them. Any thing will then
serve, with Christ, and Grace, and the hopes of Glory.

5. Another Use of Humiliation is, to fit us for the Retaining and Improving of
Grace, when we have received it. The Proverb is, Lightly come, lightly go. If
God should give the pardon of sin, to the unhumbled, how soon would it be
cast away? And how easily would such be harkening to temptation, and returning
to their vomit. The burned Child, we say dreads the fire. When sin has
killed you once, and broken your hearts, you will think the worse of it while
you live. And when a temptation comes, you will think of your former smart: Is
not this it that cost me so many groans, and laid me in the dust, and had
almost damned me? and shall I go to it again? Was I so hardly recovered, by a
Miracle of Mercy? And shall I run again into the misery that I was saved
from? Had I not sorrow, and fear, and care enough, but I must go back again for
more, and renew my trouble? Thus the remembrance of your sorrows, will be a
continual preservative to you. And a contrite spirit that is emptied of it
self, and is taught the worth of Christ and mercy, will not only hold them
fast, but will know how to use them, in thankfullness to God, and benefit to
himself.

6. Another Use of Humiliation is, to fit the Soul for it is approach to God
himself, from whom it had revolted. As it beseems not any creature, to approach
the God of Heaven, but in Reverentiall humility: so it beseems not any sinner
to approach him, but in Contrite Humility: Who can come out of such wickedness
and misery, and not bring along the sense of it on his heart? It beseems not
a Prodigal to meet his Father as confidently and boldly, as if he had never
departed from him: but to say, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15. 18. It is not
ingenious for a guilty Soul, or one that is snatched as a brand out of the fire,
to look toward God with a brazen face, but with shame and sorrow, to hang down
the head, and smite upon the breast, and say, O Lord be merciful to me a
sinner. For God resists the proud, but gives Grace to the humble: 1 Pet. 5.
5. Jam. 4. 6. Though the Lord be high, yet he has regard unto the lowly: but
the proud he knows afar off. Psalm. 138. 6. For thus says the High and Holy
one, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy; and I dwell in the High and
Holy Place, with him also that is of a contrite, and humble spirit, to revive
the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Isa.
57. 15. To this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
spirit, and that trembles at my Word. Isa 66. 2. The Lord is nigh to them that
are of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite spirit. Psalm. 34.
18. The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51. 17. There is no turning to God, unless we
loath our selves for all our abominations, Ezekiel. 16. 63.

The nearer we approach him, the more we must abhor our selves in dust, and
ashes, Job 42. 6. He will not embrace a sinner in his dung; but will first wash
and cleanse him, Isa. 1. 16. Conversion must make us humble, and as little
Children, that are teachable, and look not after great matters in the world, or
else there is no entering the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 18. 3, 4. And thus you see
the Uses, and Necessity of Humiliation.

III. By what has been already said, you may perceive what Mistakes are
carefully to be avoided, about your Humiliation, and with what caution it must
be sought.

1. One Error that you must take heed of, is, That you take not Humiliation for
an indifferent thing, or for such an appurtenance of Faith, as may be spared:
Think not an unhumbled Soul while such can be Sanctified. Some carnal hearts
conceive, that it is only more heinous sinners, that must be contrite and
broken hearted; and that this is not necessary to them that have been brought
up civilly, or religiously from their youth. But it is as possible to be saved
without Faith, as without Repentance, and that special Humiliation, which I
described to you before. It Is part of your Sanctification.

2. Another mistake to be carefully avoided, is, The placeing of your
Humiliation, either only, or principally, in the Passionate part, or in the
outward expression of those Passions. I mean, either in pinching grief, and
sorrow of heart, or else in tears. But you must remember that the Life of it
is, as was said before, in the Judgment and the Will. It is not the measure of
Passionate sorrow and anguish, that will best show the measure of your sincere
Humiliation: much less is it your tears, or outward expressions. But it is
your low esteem of your selves, and contentedness to be vile in the eyes of
others: And your displacency with your selves, and willingness to mourn, and
weep for sin as much as God would have you: with the rest of the acts of the
Judgment and Will before described.

Two great dangers are here before you to be avoided. First, some there be that
have terrible pangs of sorrow, and are ready to tear their own hair, yea or
make away themselves as Judas, in the horror of their Consciences: and these
may seem to have true Humiliation, and yet have none. And some can weep
abundantly at a Sermon, or in Prayer, or in mentioning their sin to others:
and therefore think that they are truly humbled: and yet it may be nothing so.
For if at the same time their hearts are in love with sin, or had rather keep
it then let it go, or have not an habitual hatred to it, and a predominant
superlative Love to God, their Humiliation is no saving work. That which is in
the Passions, and tears may be even forced against your wills: And it
signifies scarce so much as a common Grace, where you are not willing of it.
Many a one can weep through a passionate, womanish, tender nature; and yet not
only remain unhumbled, but be Proud in a very high degree. How many such do we
ordinarily see; especially women, that can weep more at a duty or conference,
then some that are truly broken hearted could do in all their lives: and yet be
so far from being vile in their own eyes, and willing to be so in the eyes of
others, that they will hate, and reproach, and rail at those that charge them
with the faults, which they seemed to lament; or at least, that charge them
with disgraceful sins: and they will excuse and mince their sins, and make
a small matter of them, and love none so well, as those that have the highest
thoughts of them. So that Pride does ordinarily reign in their hearts, and
break out in their words, and lives, and make them hate the faithfullest
reproachers, and live in contention with any that dishonor them for all the
tears that come from their eyes. Judge not therefore by passions, or tears
alone, but by the Judgment, and the Will, as is aforesaid.

2. Another sort there are, much better and happier than the former, that yet
to their great trouble are mistaken in this point: And that is, they that think
they have no true Humiliation, because they find not such pangs of sorrow, and
freedom of tears, as others have: when as, their hearts are contrite, even when
they cannot weep a tear. Tell me but this: Are you vile in your own eyes,
because you are guilty of sin, and that against the Lord, whom you chiefly
love? Do you loath your sins, because of your abominations, and could you
heartily wish, that you had been suffering when you were sinning; and if it
were to do again, would you choose to suffer rather then to sin? Have you a
desire to grieve, when you cannot passionately grieve, and a desire to weep
when you cannot weep? Can you quietly bear it, when you are vilified by
others, because you know your selves to be so vile? And are you thankful to a
plain Reprover, though he tell you of the most disgraceful sin? Do you think
meanly of your own sayings and doings, and think better of others, where there
is any ground, then of your selves? Do you justify Gods afflictions, and men's
true rebukes, and think your selves unworthy of the Communion of the Saints, or
to see their faces; and unworthy to live on the face of the Earth? Yea would
you justify God, if he should condemn you? This is the state of a humbled
Soul. Find but this, and you need not doubt of Gods acceptance, though you were
unable to shed a tear. There Is more Humiliation in a base esteem of our selves,
then in a thousand tears: And more in a will, or desire to weep for sin, then
in tears, that come through force of terror, or moisture of the brain, or
passionate tenderness of Nature. If the Will be right, you need not fear. It is
he that most hates sin, and is hardliest drawn to it, that is trulyest
humbled for it. He that will lament it to day, and commit it to morrow, is far
less humbled and penitent, then he that would not be drawn to it with the hopes
of all the pleasures of the world, nor commit it, if it were to save his life.

3. To avoid this, some run into the contrary mistake, and think that sorrow
and tears are unnecessary, and that they may Repent as well without them, as
with them; and they lay all in some dull uneffectual wishes; and so they think,
the Heart is changed. But certainly God made not the Affections in vain. It
cannot be that any man can have a Sanctified Will, but his Affections will hold
some correspondence with it, and be commanded by it. Though we cannot mourn in
that Measure as we desire, yet some sorrow there will be wherever the Heart is
truly changed. And appretiative this sorrow will be the greatest. No man can
heartily believe, that sin is the greatest evil to his Soul, and not be
grieved for it. And indeed our Liveliest Affections should be exercised about
these weightiest things. It Is a shame to see a man mourn for a friend, and
whine under a Cross that touches but the flesh, and yet be so insensible of
the plague of sin, and the anger of the Lord, and to laugh and ^est with such
mountains on his Soul. Though grief, and tears be not the heart, or principal
part of our Humiliation, yet are they to be looked after as our duty; yea sorrow
in some measure, is of absolute necessity: and the want of tears is no good
sign in them that have tears, for other things. Indeed the sense of our folly
and unkindness should be so great, that it should even turn our hearts into
sorrow, and melt them in our breasts, and draw forth streams of tears from our
eyes: and if we cannot bring our selves to this; we must yet lament the
hardness of our hearts, and not excuse it.

4. In the next place, you are hence informed, how to answer that Question,
Whether it be possible for a man to be humbled, and repent too much. That part
of Humiliation, which consists in the acts of the Uuderstanding and the Will,
cannot be too much as to the Intention of the Act; And if it be too much as to
the Objective extent, then as it is misguided, so it changes its Nature, and
cease to be the thing that it was before. A man may think worse of himself
then he is, by thinking falsely of himself, as that he is guilty of the sin
which he is not guilty of: But this is not the same thing with true
Humiliation. But to have too clear an apprehension of the evil of his sin,
and his own vileness; this he need not fear. And in the will it is more
clear: No man can be too willing to be rid of sin, in Gods time and way; nor
be too much averse from it, as it is against the Lord. But then the other part
of Humiliation, which consists in the depth of sorrow, or in tears, may
possibly be too much. Though I know very few that are guilty of it, or need to
fear it; because the common case of the world, is to be stupid, and
hard-hearted; and most of the Godly are lamentably insensible. But yet some few
there are, that have need of this advise, that they strive not for too great a
measure of grief. Let your hearts be against sin as much as is possible: But
yet let there be some limits in your grief and tears. And this counsel is
necessary to these sorts of people. 1. To Melancholy people, that are in
danger of being distracted, and made unreasonable, and useless by overmuch
sorrow. Their thoughts will be fixing, and musing, and sad, and dark, and full
of fears, and either make things worse then they are, or else be deeplyer
affected with them then their heads can bear. 2. And this is the Case of some
weak spirited women, that are not Melancholy; but yet by natural weakness of
their brains, and strength of their passions, are unable to endure those
serious deep affecting apprehensions, which others may desire; but the depth of
their sensibilitie, and greatness of their passion, does presently endanger the
crazing of their brains, and quickly cast them into Melancholy, or worse.

And this is a very heavy affliction where it comes, both to the persons
themselves, and those about them. To be deprived of the Use of Reason, is one
of the greatest corporal calamities in this life. And it is matter of offense,
and dishonor to the Gospel, in the eyes of the ungodly, that understand not
the Case. When they see any languish in unmeasurable sorrow, or fall into
distraction, it is a grievous temptation to them, to fly from Religion, and
avoid godly sorrow, and all serious thoughts of heavenly things: And it
occasioneth the foolish scorners to say, that Religion makes men man; and that
this Humiliation, and Conversion which we call them to, is the way to bring
them out, of their wits. So that by reason of the grief of the godly, and the
hardening of the ungodly, the Case is so sad, that it requires our greatest
care to avoid it.

Quest. But if it be so dangerous to sorrow, either too little, or too much,
what shall a poor sinner do in such a straight? And how shall he know when to
restrain his sorrows?

Answ. It is but very few in the world, that have cause to fear excess of this
kind of sorrow. The common Case of men, is to be blockish, and worldly sorrow
does cast more into Melancholy, and distractions then godly sorrow: But for
those few that are in danger of excess. I shall first tell you how to discern
it, and then how to remedy it,

1. When your sorrow is greater then your brains can bear, without apparent
danger of destraction, or a Melancholy disturbance and deminution of your
Understanding, then it is certainly too much, and to be restrained. For if you
overthrow your Reason, you will be a reproach to Religion, and you will be fit
for nothing that is truly good, either to your own Edification, or the Service
of God.

2. If you be in any grievous disease, which sorrow would increase, to the
hazard of your life, you have reason to restrain it: Though you may not
forbear Repenting, or Carefullness of your Salvation, yet the Passion of grief
you must moderate and abate.

3. When sorrow is so great as to discompose your mind, or enfeeble your body,
so as to un-fit you for the service of God, and make you more unable to do
good, or receive good, you have reason then to moderate and restrain it.

4. When the greatness of your sorrow, does overmatch the necessary measure of
your Love, or Joy, or Thanks, and keep out these, and takes up more of your
spirit then its part, having no room for greater duties, then it is excessive
and is to be restrained. There are some that will strive and struggle with
their hearts, to wring out a few tears, and increase their sorrow, that yet
make little Conscience of other affections, and will not strive half so much to
increase their Faith, and Love, and Joy.

5. When your sorrow by the greatness of it, does draw you into temptation,
either to despair, or think hardly of God and his Service, or to undervalue his
Grace, and the Satisfaction of Christ, as if it were too scant, and
insufficient for you; you have then cause to moderate and restrain it.

6. When your sorrow is unseasonable, and will needs thrust in at those times,
when you are called to Thankfullness, and Joy, you have then cause to moderate,
and restrain it at that season. Not that we should wholly lay by sorrow in any
day of Joy and Thanksgiving: unless we could lay by all our sin in the duties
of that day: Nor should we wholly lay by Spiritual comfort and delight, in
days of greatest Humiliation. For as our state is here mixed, of Grace and
sin, so must all our duties be mixed of Joy and Sorrow: It is only in Heaven
where we must have unmixed Joys, and only in Hell that there are unmixed
sorrows; or at least, not in any state of Grace. But yet for all that, there
are seasons now, when one of these must be more eminently exercised, and the
other in a lower measure. As in times of Calamity, and after a fall, we are
called out so much to Humiliation, that Comfort should but moderate our
sorrows, and the exercise of it be^veiled for that time; so in times of Special
Mercies from the Lord, we may be called out to exercise our Thanks, and Praise,
and Joy so eminently, that sorrow should but keep us humble, and be, as it
were, serviceable to our Joies. When Grace and Mercy is most eminent, then Joy
and Praise should be predominant (which is through the most of a Christians
life, that walks uprightly and carefully with God:) And when sin and
Judgments are most eminent, sorrow must be th^n predominant, as being a
necessary means to solid Joy. And therefore ordinarily a sinner that is but in
the, work of Conversion, and newly coming to God from a rebellious state, must
entertain more sorrow, and let out himself more to groans and tears then
afterward, when he is brought to Reconciliation with God, and walks in
integrity.

Quest. But when is it that my sorrow is too short, and I should labor to
increase it?

Answ. 1. When there is no apparent danger of the last-mentioned evils, that
is, Of destroying your bodies, distracting your brains, discomomposing your
minds, and drowning other Graces and duties, and the rest; then you have little
cause to be afraid of an excess.

2. When you have not smart enough to cause you to value the Love of Christ,
and highly prise his blood, and the effects of it, and hunger and thirst after
him and his righteousness, and earnestly beg for the pardon of your sin; you
have cause to desire the more sorrow: If you feel no great need of Christ, but
pass by him as lightly as the full stomach by his food, as if you could do well
enough without him; you may be sure then you have need to be broken more. If
you set not so much by the Love of God, that you would part with any thing in
the world to enjoy it, and would think no terms too dear for Heaven: You have
need to lie under the sense of your sin and misery a little longer, and to
beseech the Lord to save you from that heart of stone. When you can hear of the
Love and sufferings of your Redeemer, without any warmth of Love to him again;
and can read or hear the promises of Grace, and offers of Christ, and Eternal
life, without any considerable Joy, or Thankfullness, it is time for you then to
beg of God a tender heart.

3. When you make many pawses in the work of your Conversion, and are sometime
in a good mind, and then again at a stand, as if you were yet unresolved
whether to turn or no; When you stick at Christ terms of denying your selves,
and crucifying the flesh, and forsaking all, for the hopes of Glory; and think
these sayings somewhat hard, and are considering of the matter whether you
should yield to them or not; or are secretly Reserving somewhat to your selves;
this certainly shows, that you are not yet sufficiently humbled, or else you
would never stand trifling thus with God. He must yet set your sins in order
before you, and hold you a while over the fire of Hell, and ring your
Consciences such a peal, as shall make you yield, and resolve your doubts, and
^each you not to dally with your maker. If Pharaoh himself be off and on with
God, and sometime he will let Israel go, and then again he will not; God will
follow him with plague after plague, till he make him yield, and glad to drive,
or hasten them away. And even where he deals in ways of Grace, he makes so
much use of sorrows, as to make men yield the sooner to his terms, and glad to
have Mercy on such terms, if they were harder.

4. When you are heartless and dull under the Ordinances of God, and Scripture
has little life or sweetness to you, and you are almost indifferent whether
you call upon God in secret, or no; and whether you go to the Congregation, and
hear the Word, and join in Gods Praises, and the Communion of the Saints, and
you have no great relish in holy Conference, or any Ordinance, but do them
almost merely for custom, or to please your Consciences, and not for any great
need you feel of them, or good you find by them; this shows for certain you
want some more of the rod, and spur; your hearts be not wakened and broken
sufficiently, but God must take you in hand again.

5. When you can be mindless of God, and of the life to come, and forget both
your sin, and Saviors Blood, and let out your thoughts almost continually
upon worldly vanities, or common things, as if you were overgrown the need of
Christ; this shows that the stone is yet in your hearts, and that God must keep
you to a harder diet to mend your appetites, and make you feel you sin, and
misery, till it call off your thoughts from things that less concern you, and
teach you to mind your Everlasting state. If you begin to forget your selves
and him, ^t's time for you to have a remembrancer.

6. When you begin to taste more sweetness in the creature, and be more tickled
with applause and honor, and pleased more with a full estate, and more
impatient with poverty, or wants, or wrongs from men, and crosses in the world;
and when you are set upon a thriving course, and are eager to grow rich, and
fall in love with money; when you drown your selves in worldly cares, and
business, and are combred about many things, through your own choice; this shows
indeed that you are dangerously unhumbled; and if God have Mercy for you, he
will bring you low, and make your riches gall and wormwood to you, and abate
your appetite, and teach you to know that one thing is needful; and so be more
eager after the food that perishes not, and hereafter to choose the better
part, Luke 10. 41, 42. Joh. 6. 27.

7. When you can return to play with the occasions of sin, or look upon it
with a reconcilable mind, as if you had yet some mind on it, and could almost
find in your heart to be doing with it again; when you begin to have a mind of
your old company and courses, or begin to draw as near it as you dare, and are
gazing upon the bair, and tasting of the forbidden thing, and can scarce tell
how to deny your fancies, your appetites, your senses their desires; this shows
that you want some* wakening work: God must yet read you another lecture in the
black book, and set you to spell those lines of blood which it seems you have
forgotten; and kindle a little of that fire in your Consciences, which else you
would run into; till you feel and understand,, whether it be good playing
with sin, and the Wrath of God, and the Everlasting fire.

8. When you begin to be indifferent as to your Communion with God, and think
not much whether he accept you, and manifest his love to you or not, but can
huddle up your prayers, and look no more after them, or what becomes of them,
and use Ordinances and seldom enquire of the success: When you can spare the
Spiritual Consolations of the Saints; and fetch little of your comfort from
Christ, or Heaven; but from your friends, and health, and prosperity, and
accomodations; and perhaps can be as merry in carnal company, when you say and
do as they, as if you were considering of the Love of Christ: this shows that
the threatenings went not deep enough. Sorrow has yet another part to play: You
must be taught better to know your home, and to take more pleasure in your
father, and your husband, and your brethren, and your Inheritance, then in
strangers, or enemies to God and you.

9. When you begin to grow wanton with Ordinances, or other Mercies, and in
stead of thankful receiving them, and feeding on them, you pick quarrels with
them, and nothing will please you: either the Minister is too weak; or he is
too curious, or too formal; you must have it this way or that way; either you
must have more of a form, or no form; in this gesture, or that order, and
something or other is still amiss: this shows that you want humbling, and that
you are fitter for the rod, then for meat. If God do but open you a door into
your hearts, and show you the monsters and emptyness that is there, you will
then see, that the fault lay somewhere else then in the Minister, or the
Ordinances: If it were in them, it was more in you. The cause of your loathing,
and quarrelling with the Word, was the fullness of your own stomach; and God
must give you a vomit, or purge, that shall make your hearts ache before it has
done working, and then your appetits will be mended, and your wantonness will
cease; and that will be sweet to you which before you slighted.

10. When you begin to be leavened with Pride, and think highly of your selves,
and have good conceits of your own parts and performances, and would be noted,
and taken for somebody among the godly, and you cannot endure to be overlookt,
or past by: when you think mea^ly of other men's parts, and dutys, in comparison
of yours, and think your selves as wise as your Teachers, and begin to hear
them as Judas magisterial spirit, and think you could do as well as this your
selves; when you are finding fault with that which should nourish you, and in
every Sermon you are most noting the defects, and think that this you could
have mended; when you itch to be Teachers your selves, and think your selves
fitter to preach then to learn, to rule then to be ruled, to answer then to ask
for resolution; when you think so well of your selves, that the Church is not
pure or good enough for your company, though Christ disowneth it not, and they
force you not to sin; when you grow censorious; and aggravate the fault of
others, and extenuate their graces, and can see a mote in another's eye, but
will discern none of their Graces, if they be not as high as mountains, and
none can pass for Godly with you, but those of the most eminent magnitude; when
you are itching after novelties in Religion, and setting your wisdom against
the present, or ancient Church; and affecting singularity because you will be
of no common way; when you cannot hear this Minister, nor that Minister,
though the Ministers of Christ; and you are harping upon that, Come out from
among them, and be ye separate; as if Christ had called you to come out of the
Church, when he called you to come out of the company of Infidels: All this
cries aloud for further Humiliation: You have a tympanie that must be pricked,
to let out the wind that puffs you up: If you be not for perdition, and to be
forsaken, and given over to your selves, you must be fecht over again and
humbled with a witness. When God has turned your inside outward, and showed
you that you are poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked, and that you are
empty Nothings, who thought so well of your selves; he will then make you stoop
to those that you despised, and think your selves unworthy of the Communion of
those that before you thought unworthy of your selves. He will make you think
your selves unworthy to hear those Ministers that you turned your back upon;
and he will take down your Teaching, talking vain, and make you glad again to
be learners: In a word, he will by Conversion make you as little Children, or
you shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

And this spiritual Pride is a most lamentable disease, and the issue usually
is exceeding sad. For with many, it is the forerunner of damnable Apostasy, and
God gives them once to their own conceits, and the wisdom which they so esteem,
till it have led them to perdition. And those that are cured, are many of them
cured by the saddest way of any men in the world. For it is usual with God to
let them alone, till they have run themselves into some abominable error, or
fallen into some shameful scandalous sin, till they are made a hissing and
byword among men; that shame and confusion may bring them to their wits, and
they may learn to know what it was that they were Proud of, and see that they
were but silly worms.

And thus I have showed you, when you must seek after deeper Humiliation, and
may conclude that you are not humbled enough: Yea and when a greater measure,
is of some Necessity to your Souls.

Quest. Well, but yet you have not told ^is what course a poor Sinner should
take in such a strait, when he knows not whether his Humiliation, as to the
Affectionare part, be too little or too much?

Answ. 1. You may partly discern your selves by what is said, whether you have
need of more or less Humiliation, if you can but try your hearts by these
signs. 2. But yet I would advise, and earnestly persuade you, in Cases of
difficulty, to betake your selves to some able faithful Minister for
resolution. If you feel sorrow seize so deep upon your spirits, that it
distempereth you, or threatens your understanding, or your health, especially
if your are either passionate women, or Melancholy persons; stay not then any
longer, left delay do that which cannot easily be undon, but go and open your
case, and crave advice. This is a principal Use of Pastors, that you should
have them at hand, to advise with in the diseases and dangers of your Souls, as
you do with Physicians, in the diseases and dangers of the body. Lay by all
sinful bashfullness, and trust not your selves any longer with your own skill,
but go to them that God has set in Office over you for such uses as these, and
tell them your Case: This is Gods way; and he will bless his own Ordinance:
Melancholy, and Passionate distempered persons, are not fit judges of their
own condition. In this Case you must distrust your own understanding, and be
not selfconceited, and stick not obstinately to every fancy that comes into
your heads, but in the sense of your weakness rely upon the guidance of your
faithful Overseers; till your distempers are overcome, and you are made more
capable of discerning for your selves.

5. You are further here to be informed, that it is not for it self that
sorrow and tears are so desirable; but as they are expressions of a gracious
temper of the will, and as they help on to the Ends that Humiliation is
appointed to. And therefore you may hence learn in what sort you must seek
after it. 1. You must not place the chief part of your Religion in it, as if it
were a life of mere sorrow, that we are called to by the Gospel. But you must
make it a servant to your Faith, and Love, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, and other
Graces. As the use of the needle is but to make way for the thread, and then it
is the thread and not the needle that makes the seam: So much of our sorrow is
but to prepare for Faith and Love, and these are they that close the Soul with
Christ. It is therefore a sore mistake of some, that are very apprehensive of
their want of sorrow, but little of their want of Faith, or Love: and that pray
and strive to break their hearts, or weep for sin, but not much for those
higher Graces, which it tends to. One must be done, and not the other left
undone.

2. As tears are the Expressions of the heart, so those are the most kindly and
sincere, which voluntarlly flow from the inward feeling of the evil that we
lament. If you could weep never so much, merely because you think that tears
are in themselves necessary, and had not within, the hatred of sin, and sense
of its vile and killing nature; this were not true Humiliation at all. And if
the Heart be humbled before the Lord, it is not the want of tears that will
cause him to despise it. Some are so backward to weep by Nature, that they
cannot weep for any outward thing, no not for the loss of the dearest friend,
when yet they would have done ten times more to redeem his life, then some that
have tears at will. Groans are as sure Expressions of sorrow as tears, with
such as these. And the hearty rejecting and detestation of sin, is yet a
better Evidence then either. But where men have naturally a weeping
disposition, which they can manifest about Crosses in the world, and yet cannot
shed a tear for sin, there the Case is the most suspicious.

3. The principal Cause why you must strive for deeper sorrow, is, that you may
obtain the Ends of that sorrow; that sin may be more odious to you, and more
effectually mortified: that self may be taken down, and Christ may be valued,
and desired, and exalted, and that you may be fitted for a Holy Communion with
God for the time to come, and saved from Pride, and kept in watchfullness.

6. From this that was last said you have a Rule by which you may certainly
discern, what measure of Humiliation it is that must be had. It mst go so deep
as to undermine our Pride, and so far the heart must needs be broken, as is
necessary to break the heart of sin, and carnal self. If this be not done
there is nothing done, though you weep out your eyes. You must be brought so low,
that the blood of Christ, and the favor of God, may be more precious in your
eyes then all the world, and in your very hearts prefered before it: And then
you may be sure that your Humiliation is sincere, whether you have tears or
none.

7. From hence also you may see, that you must take heed of ascribing to your
own Humiliation, any part of the office and honor of Christ: Think not that
you can satisfy the Justice of the Law, or merit any thing of God by the worth
of your sorrows, though you should weep even tears of blood. It is not true
Humiliation if it consist not in the sense and acknowledgment of your
unworthyness, and desert of condemnation, and if it do not lead you to look out
for pardon and life from Christ, as being lost and wholly insufficient for your
selves. And therefore it would be a plain contradiction, if true Humiliation
should be taken as Satisfaction, or Merit, or trusted on instead of Christ.

IV. Having thus far opened the Nature and Reasons of true Humiliation, I
conclude with that advice which I principally here intended: Refuse not to be
thoroughly and deeply humbled. Be not weary of the humbling workings of the
Spirit. Grief is an unwelcome guest to Nature: but Grace can see Reason to bid
it welcome. Grace is ingenious, and cannot look back on so great unkindness,
with unwillingness to mourn over it, Zech. 12. 10. There is somewhat of God in
godly sorrow, and therefore the Soul consents to it, and seeks for it, and
calls it in: Yea and is grieved that it can grieve no more. Not that sorrow as
sorrow is desirable; but as a necessary Consequent of our grievous sinning,
and a necessary Antecedent of our further recovery: As we may submit to Death
it self, with a cheerful willingness, because it is sanctified to be the
passage into Glory, how dreadful soever it be to Nature in it self: so much
more may we submit to Humiliation and brokenness of heart, with a holy
willingness, because it is sanctified to be the entrance into the state of
Grace. Consider for your satisfaction of these following things.

1. The main brunt of your sorrows will be but in the beginning: and when once
you are settled in a holy course, you will find more Peace and comfort, then
ever you could have had in any other way. I know if you will be meddling with
sin again, it will in its measure breed sorrow again: But a godly life, is a
life of Uprightness; and Conversion is a departing from sin, and consequently
a departing from the Cause of sorrows. And can you not bear such a sorrow for a
little while?

2. Consider but whence you are coming? Is it not out of a state of wrath? And
where you have been all this while? Was it not in the power of Satan? And and
what you have been doing all your lives? Has it not been the drudgery of
sin, and the offending of your Lord, and the destroying of your selves? And
is it meet, is it reasonable, is it ingenious, for you to come out of such a
Case, without lamentation that you staid in it so long?

3. Consider also, that it is Necessary to your own recovery and Salvation. Do
you think to take so dangerous a surfeit, and then to be cured without a Vomit?
You will endure for the health of your bodies, the bitterest pills, and
loathsomest potions, the shortest diet, and the letting out of your blood: for
you know that your life lies on it, and there is no remedy. And should you not
endure for the saving of your Souls, the bitterest sorrows, the keenest rebuks,
the freest Confessions, and the most plentiful tears? Sin will not down at
easier rates: Self will not be conquered else: The heart of it will not be
broken, till your hearts be broken. We know your sorrows Merit nothing, and
make not God amends for your sins; nor is it for want of sufficiency in the
blood of Christ that we require them. But it is part of the fruit of his Blood
upon your Souls. If his Blood do not melt and break your hearts, you have no
part in him. It becomes you to mourn over him whom you have pierced, Zech. 12.
10. And this fruit of his Blood is a preparative to more. You may as well think
of being saved without Faith, as without Repentance, and Humiliation.

4. Consider so much as is bitter in it, is of your own preparation: You may
thank your selves for it. Who was it that brought you to this Necessity of
sorrow? Have you been all your life time surfeiting of the creature, and
causing your own disease, and now will you grudg at the trouble of a cure? Whom
have you to blame, and find fault with but your selves: was it not you that
sinned? was it not you that laid in the fuel of sorrows, and sowed the feeds of
this bitter fruit, and cherished the Cause of trouble in your selves? God did
not do this: It was you your selves. He does but undo that which you have been
doing. Grudg not therefore at your Physician, if you must be purged, and let
blood, and dieted strictly, but thank your selves for it that have made it so
necessary.

5. Consider also that you have a wise and tender Physician, that has known
what sorrow and grief is himself; for he was made for you a man of sorrows,
Isa. 53. 3. And therefore can pity those that be in sorrow. He delights not
in your trouble, and grief; but in your Cure and after-consolations. And
therefore you may be sure that he will deal gently and moderately with you: and
lay no more on you then is necessary for your good: Nor give you any bitterer a
cup, then your disease does require. When he shows his greatest liking of the
contrite; it is that he may Revive their hearts; and he professes withal,
that he will not contend for ever, nor be always wrath, lest the Spirit should
fail before him, and the Souls which he has made, Isa. 57. 15. 16. He calls to
him the weary and heavy laden, that he may give them ease, Matthew. 11. 28. He
was sent to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives,
and recoveing of sight to the blind, and to set at liberty them that are
bruised, Luke 4. 18. When he has broken your hearts he will as tenderly bind
them up, and as safely heal them as you can reasonably desire. Even his
Ministers that labor to break your hearts, and bring you low, even to the
dust, have no worse meaning in it then to bring you to Christ, and life, and
comfort: And though they are glad to see the weeping eyes of their hearers, and
to hear their free Confessions and Lamentations, yet this is not because they
take pleasure in your trouble, but because they foresee the saving fruits of
it, and know it to be necessary to your Everlasting Peace. You may read what
their thoughts are in the words of Paul, 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10, 11. Now I rejoice,
not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to Repentance: for ye were
made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in
nothing. For godly sorrow works Repentance to Salvation, not to be Repented
of; but the sorrow of the world works death. For behold this self-same thing
that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefullness it wrought in you; yea
what clearing of your selves; yea what indignation; yea what fears; yea what
vehement desire; yea what zeal; yea what revenge; etc. Indeed neither Christ,
nor his Ministers have that fond and foolish love to you, and pity of you, as
you have to your selves: They be not so tender of you, as to save you from the
sorrow which is needful to the saving of you from Hell. But they would not put
you to any more then needs: nor have you taste a drop of the vinegar and gall,
or shed one tear, but what shall tend to your comfort and Salvation.

6. Consider what sorrows they be that these sorrows do prevent, and what those
suffer in Hell, that avoid this godly sorrow on earth. O Sirs, your
Repentance-sorrows are joys to those: Yours have Hope; but theirs are quickened
with desperation: Yours are small, and but a drop to their Ocean: Yours are
Curing; but theirs are Tormenting: Yours are a Fathers Rod: but theirs are the
Rack and Gallows: Yours are mixed with love; but theirs are unmixed,
overwhelming them with confusion: Yours are short; but theirs are endless. And
had you rather sorrow as they do, then as the godly do? Had you rather howl
with Devils and rebels, then weep with Saints and Children? Had you rather be
broken in Hell by Torments, then on earth by Grace? Is it not an unreasonable
thing of you, to make such a stir at the sorrow that must save you, when you
remember what it would save you from, and what all must suffer that are not
Humbled here by Grace. O it is another kind of sorrow that others are now
enduring. Grudg not at the pricking of a vein, when so many thousands are
everlastingly bleeding at the heart.

7. Consider, The more you are rightly Humbled, the sweeter will Christ and all
his Mercies be to you ever after while you live. One taste of the healing Love
of Christ, will make you bless those sorrows that prepared for it. The same
Christ is not equally esteemed even by all that he will save: And had you not
rather be emptied yet more of your selves, that you may be fuller of Christ
hereafter? When you do but feel his arms embracing you, and perceive him in
that posture as the prodigal's Father was, Luke 15. 20. You will thank that
sorrow that fitted you for his arms.

8. If you be thoroughly humbled, you will walk the more safely all your days,
if other things correspond. It will make you hate the sin you smarted by, and
fly the occasions of that which cost you once so dear.

9. The sin of Pride, is one of the most mortal damning sins, in the world;
and that which thousands of professors do miscarry by. And Humiliation is most
directly contrary to this: and therefore must needs be an amiable and necessary
thing. It Is worth all the sorrow that a hundred men endure here, to be saved
from this dangerous sin of Pride.

10. A through Humiliation is usually a sign of the greater Exaltation, to
come after. For those that humble themselves shall be exalted; and those that
exalt themselves shall be brought low, Luke 14. 11. Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, and he shall lift you up, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
The higher you mean to build, the deeper you will dig to lay the foundation.
Your Consolations are like to be greater, as your sorrows have been greater.
You may be free from those doubts that follow others all their days, lest they
were never truly humbled. You need not be still questioning, or pulling up your
foundations, as if you were to begin again. It is a sign that you are intended
to greater employments (if other things concur.) Paul must be laid exceeding
low in his Conversion, that he might be the fitter as a chosen Vessel, to bear
Christ's Name among the Gentiles.

Lay all this now together Sirs, and consider what cause you have to cherish
the Humbling works of Grace, and not to quench them. When your hearts begin to
be afflicted for sin, go not among foolish and merry Companions, to drink or
laugh it away: drive it not out of your minds, as unkindly, as if it came to do
you hurt: But get alone, and consider of the matter, and on your knees in
secret, beseech the Lord to follow it home, and break your hearts, and make you
meet for his healing consolations, and not to leave you in this red sea, but to
bring you through, and put the Songs of praise into your mouths.

DIRECT. V. Having thus directed you about your Humiliation, the next Direction
which I would offer you, that you may not miscarry in the work of Conversion,
is this: See that you close with the Lord Jesus Christ, understandingly,
heartily, and entirly as he is revealed, and offered to you in the Gospel. In
this your Christianity does consist: Upon this your Justification, and
Salvation lie. This is the sum of your Coversion; and the very heart of the
New creature. The rest is all but the preparatives to this, or the fruits of
this. Christ is the end and the fulfiling of the Law; the substance of the
Gospel; the way to the Father: the life, the help, the hope of the Believer. If
you know not him, you know nothing: If you possess not him, you have nothing:
And if you are out of him, you can do nothing; that has a promise of
Salvation. And therefore I shall distinctly (though briefly) tell you what it
is to close with Christ, Understandingly, heartily, and entirely, as he is
offered in the Gospel.

And I. That you may close with Christ Understandingly, you must look to these
things: 1. That you understand who Christ is, as in his Person and his Offices:
2. That you understand the Reason of his undertaking: 3. That you understand,
what it is that he has done and suffered for us. 4 That you understand the
Nature and worth of his benefits, and what he will do for you. 5. That you
understand the terms on which he conveyeth these benefits to men; and what is
the nature, extent, and condition of his promises. And 6. that you understand
the Certain Truth, of all this.

For the first, you must understand, that Jesus Christ has two Natures in one
Person: that he is both God and Man: As he is God, he is of the same substance
with his Father, and one in essence with him; the Second Person in the Blessed
Trinity; the Word of God; the only begotten Son of the Father; Eternal,
Incomprehensible, and Infinite: As Man, he has a true Humane Soul and body as
men have: so that his Godhead, his Humane Soul, and his Body, are really
distinct. This Humane Nature was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Virgin
Mary, without man, and born of of her, and is so truly united to the Divine
Nature, as that they are one Person: Not that the Godhead is turned into the
manhood, nor the manhood into the Godhead; but the Godhead has taken the
manhood into Personal Unity with it self. This was not from Eternity, but when
man had sinned, and had lost himself, and needed a Redeemer. By reason of his
Miraculous Conception, he was free from all Original sin, being holy,
harmless, and undefiled. His Person, and Natures, were fit for his Office;
which was to be the Mediator between God and man, to make Reconciliation and
recover us to God. Had he not been God, but mere man, his dignity would not
have been sufficient for such an interposition, nor his obedience or
sufferings, of any such value, as to be the price of our Redemption: Nor could
he have born our burden, or conquered death, and risen again, and overcome the
Prince of death, the Devil; nor have ruled his Church, and preserved, and
sanctified them, and prospered his Cause, and subdued his enemies, nor
effectually interceded with the Father, nor judged the world, or raised the
dead, and done the work of a perfect Savior. Nor was the Angelical Nature
sufficient for this Office. Had he not been man, he had not been near enough to
us, to have suffered in our stead, and taught us by his Doctrine, and given us
his Example, nor could he have suffered, or dyed for us: For God cannot die or
suffer. As he is God he is One in Nature with the Father; and as he is man, he
is One in Nature with us: and therefore is fit to Mediate for us; and in him we
are brought thus nigh to God. To this Office of the Mediator there are many
acts belonging, from whence it has several denominations, of which more anon.
So much of Christ's Person.

2. The next thing that you must understand, is, the Reason and Ends of his
Undertaking; which though we are not able fully to comprehend (nor the Reason
of any of the works of God,) yet must we observe so much as is revealed. And
these following Ends or Reasons of this work, do show themselves clearly in the
Scripture, and in the event.

1. One is, The Demonstration of Gods Justice, as he is Governor of the world,
according to the Law of Nature. He made man rational and a voluntary Agent,
capable of Good or Evil, with Desires and Hopes of the Good, and fears of the
Evil; and so to be ruled according to his Nature. He made for him a Law that
Revealed Good and Evil, with Promises to move him by Desire, and Hope, and with
Threatenings to drive him by necessary Fear. By these engines God resolved to
govern mankind. This Law was the Rule of man's Duty, and of his Receivings, or
of Gods Judgment: According to this Law, the world was to be Governed by God.
His Governing Justice consists in giving all their Due, according to his Law:
At least so far as that the End of the Law may be attained, that is, the honor
of the Lawgiver preserved, transgression made odious by the terror of penalty,
and obedience made honorable by its fruits of impunity and reward: Otherwise
the Law would not have deterred effectually from Evil, nor encouraged to Good,
especially to so much as Creatures must go through for the Crown of Life: And
so the Law would have been no fit Instrument for the Government of the world:
that is, the Law would have been no Law. But this the Wise and Righteous God
would not be guilty of, of making a Law that was no Law; and was unmeet for the
ends, to which he made it; which was essential to it as a Law. There was no way
to avoid this intolerable consequent, when man had sinned, but strict
execution of the Law, or by sufficient Satisfaction in stead of such an
Execution. The Execution would have destroyed the Commonwealth, even the whole
inferior world, at least, the reasonable Creature who was the Subject. The
Wisdom, and Love, and Mercy of God would not give way to this, that the world
should be destroyed so soon after it was made, and man left remediless in
everlasting Misery: Satisfaction therefore must be the Remedy: This must be
such as might be as fit to procure the Ends of the Law, as if the Law it self
had been executed, that is; as if the offenders had all dyed the death that it
did threaten. It must therefore be a publik Demonstration of Justice, and of
the odiousness of Sin, to the terror, and warning of sinners for the future:
And this was done by Jesus Christ, when none else in Heaven, or Earth could do
it: For it did as fully demonstrate this Justice of God, and preserved his
honor, and the usefullness of his Law and government, that a Person so high
and Glorious, and so dear to him, should suffer so much for sin, as if all
the world had suffered for themselves. And thus God made him to be sin for
us, who knew no sin. 2 Cor. 5. 21. And thus Christ has Redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13.

2. Hereby also God Demonstrated the Holiness of his Nature: How much he hates
sin; and how unreconcilable he is to it; as light to darkness: As the Law and
Judgments of God do proceed from his Perfect Nature and Will, so do they bear
the Image of that perfection, and demonstrate it to the world. This therefore
is the nobler End, and work of Christ in our redemption, to declare the
Holiness and Perfection of God in his Nature and Will; though the former (the
declaring of his Governing Justice) be the nearer End. If the death of Aarons
two sons were such a Declaratition, that God will be sanctified in all that
draw near him. Lev. 10. 2, 3, If his Laws and present Judgments do declare him
to be a Holy and Jealous God, that will not forgive sin (without a valuable
consideration, or satisfaction) Jos. 24. 19. how much more evidently is this
declared in the death of Christ? If the Bethshemites cry out, who is able to
stand before this Holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6. 20. Upon the death of 50070 men; how
much more may the guilty Soul say so, when he thinks on the Crucified Son of
God? As it is the End of Gods execution on transgressors, that the Lord may be
exalted in Judgment, and God that is Holy may be Sanctified in Righteousness;
Isa. 5. 16. So was it his End in the Sacrifice of his Son.

3. Another End of our Redemption by Christ, is the Demonstration of the
Infinite Wisdom of God. His Wisdom in the preventing the ruin of the
late-created world; that it might not be said that sin and Satan had frustrated
him of the Glory of his Creation, and destroyed it almost as soon as he had
made it: Yea in getting an advantage by the malice of his enemies, for the more
admirable attainment of the Ends of his Law, and the Glorifying of all his
Governing Attributes: He would not have made man a free Agent, and left him in
the hand of his own will, and suffered him to sin, if his Wisdom had not
known how to secure his own Intrest and Honor to the full. And so also in the
economy and admirable frame of his Gracious Sapiential Government by Christ,
the manifold Wisdom of God does shine forth, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10. As the wonderful
structure of Heaven, and Earth, and every part of this Natural frame, does
gloriously reveal the Wisdom of the Creator; so the wonderful Contrivance of
our Redemption by Christ, and the Reparation of the world by him, and the Moral
frame of this Evangelical dispensation, does wonderfully demonstrate the Wisdom
of the Redeemer. And as the observation of our Natures, may give us Cause to
say with David, Psalm. 139. 14. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made. So the observation of our new Natures and condition, may well
cause us to say, I will praise thee; for I am graciously and wonderfully
Redeemed, marvelous are thy Works, and that my Soul knows right well. As
Nature may teach us to admire the frame of Nature; so Grace will teach us to
admire the frame of Grace; and to see the beauty of its several parts; and much
more of the whole where all the parts are orderly composed.

4. Yea the very Power of God is demonstrated in Christ. And therefore he is
called, 1 Cor. 1. 24. The Power of God, and the Wisdom of God: not only
formally, because Christ himself is the Wise and Powerful God; nor only
Efficiently, because God does exercise his Power and Wisdom, by his Son in
Creation, Redemption, and Government; but also Effectually and Objectively, as
Christ is the great and most admirable Demonstration, of the Power and Wisdom
of God, in the world.

What work transcendeth the incomprehensible Miracle of the Incarnation? That
God should assume the Nature of man into personal Union? The Creation of the
Sun; is no greater a work of Power, then the Incarnation, and sending of the
Son of God, the Intellectual Sun, the Light of the world, That living
Light, that lightneth every one that comes into the world: though yet the
darkness comprehends not his light. Joh. 1. 4, 6, 9. What was he but the
living visable Power of God, when he healed all diseases, cast out Devils,
raised the dead, and rose from the dead himself, and ascended into Glory, and
sent down the Holy Spirit on his Church, enduing them with Power from on high.
Acts 1. 8. Luke 24. 49. when he was on Earth, he was Anointed with the Holy
Ghost, and with Power, and went about doing good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the Devil, Acts 10. 38. Being dead he was declared to be the Son
of God with Power, by the Resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. 4. When he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. 8. Yea, he filled his
servants with power, Act. 6. 8. Even such as was admired and desired by the
ungodly, Act. 8. 19. He being the brightness of Gods Glory, and the express
Image of his Person, and upholding all things by the Word of his Power, when he
had by himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty
on high, being made so much better then the Angels, as he has by Inheritance
obtained a more excellent Name then they, Heb. 1. 3, 4. As Christ therefore in
his glorified Humanity united to the Godhead, is far more excellent then the
Angels of God, and more glorious then the Sun, so is the Power of God more
abundantly demonstrated in him, than in the Sun, or the Angels, or any other
Creature. The Illuminated do know this, and what is the exceeding greatness of
his Power, to usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty
Power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him
at his own right hand in the Celestials, far above all Principality and Power
and Might and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world,
but also in that which is to come; and has put all things under his feet, and
given him to be Head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 19. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Besides this, even in the Works of Christ for his Church, his Calling, and
Sanctifying, and Ruling, and Preserving them, his subduing their Enemies, and
raising them from the dead, and Glorifying them with himself, how glorious is
the very Power of God by his Son, 2 These. 1. 11. Phil. 3. 10. Ephesians. 3. 7,
20. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 16. 1 Cor. 4. 20. Ephesians. 6. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 43. 1 Pet. 1. 5.
And therefore his Gospel may well be called, The Power of God to Salvation,
Romans 1. 16. Which has been the Instrument of his Power in doing such wonderful
works in the world. 1 Cor. 1. 18. and 2. 5. 2 Cor. 6. 7. 2. Cor. 13. 3, 4.

5. But the most sweet, and conspicuous End of our Redemption, was the
Demonstration of Gods Love and Mercy to mankind, and that he might make known
the Riches of his Glory on the vessels of Mercy, prepared unto Glory, Romans 9.
23. Of all Gods Attributes there is none shines more illustrously in the work
of our Redemption than Love and Mercy. Hereby perceive we the Love of God,
because he laid down his life for us, 1 John 3. 16. By the Creation, and
Sustentation of us we perceive the Love of God, but more abundantly by our
Redemption. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, 1 John 4. 9. O wonderful Love which condescendeth to such Rebels, and embraces
such unworthy and polluted sinners, and pittyeth them even in their blood! Even
after we had sold our selves to Satan, and cast away the Mercies of our
Creation, and had all come short of the Glory of God, and were sentenced to
death, and ready for the Execution; then did this wonderful Love step in, and
rescue and recover us. Not staying till we Repented and cried for Mercy, and
cast our selves at his feet; but seeking us in the Wilderness, and finding us
before we felt that we were lost, and being found of us before we sought him,
and beging to us in the depth of our Misery. Herein is Love, not that we Loved
God, but that he Loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins, 1 John 4. 10. Though God Love us not in our sin and misery, before
our Conversion, so far as in that state to Justify us, and Adopt us, and take
pleasure in us, or have Communion with us in the spirit, yet does he so far
Love us in that state, as to Redeem us by the Blood of Christ, and tender us
his Salvation, and to bring in his chosen effectually to entertain his offer.
And thus the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which
is given to us; For when we were yet without strength in due time Christ dyed
for the ungodly: And God commended his Love toward us, in that while we were
yet sinners Christ dyed for us, Romans 5. 6, 8. Greater Love has no man then
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends, Joh. 15. 13. What was the
Son of God, but Love Incarnate? Love borne of a Virgin? Love coming down from
Heaven to Earth, and walking in flesh among the miserable, seeking and saving
that which was lost: Was it not Love that spoke those words of life, those
comfortable promises, those necessary precepts, those gracious encouragements,
which the Gospel does abound with? Was it not Love it self, that went preaching
Salvation to the Sons of death, and deliverance to the Captives, and offered
to bind up the broken hearts, Luke 4. 18? Was it not Love that invited the
weary and heavy laden, Matthew. 11. 28? And that sent even to the highways, and
the hedges to compel men to come in that his house might be filled, Matthew. 22.
9, 10. Luke 14. 23. Was it not Love it self that went up and down healing and
doing good; that suffered them, for whom he suffered to scorn him, and spit
upon him, and buffet him, and condemn him? that being reviled, reviled not
again: that gave his life, an offering for sin, and dyed, and prayed for them
that murdered him? No wonder if the Gospel be it that teaches us, to call God
by the name of Love it self, 1 John 4. 8 For it is the Gospel that has most
fully revealed him to be so. No wonder if the Gospel do so frequently, and
importunatly require us to Love one another, and even to lay down your lives
for Christ, and for one another, when it has given us such a ground and
motive, and president for our Love. He that sees the true face of Redemption,
and understands, and savoureth the Gospel and the Grace of Christ, must needs
see most cogent Reasons for such duties, 1 John 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Beloved, let us Love one another, for Love is of God: and every one that Loves
is born of God, and knows God: he that Loves not knows not God; for God is
Love. If God so Loved us, we ought also to Love one another. -- If we Love one
another, God dwells in us, -- So 1 John 3. 10, 11, 14, 16, 17, 18. No wonder
if by this Love we know that we are translated from death to life, and if by it
the Children of God be known from the Children of the Devil, 1 John 3. 10, 11,
14. For Love is the very Nature and Image of our Father. No wonder if this be
the New Commandment, which had newly such a powerful motive, and president:
And no wonder if it be the great distinguishing Caracter, by which all men
shall know that we are the Disciples of Christ, Joh. 13. 35. When he had set us
such a Copy, and taught us this lesson by such effectual means; writing it out
for us in lines of blood, even of his own most precious Blood, and shedding it
abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost.

But if we should come down, to the particular benefits of Christ's death, and
see what Love is manifested in them, even in our Calling, our Justification our
Adoption, or Sanctification, our Preservation, and our everlasting
Glorification, we should find our selves in an Ocean that has neither banks
nor bottom; and when we have fathomed as far as we can, we must be contented to
stand and admire it, and to say with the Beloved Apostle, Behold what manner of
Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of
God! 1 John 3. 1.

And this is the blessed employment of the Saints, which they are called to by
the Gospel, to live in the participation, and consideration and admiration of
this wondrous Love, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by Faith, and so
being rooted and grounded in Love, they may be able to comprehend with all
Saints* what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the
Love of Christ, which passes knowledge, and be filled with all the fullness of
God, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. And withal, to be followers of God as dear
Children, and walk in Love as Christ has Loved us, and given himself for us,
an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 1,
2. And to love without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9, 10. Even from a pure heart
fervently, 1 Pet. 1. 22. That we love as brethren, being compassionate,
pitiful, and courteous; not rendering evil forevill, but contrariwise
blessing; knowing that we are thereunto called, that that we should inherit a
blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9 And that we keep our selves in the Love of God, Jud.
21. that nothing may be able to separate us from it, Romans 8. 35, 36, 37. And if
we thus imitate our Heavenly pattern, the God of Love and Peace will be with
us, 2 Cor. 13. 11. And thus I have showed you the principal Ends of the
undertaking of Christ in the work of our Redemption, especially as they are
attained directly by his Cross, and Resurrection.

6. Another End also is apparent in the Scripture; which is the Glorifying of
Gods Rewarding Justice, together with his Mercy in the Salvation of his Elect.
This End he has partly attaineth here (for God has his Ends continually:) In
this life his Servants have much of his Mercy; and the beginnings of their
Reward in the beginning of their Salvation; But the fullness is hereafter in
their Glorification. All his promises he performs in their seasons. Even in
the present pardon of our sins he honors his Faithfullness and Justice, 1 John 1. 9. His Faithfullness in making good his promise, and his Justice in
Rewarding the performers of the condition, and giving what his promise had made
their due: that so men may even here in part discern between the Righteous and
the Wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not; while
they see God esteem of his people as his jewels, and spa^e them as a man
spares his son that serves him Mal. 3. 17, 18. The King of Zion is just,
having Salvation, Zach. 9. 9. The Righ^^ousness of God is manifested in our
Justification, Romans 3. 21, 22. Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith
of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no
difference: For all have sinned and come short of the Glory of God; being
Justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness: for the remission of sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God: to declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness; that
he might be Just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 25,
26.

But it is most eminently at Judgment, and in the world to come, that this
Remunerative Justice with Mercy will be Glorified: When Christ shall come
(purposely) to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that
believe (not only in himself, but in them:) and that because they were
believers, 2 These. 1. 10. When we have fought the good fight, and finished our
Course, and kept the Faith, we shall find that there is laid up for us a Crown
of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give us, and all that
love his appearing at that day ^ 2 Timothy 4. 8. He will justify and applaud them
before all the world, yea and adjudge them to everlasting Life, with a Well
done, Good and Faithful sevant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord; I will
make thee Ruler over many things; even Because they had been faithful in a
little, Luke 19* 17. Matthew. 25. 21, 23. Because they showed their love to him
in his members, he will say to them, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Matthew. 25. 34, 35,
36. He that now commands us to say to the Righteous, It shall be well with
him, Isa. 3. 10. Will in Righteousness Cause it then to be well with him. Then
shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father,
Matthew. 13. 43 And the Righteousness and Mercy of their Father shall as
conspicuously and gloriously shine in them. For it is a day appointed for the
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every man
according to his deeds, Romans 2. 5, 6. The present Faith and Patience of the
Saints in all the Persecutions and Tribulations which they endure, is a
manifest token of the Righte^us Judgment of God, that they may be accounted
worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which they suffer: It being a Righteous thing
with God to Recompense Tribulation to them that trouble us, and to us that are
troubled, Rest with the Saints, 2 These. 1. 5, 6, 7. For the Righteous Lord
loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11. 7. and in Righteousness will he Judge the
world, Acts 17. 31. Rev. 19. 11. And therefore in the keeping of his Word there
is great Reward, Psalm. 19 11. Yea a cup of water given in Love to him, shall
not be unrewarded, Matthew. 10. 41, 42. To him that sows Righteousness shall be
a sure Reward, Prove. 11. 18. If in this life men are forced to say, Verily there
is a Reward for the Righteous: Verily there is a God that Judges in the Earth,
Psalm. 58. 11. Much more when we receive the Reward of the Inheritance, Col. 3.
24. This causes the Saints to forsake the pleasures of sin, because they
have respect to the Recompense of Reward, Heb. 11. 26. This is it that makes
them Rejoice and be exceeding glad in their Persecutions, because that great is
their Reward in Heaven: and therefore it is that they Cast not away their
confidence, because it has great Recompense of Reward, Heb. 10. 25. If we let
no man beguil us of our Reward, Col. 2. 18. And if we Look to our selves that
we lose not those things that we have wrought, we shall receive a full Reward,
2 John 8. For the Lord has said Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with
me, to give every man according as his work shall be, Rev. 22. 12.

7. Another End of Christ's undertaking in this blessed work, is, The
Complacency and Glory of God in the Love, and Praise, and Service of his
Redeemed ones; in some measure here; but in perfection when they are perfected.
Sin had made us unserviceable to God: And Christ brings us back into a
fitness for his service: He disposes us Godward by Faith and Love; and he has
Redeemed us from our iniquity, and purifieth to himself a Peculiar People
zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. To which he creates us, that we should walk
in them, Ephesians. 2. 10. And with such Sacrifice God is well-pleased, Heb. 13.
16. Phil. 4. 18. The blood of the Covenant was therefore shed, to make us
perfect in every good work to do his will, who works in us that which is
wel-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13. 20, 21. And this must be our care, to walk
worthy of the Lord in all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work,
Col. 1. 10. And then whatsoever we ask, we shall receive of him, because we
keep his Commandment, and do those things that are Pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3. 22. see 1 These. 4. 1. Heb. 11. 6. Romans 8. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 4. 1 Cor. 7. 32.
Heb. 11. 5.

But principally when we are Glorified, and fitted by our perfection for the
Perfect Love, and Promises of God, then will God perfectly take Pleasure in us,
and in our Love and Praise. The Glory of the new Jerusalem and the Harmony of
everlasting Praise and Thanksgiving will be his delight. He will Rejoice over
us with Joy, he will Rest in his Love; he will joy over us with singing, Zeph.
3. 17.

8. Another End of Christ's undertaking this blessed work, is the Everlasting
Glory of God which shall shine forth in the Glorified Manhood of the Redeemer,
and the everlasting complacency that God will have in him, for his own
perfection, and the work that he has wrought.

Though Christ had no need to suffer for any sin or want of his own; yet was
it his personal dignity, dominion, and Everlasting Glory, as well as our
Salvation, that was intended by him, and by the Father in this work, and which
he was to receive as the Reward of his performances, Romans 14. 7. Phil. 2. 8, 9,
10. Matthew. 28. 18, 19 Heb. 1. 3, 4, 6. Ephesians. 12. 22. Nay if we may make
comparisons, this seems the highest part of Gods End, in the sending of his
Son. As there is no part of all the Works of God, to be compared to the
Person of the Redeemer, so consequently there is none in which the Glory of God
will shine forth so admirably, and illustriously as in Christ. If on Earth the
Heavenly voice bare witness that it was in him that the Father was
well-pleased, Matthew. 3. 17. and 17. 5. and 12. 18. Which was uttered both at
his Baptism, and his Transfiguration, when his Disciples saw a glympse of his
glory, and he was the chosen Servant of God in whom his Soul delighted, Isa.
42. 1. Much more is it apparent, that in his Heaveny Glory he will be the
Fathers Everlasting Pleasure and delight: and in him, and by him, and for the
work that he has wrought, the Redeemed in glory will honor him for ever, Rev.
5. 9. He is the Head of the body, the Church: the beginning, the firstborn
from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence: For it
Pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1. 17, 18, 19.
And therefore in him the Glory of God will shine in fullness, and he shall have
the pre-eminence in the Fathers Everlasting Love. When Christ prayed, Joh. 12.
28. Father Glorify thy Name: He was answered by a Voice from Heaven, I have
Glorified it, and will Glorify it again. Even in the Son that thus desired
it. He has done it on Earth, and he will do it again more perfectly in Heaven.
He has glorified the Son, that the Son also may glorify him, Joh. 17. 1.
As he glorified his Father on Earth, and finished the work which he gave him to
do, so the Father has now glorified him with himself, that in his Glory he may
be yet more glorified, Joh. 17. 4, 5, 6. In his Transfiguration his Face did
shine as the Sun. Joh. 17. 2. And in his appearance to Paul, his shining
light did cast him blindfold and trembling on the Earth, Acts 9. 4, 6. It was
Stephen's encouragment to the suffering of his Martyrdom, to see the Glory of
God and Jesus standing on Gods right hand, Acts 7. 55, 56. When John saw him on
the Lords Day in the spirit, he beheld his eyes as a flame of fire, and his
feet like burning brass, in the furnace, and his voice was as the sound of many
waters, and in his right hand were the stars, and out of his mouth went a
sharp two-edged sword, and his countenance was as the Sun that shines in his
strength, Rev. 1. 14, 15, 16. His voice also did proclaim his Glory, I am the
first and the last. I am he that lives and was dead; and behold I am alive for
evermore, Amen, and have the keys of Hell and of death, verse. 17, 18. It was
the Lord of Glory that was crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 8. God was manifest in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, received up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Where he is
Glorified with the Father in the praises of the Saints, Rev. 5. 12, 13. The
Glory in the Holy Mount was great at the giving of the Law: But it was no Glory
to that of the Gospel administration, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 10 Much more, to that
purpose of the Glorified Redeemer who has overcome, and is set down with the
Father in his throne, Rev. 3. 21. Yea the Glory that will be given to God for
ever will be through Jesus Christ, Romans 16. 17.

And indeed, it is a very great Question whether: we shall immediately see the
Essence of God in Heaven, or only see him in the glorified Redeemer, and
whether Christ will not then be the Mediator of our Fruition, as he was here
the Mediator of Acquisition. But certain we are, that God will be everlastingly
pleased and glorified in the Person of the Redeemer, as well as in the Church,
which is his body.

9. And reductively it may be said to be Gods End in this blessed work, that he
may more fully demonstrate his Vindictive Justice, according to the Gospel, or
Law of the Redeemer, upon them that finally reject his grace, then it would
have been manifested on the terms of the Law of Creation, on Adam and his
offspring. Though Christ came not into the world, (primarily) to condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved, yet was it his purpose,
that unbelievers that love darkness rather then light, should fall under the
special condemnation, Joh. 3. 18, 19. And that they should not see life, but
the Wrath of God should abide upon them, verse. 36. God would not so much as
permit them to reject his Salvation, but that he knows how he may be no loser
by them: He suffers with much patience the vessels of wrath, to make his
Wrath and Power known, Romans 9. 22. The mouths of the condemned will be utterly
stopped, and they will be left speechles, when they are judged on terms of
Grace, much more then they would have been if they had been judged only by the
first Law: When they see Christ and Heaven, that was offered them, and remember
their wilful and obstinate contempt of them, their own Consciences and tongues
shall justify God, and confess that he is Righteous in the dreadfulest of his
Judgments. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression
and disobedience received a just recompense of reward, How shall they escape
that neglect of great Salvation, which at first began to be spoken by the Lord,
and then was confirmed by them that heard him, God also bearing them witness
with signs and wonders, and with diverse Miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
Heb. 2. 3, 4. And if they escaped not, that refused him that spoke on Earth,
much more shall not they escape that turn away from him that speaks from
Heaven? For our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 25, 29. So much of the Ends
of Christ's undertaking in our Redemption.

In which you may see that there are diverse things which Demonstrate the Glory
of the forementioned Attributes of God, in this Gospel Dispensation. 1. It
shines forth in the Person of the Redeemer as he was on Earth, in his Nature
and wonderful conception, and his perfections. 2. And it also shines forth in
the Actions of his life, overcoming the world, and the Devil, and perfefectly
fullfilling the Law of God: So that the Image of his Father, did shine forth in
his Conversation. 3. And also in his Death and Sufferings was the Father
glorified, as I showed before. 4. And also in the most Wise and Holy frame of
those Laws, by which the grace of the Mediator is conveyed, and the Church
governed. 5. And by the Image of God, by the impress of those Laws on the Souls
of his Saints, and by the holiness of their lives, the Glory of God is also
demonstrated. 6. As also by the Justifying sentence of the Judge, and the
glorious Reward bestowed on the Faithful. 7. And by the Condemning sentence
and execution on the ungodly, in whom Vindictive Justice will be honored. 8.
And in the perfection of the Individual Saints, and their perfect Love and
Praise. 9. And in the Saints as imbodyed in the Heavenly Jerusalem, the Glory
of which will be the Glory of God. 10. And pricipally in the Blessed Person and
Work of the Redeemer. In all these will Gods Glory shine forth for ever.

Quest. But to whom is it that God does thus Demosntrate his Glory?

Answ.) 1. To the Saints in this life, in that degree as is suited to a state
of Grace, and the condition of a travailer that lives by Faith. We are apt to
look upward, and long after fuller revelations of the Heavenly Kingdom and
mystery, and marvail that God will not show himself more fully to his Saints on
Earth. Fain we would know more of God, and Christ, and the life to come, and it
is often matter of some temptation to us, that God does not satifie these
desires, but leaves them in so much darkness, that are willing of his light.
But this is, because we do not consider how much of Glory consists in the
light: and that Grace is more in the Disires of it then in the possession: and
if we should have as much of it as we desire, it were but to bring down Heaven
to Earth. Means must be suited to their ends. God will discover to us so much
of his Glory, as may quicken our desires, and keep alive our hope, and
patience, and endeavors; but not so much as shall satisfy us, and answer our
expectations. For Heaven is not here. We must not carry our Home about with us,
but travail toward it, that we may reach it at the last.

2. God does even now Demonstrate the Glory of his forementioned Attributes, in
the work of Redemption, not only to his Saints, but to the Angels of Heaven.
The consideration of this has often satisfied me, when I have been tempted to
wonder at the work of Redemption, that God should so far condescend as to be
incarnate, and make such glorious discoveries of himself, and yet that so few
in the world should take notice of it, and be should have from men so little of
the honor, that he seems by his preparations to expect. But the most part of
the world did never once see the Glory that shines to them in the Redeemer.
But God has another world besides this, and other Creatures besides man, in
all likelihood incomparably more numerous (perhaps thousands for one) and
certainly more excellent. And though Christ did assume the Nature of Angels,
and came not to Redeem them that needed no Redeemer, yet may the luster of this
work of Redemption appear to the Angels more clearly then to man; and God may
have a thousand-fold more Glory from them that are but the spectators and
admirers, then from us in our present darkness, that are yet possessors. As we
that are here on Earth, do look upon and admire the Glory of the Sun, which
is as it were in another world, and out of our reach; so the Angels much more
may gaze upon the Glory of the Son of God, and admire the Lord in the work of
our Redemption, though they were not the Redeemed ones. So that unto them does
God shine forth by it in his excellencies.

Perhaps you will say, that cannot be: because this is but seeing him in a glass;
when the Angels see him face to face, and immediately behold his blessed
Essence: or else how can the Saints expect that beatificall Vision. To which I
answer First, that I am uncertain whether seeing face to face bean immediate
intuition of the Essence of God, or only such a sight of his Glory in those
emanations, that are as appropriated to the place or state of Bliss. Gods
Essence is every where; but that Glory is not every where: And so I know not
whether our present knowledge be not called Enigmaticall, and as in a glass,
comparatively to that Glory prepared for the Saints: But secondly, I answer,
that certain I am that God is Demonstrated to his Angels in the Redeemer, yea
in the Church it self, which is the Subject of his Grace, and that they are
both Affected, and Employed about us accordingly. He that spoiled
Principalities, and Powers, and openly triumphed over them, and by death,
overcame him that had the power of death, Col. 2. 15. Heb. 2. 14. And had so
much to do against the evil Angels as Enemies, no doubt is joyfully observed
by the good Angels. And he that is set so far above Principalities, and Powers,
and Might, and Dominion, and every name that is named in this world, or that
which is to come, Ephesians. 1. 21. And is gone in to Heaven, and is on the right
hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject to him, (1
Pet. 3. 22.) no doubt is honored and admired by Angels. And indeed it is
expressly said, Let all the Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1. 6. And what are
they all but Ministering spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be
heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. And therefore sent forth by Jesus Christ, the
Lord of Saints. Which makes some think that the title of Angels, was never
given to any of these Spirits, till the Mediators undertaking, and that it was
only as they were his deputed messengers, or servants for the Ends of that
undertaking. Sure we are, they attended his birth with their acclamations, and
his life and sufferings (as far as was meet) with their service; and that they
are deputed to bear his servants in their hands, that they dash not their foot
against a stone; that they are ascending, and descending, and are present with
the Churches in their Holy Worship; and that they rejoice at the Conversion of
one sinner; and that the least of Christ's servants, have their Angels
beholding the face of God: and that the Law was given by their disposition or
ordination; and they attend the departing Souls of Believers; and that they
contend against evil spirits for our good, and are encamped about us, and that
they shall attend the Lord at his coming to Judgment, and be his glorious
retinue, and Instruments in the work; and that they are numbered with us, as
members of the same Heavenly Jerusalem, and that we shall be like or equal to
them, Luke 2. 14, 15. Mark 4. 11. Luke 22. 43. Acts 10. 6, 7, 22. Psalm. 34. 7.
and 91. 11. Matthew. 13. 39, 41. and 16. 27. and 24. 31. and 25. 31. and 26. 53.
Luke 16. 22. Matthew. 18. 10. 2 These. 1. 7. Luke 20. 36. Mark 12. 25. Acts 7.
65. Gal. 3. 19. Heb. 12. 22. 2 Pet. 2. 11. Luke 15. 10. Joh. 1. 51. Yea men
must be either confessed or denied, owned or disowned, before the Angels, Luke
12. 8, 9. See Rev. 19. 18. Rev. 3. 5. But if all this seem not sufficient to
persuade you that the Angels are so far interessed in the affairs of God about
the Redeemed, as to behold and admire him in this blessed work, take notice of
the express affirmations of the Scriptures, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Which things the
Angels desire to look into. And why but to see and admire the Wisdom, and
Power, and Goodness, and Mercy, and Justice of God, shining forth in the
Redeemer? If this be not plain enough, mark well those words, Ephesians. 3. 10. To
the intent that now unto the Principalities, and Powers in Heavenly places,
might be known by the Church, the manifold Wisdom of God. You see here that the
Church of the Redeemed, is that admirable looking glass, which God has set up
to this very intent, that his Angels may in it, or by it, behold the manifold
Wisdom of God: Yea and that upon the full revelation of Christ by the Gospel,
they saw that which did more fully inform, and illuminate them. No doubt but
the very work of Creation, yea of this inferior world, that are made for the
habitation, and use of man, are far better known to Angels then to man: for we
know but little of what we daily see and use: And consequently it is by Angels
more then by men, that God is beheld, admired, and glorified in them. And if it
be so in these works of Creation, we may well say, it is so in the works of
Redemption.

3. But when we are perfected in Glory, then we our selves shall clearly see
the Glory of this Mystery, and of God therein. As it is not till we come to
Heaven, that we shall have the fullest benefits of Redemption, so it is not
till then, that we shall have the fullest understanding of it, and God have his
fullest praises for it. As we are here but sowing the seed of our own Glory,
which we must reap in the everlasting fruition of God; so God is here but
sowing those seeds of his Praise, and Glory, which he will eternally reap by
this blessed work. Do not therefore judge of the ends, and fruits of Christ's
undertakings, by what you see him attain on Earth, but by what he shall attain
in Heaven, when he has fully seen the travail of his Soul, to his
satisfaction, and has presented the whole Church without spot unto God, and
when the glorious manage of the Lamb, with the Heavenly Jerusalem is
solemnized, and the Kingdom delivered up to the Father, Isa. 53. 11. Ephesians. 5.
27. Rev. 19. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 24. It will be another manner of conceiving which we
shall have in Heaven of this blessed work, when we see the face of our
Glorified Lord, and fully possess the fruits of his Redemption, then this is
that we have now by our weak believing. We shall then have another manner of
sight of the Wisdom, and Power, and Love, and Justice that appear to man, in
the face of Christ, then now we have.

4. Yea the tormenting discoveries of the Glory of Redemption to the condemned
rejecters of it, shall also contribute to the Glory of God.

You see then that this work has most Glorious Ends; which I have mentioned
the more largely, both to remove their temptations that are apt to think, that
it was an unnecessary thing, and therefore the less regardable, and to teach
men the true value of it, by showing them the true Ends.

For the former, I say, There was no necessity that God should make the world,
and reveal his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, in this excellent frame, but
what did suppose the free Will of God, the Original Cause. Will you therefore
say, that the Creation is vain; and undervalue Gods admirable works in which
he thus reveals himself to the intellectual Creatures? So here; we confess
that there could be no necessity of Redemption, but what was Originally derived
from the Will of God, (though a necessity ad finem there was, from the
constitution of things, upon supposition of what went before the undertaking.)
But yet shall we undervalue so glorious a work, in which the Divine perfections
do so fully reveal themselves to the world?

And I say the more of this, because I do observe that its the not apprehending
the high and excellent Ends of Redemption, that makes it so much slighted, and
consequently tempts many to infidelity. For the Ends and Uses do set the
value on the means. That is of little worth, that is to little purpose, and
does but little good. If men understood more the Ends of Redemption, and how
much of God does shine forth in the world, in the Person, and Life, and Laws,
and Works of the Son of God, they would then live in the admiration of it,
and be always searching, and prying into it, and desire to know nothing but
God in Christ Crucified, and account all things else but as loss and dung for
this excellent knowledge: But alas, the most do s^arce discern any higher Ends
of Christ, or other use of him, then to save themselves from Hell, and for want
of Faith, and through Humiliation, they have but little sense of that: And
therefore no wonder if the Redeemer be neglected, and God denied the honor of
the work.

So much of this second point, the Reasons, and Ends of Christ's undertaking. I
shall purposely be shorter on the rest.

3. The third point to be understood concerning our Redeemer, is, What he has
done and suffered for mankind, and wherein his Redeeming work consisted both as
to the General and the special part. Should I stand on these at large, I must
needs be voluminous; and therefore I shall but briefly reciet them for your
remembrance.

I. The first thing that Christ did for the saving of the world, was his
Interposing between offending man, and the wrath of God; and so preserving the
world from the destruction, which the execution of the violated Law would have
procured: Undertaking then to become the Seed of the woman, and so to break the
Serpents head: and revealing this Grace by slow degrees, till the time of his
coming.

And then when the fullness of time was come, he was made man, being conceived
by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, and so the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among men, who beheld his Glory, as the Glory of the only begotten of
the Father, full of Grace, and Truth, Joh. 1. 14. Thus God was manifested to
men in the flesh. 1 Timothy 3. 16.

3. And as he was perfectly Holy in his Nature without any stain or guilt of
Original sin; so was he perfectly Holy in his Life, and never broke the least
Command of God in thought, word, or deed. Never could any convince him of
sin, Joh. 8. 46. He fulfilled the Law of Nature, which all the world was
under, and the Mosaical Law which the Jews were under, and the special Law that
was given to himself as Mediator, and was common to no other Creature in the
world.

And thus he performed these excellent works. I. By the fullfilling of all
Righteousness he pleased the Father, always accomplishing his Will; and so did
much of the work of a Savior in Meriting for for us. Matthew. 3. 15. and 5. 17.
Joh. 8. 29. Matthew. 12. 18. and 17. 5. Romans 5. 19. For such an High Priest
became us, who is Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26.

2. He has conquered the Tempter, that conquered us. And therefore did he
purposely yield himself to such sore temptations, Matthew. 4. That his Victory
might be glorious, and the Second Adam might overcome him that had overcome the
first. And thus he has done much to the rescue of the Captivated.

3. Hereby also he has overcome the world, which overcame the first Adam, and
his posterity: He trampled upon its seeming glory; he neglected and despised
its baits and allurements; he went through all its cruel persecutions, and
oppositions: So that the world now as well as the Devil, are conquered things.
By which he has made way for the Victory of his followers, and given them
ground of great encouragment, Joh. 16. 33. Be of good cheer: I have overcome
the world. Yea I may say in a sort he has overcome the flesh also. For though
Christ had no corrupt flesh as we have to contend with, yet had he a natural
and sensitive appetite, which the Command of God did forbid him to fulfill. And
therefore when innocent Nature di^^red that the Cup might pass from him, and
abhor death by a simple Aversness; yet perfect Holiness permitted not this to
proceed to a Refusal by the comparing Intellect, and Choosing, or Refusing
Will; but says, Not my will, but thine be done. And when Christ was hungry and
weary, the desire of food and rest, by the sensitive appetite, was no sin:
But when the Work of God forbad the fullfilling of such desires, he still
denied them.

4. Hereby also he has set us a perfect copy and pattern of obedience, and is
become our Example whom we must endeavor to imitate. For he knew that it is
the most effectual teaching, to do it by words and deeds together. It is a
great help to us, when we do not only hear his voice, but see also which way
he has gone before us. When he says, Learn of me, he directs us, not only to
his words, but to himself, who was meek and lowly, Matthew. 11. 28.

5. Moreover Christ received of the Father fullness of the Spirit, and Power,
for the benefit of the Redeemed: that he might be meet to be the Head, and the
Treasury of the Church, and to shower down the streams of Grace upon his
Members; and when all Power was given him in Heaven, and Earth, he might be
fitted to the following application of his benefits, and to rule, and support,
and defend his people.

6. Moreover he was pleased himself to become a Preacher of the Gospel of
Salvation; not to all the world, but principally as a Minister of the
Circumcision, that is, the Jews, Romans 15. 8. He that purchased Salvation,
condescended also to proclaim it. The preaching of the Gospel, is a work that
Christ thought not himself too good for, Sometimes to many, sometimes to one or
two as he had opportunity; often with tears; and always with earnestness and
compassion, did he go about doing good, and seeking the lost, and healing the
diseased, and calling men to Faith, and Repentance, and offering them the
Grace, and Life which he purchased.

7. And he was pleased also to seal up his Doctrine by his Works, casting out
Devils, healing all diseases, raising the the dead, and working diverse other
Miracles, to assure them that he came from God, and did his Work, and revealed
his Will, that so the world might have no excuse for their unbelife; but that
they that would not believe upon any other account, might yet believe him for
the sake of his works, Joh. 3. 2. Acts 2. 22. Heb. 2. 4. Joh. 5. 36. and 10. 25
38. and 14. 11, 12. and 15. 24.

8. Besides all this, he gave up himself, to a life of suffering, being
despised by his Creatures whom he came to Redeem, and destitute voluntarily of
fleshly pleasures, and of that riches, and worldly provision, that might
procure it: He was a man of sorrows, afflicted from his youth; persecuted from
the Cradle; he gave his Cheeks to the smiters, and his Person to be made the
scorn of fools: He was crowned with thorns, spit upon, and buffited, and
having sweat water, and blood, in his Agony in the garden, he was hanged on a
Cross, where thieves were both his companions, and revilers, where they gave
him gall, and vinegar to drink, pierced his blessed Body with a spear and put
him to a shamfull cursed death. But he endured the Cross, despising the shame,
and gave up himself thus a Sacrifice for sin, and bore our transgressions,
that we might be healed by his stripes; and having ransomed us by his Blood, he
was buried as an offender, continuing for a time in the Power of the grave,
Isa. 53. throughout, Matthew. 26* and 27. Heb. 12. 2. All this he consented to
undergo (though he consented not to the sin of them that did inflict it) For
he laid down his Life, it was not taken from him against his Will, Joh. 10. 17,
18.

9. Having thus paid the price of our Reconciliation to God, the third day he
Rose again from the dead: Though Soldiers watched his grave, because he had
foretold them that he would rise the third day, yet were they soon daunted by
the glory of an Angel, that came and roled away the stone. And so Christ made
known his Divine Power, and Victory, and the finishing of his work: And as by
death he overcame him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 3,
14. So by his Resurrection he triumphed over death it self. For how should the
grave detain the innocent, and death overcome the Lord of Life? This was the
glorious day of triumph: In remembrance of this, he appointed the Lords Day to
be observed by the Church. The Resurrection of Christ, was the confusion of all
the powers of darkness; the great Argument to confirm the truth of his
Doctrine, and prove his Godhead to the unbelieving world.

10. Being risen, he more fully revealed his Gospel, and sent forth his
Apostles and Disciples, to proclaim the offers of Life to the world, and settle
the Churches in a Holy order, when they had gathered them, and to ordain such
Ministers to succeed them, as might carry on his work to the end of the world,
Matthew. 28. 19, 20. And thus he is the faithful Lawgiver to the Church.

11. When he had abode thus forty days on Earth, he ascended up into Heaven
while his Disciples stood by, and gazed after him, Acts 1. 9, 10. And there
has taken possession in our Nature, advancing it to the Fathers right hand in
Glory, which was by sin deprest so low in misery. And so he is gone to
prepare a place for us, leaving us a certain word of promise that he will come
again, and take us to himself, that where he is there we may be also, Joh. 14.
2, 3. And as our life now is hid there with Christ in God, so when he shall
appear, we shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 3, 4.

12. Being ascended, he manifested his Power and his Truth in sending down the
Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, enabling them to do such works as he had done,
and such as were necessary to convince the unbelieving world, and to conquer
the opposing wisdom and power of the flesh: Enabling them to speak in variety
of Languages, which they had never before learnt; as also to understand, and
powerfully preach the mysteries of the Gospel, to confirm their Doctrine by
Miracles, healing the lame, the blind, the sick, casting out Devils, raising
the dead, and conquering the resistance of Principalities, and Powers, in
seeming weakness, and in a contemptible garb. Not to speak now of the
Sanctifying Work of the same Spirit, on them, and on the rest of the Church.

13. Lastly in this Glory Christ Intercedeth for us, and is our High Priest in
the Heavens with God, living for ever, procuring and conveying to us the
Mercies which we need upon the account of his Sacrifice: Ruling his Church, and
preserving them; succeeding his Cause, and Servants; restraining and subduing
his Enemies and ours; and will perfect his work at the day of his Coming to
Judgment. So much of the works of Christ.

4. The fourth point to be understood concerning our Redemption, is, The Nature
and worth of the Benefits that are procured for us. Which though you may gather
much from what is said, and the full handling of them, would be a larger work,
then is suitable to my present Ends, yet such a brief recital I shall here give
you, as my Ends require.

In General, we have All from Jesus the Mediator that is worth the having; even
all the blessings of this present life, and of the life to come. As we lost our
Right to all by sin, so we have our restored Right by Christ alone, who came
to destroy sin, and its effects. Had not he interposed, we might have had
materially life, and natural faculties, and other things which now are Mercies;
but not as Mercies, but as the requisites to our deserved punishment: Even as
the Devils have their Being, and natural perfections to sustain them in their
sufferings. Nature it self, so far as Good, and all Natural blessings, are now
of Grace: And that not only of such Grace as they were to Adam, which was Mercy
without proper Merit: but of Gospel Grace procured by Christ; which is Mercy
contray to Merit. It is no sounder Doctrine to say, that God does without the
Merit of his Son bestow our common forfeited Mercies, either on the Elect, or
others, then that he gives us his Saving grace without it. As all things are
delivered into the hands of Christ, Joh. 13. 3. So none can receive any good
but from his hands. To give Mercies to men that forfeit them, and descern
misery, is so far to pardon their sin; for to remit the sin, is to remit
the punishment: But the Scripture is not acquainted with any pardon of sin,
but what is on the account of the Merits of Christ. They that deny this Mercy
of God, in giving even to the ungodly such a measure of forgiveness, do speak
against the daily, and hourly experience of all the world; and therefore need
no other confutation.

More particularly. 1. Christ having taken the Humane Nature into Union with
the Divine, our nature is thereby unconceivably advanced, and brought nigh to
God.

2. Having fulfilled the Law, and offered himself a Sacrifice for sin, Gods
Justice, and Wisdom, and Holiness, and Goodness, is admirably Demonstrated: And
this Sacrifice is both Satisfactory, and meritorious, on our behalf, Heb. 1. 3.
2 Cor. 5. 19. Heb. 9. 26. and 10 12.

3. The world, and the Devil, and Death, and the Grave, are conquered by him;
in preparation to our conquest.

4. The Lord Jesus himself being risen, and Justified, has received all Power
in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28. 19. and is enabled to do all things that are
necessary for his further ends. As the Redeemer he is become Lord of our
selves, and of all we have; and he is made the Sovereign Ruler of all, having
full Power to relax the Law that cursed us, and to deal with the world on terms
of Grace.

5. Accordingly he has kept off the stroke of the rigorus Justice of God, and
hindered the strict execution of the Law of works, and gives still abundance
of forfeited Mercies to the sinful world, keeping them from deserved torments,
while he is treating with them on terms of life.

6. He has made an Universal deed of gift, of Christ, and Life to all the
world, on Condition that they will but Accept the offer, 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12.
Joh. 1. 11, 12. and 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. In this Testament or Promise or Act of
Oblivion, the sins of all the world are conditionally pardoned, and they are
conditionally Justified, and Reconciled to God.

7. He has given Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, to proclaim
this Act of Grace to the world, commanding them to go into All the world, and
preach this Gospel to every Creature, and promise Salvation to all that by
Faith will become his true Disciples, Mark 16. 16. Matthew. 28. 20, 22. So that
their commission also for the promulgation is universal.

8. Though his servants have most lamentably neglected their duty, and have not
gone abroad the world, to divulge the Gospel according to his Will; imagining
that this work had been proper to Apostles; and though the Nations have
sinfully neglected a due inquiry after this blessed Light, yet has he not
left himself among them without witness, but has given them some dawnings of
the day, or some moonlight in the reflections of Evangelical Truth, who have
not seen the Sun it self: Much Mercy they have had, notwithstanding their
transgressions; and while they served Devils, they have been provided for by
God, in whom they live, and move, and be: doing them good, and giving them
rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with fo^d and
gladness; and this to teach them, that they should seek the Lord, if happily
they might feel after him, and find him; though he be not far from every one
of them, Acts 14. 17. and 17. 27, 28. And that which may be known, of God, is
manifest among them, for God has showed it to them; for the invisible things
of him from the Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal Power, and Godhead; so that they are
without excuse, Romans 1. 19, 20. By experience they may find, that God deals
not now in rigor of Justice, but on terms of Grace, and that sin is not ^ow
unpardonable: and they should know that the Goodness of God leads them to
repentance, Romans 2. 4.

9. As the Gospel conditionally pardons all their sins, and offers them
Everlasting life, so it contains the clearest Reasons, and most effectual
motives, to persuade them to Accept the offer. It affords them most excellent
precepts, and instructions, and exhortations, and other helps to bring them to
a willingness, that Salvation may be theirs.

10. To which also is added abundance of outward providential helps, to
further the working of the Gospel; as seasonable afflictions, and Mercies of
diverse sorts.

11. And with these is usually concurrent some inward motions, and assistance
of the Holy Ghost; as knocking at the door, where he is not yet let in, and
entertained.

12. And by their presence in the visible Church, even the ungodly have many
benefits in the Ordinances, and instructions, and examples of the Saints. All
these (besides a Resurrection) are common effects of General Redemption, and
not appropriated to the Elect.

Besides which there are others that the Elect only do receive. As 1. God is
pleased by effectual Grace, to draw them to his Son, and make the Gospel
succesfull to their Conversion, insuperably teaching, and charging them by his
Spirit, and causing them to Repent, and believe in Christ, and to perform the
Conditions of his forementioned Promises. That Love that brought the Lord on
Earth, that cloatheth him with flesh, that lifted him up upon the Cross, does
stream forth in his season into the hearts of his Elect, and touches them with
a changing Power, and wins them to his Father, and himself, and droppeth
into them those Heavenly Principles, which will grow up in them to Everlasting
Life.

2. Hereupon the Soul believing in Christ is United to him, as a Member of his
Body, even of his true Catholic Church; and Christ is become the Head, the
Husband, the Lord, the Savior of that Soul in a special sort. Christ himself
is first given to us in these Relations; and from him as our Head, his
following benefits are conveyed. He that has the Son has life, and he that
has not the Son has not life; for this Life is in the Son, 1 John 5. 11,
12. He is the Vine, and we are the Branches, and out of him we can do nothing,
Joh. 15. 1, 2, 5. As it was not we that purchased our own Salvation, so it is
not we, but Christ that must have the keeping, and dispensing of the purchased
benefits. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, and
that he should be the Head over all things to his Church, that it might by
communication become his fullness, Col. 1. 19. Eph's. 1. 22, 23. He is our
Treasury, and from him we must have our continual supplies: For with him the
Father will give us all things, Romans 8. 32. And thus Christ will dwell in our
hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. And set up the Kingdom of God within us.

3. Hereupon we have the pardon of all our sins; not only as to the temporal
punishment, nor only as to the bestowing of temporal Mercies, or common helps
of Creatures, and Providence; for this is but a winking at the days of our
ignorance (Acts 17. 30.) in comparison of the pardon, which afterward we
receive Nor is it only a Conditonal, or Offered pardon; But it is an Actual
Remission of the Eternal, and of all the destructive Punishment. And thus we
are Justified from all that might be charged on us from the Law, and accepted,
and used as just by God. There is a kind of forgiveness that was promised to
the Sacrificers, Lev. 4. 20, 26, 31, 35* and 5, 10, 13, 16, 18, and 6. 7. Numb.
15. 28. But as that was upon Christ's account, so it extended not to the pardon
of the Eternal Punishment to any but true Believers. He that was once
Crucified, is exalted by Gods righthand, a Prince, and a Savior, to give
Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5. 31. Through this man
is preached the forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe, are
justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, Acts 13. 38, 39. When our eyes are open, and we are turned from dakness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, we then receive Remission of
our sins, Acts 26. 18. When we are delivered from the power of darkness, and
translated into the Kingdom of Christ: in him we have then Redemption through
his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Col. 1. 13, 14. And blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, to whom the Lord
imputes not sin, Romans 4. 7. And now who shall condemn us? It is God that
justifies us: For there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1, 33, 34.

4. With this benefit does concur, our Reconciliation to God, and our
Adoption; by which we are made his Sons, and God is pleased to own us as our
Father. For being one with Christ the Son of God, we are Sons by him. For
to as many as receive him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe in his Name, Joh. 1. 12. This is the wonderful Love
that the Father has bestowed on those that were his Enemies; that they should
not only be reconciled to him, by the death of his Son, but also be called
the Sons of God, Rom 5. 10. 1 John 3. 1. For he has chosen us in him, before
the foundation of the world, that we should be Holy, and without blame before
him in love; having predestiuated us to the Adoption of Children, by Jesus
Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will, to the praise of
the Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved, Ephesians.
1. 4, 5. 6. O what an unspeakable Mercy is it, to have the blessed God, whom we
had so often offended, to become our Reconciled Father in Christ. For it is not
an empty title that he assumeth; but he has more abundant love to us, and
tenderness of our welfare, then any title can make us understand.

5. And hereupon it does immediately follow, that we have a right to the blessed
Inheritance of his Sons, and are certain Heirs of his Heavenly Kingdom, Col.
1. 12. For if Sons, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with Christ,
Romans 8. 17. Being saved by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost, and justified by Grace through Christ, we are made Heirs, according
to the hope of Eternal Life, Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7. Being begotten again to a lively
hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
us, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

6. With all the Holy Ghost is given to us, not only to close us at first with
Christ, but to take up his abode in us as his temples, and to be the Agent, and
Life of Christ within us, and to do his work, and maintain his Interest, and
cleanse us of all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, and Sanctify us throughout,
and to strive against, and conquer the flesh, and to keep us by Divine Power
through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Gal. 5. 17, 22. 2 Cor. 6. 1. 1 Pet.
1. 5. For because we are Sons, God seudeth forth the Spirit of his Son into
our hearts, whereby we cry Abba, Father, Gal. 4. 6. This Spirit of Adopton
which we receive, does bear witness with our spirits, that we are the Sons of
God, Romans 8. 15, 16. For if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is
none of his, Romans 8. 9. By this Spirit is the spirit of the world cast out of
us; the spirit of pride, and of blindness, and of delusion, and
hard-heartedness, and of sensuality, and malice, and hypocrisy, are cast out.
By this is Gods Image imprinted on our Souls; we are conformed to his blessed
Will; we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, being Holy, as God is Holy,
Col. 3. 10. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 16. Hereby we are delivered from the
thraldom of sin, and the slavery of the Devil; and the seduction of the
world, and our treacherous Flesh. Hereby also we are fitted for the Service of
God, to which before we were undisposed and unfit. O what an ease is it to the
Soul, to be free from so much of the burden of sin? What an honor is it to
have the Spirit of God within us, and to have a Nature so truly Heavenly and
Divine? How can it go ill with him that has God dwelling in him, and that
dwells in God? 1 John 4. 15.

7. Another of our precious benefits by Christ is, that we shall be actually
employed in the special, and nearest Service of God, that on Earth is to be
performed. Let diseased Souls desire idleness; and swinish sinners take pleasure
in the mire, and feed like ravenous beasts on carrion, or as dogs on dung: but
the Saints will ever rejoice in God, and take it for the most blessed life on
Earth, when they can but do him the greatest Service. Let his Enemies that hate
his Service, be weary of it, as if it were a toil or drudgery; but his
Children will desire no sweeter work: They never think themselves so well as
when they are most serviceable to their blessed Lord, though at the greatest
cost and labor to the flesh. So sweet is Gods Service, that the more of it we
can do, the more is our pleasure, and honor, and content. Other work spends
strength, but this increases it: Other work must have r^creation intermixed,
but this is it self the most delightful recreation: Other service is
undertaken for the love of the wages; but this is undertaken for the Love of
the Master, and the work, and is wages it self, to them that go through with
it. For other service is but a means, and that to some inferior end; but this
is a means to the Everlasting perfection, and blessedness of the Soul; and such
a means as contains, or Presently procures somewhat of the end. All the
Saints are even here a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar People, that they should show forth the praises of him that has
called them, out of darkness, into his marvelous light: They are an holy
Priesthood, to offer up a Spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. Their very bodies are a living Sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable to God, in their reasonable service. What a sweet work is it to live
in the daily Love of God? in his Praises; in the hopes, and sweet fore-thoughts
of Everlasting Joys: The world affords not such a Master, nor such a work.

8. Another of the precious benefits by Christ is, The liberty of access in
all our wants to God by Prayer, with a promise to be heard. The flaming sword
did keep the way to the tree of life, till Christ had taken it down, and
consecrated for us a new and living way, through the Veil, which is his flesh:
and now we have boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the blood of Jesus: and
therefore may draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.
19, 20, 22. When worldlings may cry to their Baal in vain, the Righteous cry,
and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all their (hurtful)
troubles. O what a Mercy is it in our falls, in our distresses, in our dangers,
in our wants, to have a God, a faithful merciful Father, to go to, and make
our moan to for relief? What a Mercy is it, when our flesh, and our hearts do
fail us, when friends, and worldly things all fail us, to have God for the
Rock of our hearts, and our Portion? Psalm. 73. 26. When sickness begins to
break these bodies, and earthly delights do all forsake us, and death calls us
to come to our endless state, then to have a Reconciled Father to go to, and
crave his aid, upon the encouragment of a promise, and recommend our Souls into
his hand as to a faithful Creator, and our surest dearest friend; this is a
Mercy that no man can well value, till they come to use it. To know every day,
that as often as ever we come to God, we are always welcome; and that our
persons, and prayers are pleasing to him through his Son; what a Mercy is it?
One would think we should live joyfully, if we had but one such promise as this
for Faith to live upon: Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. 15. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son, Joh. 14.
13, 14. No wonder if they be rich, that have so free access to such a treasure;
and if they be safe that have access to so sure a help. For God is a very
present help in trouble, Psalm. 46. 1.

9 Another precious benefit is, that we have Peace of Conscience, or ground for
it at the least, in our Peace with God: and so may come to assurance of
Salvation, and may partake of the Joy in the Holy Ghost: For in this Peace and
Joy the Kingdom of God does much consist. When the chief cause of all our fear,
and sorrow is done away, what then is left to break our Peace. When we have no
cause to fear the flames of Hell, nor the sting of death, or the appearance of
our Judge, any further then to move us to make ready; what then should greatly
trouble the Soul. If God and Heaven be not matter of comfort, I know not what
is? If we saw a man, that had got many Kingdoms, to be still sad, and dumpish
because he had no more; we would say, he were very ambitious, or covetuous: And
yet he might have reason for it: But if you have the Love of God, and a title
by promise to the Heavenly Inheritance, and yet you are discontented, and God,
and Glory is not enough for you; this is most unreasonable.

10. Another of our precious benefits by Christ is, Our Spiritual Communion
with his Church, and holy members. We do not only join with them in outward
Communion, but we unite our desires, and there is an harmony of affections. We
are in the maine of one Mind, and Will, and Way: and we jointly constitute the
Body of our Lord: We are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the City of the Living
God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the
general Assembly, and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven,
and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and
to Jesus the Mediator of the new C^venant, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. We are joined
to that Body, and have Communion with it; which consists both of militant,
and triumphant Saints, and of the Angels also. We are no more strangers and
forreiners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God,
and are built on the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief cornerstone; in whom all the building fitly framed
together, grows unto an Holy Temple in the Lord; in whom we also are builded
together, for an habitation of God, through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21,
22. And as in holy concord we serve the Lord, having one God, one Christ, one
Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism, one Rule, the Word of God, one mind, one heart,
one work of Holiness, and Righteousness in the main; one hope, one Heaven, the
place of our expectations; so have we the fruit of the Prayers of each other,
and of all the Church, and have the honor, the safety, and other benefits of
being members of so blessed a Society.

Yea we have in this Communion, the whole Church obliged, and disposed
according to their capacity to endeavor the good of every member. So that
Ministers, and Magistrates, yea though they were Apostles, and Prophets, Paul,
or Apollos, all are ours, 1 Cor. 3. 22. Kings have their Power for us:
Ministers have their Gifts for us: and for us they must use them. If we suffer,
every member must be as forward to assist us, and if we want, to relieve us
according to their power, as if they suffered with us, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26.

Yea the Angels are our Brethren (Rev. 22. 9.) and fellow servants, yea
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall be Heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. To encamp about them, and to bear them in their arms,
rejoicing to behold their graces, and prosperity, as was showed before.

11. Another of our precious benefits by Christ is, that All things shall work
together for our good, Romans 8. 28. When we are Sanctified to God, all things
are Sanctified to us, to serve us for God, and help us to him. Every Creature
that we have to do with, is as it were another thing to the Saints, then to
other men. They are all wheels in that universal Engine of Grace, to carry us
to Salvation. The same things that are common Mercies to others, are special to
us, as proceeding from a special Love, and being designed to a special use. As
flesh-pleasing is the ultimate end of the ungodly, and all things are thereby
debased, to be but means to that ignoble end: So the Pleasing and fruition of
God, is the End of all the Saints, and thereby all things that they have to do
with, are advanced to the honor of being Sanctified means to this most high,
and noble End: And as they are engaged to use them to this End, and
consequently to their own greatest advantage; so God has engaged himself to
bless them in that holy use, and to cause them all by his gracious providence
to cooperate to their good. The greatest afflictions, the cruellest
persecutions from the most violent enemies, our wants, our weaknesses, and
death it self, all must concur to carry on this work. What then should a
Christian fear, but sin? How honorable, and how safe, and how happy a life
may he live, that has all these assured for his service. And what causeless
fears are they that use to afflict the Servants of God, concerning their
outward troubles, and necessities? What do we fear, and groan under, and
complain of, but our Fathers physic, and the means of our Salvation? If this
one Truth were but believed, and received, and used according to its worth, O
what a life would Christians live.

12. The last, and greatest of our benefits by Christ is, Our Resurrection, and
our Justification at the bar of God, and our reception into Glory. This is
the end of all, and therefore contains all. For this Christ died; for this we
are Christians; for this we believe, hope, and labor; for this we suffer, and
deny our selves, and renounce this world. Our bodies shall then be spiritual
and glorious, no more troubled with infirmities, diseases, or necessities. Our
Souls shall be both naturally, and graciously perfected; both in their
faculties and qualities. We shall be brought nigh to God: We shall be numbered
with the Inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and be members of that blessed
Society, and be companions, and equal with the Angels of God: we shall for ever
behold our Glorified Redeemer, and see our own Nature, united to the Godhead;
and we shall have the greatest, and nearest intuition and fruition of God,
thefullest Love to him, and the swetest Rest, content, and delight in him, that
our created Natures are capable of: We shall everlastingly be employed in this
Love, and delight, and in his Praises with all the Heavenly Host: And the Glory
of God will shine forth in our Glory, and the abundance of his Goodness will be
communicated to us; and he will be well pleased with us, with our praises, with
all that blessed Society, and with our Head: And this will endure to all
Eternity.

Christians I have now named in a few words, those Benefits by Christ, which
the heart of man is not able to value, in any proportion to their unexpressible
worth: I have named that in an hour, which you must enjoy for ever. So much of
our Benefits by Christ.

5. The fifth point to be understood, in the right Knowledge of Christ, is, The
terms on which he conveyeth his Benefits to men, and how we must be made
partakers of them.

And these Mercies are of two sorts, 1. Common: 2. Proper to them that are
Heirs of Salvation. The Common are, 1. Those discoveries of Grace, that are
made even to Heathens in the Creatures, and the merciful Providence of God.
These are Absolutely, and freely bestowed, stowed, in some measure on all, but
in a greater measure upon some as please the Giver. 2. The Supernatural, or
Instituted means, of Revealing Christ, and Life to the world, and drawing them
to a saving consent of Faith. These are, the Gospel written and preached, with
other concomitant helps. The Commission Christ has given to his Ambassadors,
is to preach this Gospel to all the world, even to every (reasonable) Creature,
without exception, or restriction. And it is Absolutely, and freely, given
where it is given. But as to the providential disposal of the event, God
causes it not to be sent to all, but to whom he sees meet.

2. The Proper or Special Mercies are of two sorts. 1. Some are Physical
inherent qualities, or performed acts: 2. And some are adherent Rights, or
Relations.

Of the former inherent sort, there are these three Degees: 1. There is the
first special work of Vocation, Conversion, or Regeneration, causing the sinner
to Repent, and Believe, and giving him the Principle of Spiritual Life. 2.
There is the bestowing of the In-dwelling Spirit of God, and progressive
Santification of heart, and life, and perseverance with Victory. 3. There is
the perfecting of all this, in our Glorious Perfection in the life to come.

For the first of these, God has not promised it Conditionally, or Absolutely
to any individual person that has it not. He has bound all to Repent, and
Believe, but has not promised to make them do it: (only he has revealed, that
there are certain persons, so given to Christ, as that they shall be infallibly
drawn to believe.) But he has appointed certain means for the ungodly, which
they are bound to use, in order to their Conversion; and if they will not use
them, they are without excuse. If they will, they have very much encouragement
from God: Both 1. In the Nature of the means, which are fitted to their ends,
and are mighty to bring down, all oppositions; and 2. In the Commands, and
Institution of God; whose Wisdom and Goodness may easily resolve us, that he
will not appoint us means in vain, nor set his Creatures on fruitless labors:
And 3. Also from the Issue: for no man can stand forth and say, such a one did
his best in the Use of means, and yet could not attain the End, but fell short
of the Grace, and Glory of God.

The diseases of men's Souls, are wilfullness, and blindness: The means of Cure,
are the Persuasions, with the Revelations of the Gospel. Men have the Natural
Powers of Understanding, and Willing: but they want that right disposition,
which we call the Habit, or Moral Power, which is no more then to say, They are
Habitually Blind and Wilful. It is so far from being unreasonable to teach,
and persuade men that are under such an Impotency as this, that there is
nothing in the world, that does more bespeak our teaching, and persuasions: For
this is the Natural, and Instituted way to cure them, and give them Power. What
means of overcoming Ignorance like Teaching; and what means of overcoming
Habituated Wilfullness, like Persuasion, added to informing truths? We do not
use to reason men out of a Natural Impotency, nor to persuade them to do that,
for which they have no Faculties, or Object; but it is the very means of
overcoming a Moral Impotency, and making men willing of the Good which they
rejected. And with this means does God set in, and infallibly cause it to be
effectual with his chosen. Thus no man comes to the Son, except the Father
draw him; And then for the two following Degrees, of Holiness in our
Sanctification, and Glorious Perfection, God has promised them to those that
have this first Degree. For the Spirit of Holiness is promised to all that
truly Repent and Believe, and Salvation to all that are Sanctified, and
persevere. So that the Right to these Inherent Mercies, being a Relaetion, is
conveyed as other Rights, and Relations, of which we are next to speak.

2. As the Spirit by the Operation of the Word upon the heart, conveyeth the
foresaid Inherent benefits, or qualities and acts, so the Promise of Grace,
indicted by Christ, and the Spirit, does as a Deed of Gift, or Testament, or Act
of Oblivion, bestow on us our Rights, and Spiritual Relations; and from these
they do result, as the immediate instrumental Cause. Thus does he give Power,
or Right to as many as receive him, to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1. 12.
Thus does he give us Pardon, Justification, Adoption, and our Right to further
Grace, and Glory. And these Promises are Conditional; and our Repenting, and
Believing in Christ is the Condition. And therefore till Conversion do bring us
to Repent and Believe, we have no Right to any of these benefits of the
Promise. And therefore though our Repentance and Faith, be none of the Proper
Cause of our Justification, or Right; yet the main work, in order to our
procurement of these benefits, that is now to be done, is to persuade the sinner
to Repent and Believe; to turn that he may live: For Gods Act of Grace is past
already, and the Conditional Pardon is granted long ago, and will effectually
Pardon us, as soon as we perform the Condition, and not before. Till then we
hinder the Efficacy of the Deed of Gift: For Unbelief and Impenitency, are true
Causes of men's Condemnation, though Faith, and Repentance be not Proper Causes
of their Salvation.

These Promises being Conditional, we cannot be assured of our part in the
benefits, but by being assured that we perform the Condition. By this you may
see the Nature of presumption: When men say, they believe that which never was
promised; or believe that they have right to the Blessings that are promised to
others, and not to them; or believe that they shall have the benefits promised,
when they perform not the Conditions; all this is presuming, and not true
believing. If men believe that God is reconciled to them, and will Pardon them,
and Justify them, and save them, when they are unconverted, impenitent,
unregenerate men; this is not indeed a believing of God, that has never made
them any such promise, nor ever told them any such matter, but the contrary:
But it is a believing the false delusions of the Devil, and their own hearts.
He that will claim any title to Christ, and Pardon, and Salvation, must have
something to show for it; yea and something more then the most of the world
have to show: For the most shall be shut out. Every man therefore that
regards his Salvation, must seriously ask his Soul this question, What have I
to show for my title to Salvation, more then the most of the world can show? It
is not saying, I hope to be saved, that will serve the turn' except I can give
a Reason of my hopes' Thousands that lay claim to Salvation shall miss of it,
because they have no title to it. And that which you must have to show is this:
A Promise, or Deed of Gift on Gods part, and the fullfilling of the Condition
on your part. God says to all men, who ever Repents, Believes, or is
converted, shall be saved. When you have found that you Repent of all your
sins, and truly believe, and are converted to God, then, and not till then,
you may conclude that you shall be saved.

6. The sixth Point to be understood, or believed, concerning these Benefits of
Christ, is, the infallible Certainty of them. While men look on the promised
Glory to come, as on an uncertain thing, they will hardly be drawn to venture,
and let go the porfits, and pleasures of the world to attain it; much less to
part with life it self. The life of all our Christian motion, is the unfeigned
belief of the Truth of Gods Word, and specially of the unseen things of the
world to come. Such as men's belief of Heaven, and Hell is, such will be the
bent of their hearts, and the course of their lives, and such they will be in
yielding to sin, or in resisting it, and in all the service they do for God.
As all men would take another course, if they did but see Heaven, and Hell with
their eyes; so all men would presently throw away their worldly fleshly
pleasures, and turn to God, and a holy life, if they did but as thoroughly
believe the Joys, and torments to come; as if they saw them. Flesh and blood
can hardly judge of things, without the help of sense; and fleshly men take all
things to be fantasmes or nothings, that are not within the judgment of their
senses. They must see it, or feel it, or taste it, or hear it; and Believing is
a way that hardly satisfies them; though it be God himself, that they are to
believe. Believing is, trusting the Credit of an other: and we are naturally
loath to trust to any, but our eyes, or other senses. We are so false our
selves, that we are ready to measure God by our selves, and to think that he is
a deceiver, because that we are such. And hence it is that the world is so
ungodly, that they venture on sin, and will not be at the cost, and labor of
a Heavenly life; because they take the matters of the life to come, to be but
uncertainties, and have not so true a belief of them, as might possess them
with a deep apprehension of their reallity. How should the Word profit them,
that mix it not with Faith, Heb. 4. 2. Unless by begetting Faith it self. O
what a change would a sound belief of the Scriptures, make in the world. But
having spoken so often of this, in other writings, I shall say no more of it now.
So much of the Knowledge of Christ.

II. I have showed you the first part of this Direction, How Christ must be
Received understandingly. I now come to the second, which is, that He must be
Received heartily. As God must be loved, so Christ must be believed in, with
all the heart, and Soul, and strength: If not with All in a Perfect degree,
(for that will not be till we come to Heaven) yet with All in a predominant
prevalent degree. There are many convictions, and good meanings, and wishes,
and purposes, which may proceed from common Grace, and be found in those that
never shall be saved: These may be called (analogically) Faith, and Love, and
Desire, as those are that are found in the truly Regenerate: and yet the
persons in whom they are found, may not fitly be called Believers, or Lovers of
God; because a man is to be denominated, from that in him which is predominant,
and has the chief power on his heart. The Soul of man is not so simple as to
move but one way: Its state in this life is to stand between two differing
Competitours, God and the world, Spirit and flesh; and there is no man, that is
Totally given up to either of them. No man is so good, and spiritual, that has
not something in him that is bad and carnal: And no man is so fully addicted to
God, but the Creature has too much interest in his heart. Nor is there any man
so given up to the Creature, in whom God has no manner of interest at all, in
his Estimation, and Affections; if he indeed believe that there is a God. At
least it is not so with all that are unconverted. Otherwise, 1. What: is it
that common Grace does, if it no whit dispose them toward God? Certainly it
would not else be Grace. 2. And if this were not so, then we must say, that no
unregenerate man has any Good in him, that is truly Moral: For if there be no
interest of God in his mind or will, there can be no Good in him. But this is
contrary to Scripture, and experience. It was undoubtedly some Moral Good,
which Christ loved the man for, in Mark 10. 21. Who was not far from the
Kingdom of God. 3. Otherwise all men must be equally departed from God, which
is contrary to experience: 4. Yea all men must be as bad on Earth (privatively)
as in Hell: which certainly is false. I may well say, that on Earth there is
some Good in the worst; much more in those, that are almost persuaded to be
converted Christians. Many a thought of the Goodness of God and the necessity
of a Savior, and of the Love of Christ, and of the Joys of Heaven, may be
stirring, and working in the minds of the unsanctified; but if they take not up
the Heart for Christ, the person is not a true Believer. As the Gospel must be
Believed to be True, so Christ that is offered us in the Gospel as Good; must
be Heartily, and Thankfully accepted accordingly: And the Glory, the
Justification, Reconciliation with God, and other benefits procured by him, and
offered with him, must be valued, and desired above all earthly fleshly things.
If you are convinced that sin is evil, as contrary to God, and hurtful to
you, and hereupon have some mind to let it go, and some wishes that Christ
would save you from it, and yet still have a Love to it that is greater then
your dislike, and the bent of your heart is more for it, then against it, and
your habituate desires, are rather to keep, then to leave it; this is not
Sanctification, nor a saving consent to be saved by Christ. If you have some
convictions that Holiness is good, as being the Image of God, and pleasing to
him, and necessary to your Salvation, and so should have some mind of Holiness
on these grounds; yet if you have on the other side a greater aversness to it,
because it would deprive you of the pleasures of your sin, and the Habitual
inclination of your will, is more against it then for it; certainly this will
not stand with true Sanctification, of Faith in Christ, to save you from the
power of sin by his Spirit. Thousands deceive themselves, by misunderstanding
some common passages, that are spoken to comfort afflicted Consciences; viz.
That the least true desires after Grace, do prove the Soul to be Gracious. This
is true, if you speak of the least Desires, which are Predominant in the Soul,
when our Desire is more habitually then our unwillingness, and we thus prefer
Christ before all the world, the least of this is an Evidence of Saving Grace.
But such Desires as are subdued by the contrary Desires; and such a will as is
accompanied with a greater unwillingness, habitually, and such a Faith, as is
drowned in greater unbelief, these are not Evidences* of a saving change; nor
can you justly gather any special comfort from them. He that has more unbelief
then Belief, is not to be called a Believer, but an unbeliever: And he that
has more hatred, or dislike of God, and Holiness, then Love to them, is not to
be called Godly, but ungodly, nor a Lover of God, but a hater of him. I am
easily persuaded, that many of you that are ungodly, could be contented that
God be Glorified, if his Glory do not cross your carnal interest, and so you
desire Gods Glory even for it self, as that which is absolutely Good in it
self: But if your fleshly interest be so dear to you, that you will sacrifice
Gods Glory to it, and had rather God were dishonored, then your fleshly
interest contradicted, it is your flesh then that is made your God, and your
chief End. It is not every wish, or mind of Christ, no not to save you from
sin as sin, that will prove you true Belielievers: Nor is it every minding
of God, or love to him, no not as one apprehended by you, to be the chiefest
Good, and desirable for himself, as your End, that will prove indeed that you
savingly love him; as long as the contrary mind and will, is Habitually
predominant in you. Such as the very habit and bent of a man's heart is, such
indeed is the man. Its possible for a man, even a good man, to have two
contrary ends, and intentions; yea ultimate ends; as that which is desired for
it self, and referred to nothing else, is called Vltima^e: but it is not
possible for him, to have two principal predominant Ends. So far as we are
carnal still, we make the pleasing of our flesh our ultimate End: For doubtless
we do not sin only, by pleasing the flesh, as a means to Gods Glory; nor only
in the mischoosing of other means: But yet this is none of our Principal End,
so far as men are truly Sanctified. And because that is called a man's mind, or
will, which is the chiefest, and highest in his mind, and will; therefore we
use to denominate men, from that only which bears rule in them: And thus we
may say with Paul, It is not I, but sin that dwells in me. For a disowned
act, that proceeds from us, against the bent, and habit of our wills, and the
course of our lives, from the remnants of a carnal misguided will, is not it
that must denominate the person, nor is so fully ours as the contrary act. And
therefore though indeed we sinfully participate of it, yet when the question
is, whether Believing, or unbelief, sinning or obeying, be my work; it is not
Comparatively to be called mine, which I am much more against then for. So on
the other side, if the unsanctified have some transient, superficial,
uneffectual acts of Desire, or Faith, or Love to God, which are contrary to the
bent, and habit of their hearts, this is not theirs, nor imputable to them, so
far as hence, to give them their. Denomination. It is not they that do it, but
the common workings of the Spirit upon them.

If ever then you would be assured that your are Christians, look to the
Habitual bent of your hearts, and see that you do not only talk of Scripture,
and sl^ghtly believe it, and speak well of Christ, with some good wishes, and
meanings, and purposes; but, as you love your Souls, see that Christ be
Received as your dearest Savior, with Thankfullness, and greatest Love; and as
your Sovereign Lord, with true subjection; and that he have your Superlative
estimation and Affections, and all things in the world be put under him in your
Souls. This must be so, if you will have the portion of Believers. No Faith
that is short of this, will prove you Christ's Disciples indeed, or Heirs of
the Promises made to Believers. The voice of Christ that calls to you in the
Gospel, is, My son give me thy heart, Prove. 23. 26. Do, what thou will in
ways of duty, and think as highly as thou will of thy self, thou art no true
Believer in Christ's account, till thou have given him thy heart. If he have
thy tongue, if he have thy good opinion; nay if thy body were burnt in his
Cause, if he had not thy Love, thy Heart, it were as nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 3. For
thy works, and sufferings, are so far acceptable (through Christ) as they are
testimonies of this, that Christ has thy heart. If he have not thy heart, he
takes it as if he had nothing: And if he have this, he takes it as if he had
all. For this is not only preferred by him before all; but also he knows that
this commands all. If Christ have thy Heart, the Devil will not have thy
tongue, and life; the Alehouse, or a Harlot will not have thy body; nor the
world will not have the principal part of thy life. If Christ have thy Heart,
it will be heard much in thy conference; it will be seen in thy labors: For
that which has a man's Heart will hardly be hid, unless he purposely hide it,
which a Christian neither can, nor ought to do. It would make a man wonder to
hear some wretches, that will run from God as fast as they can, and yet face
you down, that God has their hearts: that have no mind, so much as to
meditate, or talk of Christ, or his precious Blood, or mysterious Redemption,
or the glorious Kingdom purchased by him; that will be at neither, cost nor
labor in his Service, and yet profess that Christ has their hearts: that will
refuse a Holy Heavenly life, and perhaps make a scorn of it, and maliciously
prate against the Sanctified, and yet will stand to it that the Holy Ghost, the
Sanctifier of the Elect, has their hearts. No wonder if those hearts are ill
managed, and in a miserable deceived state, that are so unacquainted with
themselves.

Faith enters at the Understanding, but it has not all its essential parts,
and is not the Gospel Faith indeed, till it have possessed the will. The heart
of Faith is wanting, till Faith has taken possession of the heart. For by
Faith Christ dwells in the Heart, Ephesians. 3. 17. And if he dwell not in the
heart, he dwells not in the Man, in a saving sort. He had some interest in
Judas, Simon Magus, Ananias, and Saphira, as to the head, and perhaps somewhat
more in a superficial sort. But Satan entered into the heart of one, and filled
the heart of another of them with a lie, and the heart of the third was not
right in the sight of God, and therefore he had no part, or lot in Christ, but
was still in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity: and all because
Christ was not heartily entertained, Acts 5. 3 and 8. 22, 23. It is in the
heart that the word must have its rooting, or else it will wither in time of
trial. It is seeking with the whole heart that is the evidence of the blessed,
Psalm. 119 2. And it is a feigned turning, when men turn not to God with the
whole heart, Jer. 3. 10. This is Gods promise concerning his Elect; I will give
them a heart, to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and
I will be their God: for they shall return unto me with their whole heart, Jer.
24. 7. See then that the heart be unfeignedly delivered up to Christ: For if
Christ have it not, the flesh, the world, and the Devil will have it. Your
Hearts must be a dwelling for one of these Masters; choose you whether.

It is the damnation of most professed Christians, that they have nothing for
Christ but a good opinion, or a few good words, or outside services, or some
slight Religiousness on the by; when the flesh, and the world go away with
their hearts; and yet they will not know it, nor confess it. Christ will not be
an underling, or servant to your flesh. Your Hearts he has bought, and your
Hearts he will have; or you are none of his. If he shall have nothing from you
but a name, you shall have nothing but the name of his purchased Salvation.

III. The last part of the Direction yet remains, viz. that you must cl^se with
Christ entirely, as well as Understandingly and Heartily. It is whole Christ,
that must be received with the whole heart.

For the understanding of this, it must be known, both How and Why Christ is
offered to us.

As he came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8 and
to seek and save that which was lost, Luke 19. 19 And by his Mediation to
reconcile us to God, and bring us up to Glory; so two things were to be done,
for the accomplishment of this: First he was himself to Merit our Salvation,
and pay the price of our Redemption on the Cross, and in his own Person to
conquer the world, the Devil, and death, and the grave: And then he was by his
Intercession in the Heavens, to make application of this, and bestow the
benefits thus purchased by him. And because it was he, and not we that made the
purchase, it therefore pleased the Father, that the purchased treasure should
be put into his hands, and not immediately put into ours. He is become our
Treasury, and authorized to be our Head: All Power is given him in Heaven, and
Earth. We have so foully miscarryed already, that he will no more trust his
honor in our hands, as at first he did. We shall have nothing, of Pardon, or
Grace, or Glory, but what we have in and from the Son. God has given us
Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son: He that has the Son has Life,
and he that has not the Son, has not Life, 1 John 11. 12. It is not only
the Nature, and Person of Christ, that is to be believed in, but it is the
Person, as empowered to certain ends, and clothed with his Office, yet we must
now entertain. Now the Office of Christ being for our Salvation, and the Glory
of God, is suited to these happy ends.

And our Necessities are principally in these three points. 1. We have the
Guilt of sin upon us to be pardoned, and the Wrath of God, and Curse of the
Law, and the punishment of sin to be removed. 2. We have the Corruption of
our Nature to be healed; the power of sin to be destroyed; the Image of God
repaired on us; and our hearts, and lives to be acted, and ordered according to
the Will of God; and to these ends, Temptations to be conquered; and our Souls,
directed, strengthened, and preserved to the end. 3. We must be raised from the
Grave at the last day; we must be Justified in Judgment, and possessed of that
Glory which is the End of our Faith. To this Justification, Sanctification, and
Glorification may the rest be reduced.

Now the Office of Christ is suited to these Necessities of ours: and as we
cannot possibly be saved, unless all these Necessities be supplied, and these
works done for us: so we cannot possibly have these things done, but by
Accepting of Christ, as Authorized, and empowered by his Office, and
Perfections, to do them.

The Glory that God will have by this work, I have before expressed to you at
large. He will have his Justice, and Wisdom, and Power, and Holiness, and Mercy
to be demonstrated, and honored by Christ. And therefore Christ has resolved
to give out none of his benefits, but in such manner, and ways, as may best
attain these highest Ends.

These several points therefore I must entreat you here to note distinctly. 1.
That you must be brought into a special Relation to the Person of Christ, as
clothed with his Office, before you can lay claim to his Saving Benefits. He
is the Head, and you must become his Members: He is the Husband of the Church,
and you must become his Spouse, and so of the rest. This is called our Vni^^ng
to Christ, which must go before your further Communion with him. It is the Will
of God, that you shall never receive his Benefits, without, or before you
receive his Son: (Except only those Benefits, which go before your Union with
Christ himself, in order to the accomplishing it; as the Gospel, the gift of
Faith to the Elect, etc.) You shall never have actual Pardon, Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, or Glory, till you have first saving interest in
Christ himself. He is the Vine, and we are the Branches: we must be planted
into him, and live in him, or else we can have nothing further from God, nor do
nothing acceptable to God. And therefore the first, and great work of Faith is
to Receive, and close with the Person of Christ, as clothed with his Office.

2. Understand and note, that as you shall not have his great Benefits before,
or without his Person, so God has resolved, that you shall not have his
Special Benefits, unless you will take them all together. (I speak of men at
age, that are capable of all.) You shall not have Pardon, and Justification, or
Glory, without Sanctification; nor the Comforts of Christ, without the
guidance, and government of Christ. You must have all, or none.

3. From hence it follows, that therefore you must Receive, and close with
Christ Entirely, in his whole Office, as he is to accomplish all these works,
or else you cannot be United to him. He will not be divided: You shall not have
Christ as a Justifier of yon, if you will not have him as a Guide, and Ruler,
and Sanctifier of you. He will not be a partial Savior: If you will not
consent that he shall save you from your sins, he will not consent to save
you from Hell.

4. Understand, and note that Christ will look to his Fathers Interest, and
Honor, and his own, as well as to your Salvation; yea and before it. And
therefore you must not hope for any Mercy from him, in any way that is
dishonorable to him, or that is inconsistent with his own blessed Ends, and
Interest. And therefore do not look for any such Grace from him, as shall
discharge you from your duty, or give you liberty to dishonor, or disobey him:
Nor do not think that you shall have him Related to you only for your own ends,
but on terms of highest honor to God, and you Redeemer. And do not think that
your Grace is ever the less free, because Gods Honor is thus preferred: For if
you are Christians indeed, you will take Gods Interest, as your own highest
Interest, and will confess, that you could not have your own Ends, and welfare
any other way.

5. Understand and Note also, that as all your Mercies are in the hand of
Christ, so Christ has appointed in his Gospel, a certain way and course of
means, in which he will bestow it: And you cannot expect it from him, in any
other way, but his own. As God has made Christ the way, and no man comes to
the Father but by him, so Christ has ordained a standing course of means,
which are his way for the making over of his Benefits: and here you must have
them, or go without them.

6. Understand and Note, that there are some of Christ's Ends, and Benefits,
that the very Natural man desires, and some that Corrupted Nature is against.
Now it is therefore the established way of Christ, to Promise us those which we
can desire, on Condition that we will also accept of, and submit to those that
we are against. Not but that his Grace does dispose men to the performance of
such Conditions: But his Grace works by means: and a Conditional Promise is
his stablished means, to draw man's heart to the Performance of the Condition:
(which well considered, is a sufficient answer to the Arguments that are
commonly urged against the Conditionality of the Promise.) As the Spirit does
Powerfully work within; so he uses that Word from without, as his Instrument,
which works Sapientially, and Powerfully to the same work. If a Physician
have two medicines to give his patient, as necessary for his cure, the one very
sweet, and the other bitter; the one which he loves, and the other which he
loathes, he will Promise him the Sweeter, if he will take the Bitter one; that
by the love of one, he may prevail against the loathing of the other, and may
^ice it down. He will not promise the bitter one which is loathed, and make the
Taking of the sweet one the Condition: He will not say, I will give thee this
Aloes, on Condition thou will take this Sugar: but contrary; I will give thee
the sweeter, if thou will take the bitter.

In Christ's Ends, and Works, 1. We Naturally are more willing of that which
makes for our selves directly, then of that which makes directly for the Honor
of God, and the Redeemer. We prefer our own Ends before Gods Glory: And
therefore Christ has so ordered the Condition of his Promises, that unless we
will take him, in his Relations of Dignity as King and Lord, and will make the
Glory, and Pleasing of God our principal End, we shall have none of him, or his
Saving Benefits. For he came not to fulfill our selfish desires, but to fetch
us off from our selves, and recover us to God, that he might have his own. And
if we will not have our All in God, we shall have Nothing. 2. And Naturally we
are willing, as to our own Benefits, to be pardoned, and freed from the Curse
of the Law, and the flames of Hell, and Natural death, and punishment: And
therefore we are thus far Naturally willing of free Justification. But we are
unwilling to let go the seeming profit, and credit, and pleasure of sin, and
to deny the flesh, and forsake the world, and we are averse to the Spiritual
felicity of the Saints, and to the Holiness of heart, and life, that is the way
to it. And therefore Christ has most wisely so ordered it, in the tenor of his
Promises, that our Repentance and Faith, shall be the Condition of our
Justification, and deliverance from death and Hell: And this Faith is the
believing in him, and Accepting him Entirely in his whole Office, to Sanctify
us, and Rule us, as well as to Justify us: And thus we must take him wholly,
or we shall have none of him. And the Accepting him as our Teacher; and
Sanctifier, and King, is as much; (at least, the Condition of our
Justification, and Pardon, and deliverance from Hell,) as the Accepting him as
a Justifier of us, is. He that had the Power in his own hands, and that made
the free Promise, or Deed of Gift, has put in such Conditions, as his own
Wisdom saw best; and they are such as suit most congruously to all his Ends;
even the Glory of God, in all his Attributes, and the Redeemers Glory, and our
own, and most full and free Salvatition: And on his Conditions must we have his
Benefits, or we shall never have them.

7. Lastly Understand and Note, that the Means which Christ has resolved on
for Teaching, and Ruling us, ordinarily, are his Word, his Ministers, and his
Spirit: all must be submitted to together, where they may be had, and none of
them laid by, by separation. His Word, is the Grammar, or Book, as it were,
that we must learn: His Ministers must teach us this Book: And his Spirit (who
in the Apostles, and Prophets indicted, and sealed it) must inwardly teach us,
by powerful Illumination. The Word is Gods Laws: the Ministers are his
Ambassadors, or Heralds to proclaim them, and command obedience in his Name:
and his Spirit must open men's hearts to entertain them. The Word is Gods Seed:
the Ministers are the Husbandmen, or Servants that sow it: and the Spirit must
give the increase; without which, our planting, and watering will do nothing.
He therefore that takes Christ for his Master, and King, must resolve to be
taught, and ruled by his established means, even by his Word, and Ministers,
and Spirit conjunct: For he that refuses and despises these, does refuse, and
despise Christ; and consequently the Father that sent him, Luke 10. 16. 1 These.
4. 8. For it was never the meaning of Christ, when he became the Teacher, and
King of the Church, to stay on Earth, and personally, and visiby to teach them
himself: but these three are his means, which all must submit to, that will be
his Subjects, and Disciples. And he that despises the Word, shall be
destroyed, Prove. 13. 13. He that will not have the Word, Ministry, and Spirit
teach him, will not have Christ teach him: and he that refuses to be ruled by
these three, shall be destroyed as a Rebel against Christ himself, Luke 19. 27.
Still it is supposed that Ministers must Teach, and Rule according to this Word.

And the Society in which Christ will Teach and govern us, is his Church: As
members therefore of the Universal Church, and in Communion with his Particular
Church, where we live and have opportunity, we must wait on Christ for his
Teaching and Benefits. For this is his School, where his Disciples must
diligently attend and learn.

Lay all this together, and this is the sum: The Object of Justifying, Saving
Faith, is One only undivided Christ, one in Person, but of two Natures, God,
and Man; in Office the Mediator between God and man, who has already done the
work of Sanctification, and Merit, and is authorized further to bestow the
Benefits: By the Gospel Grant he has given himself as Head, and Husband,
Teacher, King, and Savior, to all that will entirely, and heartily accept him;
and with himself he gives Justification by the Promise, Sanctification by the
Word, Ministry, and Spirit, and final Absolution, and Everlasting Life. If ever
then you will have Christ, and Life, you must accept him in all these
Essentials of his Person, and Office, and that to the Ends, which his
Redemption was intended for; you must be willing to be Sanctified by him, as
well as to be Justified: You must at once unfeignedly become his Disciples, his
Subjects, his Members, if you would become his saved ones. You wust consent,
that as your Teacher, and your Lord, he shall Teach and Rule your heart, and
life, by his Word, Ministers, and Spirit, in Communion with his Church. No
bar or exception must be put in, nor reservation made against any one of
these parts of his Office. If you yield not to those parts of his Saving work,
that tend but to the compleative growth, you sin, and deprive your selves of
the Benefit; but if you yield not to those that must make you truly Sanctified,
and Justified men, you cannot be saved. The Essentials of Christ's Person, and
Office, do costitute him the Christ, and if he be not received in all those
Essentials, he is not received as Christ.

And thus I have given you the sum of the Gospel, and the description of
Faith, and true Christianity in this Direction for a right closing with the
Lord Jesus Christ. And experience of most that I discourse with, persuades me
to think this Direction of great necessity, and to entreat you thoroughly to
peruse, and consider it: I find abundance of ignorant people, that talk much of
Christ, but know very little of him: that can scarce tell us whether he be God
or man, or which Person in the Trinity he is, nor to what End he was incarnate,
and died, no^ what Relation he stands in to us, or what use he is of, or what
he now is, or what he is engaged to do for us. But if we ask them about their
hopes of Salvation, they almost overlook the Redemption by Christ, and tell us
of nothing but Gods Mercies, and their own good meanings, and endeavors. And I
am afraid too many Professors of Piety, (do look) almost all, at the Natural
part of Religion, and the mending of their own hearts, and lives, (and I would
this were better done) while they forget the supernatutural part, and little
are affected with the infinite Love of God in Christ. I desire such to consider
these things: 1. You overlook the sum of your Religion, which is Christ
Crucified, besides whom Paul desired to know nothing. 2. You overlook the
fountain of your own life, and the author of your supplies; and you strive in
vain for Sanctification, or Justification, if you seek them not from a
Crucified Christ. 3. You leave undon the principal part of your work, and live
like moral Heathens, while you have the name of Christians. Your daily work is
to study God in the face of his Son; and to labor with all Saints to
comprehend the height, and breadth, and length, and depth, and to know the Love
of Christ, which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. 19. All your Graces should be
daily quickened, and set awork by the life of Faith, in the contemplation of the
Redeemer, and his blessed work. This is the weight that must set all the wheels
agoing. You do God no Service, that he can accept, if you serve him not in this
Gospel-work, of loving, trusting, and admiring, and praising him in the
Redeemer, and for his Redemption. 4. And so you rob God of the principal part
of his Glory, which you are to give him; which is for this most glorious work
of our Redemption. I pray you read over again the Ends of this work, which I
laid down in the beginning of this Direction. 5. Moreover you rob your selves
of your principal comfort, which must all come in, by living upon Christ. 6.
And you harden the Anti^omians, and Libertines, and tempt men to their
extremes, that run from us as Legalists, and as men that Savor not the
Doctrine of free Grace, and are not of a Gospel Spirit, and conversation. I
would our great neglect of Christ had not been a snare to these mistaken Soul^,
and a stumbling block in their way.

O Sirs, if a thought of your hearts, if a word of your mouths, have not some
relation to Christ, to suspect it, yea reject it. Call it not a Sermon or a
Prayer, nor a duty, that has nothing of Christ in it. Though the pure Godhead
be your principal End, yet there is no way to this End, but by Christ: and
though Love, which is exercised on that End, must animate all your graces, and
duties, as they are Means to that End; yet Faith has Love in it, or else it is
not the Christian Faith; and Christ is the Object of your Faith and Love: and
your perfect Everlasting Love will be animated by Christ: For your Love and
Praise, will be to him that was slain, and Redeemed us to God by his Blood, out
of every Kindred, Tongue, and Nation, and made us Kings, and Priests to God. So
much for the fifth Direction.

DIRECT. VI. The next Direction which I would give you for a through Conversion
is this; See that the flesh be thoroughly mortified, and your hearts be
thoroughly taken off the world, and all its pleasures, and profits, and honors,
and that the Root of your fleshly Interest prevail not at the heart, and that
you think not of reconciling God, and the world, as if you might secure your
Interest in both.

This is a very common cause of the deceit, and destruction, of such as verily
think they are converted. It is the very Nature, and business of true
Conversion, to turn men's hearts from the flesh, and from the world to God, and
from an earthly and seeming happiness, to a Heavenly Real Everlasting
Happiness* And when men are affrighted into some kind of Religiousness, and yet
never learnt to deny themselves, and never mortified their fleshly mind, but
the love of this world, is still the chiefest principle at their hearts; and so
go on in Profession of godliness, with a secret reserve, that they will look as
well as they can to their outward prosperity, whatever become of their
Religion, and they will have no more to do with the matters of another world,
then may stand with their bodily safety in this world; these are the miserable
deluded Hypocrites, whose hopes will prove, as the giving up of the ghost; whom
Christ will disown in their greatest extremities, after all their seeming
Religiousness. O Sirs, look to this as ever you would be happy. Its an easy,
its a common, its a most dangerous thing, to set upon a course of outward
Piety, and yet keep the world next your hearts, and take it still as a great
part of your felicity, and secretly* to love your former lusts, while you seem
to be converted. The heart is so deceitful, that you have great cause to watch
it narrowly in this point: It will closely cherish the love of the world, and
your fleshly pleasures, when it seems to renounce them, and when your tongue
can speak contemptuously of them. It was not for nothing that Christ would have
the first fruits of his Gospel Church (who were to be the Example of their
successors) to sell all, and lay it down at the feet of his Apostles: And it
is his standing Rule, that Whoever he be, that forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14. 33. In estimation, affection, and
resolution, it must be forsaken by all that will be saved; and also in
practice, when ever God calls us to it. You can have but one Happiness: If you
will needs have it in this world, in the contenting of your flesh, there is no
hope of having it also in another world, in the fruition of God. If you think
not God and Heaven enough for you, and cannot let go the Prosperity of the
flesh for them, you must let go all your hopes of them. God will not halve it
with the world in your hearts, nor part stakes with the flesh; much less will
he be below them, and take their leavings: Heaven will not be theirs, that set
not by it more then Earth. God will not call that Love to him Sincere, which is
not a Superlative Love, and able to make you even hate all those things, that
would draw away your affections, and obedience from him; Luke 14. 26, 27.
There Is no talk of serving God, and Mammon* and compounding you a Happiness of
Earth. and Heaven. Do therefore as Christ bids you, Luke 14. 28, 29, 30.

Sit down, and count what it must cost you, if you will be saved; and on what
rates it is, that you must follow Christ. Can you voluntarily, for the love of
him, and the hope of Glory, take up your Cross, and follow him in poverty, in
losses, in reproaches; though scorns, and scourgings, and prisons and death?
Do you value his loving kindness better then life, Psalm. 63. 3? Can you deny
your eyes, and your appetites their desires? Can you consent to be vile in the
eyes of men, and to tame your own flesh, and keep it in subjection, and live a
flesh-displeasing life, that h^ving suffered with Christ, you may also be
glorified with him, Romans 8. 17. If you cannot consent to these terms, you
cannot be Christians, nor you cannot be Saved. If you must needs be rich, or
must be honorable, yea, if you must needs save your estates, or liberties, or
lives, it is past all question, you must needs let go Christ, and Glory: If you
must needs have the world, you must needs lose your Souls. If you must have
your good things here, you must not have them hereafter too, but be tormented,
when Christ's sufferers are comforted, Luke 16. 25. These hopes of purveying
for the flesh, as long as they can; and then of being saved, when they can stay
here no longer, is it that has deceived many a thousand, to their undoing.
It Is a strange thing to see how the world does blind very knowing men, and how
unacquainted these Hypocrites are with their own hearts. What a confident
profession of downright godliness many of them will make, yea of some
extraordinary height in Religion, when nothing is so dear to to them, as their
present prosperity, and God has not near so much interest in them as the
flesh? What contrivances some of them make for riches, or rising in the world?
And how tender others are of their honor with men; and how tenacious they are
of their Mammon of unrighteousness; and how much money, and great men can do
with them: And most of them pamper their flesh, and serve it in a cleanlier way
of Religiousness, even as much, though not so disgracefully, and grossly, as
drunkards, and whoremongers do, in a more discernable sensuality. If the times
do but change, and countenance any error, how small an Argument will make their
judgments bend with the times: If truth or duty must cost them deer: O how they
will shift, and stretch, and wriggle, to prove Truth to be no Truth, and duty
to be no duty; and no Argument is strong enough to satisfy them, when the
flesh does but say, Its bitter, its dangerous! it may be my undoing.

Its none of my meaning, that any should needlessly run into suffering, or
cross their governors, and themselves, through a spirit of pride, singularity,
and contradiction: But that men should think themselves truly Religious, that
keep such reserves for their fleshly interest, and show by the very drift of
their lives, that they are worldlings, and never felt what it was to be
crucified to the world, and deny themselves, but are Religious on this
supposition only, that it may stand with their worldly ends, or at least not
undo them in the world; this is a lamentable hypocritical self-deceit. When God
has so plainly said, Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world:
If any man love the world, the Love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15.
Nay that the neighborhood, and all the Country that know them, should ring of
the worldlyness of some, that think themselves good Christians; and yet they
will not see it themselves. What a cheating, blinding thing is the world?

Well Sirs; if you will be Christians, count what it must cost you? And if you
will be Heirs of Heaven, away with the world: Cast it out of your hearts: and
if your hands must yet trade in it, yet trade not for it: Use it for God, but
enjoy it not for it self. Take your selves as strangers here; and look on the
world as a desolate wilderness; through which, in the Communion of the militant
Saints, you may safely travail on to Heaven; but do not make it your home, nor
take it for the smallest part of your felicity. To be Sanctified without
Mortification, is a palpable contradiction. Be at a point with all things
below, if you will groundedly hope for the Heavenly Inheritance. But I shall
purposely forbear to enlarge this any further, because I have preached, and
written a Treatise on this Subject, which I desire you to peruse.

DIRECT. VII My next Direction is this: If you would be truly Converted, be
sure that you make an absolute resignation of your selves, and all that you
have to God.

This is the very form, and life of Sanctification. To be Sanctified, is to be
separated, in heart, life, and profession, from all other Masters, and Ends, to
God. When the heart that was set upon the world, and flesh, is separated from
them, and inclined to God by the power of Love, and devoted to him, to serve
and please him; this is indeed a Sanctified Heart: And when the life that
before was spent in the service of Satan, the world, and the flesh, is now
taken off them, and spent, as to the drift, and course of it, in the Service of
God, for the Pleasing, and Glorifying of him, from the impulse of Love; this is
indeed a Holy life. And herein consists the very nature of our Sanctity. And
when a man does but profess to renounce the Devil, the world, and the flesh,
and to give up his heart, and life to God, this is a Profession of Holiness.
God is both on the title of Creation, Preservation, and Redemption, or absolute
Lord or Owner, and we are not our own but his! And therefore we must give to
God the things that are Gods, and Glorify him in our Souls, and bodies, which
are his, 1 Cor. 6 19, 20. As we are his Own, so he will have his Own, and be
served by his Own: Do not imagine that you have any title to your selves, or
propriety in your selves; but without any more ado, make a full, unreserved,
absolute resignation of your selves, of your understandings, and of your wills,
of your bodies, and of your names, and of every pennyworth of your estates, to
God, from whom, and for whom you have them. Think not that you have power to
dispose of your selves, or of any thing that you have. Ask not flesh and blood,
what life you shall lead, or what mind or will you shall be of: But ask God, to
whom you do belong. Ask not your carnal selves, what you shall do with any of
your estates, but ask God, and then ask Conscience, which is the way that God
would have me use it in, that is, which way may I use it to be most serviceable
to God? And that resolve upon. No service that you do to God, will prove you
Sanctified, unless you have heartily, and absolutely given up, and devoted your
selves to him; and he that gives up himself, must needs give up all that he
has with himself. For he cannot keep it for himself (ultimately) when even
himself is given up to God. Though you be not bound to give all that you have
to the poor, nor all to the Church, nor to deny your own bodies, or families
their due supplies, yet must it all be given up to God, even that which you
make use of for your selves, and families: For as you are given up to God your
selves, so you must feed your selves as his, and cloth your selves, and your
families as his, to fit your selves, and them for his Service, and not as your
own, for the satisfying of your flesh. Thus it is that all comes to be pure to
the pure, Sanctified to them that are themselves first Sanctified: because when
you feed your self, you do but feed a Servant of God, that is Consecrated to
him, and separated from things common, and unclean. And even as the Tithes, and
Offerings, that were given for the food, and maintenance of the Priests, and
Levites, were called the Lords Portion, and Holy to the Lord, because they were
their portion that were separated to his Altar; Even so that which is necessary
to fit you for Gods Service, while you use it to that very end, is Sanctified
in your Sanctification, and is Holy to God; for all his Saints are a Holy
Nation, a Royal Priesthood, to offer up acceptable sacrifice to him. And thus,
whether you eat, or drink, or what ever you do, you must do all to the Glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. For Of him, and Through him, and To him are all things, and
therefore to him must be the Glory for ever, Romans 11. 36. God who is the End of
your hearts, and lives, must be the End of every action of them, unless you
will step out of the way of Order, and Safety, and Holiness. For every action
that is not from God, and by God, and for God, is contrary to the nature of
true Sanctification. If then you would be Christians indeed, be heartily
willing that God should have his own. Understand what an excellent honor, and
priveledge, and happiness it is to you to be his. If his Right to you will not
move you, let your own necessity, and benefit at least move you, to give up
your selves, and all you have to God. Bring you hearts to the bar, and plead
the Cause of God with them, and convince them of Gods title to them, and how
sinfully they have robbed him of his own all this while: Have your days and
hours, your wealth and interest, been used purposely for God as his own! O what
abundance be there, that in word, and confident profession, do give up
themselves, and all to God, and yet in the Use of themselves, and all, do
plainly show that it is no such matter; but they dissembled with God, and yet
never knew so much by themselves. How little do they use for God, when they
have with seeming devotion resigned all to him? If a Lord, or Knight, or
Gentleman, of 4000l, or 3000l a year, or 400l, or 300l a year, were to show the
accomts of all his expenses, how much of all this should you find expended for
God, when they have acknowledged that all is his? One would think by their
lives, that they look to be saved by robbing God, and confessing the robbery;
by saying that all is Gods, while they allow him next to nothing.

The devoted, resigned, Sanctified Soul, has the true principle of all
obedience, and that which will do much to repel all temptations, and carry him
through the greatest straits and trials. If I am not my own, I need not be over
solicitous for my self, but may expect that he that owes me should care for
me: Nor do I need to use any sinful shifts for my own preservation. If I have
nothing of my own, what need I to sin, for the saving of any thing? What need
I to venture upon unwarrantable means, to preserve either credit, or goods, or
life? It is Self, and Own, that are the root of all sin, the heart of the old
man, and the seed of Hell: Nothing else is pleaded against God, and our
Salvation. If the flesh would have you abuse Gods Creatures, you must remember
they are not your own. If the Devil would entice you to sin against God,
either for the Geting, or Keeping of any Creature, it would easily repel the
temptations, were you but rightly sensible, that nothing is your own: For God
has no need that you should sin, to get Riches, or Honors, for him. If you
are called to let go your houses, or lands, or friends, or lives, or to deliver
up you bodies, to the flames, did you but rightly take them as none of your
own, how easy would it be. You can be content that another man give his goods,
or life it self to God, when ever God requires it: but your own you cannot be
content to part with; and that because it is your own, But if you had rightly
resigned all to God, and took not your selves, or any thing for your own, but
looked upon your selves, and all as Gods, the greatest works of obedience, or
suffering, would be much more easy to you; and you would have little
difficulty, or hindrance in your way. Self denial is but Sanctification it
self; denominated from the wrong End, and Principle, which we forsake. And
where self is denied, and dead, what is there left to draw us from God, or
stand up against him, in any part of our lives. So much interest as self has
in you, so much the world, and the Devil has in you. And nothing is more
proper to a miserable Hypocrite, then deep Reserves of life, or worldly things
to themselves, while they seem to give up all to God.

O happy Soul, that is wrought to this sincerity, by the Spirit of Grace! to
say unfeinedly, O Lord I devote, and resign my self wholly unto thee! I am not
my own, nor desire any further to be, then to be thine: I have nothing that is
my own, nor desire to have any thing that shall not be thine. Happy and truly
wise is that man, that keeps as constant, and faithful a reckoning, how he
lays out himself, and all that he has for God, as a faithful Steward does,
of his receivings, and layings out for his Masters use. Every penny that is
reserved from God, is the fuel of sin, and a Sacrifice to the Devil, and the
flesh; and if it be pardoned to the truly penitent, by the Sacrifice of Christ,
that is no thanks to us, that would else have made it the fuel of Hell. God is
not so careless of us, or his Mercies, but that he keeps an exact account of
all that we have from him, and will require an account of our improvement of
all: Not only requiring his Own again, but his own with advantage, Matthew. 25
27. Why else did he give us such leisure, and ability to improve it? I can
never forget what a sinful thought was once in my mind, which I will venture
to confess, because it may possibly be the case of others, that so they may
beware. I hearing of some that used to lay by the tenth part of their yearly
comings in for charitable uses, I purposed to do so too, and thought it a fair
proportion; But since I have perceived what a vile and wicked thought that was,
to offer to cut out a scantling for God, or give him a limited share of his
own, or say that so much he shall have, and no more. Though we cannot say that
God must have all in any one kind of service only; either only for the Church,
or only for the poor, or only for public uses; yet must we resolve, that in
one way or other he must have all; and the particular proportions to the poor,
or Church, or other uses, must be assigned by truly Sanctified prudence,
considering which way it may be most serviceable to God. I must relieve my own
family, or kindred, if they want: but not because they are my own, but because
God has commanded me, and so has made it a part of my obedience: But if I see
where I may do more service to God, by relieving a stranger, and that God does
more require it, I must yet prefer them before all the kindred that I have in
the world. When the Christian pattern was set us by the Primitive Church, Acts
2. and 4. They sold all, and laid down the whole price at the Apostles feet,
which was not distributed to their natural kindred only, but to all the poor
Christians, that had no other relation to them, even as every one had need. And
as it is the loving of our Spiritual Brethren in Christ, that is made the sign
of our translation from death to life, so is it the relieving of Christ in
these his Members, that is, the relieving them, because they are his Members,
that is made the very matter of our Cause in the last Judgment, and the ground
of the sentence of life, or death, Matthew. 25. I must provide for my own body,
and you must provide for your children, but that is (as I said before) not as I
am my own, nor as your children are your own; but as I am a Servant of Christ,
that must be supported in his Service, or as your selves, and yours, are put
under your care, and duty by God. So that I may give it to my self, or others,
when I can truly say, I do but use it principally for God, and think that the
principal Service I can do him by it: but I may neither take to my self, nor
give to any that are nearest to me, any more then God commands, or his
Service does require. When you and yours have your daily bread, (which also
must be used for him) you must not go to flesh and blood, but to God, to ask
which way you shall dispose of the remainder. This is a strange Doctrine to the
unsanctified world; but that is because they are unsanctified. And it is a
Doctrine that a worldly Hypocrite is loath to believe, and understand; but that
is because of Carnality, and Hypocrisy, that always deals with God, like
Ananias and Saphira, lying to the Holy Ghost, and giving God but half, (and
few so much as half) when they daily confess that all is from him, and should
be his, and pretend to be wholly devoted to him. There are few men so bad, but
will spare God something, rather then go to Hell: But indeed this is not to
devote it to God, but to use it for themselves, thinking by their Sacrifices,
to stop the mouth of Justice, and to please God by a part, when they have
displeased him in the rest. I much fear (and not without apparent cause) that
abundance among us, that think themselves Christians, do worship, and serve
God, but as some Indians are said to offer sacrifice to the Devil, not for any
love they have to him, or his service, but for fear he should hurt them. And
there are few Hyporcites but will pretend it is from very love.

O Sirs, it is a greater matter to resign, and give up your selves, and all you
have to God, and heartily to quit all claim to your selves, and all things,
then many a thousand self-deluding professors do imagine. Many look at this,
but as some high extraordinary strein of Piety, and the Papists almost
appropriate it to a few that live in Monastical orders, when indeed the
sincerity of this Resignation, and Dedication, is the very sincerity of
Sanctification it self.

And let me tell you, that the Unfeigned Convert that attains to this, has not
only plucked up the Root of sin, (though all of us have too many strings of it
left) nor only stopped up the spring of temptation, and got the surest evidence
of his uprightness, but also is got himself into the safest, and most
comfortable state. For when he has abso^ulutely resigned himself, and all to
God, how confidently may he expect that God should accept him, and use him as
his own; and how comfortably may he commit himself, and his cause, and all good
affairs to God, as knowing that God cannot be negligent, and careless of his
own. It Is an Argument that may make us confident of success, when we can say as
David, Psalm. 119. 94. I am thine, save me. Isa. 63. 19. Even Christ himself
does ingratiate his Elect with the Father on this account, I^h. 17. 6, 9, 10.
Thine they were, and thou gave them me: I pray for them: I pray not for the
world, but for them which thou have given me; for they are thine: and all mine
are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. And indeed by
resigning all to God, it is the more our own; that is, we have unspeakably more
of the benefit of it, and so there is no way to make it our own, but by
quitting it absolutely up to God: This is the mystery that the world will not
learn, but God will teach it all that shall be saved by the Spirit, and by
Faith, Matthew. 16. 24, 25, 26. Then Jesus said to his Disciples, If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me: For
whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life
for my sake shall find it. Me thinks a man that has time, and strength, and
money, should long to be disbursing all for God, that he might put it in the
surest hands, and it may be out of danger; yea that it may be set to the most
honest, and profitable usery. For when God has it, from the dedication of an
upright heart, it is sure: but till God have it, is in hazard; and all that he
has not is lost, and worse then lost. When it is in our hands, thieves may
steal it, bad Servants, or unadvised Children may consume it, and our own
thievish flesh may steal it worst of all, and consume it on our lusts; or if
our Children consume it not, their Children may: Or if they save it, they may
lose it most of all, by feeding their pride, and fleshly minds by it: But if
once it be in Gods hands, it is safe. You can make no comfortable account of
one penny, nor of one hours time, unless you can tell God that he had it
himself; that you used it for him: Or that you live to him in the maine, and
that the rest is pardoned. O that those Parents understood this Doctrine, that
had rather strenghten the fetters, and temptations of their Children with it,
and help them into that state which few are saved in, then to devote and use
their estates for God. Though Christ has told them how hardly the Rich are
saved, and how few such come to Heaven, yet what care is taken to leave their
Children rich; and how little to further the Work of God, or their own
accounts, that they may hear the Well done, good and faithful servant: thou
have been faithful over a few things: I will make thee Ruler over many things:
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Matthew. 25. 21, 23.

O Sirs, if you would be good husbands, and provident indeed for your Souls,
see that your hearts prove not false to you in this, and make no secret
reserves for your selves, but that God have your selves first, and all things
with your selves; as Christ first gives himself to you, and all things with
himself, Romans 8. 32. Never think your hearts right, but when they can readily
say, We are not our own, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Think not that you come aright to God in
any duty, if you do not heartily devote your selves to him, and entreat him to
accept you, as wholly his, who neither are, nor desire to be your own: and
entreat him accordingly to use you for himself. Say not that any thing is your
Own that you possess, Acts 4. 32. In respect to God, and a Communion of
Charity, though it be your own (as a Talent that God does entrust you with) in
respect of men, by a Legal Propriety.

And then trust God boldly, for you are his Own: Serve him cheerfully, and
draw near him believingly; for you are his Own. In poverty, sickness,
temptations, and the approach of death, rejoice in him confidently, for you are
his Own. Into his hands commend your departing Spirits; for they are his Own.
What reason of distrustful fears can you now have? Do you fear lest God will
yet hate you? why remember that no man ever yet hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.
29. Nay, for shame, think not the blessed God to be worse then the wicked
world: and Christ faith of the world, Joh, 15. 19 If ye were of the world, the
world would love his own. And will not God then Love his Own do you think? And
if you are willing to be his Own, Christ is certainly willing that you should
be his Own; and will Own all that Own not themselves, but him. He calls his
Own sheep by name, and leads them out; and when he puts forth his Own
sheep he goes before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice,
Joh. 10. 3. 4. And Joh. 13. 1. Having loved his Own which are in the world, to
the End he loved them.

If you are but truly willing to be his Own People, he is certainly willing to
be your Own Savior and your Own God, Not that you can have such a propriety in
him, as he has in you. But in these Relations he will be your Own; and Glory,
and Help, and Salvation shall be yours. And you may well conclude that God,
even our Own God, shall bless us, Psalm. 6. 7, 6. There is much comfort may be
fetched from that in Luke 15. 31. Though Parables must not be strecht too far:
Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine.

And upon this ground it is, that we have the greater encouragement, to believe
that God accepts of our very Infants themselves; because it is his Will that
they should be Devoted, engaged, and dedicated to him: And that which he would
have us dedicate and offer to him, he will surely accept in that Relation to
which he would have it offered.

I beseech you therefore Remember what it is to be truly Converted: It is to be
called from things common, and unclean, and separated to God: It is to be
brought nigh to him, as the Children of his Household, that are themselves, and
all that they have in his hands: It is to be taken off your Selves, and your
Own, and to lose your selves, and all you have in God, by the most gainful
loss, lest indeed you lose your selves, and all, while you persuade your selves
you save, or gain. It is a taking God in Christ for your All, and so being
content to have Nothing but him, and for him. It is a changing of your old
Master self, for God a better Master: and your old work, which was
self-seeking, and self-pleasing, to self-denial, and to the seeking, and
pleasing of God. See now that this be done, and that your treacherous hearts
hide nothing for themselves, as Rachel under pretense of necessity, hid her
Idols, but say, Here I am, to be thine, O Lord, and to do thy Will.

More I would have said on this point, but that I have written of it already,
in a Sermon on 1 Cor 6. 19, 20. Of the Absolute Dominion of Christ, and our
self-resignation; which I desire you here to peruse, to set this further home.

DIRECT. VIII. My next Advice that the Work of Conversion may not miscarry, is
this: Take heed, lest you mistake a mere change of your Opinions, and outward
profession, and behavior, for a true Saving change.

Wicked Opinions must be changed, and so must evil professions, and outward
practices: But if no more be changed, you are wicked still. I have great cause
to fear that this is the most common damning decit, that uses to befall
professors of Godliness, and that it is the case of most Hypocrites, in the
Church. A man may be brought to hold any Truth in Scripture as an Opinion; and
so far be sound, and Orthodox; and yet never be indeed a sound Believer, nor
have his Heart possessed with the life and power of those Sacred Truths. It Is
one thing to have a man's Opinion changed, and another thing to have his Heart
renewed, by the change of his Practical Estimation, Resolutions, and
Dispositions. It Is one thing to turn from loose profane Opinions, to strict
Opinions; and to think the Godly are indeed in the right, and that their case
and way is safest, and best: and it is another thing to be made One of them in
Newness, and Spirituality of heart, and life. A lively Faith differs much from
Opinion; and that which is in unsanctified men, which we call Faith, and is a
kind of Faith indeed, it is but a mere Opinionative Faith: I call it an
Opinionative Faith, because it differs from Saving Faith, much like as Opinion
does from Knowledge. Merely speculative it is not: for some intention of
practice there is: But the Practical Intention of such persons, differs from
the Predominant Intentions of the Sanctified, even as their Opiniative Faith
differs from the Saving Faith.

And it is no wonder if there be abundance of these Opiniative believers in the
world: For the Truths of God have very great Evidence, especially some of them;
and men are yet men, and consequently reasonable Creatures; and therefore have
some aptitude to discern the Evidence of Truth: Some Truths will compel Assent
even from the unwilling: Many a thousand ungodly men, believe that to be True,
which they would not have to be True, if they could help it; because they do
not heartily take it to be Good in respect to themselves. Truth as Truth, is
the Natural Object of the Understanding; though the same Truth as seeming Evil
to them; may be hated by them that are forced to Assent to it. I know that
sin has much blinded men's Understandings, and that the natural man,
Receives not the things of the Spirit, because they are foolishness to him,
and must be spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But though he cannot Savingly
receive them without the Special illumination of the Spirit, nor Opinionatively
receive them without a common illumination of the Spirit, yet he may have this
Opinionative conviction, and an answerable reformation, by the common Grace of
the Spirit, without the Special Grace. An unsanctified man may have something
more then Nature in him: And every unregenerate man, is not merely, or only
Natural. Many are far convinced, that are far from being Savingly
Converted. I can make you know that you shall die, that you must part with all
your wealth, and fleshly pleasures, and diverse such Truths, whether you will or
not. And one of these Truths does let in many more, that depend upon them. So
that as dark as the minds of natural men are, they yet lie open to many wholesome
Truths.

And as the Understanding is thus far open to Conviction, so the Will it
self, which is the Heart of the old man, will far sooner yield to the
changing of your Opinions then to the saving chang of Heart, and life. It is
not the bare Opinion, that your fleshly interest does fight against, but the
Power, and Practice of Godliness is it; and Opinions as they lead to these.
It Is one thing to be of Opinion, that Conversion is necessary, that sin must
be forsaken, and God preferred before all the world: And its another thing to
be indeed Converted, and to forsake sin, and to prefer God before the world.
It Is a far easier matter to convince a worldling that he should not love the
world, then to cure him of his worldly love: and to convince a drunkard that he
should leave his drunkenness, and the whoremonger, that he should abhor his
lusts, then to bring them to do these things, which they are convinced of. It
will cost them deer (as the flesh accounts it) to deny themselves, and cast
away the sin: but it costeth not so deer to take up the Opinion that these
things should be done. It will cost them deer to be downright for God, and
practically Religious: but they can take up an Opinion that Godliness is the
best, and necessary course, at a cheaper rate. Strict Practices pinch the
flesh, but strict Opinions may stand with its liberty. O what abundance of our
poor neighbors would go to Heaven, that are now in the way to Hell, if an
Opinion that Godliness is the wisest course, would serve the turn. If instead
of Conversion God would take up with an Opinion that they ought to turn; and if
instead of a Holy, Heavenly life, God would accept of an Opinion that such are
the happiest men, that live such a life; and if instead of temperance, and
meekness, and self-denial, and forgiving wrongs, God would accept of an
Opinion, and Confession, that they should be temperate, and meek, and
self-denying, and should forbear others, and forgive them; then O what
abundance would be saved, that are now in little hope of Salvation! If instead
of a diligent life of Holiness, and good works, it would serve turn to lie
still, and be of a good Opinion, that men should strive, and labor for
Salvation, and lay out all they have for God, how happy then were our Towns,
and Countries, in comparison of what they are.

I am afraid this deceit will be the undoing of many, that they take a change
of their Opinions for a true Conversion. Have not some of you been formerly of
the mind, that the best way is to eat, and drink, and be merry, and venture
your Souls, and follow your worldly business, and never trouble your selves
with any deep, and searching thoughts about your Spiritual state, or your
Salvation? Have you not thought that this diligent godliness, is but a needless
strictness, and precisness: and have you not since been Convinced of your
error, and perceived, that this is the wisest course, which you before thought
to be needless, and thereupon have betaken you to the company of the goldy, and
set upon a course of outward duties; and now you think that you are made New
Creatures, and that this is Regeneration, and the work is done? I fear lest
this be all the Conversion that many forward professors are acquainted with!
But woe to them that have no more.

And because the face of our present times, does plainly show the commonness,
and prevalency of this disease, and because it is a matter of so great
concernment to you, I shall here give you (but as briefly as I well can) some
signs by which a true Conversion may be known from this mere Opinionative
Change.

1. The true Convert is brought to an unfeigned Hatred of the whole Body of
sin; and especially of those secret, or beloved sins, that did most
powerfully captivate him before, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 3, 5. Col. 3. 3, 5, 7,
8. But the Opinionative Convert is still Carnal, and unmortified, and inwardly
at the heart, the interest of the flesh is habitually predominant. He is not
brought to an unreconcileable hatred to the great master sins that ruled him,
and lay deepest; but only has eased the top of his stomach, and cropped off some
of the branches, of the tree of death. The thorns of worldly desires, and
cares, are still rooted in his heart; and therefore no wonder if they choke the
seed of wholesome Truth, and there be a greater Harvest for the Devil then for
God, Gal. 5. 24. chap. 16. 19. and 6. 4, 8. Romans 8. 5. Matthew. 13. 22.

2. Another sign that follows upon this, is, that the sound Convert does carry
on the course of his Obedience, in a way of self-denial, as living in a
continual conflict with his own flesh, and expecting his comfort, and Salvation
to come in upon the conquest: And therefore he can suffer for Christ, as well
as be found in cheaper obedience, and he dare not ordinarily refuse the most
costly service. For the spoils of his fleshly desires are his pray, and Crown
of glorying in the Lord, Luke 14. 27, 33. Gal. 5. 17, 24. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Luke 9.
23, 24. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Gal. 6. 14.

But the Opinionative Convert still lives to his carnal-self: and therefore
secretly, at least, seeks himself, and lays hold on present things, as the
true Convert lays hold on Eternal Life. The Truths of God being received but
into his Opinion, do not go deep enough to conquer self, and to take down his
great Idol, nor make him go through fire, and water, and to serve God with the
best, and honor him with his substance, much less with his sufferings, and
death: He has something that he cannot spare for God, Matthew. 13. 21. Luke 18.
22, 23, 24.

3. The Sound Convert has taken God for his Portion, and Heaven for that sure
and full felicity, which he is resolved to venture upon: That Is it that he has
set his heart, and hopes upon, and thither tends the drift of his life, Col. 3.
1, 2, 3, 4. Matthew. 6. 20, 21.

But he that is changed only in his Opinions, had never such sure apprehensions
of the life to come: nor so full a confidence in the Promises of God, as to set
his heart unfeignedly upon God, and make him truly Heavenly-minded. He may have
a Heavenly tongue, but he has an Earthly heart. A bare Opinion, be it never so
true, will not raise men's hearts so high, as to make their Affections, and the
very design, and business of their lives to be Heavenly, Phil. 3. 18, 19, 20.
Romans 16, 17, 18. Romans 8. 5.

4. The Sound Convert has seen the vileness of himself, in the sinfullness of
his heart, and life, and the misery thereby deserved; and so is a sincerly
humbled, self-accusing man.

But the Opinionist is commonly unhumbled, and well conceited of himself, and a
self-justifying Pharisee; unless it be that self-accusing will cost him no
disgrace, and he take it up as a custom, or that which may bring him into the
repute of being humbled, and sincere. For his Opinion will not search, and
pierce his heart, nor batter down his self-exalting thoughts, nor root up the
master sin of Pride. These are too great works for an Opinion to perform. And
therefore you shall hear him more in the excusing of his sin, the magnifying
of himself, or the stiff maintaining of his own conceits, then in unfeigned
self-abasing, Romans 12. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. and 3. 18. 2 Cor, 10. 12. Luke 16.
15.

5. The Sound Convert is so acquainted with the defects, and sins, and
necessities of his own Soul, that he is much taken up at home, in his studies,
and cares, and censures, and his daily work: The acting, and strengthening of
Grace, the subduing of corruption, and his daily walk with God, are much of his
employment: Above all keeping, he keeps his Heart, as knowing that thence are
the issues of life. He cannot have while to spy out the faults of others, and
meddle with their affairs, where duty binds him not, as others can do; because
he has so much to do at home, Gal. 6. 3, 4. Prove 4. 23.

But the Opinionist is most employed abroad, and about mere notions, and
Opinions, but he is little employed in such heart-searching, or heart-observing
work. His light does not pierce so deep as to show him his heart, and the work
that is there to be necessarily done. As the change is little upon his Heart,
so his employment is little there. He is little in bewailing his secret
defects, and corruptions; and little in keeping his Souls accounts; and little
in secret striving with his heart, to work it into communion with God, and into
a Spiritual lively fruitful frame. He is forward to aggravate the sins of
others, and oft-times severe enough in censuring them: But he is a very gentle
censurer of himself, and a patient man with his own corruptions, and puts the
best construction upon all that is his own. He has much labor perhaps in
shaping his Opinions; but little for the humbling, and Sanctifying his heart,
by the power of the Truth.

6. And as the difference lies thus constantly in the Heart, so it is usually
manifested by the tongue, Matthew. 12. 34. The Sound Convert is most desirous to
discourse of those great, and saving truths, which his very heart has taken
in, and which he has found to be the seed of God, for his Regeneration, and
the Instruments of that Holy, and happy change, that is made upon him: He
feels most savor, and life in these great, and most Necessary points, which
formed the Image of God upon him: and upon these he daily feeds and lives. Read
Joh. 17. 3. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 2. 2. Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Acts 26. 22, 23. In these Scriptures, you may find what points they
were that the greatest Saints did study, and live upon.

But the Opinionist is most forward to discourse of mere Opinions; and to feed
upon the air of notions, and controversies of lesser moment. For one hours
Holy, Heavenly, experimental, heart-searching discourse, that you shall have
from him, you shall have many, and many hours discourse of his Opinions. I mean
it indifferently of all his Opinions, whether true or false. For though
falsehoods cannot be fit food for the Soul, yet Truths themselves, also may be
made of little service to them. A man may be a mere Opinionist, that has true
Opinions, as well as he that has false. Almost all the free and zealous
discourse of these men, on matters of Religion, is about their several sides,
and parties, and Opinions: If they be set upon a point, especially wherein they
seem to themselves, to be wiser then others, they have a fire of zeal for it
in their breasts, that makes them desirous to be propagating it to others. About
the Orders, and Ceremonies of the Church; about the forms of Prayer, and the
accidents of worship; about Infant Baptism, or other such controversies in
Religion, is the freest of their discourse.

Yea, you may perceive much of the difference even in the very manner of their
conference. A Serious Christian, even when he is necessitated to speak of lower
controverted points, yet does it in a Spiritual manner, as one that more
savoureth higher Truths, and makes a Holy, and Heavenly life his end, even in
these lower matters; and deals about such controversies in a practical manner,
and in order to the growth of Holiness.

But the Opinionists, even when they speak of the most weighty Truths, do speak
of them but as Opinions; and when they discourse of God, of Christ, of Grace,
of Heaven, it is but as they discourse of a point in Philosophy, or little
better. They go not through the shell to the kernel: they look after the Truth,
but they have but little relish of the Goodness.

The like may be said of their reading, and hearing of Sermons. The sound
Convert feels life, spirits in that which is little savory to the Opinionist.
It is one thing in a Sermon, or Text that is pleasant to a true Christian, and
another thing usually that is most pleasant to the Opinionist. The true
Christian delights in, and feeds on the inward life of Spiritual Doctrine,
and the Good which they offer him; that is, indeed, it is upon God, and Christ
himself, that he is feasting his Soul in reading, and hearing: For this is the
Soul of all, without which, letters, and words are but a carcass. But the
superficial Opinionist is much more taken up, either with the History, or the
Elegancy of Speech, or with the rational light of the discourse, still sticking
in the bark, and savouring not Christ, and the Father in all. As a man that
reads the deeds, or lease of his own Lands, delights in one thing; and a cleark
that reads the same, or the like in a book of Presidents, for his learning,
delights in another thing. So is it in this case.

7. And hence is follows, that they are several sorts of duties, and exercises,
usually that these several sorts of persons are most addicted to. The sound
Convert is most addicted to those Spiritual means, that tend most to the
strengthening of his Faith, and warming his heart with the Love of God, and
promoting Holiness, and destroying sin. But the Opinionist delights most in
those means that tend to ^^rnish him with speculative Knowledge, and discourse,
and to satisfy his fancy, or curious mind. The sound Convert is much addicted
to Prayer, even in secret, and to Heavenly Meditations, and gracious disourse.
But the Opinionist is much more addicted to reading Histories, or
Controversies, or dogmatical Divinity, or Civil, and Political matters. The
sound Convert savoureth best those Preachers, and Books, that speak the most
weighty, Spiritual Truths, in the most weighty, Spiritual manner, in Power, and
Demonstration of the Spirit: But the Opinionist relisheth those Preachers, and
Books most, that either speak curiously to please the ear, or exactly, and
learnedly to please the natural intellect, or that speak for the Opinions, or
partly that he is addicted to: But others, he has less mind of.

8. Moreover the sound Christian lays out most of his Zeal, Affections, and
Endeavors, about the great Essentials of Religion, and that as I said in a
practical manner. But the Opinionist lays out his Zeal upon Opinions; Right
or wrong, it is but as Opinions: Of these he makes his Religion: For these he
contendeth: He loves those best, that are of his own Opinion, though there be
nothing of the special Image of God upon his Soul, Or if he love a true
Christian, it is not so much for his Holiness, and Spirituality, as because he
is of his mind in those matters of Opinion. Hence it is that he is usually a
bitter censurer of those that are not of his Opinion, how upright soever they
may be: His very esteem of men, and love to them is partial, and factious, to
those that are of his Mind, and Sect: A Papist will esteem, and love men of the
Popish Sect, and an Anabaptist will esteem, and love men of that Sect most, yea
a Protestant, if he be an Opinionist; does esteem of men, and love them as a
Sect: Whereas the true Christian, as he is truly Catholic, and of the
Catholic Church, which is not confined to Papists, no nor Protestants, so he
has truly Catholic affections, and loves a Christian, as a Christian, a Godly
man, as Godly; yea if he saw more serious Godliness in one that is not of his
Opinion in lesser things, yet would he love him more then one that is in such
matters of his Opinion, that is ungodly, or of more doubtful Piety. For as it
is God in Christ that he principally loves, so it is Christ that he admireth
in his Members; and so much of Christ as he sees in any, so much are his
special affections toward them.

9. Ordinarily the mere Opinionist will Sacrifice the very Ends of the Gospel,
and the honor, and success of the great fundamental Truths of God, to the
interest of those Opinions, which he has in a singular manner to his Own. He
will rather hinder the propagation of the common Truths, and the Conversion of
the ignorant, then he will silence his Opinions, or suffer them to lose any
advantages with the world. Hence it is that we cannot prevail with the
Papists, to silence a while the differences between us, and them, till we have
taught their ignorant (in Ireland, and other barbarous parts) the knowledge of
those Truths that all are agreed in. Nor can we get many Anabaptists, or any
such Sect, that is engaged in a division, to forbear their Opinions, till we
have endeavored ^o lay the necessary grounds, on which all must build, that
will be saved. But though it be apparent to the world, that their disputes, and
contentions do exceedingly harden the ignorant, and ungodly against all
Religion, and hinder their Conversion, and Salvation, yet will they go on in
the unseasonable, intemperate, bruting of their conceits, and will not be
persuaded to agree on those terms, for the managing of differences, as most
tend to secure the interest of Christ, and his Gospel in the maine. If an
Opinionist be for the Truth, he is usually without much zeal for it, because
that Nature does not befriend the great Spiritual Truths of the Gospel, so
much as it does errors, and private conceits. But if he be of Erroneous
Opinions, he is usually very zealous for them: For Corrupted Nature, and Self,
and Satan, (and the world oft-times) do more befriend these, and furnish him
with a Zeal for them, and blow the coal. The counterfeit Angel of Light, is
very ordinarily also a spirit of heat, and great activity: not a reviving fire,
nor a refining fire, but a consuming fire, devouring Christian Love, and
meekness, and patience, and therewith the Church, and Truth of God, so far as
it: can prevail. For lesser matters, that minister Questions, such men can say
by that which tends to Godly Edifying in Faith, 1 Timothy 1. 4. Yea that Charity,
which is the very End of the Commandment, out of a pnre Heart, a good
Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, verse. 5. From these they swerve, and turn
aside to vain jangling: often times desiring to be Teachers of such thigs, in
which they understand not what they say, nor whereof they speak, verse. 6, 7.
Consenting not to the wholesome Words of Christ, and the Doctrine which is
according to Godliness, they teach otherwise, being proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about questions, and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputing of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the Truth, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. Yea they sometime take their
Opinions, or their worldly gain that they often aim at, to be instead of
Godliness: And think, that to be Godly, is to he of their mind, and way. They
use to strive about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers,
and their vain bablings increase to more ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2. 14, 16.

But the True Convert looks principally to the main: He loves every known Truth
of God; but in their Order, and accordingly to their worth and weight: He will
not for his own Opinions, wilfully do that which shall hazard the main, or
hinder the Gospel, and the saving of men's Souls. Though he will not be false to
any Truth, yet he will avoid foolish, and unlearned questions, knowing that
they do gender strife; and the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle to all men, and meekly instruct opposers; following Righteousness,
Faith, Charity, Peace with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, Tim.
2. 22, 23, 24, 25.

10. Lastly, True Converts are steadfast, but Opinionists are usually mutable,
and unconstant. The sound Convert receives the greatest Truths, and receives
the Goodness as well as the Truth; and takes it not only into the Head, but
into the Heart, and gives it deep rooting: He closes with God as his only
felicity, and with Christ as his only Refuge, and Redeemer, and with Heaven as
the sure everlasting Glory, to which the world is but a molehill, or a
dungeon. No wonder then if this man be steadfast, and unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, that knows his Labor is not in vain in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

But the Opinionist, either fasteneth on smaller matters, or else holds these
great matters but as bare Opinions, and therefore they have no such interest in
his heart, as to stablish him against shaking trials, and temptations: For two
sort^ there are of these Opinionists: the on^ sort have no Zeal for their own
Opinions; because they are but Opinions: And these are time-servers; and will
change as the King, or their Landlords change; and fit their Opinions to their
worldly Ends. The other sort have a burning Zeal for their Opinions; and these
use to wander from one Opinion to another, not able to resist the, subtilty of
seducers; but are taken with fair, and plausible reasonings; not able to see
into the heart of the cause. These are as Children t^ssed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight, and cunning
craftiness of men, whereby they lie in weight to deceive Ephesians. 4. 14. When with
great confidence they have held one sort of Opinions a while, and railed
against those that were not of their mind, ere long they will themselves
forsake them, and take up another way, and be as consident in that, and take no
warning by the experience of their former deceit. And thus they go often from one
Opinion to another, till at last finding themselves deceived so often, some of
them cast off all Religion, and think there is no certainty to be found in any:
Suspecting Religion, when they should have suspected their false hearts: And
all this comes to pass because they never received the Truth in the love of it,
that they might be Sanctified, and Saved by it, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. Nor ever
gave it deep entertainment in their hearts, that it might thoroughly Convert
them; but took it as a bare Opinion into the brain to polish their tongues, and
outsides, and deceive themselves as much as others.

And thus I have showed you the difference between a sound Convert, and an
Opinionist, or one that has but a overly superficial Change, that you may see
which of these is your own condition.

To return now to my Advice, and Exhortation, I entreat every person, that
reads, or hears these words, to see that they stick not in an Opinionative
Conversion. To which End I further desire you 1. To consider that it is a
higher matter, that Christ came into the world for, then to change men's bare
Opinions; and it is a higher matter that the Gospel is intended for, and that
Ministers are sent to you for: For it is more then a corruption of men's
Opinions, that siane has brought upon you; and therefore it is a deeper
disease that must be cured. The Work of Christ by his Gospel, is no less, then
to fetch you off all that which flesh and blood accounts your Happiness, and to
unite you to himself, and make you Holy, as God is Holy, and to give you a new
Nature, and make you as the dwellers, or Citizens of Heaven, while you walk on
Earth, Phil. 3. 20, 21. And these are greater matters then the changing of a
Party, or Opinion. The Holy Ghost himself must dwell in you, and work in you,
and employ your Soul, and life for God, that you may study him, and love him,
and live to him here, and live with him for ever. Do but think well of the
Ends, and meaning of the Gospel, and how much greater matters it drives at, and
then you will see that there is no taking up with an Opinionative Religiousness.

2. Keep company, if it be possible with the most Sober, Spiritual, and
Heavenly professors, that will be drawing you to the observation of your own
heart, and life, and opening to you the riches of the Love of Christ, and
winning up your affections to God, and Heaven: And be not the companions of
unexperienced wranglers, that have no other Religion, but a Zeal for their
Opinions, and will endeavor rather to make you like Satan, then like God, by
possessing your minds with malice, and bitter thoughts of your brethren, and
employing your tongues in reproaches, and vain strivings, and making you
firebrarnds in the places where you live: Neither be companions of them that
hold the Truth no deeper then Opinion: For though some such may be useful to
you in their places, yet if you have not more edifying familiars, your danger
will be very great, lest you should let go the life of Religion, and take up
with mere notions, and formalities as they.

3. When you have considered, that every Truth of God is a Message to your
Hearts, as well as to your Heads, and has a work of God to do upon them, look
after that work; and when you have heard, or read a Truth, go down into your
Hearts, and see what it has done there: And if you find not in your Will, and
Resolutions, and Affections, the Image, and fruits of the Truth you have heard,
fetch it up again, and ruminate upon it, and do not think you have received it,
or done with it, till this be done; yea take it but as lost, and sinfully
rejected, if it have not done you some good at the very Heart.

4. Also be sure that you Practice all practical Truths, upon the first
opportunity, as soon as you have heard them. Imprison them not in
unrighteousness. Cast them not out in forgetfulness; use not a Lecture of
Divinity as if it were a lesson of Music, or a mere Philosophical, or
Historical discourse. Read not the Doctrine of Salvation, and the Promises of
Heaven, and the forewarnings of everlasting misery, as you read a common story,
or a groundless conjecture in an Almanac: But as a Message from God, which
tells you where you must dwell for ever, and as a Direction sent from Heaven to
teach you the way thither. Fall to work then, and practice what you know, if
you would be Christians indeed. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own selves. For the Opinionative hearer, sees but a slight
appearance of the Truth, as a man that looks on his face in a glass, which he
quickly forgets: But he that is a Sound Believer, and practiser, and not only
an Opinionative forgetful hearer, is the man that shall be blessed in his deed,
Jam. 1. 22, 23, 24, 25. Opinion without Practice, is building on the Sand; but
hearing, and sound Believing, and doing, is building upon the Rock, where the
building will stand after all assaults. Matthew. 7. 26, 27, 28. An Opinionist
does but seem to be Religious, while he keeps his reigning sins, and
therefore his Religion is in vain: but the Practical Religion, is the pure, and
undefiled Religion, Jam. 1. 26, 27. Hearty obedience will not only show that
your Religion is deeper then mere Opinion, but it will also advance it to a
greater purity, and root it more deeply then it was before: A man that has
studied the Art of Navigation in his closet, may talk of it, almost as well as
he that has been at sea; but when he comes to practice it, he will find that
he is far to seek: But let this man go to sea, and join practice, and
experience to his Theory, and then he may have a knowledge of the right kind. So
if a man that has only read over Military Books, would be a true Soldier, or a
man that has only studied Physic, would be a true Physician, what better way
is there, then to fall to Practice. And so must you, if you would have a
Religion that shall save your Souls; and not only a Religion that will furnish
you with good Opinions, and expressions.

5. Moreover, if you would get above Opinion, be still searching more, and more
after the Evidences, of the ancient fundamental Truths, that you have received;
and lay open your hearts to the power of them. Think it not enough that you
take the Christian Religion for true; but labor after a clearer sight ot its
truth. For you may possibly upon some conjecture take it for a Truth, by bare
Opinion, whenas the sight of fuller Evidences, and a full sight of those
Evidences, might raise you from Opinion to a working, saving Faith.

6. Lastly, take heed lest any thing be suffered to keep possession of your
Hearts, and so to confine the truth to your brain. When the world is kept up
in life, and power, and is nearest the heart, there is no room for the Word
there, but it must float upon the top, and swim in your Opinion; because it can
go no deeper, your lusts, and profits having possession before it. The Word can
never go to the heart with unmortified men, but by casting your Idols out of
your hearts; nor will it take rooting in you, but by rooting out the world.

O Sirs, if you knew the misery of a mere Opinionist, you would sure be
persuaded now to practice these Directions, that may raise you higher. An
Opinionist is a deceiver of himself, and often of others; a troubler of the
Church* (...) he have any Zeal for Opinions, and hit (as usually he does) on
the wrong: And when his Religion is right, he is wrong himself, being out of
the way, even when he is in the right way, because he is not right in that
right way: For he does but sit down in it, when he should travail it. A runner
shall not win the prize by being in the right way only, unless he make have.
The knowledge of the Opinionist does but serve to aggravate his sin, and cause
him to be beaten with many stripes; but is not of force to Sanctify his heart
and life, and to save him: Jam. 2. fully shows. Stick not therefore in an
Opinionative Religiousness.

DIRECT. IX My next Direction that your Conversion may prove sound, is this,
Acquaint your Souls by Faith with the Glory of the Everlasting Kingdom, and see
that you make it your Portion, and your End, and from thence let the rest of
your endeavors be animated.

No man can be a sound Christian, that knows not the Ends, and Portion of a
Christian. There is a great deal of difference between the desires of Heaven in
a Sanctified man and an unsanctified. The Believer prizeth it above earth, and
had rather be with God then here (Though death that stands in the way, may
possibly have harder thoughts from him) But to the ungodly there is nothing
seems more desirable then this world: and therefore he only chooses Heaven
before Hell, but not before earth; and therefore shall not have it upon such a
choice. We hear of Gold and Silver mines in the Indies: If you offer a Golden
mountain there, to an English man that has an estate and family here, that
are dear to him; perhaps he will say, I am uncertain whether their Golden
mountains be not mere fictions to deceive men; and if it be true that there are
such things, yet it is a great way thither, and the seas are perilous; and I am
well enough already where I am, and therefore let who will go thither for me, I
will stay at home as long as I can. But if this man must needs be banished out
of England, and had his choice whether he would go to the Golden Islands, or to
dig in a colepit, or live in a wilderness, he would rather choose the better
then the worse. So is it with an ungodly man's desires, in respect to this
world, and that to come. If he could stay here, in fleshly pleasure, for ever,
he would; because he looks at Heaven as uncertain, and a great way off, and the
passage seems to him more troublesome, and dangerous then it is; and he is
where he would be already: But when he sees that there is no staying here for
ever, but death will have him away, he had rather go to Heaven, then to Hell;
and therefore will be Religious, as far as the flesh, and the world will give
him leave, left he should be cast into Hell, when he is taken from the Earth.

But take an English man that is in poverty, and reproach, and has neither
house, nor land, nor friend to comfort him, and let him have the offer of a
Golden Island, and a person of unquestionable skilfullness, and fidelity, that
will promise in short time to bring him safe thither, if he believe this
person, and can put his trust in him, doubtless he will be gone and follow him
over sea and land, and though the passage may somewhat daunt him, yet the
promised possession will carry him through all. So is it with the true
Christian; He is dead to this world, and sees nothing here in which he can be
happy; he is burdened and wearied with sin and suffering; he is firmly
persuaded of the truth of the Gospel, and sees by Faith the world, that is to
flesh invisible, and believes in Jesus Christ who has promised to convey him
safely thither; and therefore he would away; and though he love not death, the
stormy passage, yet he will submit to it, having so sure a Pilot, because he
loves the life which through death he must pass into, and had rather be there
then here.

Such as a man's principal End is, such is the man, and such is the course of
his life. He that takes this world for his Portion, and makes the felicity of
it his end, is a carnal, worldy, unsanctified man, whatever good and godly
actions may come in upon the by. It is he, and only he, that is a sanctified
Believer, who looks on Heaven as his only Portion, and is sailing through the
troublesome Seas of this world, of purpose to come to that desired harbor; not
loving these seas better then the Land of Rest, which he is sailing to; but
patiently and painfully passing through them, because there is no other way to
Glory. As it is the desire of the Land to which he is sailing, that moves the
Mariner or Passenger to do all that he does in his Voyage; and the desire of
his home or journeys End, that moves the travailer all the way; and the desire
of seeing a perfect Building, that moves the Builder in every stroke of his
Work; so it must be the love of God, and the desire after Everlasting
blessedness, that must be the very Engine to move the rest of the affections
and endeavors of the Saints, and must make men resolve on the necessary labor
and patience of Believers. Take off this weight, and all the motions of
Christianity will cease. No man will be at labor and sufferings for nothing,
if he can avoid them. It is a life of Labor, though sweet to the Spirit, yet
tedious to the flesh, which Christianity does engage us in; and there is much
suffering to be undergone; and this to the very last, and to the denial of our
selves; and, if God require it, to the loss of all the comforts of the world:
For no less then forsaking all that we have, will serve to make us Christ's
Disciples. And will any man do this for he knows not what? Will any man forsake
all that he has, unless it be for something better, which may be as sure to
him as that he had, and may make him more happy? Look to it therefore that you
have right and beliving thoughts of Heaven, and that unfeignedly you take it
for your Home and Happiness, and look not for any other Portion. Till you see
so much of the certainty and excellency of Everlasting Glory, as shall prevail
with you to lay out your faithful labor for it, and to be at a point with all
this world, as having laid up your Treasure and Hopes in the world to come, you
have no ground to conclude that you are true Christian Converts.

Seeing therefore that it is Heaven that is the very Reason, the End, the Life
of all your Religion, it follows that you must necessarily understand somewhat
of its excellency, and believe its certainty, and accordingly set your hearts
upon it, and make the attainment of it your daily work, and business in the
world: This is to be a Convert indeed.

Remember therefore first what I told you before wherein the nature of this
Blessedness does consist. I will only name the Essentials of it, that your
apprehensions may be right, and forbear to say much, as being done already.

1. The first thing considerable in our Everlasting Blessedness, will be our
personal Perfection of the whole man; This is in order to the Perfection of our
Everlasting Operations and Enjoyments. Our bodies shall be no more flesh and
blood, nor corruptible, or mortal, or subject to hunger or pain, or weariness,
nor to passions that rebel against the reasonable soul: but they shall be
spiritul bodies, and Immortal, and Incorruptible and Undefiled. Our Souls will
be perfected in their Natural Perfections, and in their Moral. They shall be of
more advanced Understanding, and comprehensive Wisdom then now: Our wills shall
attain to perfect rectitude in a perfect conformity to the Will of God, and
every affection shall be brought to its perfect order and elevation: All sin
shall be done away, whether it were in the understanding, will, affections, or
the actions. The executive power will be answerable to the rest of the
Perfections, and to the blessed work which it has to do: And thus we shall be
like the Angels of God.

2. The next thing considerable in our Blessedness is, our approximation or
approach to God: We shall be admitted into the holiest, and brought as near him
as our natures are capable of, and we are fit for.

3. Moreover, we shall be Members of the new Jerusalem, and receive our Glory
in Communion with that blessed Society, and so as Members contribute to her
Glory.

4. And we shall behold the glorified Person of our Redeemer, and he will be
glorified on us as the fruits of his Victory.

5. And we shall behold the face of the blessed God, and see his wisdom, and
power and glory, and know as we are known. Though we cannot now fully know the
manner, yet in that sense as our Angels are said to behold the face of God,
Mat. 18. 10. we also shall behold it.

6. We shall also enjoy him in the nearest relation, and by the most raised
vigorous affections of our souls: We shall be filled with his Love as full as
we can hold, and we shall abound with perfect Love to him again: And the Joy
that is in his presence, which this Intuition and Everlasting Love will afford
us, is such as no heart is here able to conceive.

7. Being thus furnished, we shall be employed in his perfect Praises, in
singing and rejoicing to him with the heavenly Host, and Magnifying his great
and holy Name.

8. And in all this will the Glory of God shine forth, and he will be admired
in his Saints, 2 These. 1. 10. 11. In us it shall appear how abundant he is in
power, and wisdom, and goodness, in holiness, faithfulness and righteousness.

9. And God himself will be well pleased with us, and with the new Jerusalem
and his glorified Son, and will take complacen^y in this manifestation and
communication of his Glory and of Himself unto his creatures. And this is his
Ultimate End, and should be the highest point of ours. The Revolution has now
brought all to that Center, which is both the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end. His Will is the Fountain or Efficient of all; and it is the Ultimate
End and Perfection of all.

There is no more to add, as to the matter, but that as to the Duration, first
we may take it as that which leaves no room for any addition, that all this
will be Everlasting, leaving not any doubts, or fears of a cessation. Abundance
of glorious adjuncts of this felicity might be mentioned; but I pass them all
by, and do but name these few which are the Essential Constitutive parts of
our Happiness, because I have touched them before, and fullyer spoken of them
in the Saints Rest. Thus much I thought meet to mention here, that you may have
somewhat of that in your eye that I am persuading you to intend and seek; and
the rather, because I perceive that many of the godly have not such distinct
Apprehensions of the constitutive parts of this Felicity, as they should have;
but much wrong their souls, and God Himself, and the Glory of their Profession,
by looking but at some of the Parts.

Believe God sirs that this is the life that you shall live, if you will take
it for your Portion, and set your hearts upon it, and follow the Conduct of
Christ for the obtaining it. Can you be content with Heaven alone? Is it enough
for you, though you be despised and persecuted in the world? Do you account
this for Certainty and Excellency to be worth all? Yea, that all is dross and
dung to this. Thus must you do if you will be true Converts. For all such are
heavenly in their minds, and hearts, and in the drift of all their lives and
Conversations.

DIRECT. X. My next Advice that you may prove sound Converts, is this: [Rest
not, and count not your selves truly Converted, till God and his holy Ways
have your very Love, and Desire, and Delight: and take not that for a saving
Change, when you had rather live a worldly ungodly life, if it were not for the
fear of punishment.]

I shall speak but little of this, because I touched upon it before, when I told
you that Christ must have your hearts, and because it is but a consectary of
the last, or contained in it. But yet I think it best to present it here
distinctly to your Consideration, because a slavish kind of religiousness, does
deceive so many; and because the life of Grace is here expressed. I deny not but
holy Fear is e^ceeding useful to us; even a Fear of the Threatenings and
Judgments of God. But yet I must tell you, that in Fear there is much more that
is common to the unsanctified, then there is in Love, Desire and Delight.
Though the Fear of God be the beginning of wisdom, it is Love that is the
Perfection: and that Fear is not filial, and of the right strain, if Love be
not its Companion. Fear of punishment shows that you love your natural selves:
but it shows not that you love God, and are true-hearted to him. The Devils
fear and tremble, but they do not Love. It is Love and and not Fear that is the
Byas, the Inclination, and, as I may say, the Nature of the will of man By his
Love it is that you must know what the man is. The Philosopher says, [Such as
a man is, such is his end] which is all one as to say, [Such as a man is, such
is his Love.] You may Fear a thing at the same time when you hate it: and it is
too common to have some hatred mixed with Fear. You may be as much against God
and his holy ways, when Fear only drives you to some kind of religiousness, as
others are that scarce meddle with Religion at all. The first thing that God
looks at is, what you would do; and the next is, what you do. If you do it, but
had rather leave it undone, you lose your reward, and God will take it as if
you had not done it: For it was not you that did it, if you did it not from
Love; but it was Fear that dwells in you. God takes men's hearty Desires and
Will, instead of the Deed, where they have not power to fulfill it: But he
never took the bare Deed instead of the Will. A blockish kind of worship,
consisting in outward actions, without the heart, is fit to be given to a
wooden god, a senseless Idol: but the true and living God abhorres it. He is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: such worshipers he
seeks, and such he will accept, Joh. 4. 23, 24. A beggar will be glad of your
Alms, though you leave it with an ill will; because he needs it: but God
has no need of you, nor of your service, and therefore think not that he will
accept you on such terms. That people worshipeth God in vain, that draw near
him with their mouth, and honor him with their lips, when their heart is far
from him, Mat. 15. 8, 9. A man's heart is where his Love is, rather then where
his Fear is. If you should lie still upon your knees, or in the holy Assembly;
If you should be the strictest Observer of the Ordinances on the Lords days;
and yet had such hearts in you, as had rather let all these alone, if it were
not for fear of punishment; it will all be disregarded, and reckoned to you
according to your wills, as if it had never been done by you at all. It Is Love
that must win Love, or make you fit for Love to entertain. If you give your
goods to the poor, or your bodies to be burned in a cause that in it self is
good, and yet have not Love, it avails nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3, 5. You
will not think your Wife has conjugall affections that loves another man
better then you, and had rather be gone from you, if she could live without
you. It Is an unnatural Son that loves not his Father, but had rather be from
him, then with him. If God called you to a bestiall drugery or slavery, he
would then look but for your work, and not care much whether you be willing or
unwilling. If your Ox draw your plow, and your Horse carry his burden, you care
not much whether it be willingly or unwillingly. Or if it be an enemy that you
have to deal with, you will look for no more then a forced submission, or that
he be disabled from doing you hurt. But this is not your case: It is a state of
friendship that the Gospel calls you to: you must be nigh to God; his Children;
and the Members of his Son; espoused to him in the dearest strongest bonds:
And do you think it is possible that this should be done without your wills and
affections? If you can be content with the Portion of a slave and an enemy,
then do your task, and deny God your affections: But if you look for the
entertainment and Portion of a Friend, a Child, a Spouse; you must bring the
heart of a Friend, and of a Child, and of a Spouse. Fear may do good by driving
you to the use of means; and taking out of your hands the things by which you
would do your selves a mischief: It may prepare you for saving Grace; and when
you are sanctified, it will prove a necessary servant of Love; to keep you in
awe, and save you from temptations. But Love is the ruling affection in the
sanctified; and fear is therefore necessary because of the present imperfection
of Love, and because of the variety of temptations that here beset us: Think
not therefore that you are savingly renewed, till God have your very hearts.
When you do but believe and tremble, it is better then to be unbelieving, and
stupid, and secure: but you are not true Christians till you believe and Love.
We use to fly from that which we fear, and therefore do apprehend it to be evil
to us. We avoid the presence and company of those that we are afraid of, but we
draw nigh them that we love, and delight in their company. We Fear an Enemy: We
Love a Friend: We Fear the Devil naturally; but we do not Love him: It is Love
that is that Affection of the soul that entertaineth God as God, even as Good:
though that Love must be accompanied with a filial fear, even a dread and
reverence of his Majesty and greatness, and a fear of displeasing him. If you
should toil out your selves in Religious duties, with a heart that had rather
forbear them, if you durst, you have not the hearts of Gods Children in your
breasts. The Magistrate can frighten men to the Congregation and outward
worship: You may lock a man in the Church, that had rather be away: And will
any man think that this makes him acceptable to God? You may keep a Theif from
stealing by prison and irons; but this makes him not accepted with God as a
true man: You may cure a man of cursing, and swearing, and railing, and idle
and ribbald talking, even in a minute of an hour, by cutting of his tongue: but
will God accept him ever the more as long as he has a heart that would do it
if he could? There Is abundance of people at this day that are kept from abusing
the Lords day, and from swearing, and stealing, yea and from laying hands on
all about them that are godly, and this by the Law of man, and the fear of
present punishment: And do you think that these are therefore innocent or
acceptable with God? By this account you may make the Devil a Saint, when he is
chained up from doing mischief: You may as well say, that a Lion is become a
Lamb, when he is shut up in his Den: Or that a mastiff Dog is become harmelss
and gentle, when he is muzled. Believe it sirs, you are never Christians, till
you see that in God that winnes your hearts to him, so that you would not
change your Master for any in the world; and till you see that in the Hopes of
Everlasting Glory, that you would not change it for any thing else that can be
imagined by the heart of man; And till you see that goodness in a heavenly
life, that you had rather live it, then any life in the world: You are not
converted to God indeed, till you had rather live in Holiness then in Sin, if
you had your freest choice; and till you would gladly be the strictest holiest
persons that you know in the world; and long after more and more of it, and
fain would reach Perfection it self: For though we cannot be perfect here, yet
no man is upright that desires not to be perfect. For he that loves Holiness
as Holiness, must needs love the greatest measure of Holiness, with the
greatest Love. This is it that makes sound Converts to be so faithful and
constant with God: A man is forward and ready to a work that he loves, when he
draws back from it, as if it were a mischief, that has no mind to do it. A man
is hardly kept from the persons, and places, and employments that he loves: but
a little will withdraw him from that which he loves not. Why is it that we
have so much ado to take off a Drunkard from his Companions and his lusts, but
because he loves them better then temperance and gracious company? And why can
we so hardly draw the lustful wretch from his filthy lusts, or the glutton, or
the idle sensual person from his needless or ezcessive recreations, but
because they love them? And why is it that you cannot draw the worldling from
his covetousness, but he parts with his money almost as hardly as with his
blood, but because he loves it? And therefore what wonder if temptations be
resisted, and the fairest baits of the world despised, by him that is truly in
Love with God: No wonder if nothing can turn back that man from the way to
Heaven, that is in Love both with Heaven and with the Way. No wonder if that
man stick close to Christ and never forsake a holy life, that tafteth the
sweetness of it, and feels its to do him good, and had rather go that way then
any in the world. There is no true Christian but can say with David, that a day
in Gods Courts is better then a thousand, and he had rather be a doorkeeper in
the house of God, then to dwell in the tents, [yea, or the Pallaces] of
wickedness. Do but mark those Professors that prove Apostates, and sorfake the
way of godliness which they seemed to embrace, and see whether they be not such
as either took up some bare Opinions and outward Duties, upon a flash of
superficial illumination, or else such as were frightened into a course of
Religion, and so went on from duty to duty for fear of being damned, when all
the while their hearts were more another way, and they had rather have been
excused. These hypocrites are they that are disputing so often the Obligations to
their Duty, and asking, How do you prove that it is a Duty to pray in my
Family, or a Duty to observe the Lords Day, or to come constantly to the
Congregation, or to use the Communion of the godly in private meetings, or to
repeat Sermons, or sing Psalms, and the like? Intimating that they are as Birds
in a Cage, or Hens in a Pen, that are boaring to get out, and had had rather be
at liberty: If it were not for the fear of the Law of God that is upon them,
they had rather let all these Duties alone, or take them up but now and then at
an idle time, when Satan and the flesh will give them leave. If a Feast be
prepared and spread before them, a good stomach will not stand to ask; How can
you prove it my duty to eat? but perhaps the sick that loath it, may do so. If
the Cup be before the Drunkard, he does not stand on those terms [How do you
prove it my duty now to drink this Cup, and the other Cup] No, if he might have
but leave, he would drink on, without any questioning whether it be a duty: If
the Gamester, or the Whoremonger, might but be sure that he should escape the
punishment, he would never stick at the want of a Precept, and ask, Is it my
duty? If there were but a gift of twenty pound a man, to be given to all the
poor of the Town, yea and to all the people in general, I do not think I
should meet with many people in the Town that would draw back and say, What
Word of God commands me to take it? Or how can you prove that it is my duty?
And why is all this? but because they have an inward Love to the thing; and
Love will carry a man to that which seems good for him, without any command,
or threatening. If these ungodly wretches had one spark of spiritual life
within them, and any taste and feeling of the matters that concern their own
salvation, instead of asking, How can you prove that I must pray with my
Family, or that I must keep the Lords day, or that I must converse with the
godly, and live a holy life? they would be readier to say, How can you prove
that I may not pray with my Family? and that I may not sanctify the Lords Day?
and that I may not have Communion with the Saints in Holiness? Seeing so great
a mercy is offered to the world, why may not I partake of it as well as others?
I can perceive in many that I converse with, the great difference between a
heart that loves God and Holiness, and a heart that seems religious and honest
without such a Love. The true Convert perceives so much sweetness in holy
Duties, and so much spiritual advantage by them to his ^oul, that he is loath
to be kept back; he cannot spare these Ordinances and Mercies, no more then he
can spare the bread from his mouth, or the clothes from his back; yea, or the
skin from his flesh, no nor so much. He loves them; he cannot live without
them; at the worst that ever he is at, he had rather be holy then unholy, and
live a godly then a fleshly worldly life. And therefore if he had but a b^re
leave from God, without a Command, to sanctify the Lords Day, and to live in
the holy Communion of the Saints, he would joyfully take it, with many thanks:
For he need not be driven to his rest when he is weary, nor to his spiritual
food when he is hungry, nor to Christ the re^uge of his soul, when the curse
and accuser are pursuing him. But the unsanctified hypocrite, that never loved
God or Godliness in his heart, he stands questioning and enquiring for some
proof of a necessity of these courses. And if he can but bring himself to hope
that God will save him without so much ado (which by the help of the Devil he
may easily be brought to hope,) away then goes the duty: If you could not show
him that there is a Necessity of Family Prayer, and a Necessity of sanctifying
the Lords Day, and a Necessity of forsaking his tippling and voluptuousness, and
a Necessity of living a heavenly life, he would quickly resolve of another
course: For he had rather do otherwise, if he durst. He never was Religious
from a true Predominant Love to God and a holy life, but for fear of Hell, and
for other inferior respects.

Remember this when you have precious opportunities before you, of doing or
receiving good, and when you see that you have leave to take these
opportunities, and yet you draw back, and are questioning, How we can prove it
to be your duty; or that you cannot be saved without it? Do not these Questions
plainly show that you Love not the work, and Delight not in a holy life; and
that you had rather let it alone? Are you not blind if you see not this is in
your selves? Yea, it is plain that you have such an aversness or hatred to God
and a holy course of life, that if you did but know what shift to make to escape
damnation, you would fly away from God and Holiness, and have as little to do
with them as you can. Your Questions and Cavils do plainly declare this wicked
emnity and backwardness of your hearts: and consequently show how far you are
from true Conversion.

Not that I am of their mind that think there is any Good which the Law of
Christ Obliges us not to accept, and which we can refuse without sin and
danger to our selves: For God does both draw us, and drive us at once. But when
the Threatening and Punishment only can prevail with men, and men Love not God
and Godliness for themselves, but had rather have liberty to live as the
ungodly, I shall never take one of these for a sanctified man, nor have any
hope of the saving of such a soul, how far soever his fears may carry him
from his outward sins, or to outward duties: Till God shall give him a better
Conversion then this, I say, I have not the smallest hope of this man's
salvation. Then you are Gods, Children, when the Honor, the Work, the Family,
the Name of your Father are lovely and delightful to you: And when you grieve
that there is any remnants of sin in your souls; and when your sins are to
you as lameness to the lame, that pain them every step they go; and as sickness
to the sick, that makes them groan and groan again, and long to be rid of it:
And when you think those the happiest men on earth that are the most holy, and
wish from your hearts that you were such as they, though you had not a house to
put your head in: When you look toward God with longing thoughts, and are
grieved that your understandings can reach no nearer him, and know no more of
him, and that your hearts cannot embrace him with a more burning Love: When you
admire the beauty of a meek, a patient, a mortified, spiritual, heavenly mind,
and long to have more of this your self, yea to be perfect in all Holiness and
Obed^ence: When your hearts are thus brought over to God, that you had rather
have him then any other, and rather live in his Family then any where, and
rather walk in his ways then in any, then are you indeed Converted, and never
till then, whatever other dispositions you may have.

And now if that were my business, what abundance of reason might I show you,
to make you willing to come over unto God, with Love, and with Delight. Whom
else can you Love, if he that is Love it self seem not lovely to you. All
loveliness is in him and from him: The creature has none of it self, nor for
it self: To Love a life of sin, is to Love the Image and Service of the
Devil, and to Love that which feeds the flames of Hell: What is it then to Love
this sin so well, as for the Love of it to fly from God and Godliness?
Methinks men at the worst should Love that which will do them good, and not
prefer that before it which will hurt them. Do sinners indeed believe that
God and Holiness will do them hurt, and that sin will do them greater good?
Is there ever a man so mad that he dare speak this and stand to it? If indeed
you think it best to live in sin, and therefore had rather keep it then leave
it, your understandings are befooled, I had almost used Paul's Phrase, and
said, bewitched, Gal. 3. 1. Will it do you any hurt to leave your beastly
sensual lives, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in the world,
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and looking for the blessed hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ? This is
the Doctrine of Saving Grace, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. Would it do you any harm to
be assured of Salvation, and ready to die, and to know that the Angels shall
Conduct your departing souls to Christ, and that you shall live in Joy with him
for ever? Or to be employed in those holy works that must prepare you for this
day, and help you to this assurance. If God be naught for you, if Holiness, and
Righteousness, and Temperance be naught for you, then you may as well say,
Heaven is naught for you; and therefore you must resolve for sin and Hell,
and see whether that be good for you. I shall say no more of this Point,
because I have written of it already, in the Conclusion of the Saints Rest,
which I desire you to peruse.

DIRECT. XI. The next part of my Advice is, If you would not have this Saving
Work misearry, Turn then this present day and hour, without any more Delay.

Somewhat I have spoke of this already, and therefore shall say the less. But
yet I shall back this Direction with such Reasons as will certainly convince
you, if you be not unreasonable, of the folly of Delay, and show you that it
concerns you presently to Return. And though my Reasons will be numerous, it
is not the Number but the Strength of them that I shall urge you principally to
Consider; and because of the Number, I will go over them with the greater
brevity.

1. Consider to whom it is that you are commanded to Turn: and then tell me
whether there can be any Reason for delay. It is not to an empty deceitful
creature, but to the faithful All-sufficient God: To him that is the cause of
all things; the Strength of the Creation; the Joy of Angels; the Felicity of
the Saints; the Sun and Shield of all the Righteous; and Refuge of the
Distressed; and the Glory of the whole World. Of such Power, that his Word can
take down the Sun from the Firmament, and turn the Earth and all things into
nothing; for he does more in giving them their being and continuance. Of such
Wisdom, that was never guilty of mistake, and therefore will not mislead you,
nor draw you to any thing that is not for the best. Of such Goodness, as that
evil cannot stand in his sight; and nothing but your evil could make him
displeased with you; and it is from nothing but evil that he calls you to
Turn. It is not to a malicious Enemy, that would do you a mischief, but it is
to a gracious God, that is Love it self: Not to an implacable Justice, but to a
reconciled Father; not to revenging Indignation, but to the embracement of
those Arms, and the Mercy of that compassionate Lord, that is enough to melt
the hardest heart, when you find your self as the poor returning Prodigal,
Luke 25. 20. in his bosom, when you deserved to have been under his feet. And
will the great and blessed God invite thee to his favor, and will thou delay
and demurre upon the Return? The greatest of the Angels of Heaven are glad of
his favor, and value no Happiness but the light of his countenance: Heaven and
Earth are supdorted by him, and nothing can stand without him: How glad would
those very Devils be of his favor, that tempt thee to neglect his favor: And
will thou delay to turn to such a God? Why man, thou art every minute at his
mercy: If thou turn not, he can throw thee into Hell when he will, more easily
then I can throw this Book to the ground; And yet do thou delay? There are
all things imaginable in him to draw thee: There is nothing that is good for
thee but it is perfectly in him; where thou may have it certain and
perpetuated. There is nothing in him to give the least discouragement: Let all
the Devils in Hell, and all the Enemies of God on Earth, say the worst they can
against his Majesty; and they are not able to find the smallest blemish in his
absolute Holiness, and Wisdom, and Goodness: And yet will thou delay to Turn?

2. Consider also, as to Whom, so to what it is that thou must Turn. Not to
uncleanness, but unto Holiness: not, to the sensual life of a Beast, but to the
Noble rational life of a man, and the more Noble Heavenly life of a Believer:
Not to an unprofitable worldly toil, but to the gainfullest Employment that
ever the Sons of men were acquainted with: Not to the deceitful drudgery of
sin, but to that Godliness which is profitable to all things, having the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Sirs. Do you know what a life of Holiness is? You do not know it, if you turn
away from it: I am sure if you knew it, you would never fly from it, no nor
endure to live without it. Why, a life of Holiness, is nothing but a living
unto God: to be conversant with him as the wicked are with the world; and to be
devoted to his Service, as sensualists are to the flesh. It is to live in the
Love of God and our Redeemer, and in the foretasts of his Everlasting Glory,
and of his Love: and in the sweet fore-thoughts of that blessed life that shall
never end: and in the honest self-denying course that leads to that
blessedness. A godly life, is nothing else but a sowing the Seed of Heaven on
Earth; and a learning in the School of Christ, the Songs of praise which we
must use before the Throne of God; and by suffering, a learning how to Triumph
and reign with Christ. And is there any thing in this life which you have cause
to be afraid of? The sins and weaknesses of the godly are contrary to
Godliness; and therefore Godliness is no more dishonored by them, then health
and life is dishonored by your sicknesses. As health is never the worse to be
liked but the better, because of the painful grievousness of sickness; so
Godliness is to be liked the better, because the very failings of the Saints
are so grievous. If a true Believer do but step out of the way of God, he is
wounded, he is out of ^oynt, he is as undone till he come in again; though it
was but in one particular. And can you endure to continue strangers to it
altogether so long. I know you may find faults in the godly, till they are
perfect: but let the most malicious Enemy of Christ on Earth find any fault in
Godliness if he can.

Can you delay to come into your Fathers Family; into the Vineyard of the Lord;
into the Kingdom of God on Earth; to be fellow Citizens of the Saints, and of
the Household of God; to have the Pardon of all your sins, and the sealed
Promise of Everlasting Glory? Why Sirs, when you are called on to Turn, you are
called to the Porch of Heaven; into the beginning of Salvation: And will you
delay to accept Everlasting life?

3. Consider also from what you are called to Turn: and then judge whether there
be any reason of delay. It is from the Devil your Enemy: from the love of a
deceitful world; from the seducement of corrupted brutish flesh: It is from
sin the greatest evil: What is there in sin that you should delay to part
with it? Is there any good in it? Or what has it ever done for you, that you
should love it? Did it ever do you good? Or did it ever do any man good? It is
the deadly enemy of Christ and you, that caused his death, and will cause
yours, and is working for your damnation, if converting and pardoning Grace
prevent it not: And are you loath to leave it? It is the cause of all the
miseries of the world, of all the sorrow that ever did befall you, and the
cause of the damnation of them that perish: And do you delay to part with it.

4. Your Delaying shows that you Love not God, and that you prefer your sin
before him, and that you would never part with it if you might have your will.
For if you loved God, you would long to be restored to his favor, and to be
near him, and employed in his service and his Family. Love is quick and
diligent, and will not draw back. And it is a sign also that you are in love
with sin: For else why should you be so loath to leave it? He that would not
leave his sin and turn to God, till the next week, or the next Month or
year, would never turn if he might have his desire. For that which makes you
desirous to stay a day or week longer, does indeed make you loath to turn at
all. And therefore it is but hypocrisy to take on you, that you are willing to
turn hereafter, if you be not willing to do it now, without delay.

5. Consider but what a Case you are in while you thus delay. Do you think you
stand on dry ground, or in a safe condition? If you knew where you are, you
would sit as upon thorns, as long as you are unconverted: you would be as a
man that stood up to the knees in the Sea, and saw the tide coming toward him;
who certainly would think that there is no standing still in such a place. Read
what I have said of the state of the unconverted, in my first Treatise of
Conversion. In a word, you are the drudges of sin, the slaves of the Devil,
the enemies of God, the abusers of his Grace and Spirit, the despisers of
Christ, the heirs of Hell. And is this a state to stay in an hour? You have all
your sin unpardoned; you are under the Curse of the Law; the Wrath of God is
upon you; and the fullness of it hangs over your heads; Judgment is coming to
pass upon you the dreadful doom; the Lord is at hand; death is at the door,
and waits but for the Word from the mouth of God, that it may arrest you, and
bring you to Everlasting misery: And is this a state for a man to stay in?

6. Moreover, Your Delaying gives great advantage to the Tempter. If you would
presently turn and forsake your sins, and enter a faithful Covenant with
God, the Devil would be almost out of hope, and the very heart of his
temptations would be broken: He would see that now it is too late: there is no
getting you out of the arms of Christ. But as long as you delay, you keep him
still in heart and hope: He has time to strengthen his prison and fetters; and
to renew his snares; and if one temptation serve not, he has time to try
another, and another: As if you would stand as a mark for Satan to shoot at, as
long as he please. What likelihood is there that ever so foolish a sinner
should be recovered and saved from his sin?

7. Moreover, Your Delaying is a vile abuse of Christ, and the holy Ghost, and
may so far provoke him as to leave you to your self; and then you are past
help. If you delight so to trample on your crucified Lord, and will so long put
him to it by your refusing his Grace, and grieving his Spirit; What can you
expect but that he should turn away in wrath, and utterly forsake you, and say,
[Let him keep his sin, seeing he had rather have it then my Grace: Let him
continue ungodly, seeing he is so loath to be sanctified: let him take his own
course, and die in his sin, and repent in Hell, seeing he would not repent on
Earth?] You provoke Christ thus to give you up.

8. Consider also I beseech you, if you ever mean to turn, what it i^ that you
stay for. Do you think to bring down Christ and Heaven to lower rates, and to
be saved hereafter with less ado? Sure you cannot be so foolish: For God will
be still the same; and Christ the same; and his Promise has still the same
Condition, which he will never Change; and Godliness will be the same, and as
much against your carnal interest hereafter as it is now? When you have looked
about you never so long, you will never find a fairer or nearer way; but this same
way you must go or perish. If you cannot leave sin now, how should you leave
it then: It will be still as sweet to your flesh as now: Or if one sin grow
stale by the decay of nature, another that is worse will spring up in its stead,
and though the acts abate, they will all live still at the root; for sin was
never mortified by age. So that if ever you will turn, you may best turn now.

9. Yea more then that; The longer you stay, the harder it will be. If it be
hard to day, it is like to be harder to morrow. For as the Spirit of Christ is
like to forsake you for your wilful delays, so custom will strengthen sin:
and custom in sinning will harden your hearts, and make you as past feeling, to
work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. Cannot you crush this Serpent
when it is but in the Spawne; and can you encounter it in its Serpentine
strength? Cannot you pluck up a tender Plant, and can you pluck up an Oak or
Cedar? O sinners, what do you do, to make your recovery so difficult by delay?
You are never like to be fairer for Heaven, and to find Conversion an easier
work, then now you may do* Will you stay till the work be ten times harder, and
yet do you think it so hard already?

10. Consider also, That fin gets daily Victories by your delay* We lay our
batter^es against it, and preach, and exhort, and pray against it, and it gets
a kind of victory over all, as long as we prevail not with you to turn. It
conquereth our persuasions and advice: It conquereth all the stirrings of your
Consciences: It conquereth all your heartless purposes, and deceitful
Promises. And these frequent Conquests do strengthen your sin, and weaken
your resistance, and leave the matter almost hopeless. Before a Physician has
used remedies, he has more hope of a cure, then when he has tried all means,
and finds that the best Medicines do no good, but the man is still as bad or
worse. So when all means have been tried with you, and yet you are
unconverted, the case draws toward desparation it self: The very means are
disabled more then before; that is, your hearts are unapter to be wrought upon
by them; When you have long been under Sermons, and Reading, and among good
examples, and yet you are unconverted, these Ordinances lose much of their
force with you: Custom will make you slight them, and be dead-hearted under
them. And it is these very same Means and Truths that you have frustrated that
must do the work, or it will never be done: The same Plaster must heal you,
that you have thrown off so often; And what a sad case is this, that there is no
hope left, but in the very same Medicine which you have taken so often in vain.

11. Moreover, Age it self has many inconveniences, and youth has many great
advantages; and therefore it is folly to delay. In age the understanding and
memory grows dull; and people grow incapable and almost unchangeable. We see by
our every days experience, that men think they should not change when they are
old; that opinion or practice that they have been brought up in, they think
that they should not then forsake* To learn when they are old, and to turn when
they are old, you see how much they are against it. Besides, how unfit is age
to be at that pains, that youth can undergo? How unfit to begin the holy
Warfare against the flesh, the world, and Devil? Gods way is to list his
Soldiers as soon as may be; Even in their infancy; which they must own as soon
as ever they come to age: And the Devil would not have it done at all; and
therefore he would have it put off as long as may be: In infancy he will tell
the Parents with the Anabaptists* It is too soon to be dedicated to God, and
entered into his Covenant: when they come to their childhood, and youthful
state, he will then persuade them that it is yet too soon; and when he can no
longer persuade them that it is yet too soon, he will then persuade them that
it is too late. O what a happy thing it is to come unto God betimes, and with
the first. What advantage has youth? They have the vigor of wit and of body:
They be not rooted and hardened in sin, nor filled with prejudice and
obstinacy against Godliness, as others be. Besides, the capacity of serving
God, of which anon.

12. You have such times of advantage and encouragement as few ages of the
world have ever seen, and few Nations on Earth do enjoy at this day. What plain
and plentiful teaching have you? What abundance of good examples; and the
society of the godly; private and public helps are common. Godliness is
under as little suffering as ever you can expect to see it: yea, it is grown
into repu^ation among us; so that it is an honor to serve God, and a dishonor
to neglect it (as well it may) Our Rulers countenance the Practices of
Godliness: they proclaim themselves the forward Professors and Patrons of it,
and take this as their Glory. And this is not ordinary in the world. Seldom
has the Church seen such days on Earth. And yet is not the way to Heaven fair
enough for you? Yet are you not ready to turn to God? When should men make Hay
but when the Sun shines? Will you delay till this Harvest time be over, and the
Winter of persecution come again? Can you better turn to God, when a godly life
is the common scorn of the Country, as it was a while ago? and when every one
will be deriding and railing at you? Or when it may possibly cost you your
lives? Have you Sun, and wind, and tide to serve you, and will you stay to set
out in storms and darkness.

13 Moreover, Your del^y does cast your Conversion and Salvation upon hazard;
yea upon many and grievous hazzards. And is your Everlasting happiness a matter
to be wil^ully hazarded, by causeless and unreasonable delays? 1. If you delay
to day* you are utterly uncertain of living till to morrow. If you put by this
one motion, you know not whether ever you shall have another. Alas, that ever
the heart of man should be so senseless, as to delay, when they know not but it
may prove their damnation; and when Heaven or Hell must certainly follow; that
they dare put off a day or hour, when they know not whether ever they shall see
another. 2. And as your life is uncertain, so are the means uncertain, by which
God uses to do the work. He may remove your Teachers, and other helps; and
then you will be further off then before. 3. And if both should continue, yet
Grace it self is uncertain. You know not whether ever the Spirit of God will
put another thought of turning into your hearts: Or at least whether he will
give you hearts to turn.

14. Moreover, The delay of Conversion, continues your sin, and so you will
daily increase the number, and increase your guilt, and make your souls more
abundantly miserable. Are you not deep enough in debt to God already, and have
you not yet sins enough to answer for upon your Souls? Would you fain have
one years sins more, or one days sins more to be charged upon you? O if
you did but know what sin is, it would amaze you to think what a mountain
lies already upon your Consciences. One sin unpardonned will sink the
stoutest sinner into Hell: And you have many a thousand upon your Souls
already: and would you yet have more. Me thinks you should rather look about
you, and bethink you how you may get a pardon for all that is past.

15. And as sin increases daily by delay, so consequently the Wrath of God
increases; you will run further into his displeasure; and possibly you may cut
down the bough that you stand upon, and hasten even bodily destruction to your
selves. When you live daily upon God, and are kept out of Hell, by a miracle of
his mercy, me thinks you should not desire yet longer to provoke him, least he
withdraw his Mercy, and let you fall into misery.

16. And do but consider, what will become of you, if you be found in these
delays. You are then lost body and Soul for ever. Now if you had but hearts to
know what is good for you, the worst of you might be converted, and saved: for
God does freely offer you his Grace. But if you die in your delays, in the
twink of an eye you will find your selves utterly undone for ever. Now there is
hope of a change: but when delays have brought you to Hell, there is no more
change, nor no more hope.

17. Consider, that your very time which you lose by these delays, is an
unconceivable loss. When time is gone, what would you then give for one of
those years, or days, or hours, which now you foolishly trifle away. O
wretched sinners; are their so many thousand Sous in Hell, that would give a
world if they had it, for one of your days; and yet can you afford to throw
them away, in worldliness, and sensuality, and loitering delays. I tell you,
Time is better worth, then all the wealth and honors of the world. The day is
coming when you will set by time: When it is gone you will know what a blessing
you made light of. But then all the world cannot call back one day or hour of
this precious time, which you can sacrifice now to the service of your flesh,
and cast away on unprofitable sinning.

18. Consider also that God has given you no time to spare. He has not lent
you one day or hour, more then is needful for the work that you have to do:
and therefore you have no reason to lose any by your delays. Do you imagine
that God would give a man an hours time for nothing; much less, for to abuse
him, and serve his enemy. No, let me tell you, that if you make your best of
every hour; if you should never lose a minute of your lives, you would find all
little enough for the work you have to do. I know not how others think of time,
but for my part I am forced daily to say, How swift, how short is time? and how
great is our work; and when we have done our best, how slowly goes it on. O
precious time ^ what hearts have they, what lives do those men lead, that think
time long? that have time to spare, and pass in idleness.

19. To convince you more; consider I beseech you the exceeding greatness of
the work you have to do; and tell me then whether it be time for you to delay.
Especially you that are yet unconverted, and strangers to the heavenly nature
of the Saints; you have far more to do then other men. You have a multitude of
headstrong passions to subdue, and abundance of deadly sins to kill; and
rooted vices to root upon You have many a false opinion of God, and his ways,
to be plucked up; and the customs of many years standing to be broken: You
have blind minds that must be enlightened with heavenly kowledg; and abundance
of Spiritual Truths, that are above the reach of flesh and blood, that you must
needs learn and understand: You have much to know, that is hard to be known,
You have a dead Soul to be made alive, and a hard heart to be melted; and a
scared Conscience to be softened, and made tender; and the guilt of many
thousand sins to be pardoned: You have a new heart to get, and a new End to
aim at, and seek after, and a new life to live: abundance of Enemies you have
to sight with and overcome: abundance of temptations to resist and conquer.
Many Graces to get, and preserve, and exercise, and increase: and abundance of
holy works, to do for the Service of God, and the good of your selves, and
others. O what a deal of work does every one of these words contain! and yet
what abundance more might I name! And have you all this to do, and yet will you
delay? And they are not indifferent matters that are before you: It is no less
then the saving of your Souls; and the obtaining the blessed Glory of the
Saints. Necessity is upon you: These are things that Must be done, or else woe
to you that ever you were born: And yet have you another day to lose! Why Sirs,
if you had a hundred mile to go, in a day or two, upon pain of death; would
you delay? O think of the work that you have to do, and then judge whether it be
not time to stir.

20. And me thinks it should exceedingly terrify you to consider, what
abundance by such Delays do perish: and how few that wilfully delay are ever
converted, and saved. Many a Soul that once had purposes hereafter to repent,
is now in the misery, where there is no Repentance, that will do them any good.
For my part, though I have known some very few Converted when they were old;
yet I must needs say, both that they were very few indeed, and that I had
reason to believe, that they were such that had sinned before in ignorance, and
did not wilfully put off Repentance, when they were convinced that they must
turn. Though I doubt not but God may convert even these if he please, yet I
cannot say that I have ever known many, if any such to be converted. Sure I am
that Gods usual time is in Childhood, or youth, before they have long abused
grace, and wilfully delaid to turn when they were convinced. Some considerable
time I confess many have before their first convictions, and purposes be
brought to any great ripeness of performance: but O how dangerous is it to
delay.

21. Consider also; Either Conversion is Good, or Bad for you: Either it is
needful, or unnecessary. If it be bad, and a needless thing, then let it alone
for altogether? But if you are convinced that it is Good, and necessary, is it
not better now then to stay any longer? Is it not the sooner the better? Are
you afraid of being safe, or happy too soon. If you are sick, you care not how
soon you are well: If you have a bone out, you care not how soon it is set: If
you fall into the water, you care not how soon you get out: If your house be on
fire, you care not how soon it be quenched: If you are but in fears by any
doubts, or ill tidings, you care not how soon your fears be over. And yet are
you afraid of being to soon out of the power of the Devil, and the danger of
Hell; and of being too soon the Sons of God, and the holy, justified heirs of
Heaven.

22. Consider also: Either you can turn now, or not. If you can, and yet will
not, you are utterly without excuse. If you cannot to day, how much less will
you be able hereafter; when strength is less, and difficulties greater, and
burdens more. Is it not time therefore to make out to Christ for strength; and
should not the very sense of your disability dissuade you from delay?

23. Consider how long you have staid already, and put Gods Patience to it by
your folly: Has not the Devil, the world, and the flesh, had many years time
of your life already? Have you not long enough been swallowing the poison of
sin? and long enough been abusing the Lord that made you, and the blood of
the Son of God, that was shed for you, and the Spirit of Grace, that has
moved and persuaded with you? Are you not yet gone far enough from God? and
have you not yet done enough to the damning of your selves, and casting away
Everlasting Life. O wretched sinners; it is rather time for you, to fall down
on your faces before the Lord, and with tears and groans, to lament it, day and
night, that ever you have gone so far in sin, and delayed so long to turn to
him as you have done. Sure if after so many years rebellion, you are yet so far
from lamenting it, that you had rather have more of it, and had rather hold on
a little longer, no wonder if God forsake you, and let you alone.

24. Have you any hopes of Gods acceptance, and your Salvation, or not? If you
have such hopes, that when you turn, God will pardon all your sins, and give
you Everlasting Life: is it think you an ingenious thing to desire to offend
him yet a little longer, from whom you expect such exceeding Mercy, and Glory
as you do? Have you the faces to speak out what is in your hearts, and
practice; and to go to God with such words as these; Lord I know I cannot have
the pardon of one sin, without the Blood of Christ, and the riches of thy
Mercy: Nor can I be saved from Hell without it: But yet I hope for all this
from thy Grace: I beseech thee let me live a little longer in my sins; a
little longer let me trample on the Blood of Christ, and despise thy commands,
and abuse thy Mercies; a little longer let me spit in the face of thy Goodness,
and prefer the flesh, and the world before thee, and then pardon me all that
ever I did, and take me into Glory. Could you for shame put up such a request
to God as this? If you could, you are past shame: If not, then do not practice
and desire that, which you cannot for shame speak out and request.

25. Moreover, it is an exceeding advantage to you, to come in to God betimes,
and an exceeding loss, that you will suffer by delay, if you were sure to be
converted at the last. If you speedily come in, you may have time to learn, and
get more understanding in the matters of God, then else can be expected: For
knowledge will not be had but by time, and study. You may also have time to get
strength of Grace, when young beginners can expect no more then an infant
strength: You may grow to be men of parts and abilities, to be useful in the
Church, and profitable to those about you, when others cannot go or stand,
unless they lean on the stronger for support. If you come in betime, you may do
God a great deal of service; which in the evening of the day, you will neither
have strength, nor time to do. You may have time to get Assurance of Salvation,
and to be ready with comfort when death shall call: When a weakling is like to
be perplexed with doubts, and fears, and death is like to be terrible, because
of their unreadiness.

26. And did you ever consider, who and how many do stay for you while you
delay? Do you know who it is that you make to wait your leisure. God himself
stands over you with the offers of his Mercy, as if he thought it long till you
return, saying, O that there were such a heart in them! and when will it once
be? How long ye simple will you love simplicity, and scorners delight in
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof. Deuteronomy. 5 29. Jer. 13.
17. Prove. 1. 22. And do you think it wise, or safe, or mannerly for you to make
the God of Heaven to wait on you, while you are serving his Enemy? Can you
offer God a baser indignity, then to expect that he should support your lives,
and feed you, and preserve you, and patiently forbear you, while you abuse him
to his face, and drudg for the flesh, the world, and the Devil? Should a worm
thus use the Lord that made him? You will not your selves hold a candle in your
hands, while it burns your own fingers; nor will you hold a nettle, or a wasp
in your hand to sting you; nor will you keep a dog in your house, that is good
for nothing but to snarl at you, and bite your Children, or worry your sheep:
And yet God has long held up your lives, while in stead of Light, you have
yielded nothing but a stinking snuff; and in stead of graps you have brought
forth nothing but thorns and thistles; and while you have snarled at his
Children, and his Flock, and done the worst you could against him. And would
you indeed put God to wait on you thus, while you serve the Devil yet one day
more. Must God as it were hold the drunkard the candle while he reeles and
spues? Must he draw the curtain, while the filthy wretch does once more please
his fleshly lusts? Marvel not, if he withdraw his supporting Mercy, and let
such wretches drop into Hell.

And it is not God only, but his Servants, and Creatures, and Ordinances, that
all are waiting on you. The Angels stay for the joy that is due to them upon
your Conversion. Ministers are studying, and preaching, and praying for you.
Godly neighbors are praying, and longing for your change. The Springs, and
rivers are flowing for you: The winds blow for you: The Sun shines for you:
The clouds rain for you: The Earth bears fruit for you: The beasts must
labor, and suffer, and die for you: All things are doing, and would you stand
still? or else do worse. What have makes the Sun about the world, to return
in its time to give you light? What have make other Creatures in your service?
And yet must you delay. Must God stay, and Christ, and the Spirit stay; Must
Angels stay, must Ministers stay, must the Godly stay, and the Ordinances stay,
and all the Creatures stay your leisure, while you are abusing God, and your
Souls, and others, and while you delay, as if it were too soon to turn?

27. Consider, that when you were lost, the Son of God did not delay the work
of your Redemption. He presently undertook it, and turned by the stroke of
damning Justice. In the fullness of time he came and performed what he
undertook: he failed not one day of his appointed time. And will you now Delay
to accept the benefit, and turn to him? Must he make such have to save you at
so dear a rate, and now will you delay to be saved.

28. Moreover, God does not delay to do you good: You have the day and night in
their proper seasons: The Sun does not fail to rise upon you at the
appointed time: You have the Spring, and Harvest in their meetest seasons: the
former and later rain in season. When you are in want you have seasonable
supplies: and when your are in danger, you have seasonable deliverance: And is
it meet or equal that you should refuse to bring forth seasonable fruit, but
still be putting off God with your delays?

29. Moreover, When you are in trouble and necessity, you are then in have for
deliverance, and relief. Then you think every day a week till your danger or
suffering be past. If you be under the pain of a disease, or in danger of
death, or under poverty, or oppression, or disgrace, you would have God relieve
you without delay: And yet you will not turn to him without delay. Then you are
ready to cry out, How long, Lord, how long till deliverance come: but you will
not hear God, when he cries to you in your sins, How long will it be ere you
turn from your transgressions: when shall it once be? When you are to receive
any outward deliverance, you care not how soon; the sooner the better: but when
you are to turn to God, and receive his Grace, and title to Glory, then you
care not how late, as if you had no mind of it. Can you for shame beg of God to
hasten your deliverances, when you remember your delays, and still continue to
trifle with him, and draw back?

30. Your present prosperity, and worldly delights are posting away without
Delay: and should you delay to make sure of better in their stead? Time is
going; and health is going; youth is going: yea life is going: your riches are
taking wing: your fleshly pleasures do perish in the very using: Your meat, and
drink is sweet to you little longer then it is in your throat. Shortly you must
part with house, and lands, with goods, and friends, and all your mirth, and
earthly business will be done. All this you know; and yet will you delay to lay
up a durable treasure which you may trust upon, and to provide you a better
tenement before you be turned out of this? What will you do for a habitation,
for pleasures and contents, when all that you have now is spent and gone, and
Earth will afford you nothing but a grave? If you could but keep that you have,
I should not much wonder, that knowing so little of God, and another world, you
look not much after it: But when you perceive death knocking at your doors,
and see that all your worldly comforts are packing up, and hasting away, me
thinks, if you have your wits and sense about you, you should presently turn,
and make sure of Heaven, without any more delay.

31. Consider also whether it be equal, that you should delay your Conversion,
when you can seasonably dispatch your worldly business, and when your flesh
would be provided for, you can hearken to it without Delay. You have wit enough
to sow your seed in season, and will not delay it till the time of harvest: You
will reap your corn when it is ripe, and gather your fruit when it is ripe,
without delay. You observe the seasons in the course of your labors, day by
day, and year by year: You will not lie in bed when you should be at your work,
nor delay all night to go to your rest; nor suffer your servants to delay your
business: You will know your dinner time, and supper time day by day: If you be
sick you will seek help without delay, lest your disease should grow to be
uncurable. And yet will you delay your Conversion, and the making sure of
Heaven? Why Sirs, shall these trifles be done without delay, and shall your
Salvation be put off? In the Name of God Sirs what do you think of? Do you
imagine that you can better suffer Hell-f^re, then hunger, or nakedness? Or
that you can better bear the loss of Everlasting Joys, then the loss of your
commodities, and provisions in the world. Sure if you believe the life to come,
you cannot think so. And can you have while for every thing, except that one
thing, which all the rest are merely to promote? and in comparison of which
they are all but dreams? Can you have while to work, to plow, and sow, and
reap, and cannot you have while to prepare for Eternal Life? Why Sirs, if you
cannot find time yet to search your hearts, and turn to God, and prepare for
death; give over eating, and drinking, and sleeping, and say, you cannot have
time for these. You may as wisely say so for these smaller matters, as the
greater.

32. Moreover; if men offer you courtesies, and commodities for your bodies,
you will not stand Delaying, and need so many persuasions to accept them. If
your Landlord would for nothing renew your lease; if any man would give you
houses, or lands, would you delay so long before you would accept them? A
beggar at your door will not only thankfully take your alms, without your
entreaty, and importunity, but will beg for it, and be importunate with you to
give it. And yet will you Delay to accept the blessed offers of Grace, which is
a greater thing?

33. Ye Consider, that it is God that is the Giver, and you that are the
miserable beggars, and receivers: And therefore it is fitter that you should
wait on God and call on him for his Grace, when he seems to delay, and not
that he should wait on you. He can live without your receiving, but you cannot
live without his giving. The beggar must be glad of an alms at any time; and
the condemned person, of a pardon at any time: but the giver may well expect
that his gift be received without delay, or else he may let them go without it.

34. And me thinks you should not deal worse with God, when he comes to you as
a Physician to save your own Souls, then you would do with a neighbor, or a
friend, when it is not for your own good, but for theirs. If your neighbor lay
a dying, you would go and visit him without delay: If he fell down in a swoon,
you would catch him up without delay: If he fell into the fire, or water, you
would pluck him out without delay: Yea you would do thus much by a very beast.
And yet will you delay when it is not another, but your selves, that are
sinking, and drowning, and within a step of death, and desparation? If a woman
be but in travail, her neighbors will come to her without delay: And yet when
their own Souls are in bondage to sin, and Satan, and a state of death, they
will let them lie there, year after year, and when we desire them to be
Converted, here is nothing but delays.

35. If yet you perceive not how unreasonably you deal with God, and your
Souls, I beseech you consider whether you do not deal worse with him, then you
do with the Devil himself. If Satan or his servants persuade you to sin, you
delay not so long, but you are presently at it: You are ready to follow every
tippling companion, or gamester that puts up the finger. You are as ready to go,
as they to invite you: The very sight of the cup does presently prevail with
the drunkard: and the sight of his filthy mate prevails with the fornicatour;
and sin can be presently entertained without delay. But when God comes, when
Christ calls, when the Spirit moves, when the minister persuades, when
Conscience is convinced, we can have nothing after all, but wishes, and
purposes, and promises, with Delays. O what a stomach has that man, or what a
brain, that will snatch at poison, and swallow dung and dirt with greediness,
without any chewing; and when you offer him meat, stands sighing, and looking
on it, and hardly will be persuaded to put it in his mouth: and if he do, he is
chewing it so long, that at last he even spits it out again, and cannot get it
down. Thus deal ungodly wretches, between their poisonous sins, and the saving
means, and Grace of Christ.

Nay more then this, so eager are they on their sin, that we are not able to
entreat them to delay it. When the passionate man is but provoked, we cannot
persuade him to delay his railing language, so long as to consider first of the
issue. We cannot entreat the drunkard to put off his drunkenness but for one
twelvemonth, while he tries another course: All the ministers in the Country
cannot persuade the worldling to forbear his worldliness, and the proud persons
their pride, and the ungodly person his ungodliness, for the space of one
month, or week, or day. And yet when God has a command, and a request to
them, to Turn to him, and be saved, here they can Delay without our entreaty.

36. Consider also that it is not possible for you to turn too soon; nor will
you ever have cause to repent of your speediness. Delay may undo you: but
speedy turning can do you no harm: I wonder what hurt you think it can do you,
to be quickly reconciled to God. And why then should there be any Delay, where
it is not possible to be too hasty. Do you think that there is ever a Saint in
Heaven, yea or on Earth either, that is sorry that he stayed not longer
unconverted? No: you shall never hear of such a repentance from the mouth of
any that is indeed converted.

37. But I must tell you on the contrary side, that if ever you be so hapy as
to be Converted, you will Repent it, and an hundred times Repent it, that you
delayed so long before you yielded. O how it will grieve you when your hearts
are melted with the Love of God, and are overcome with the infinite kindness of
his pardoning, saving Grace; that ever you had the hearts to abuse such a God,
and deal so unkindly with him, and stand out so long against that compassion
that was seeking your Salvation? O how it will grieve your hearts to consider,
that you have spent so much of your lives in sin, for the Devil, and the
flesh, and the deceitful world. O you will think with your selves; was not God
more worthy of my youthful days? Had I not been better have spent it in his
Service, and the work of my Salvation? Alas, that I should wast such precious
days, and now be so far behind hand as I am! Now I want that Faith, that
Hope, that Love, that Peace, that Assurance, that Joy in the Holy Ghost, which
I might have had if I had spent those years for God, which I spent in the
service of the world, and the flesh. Then I might have had the comfort of a
well spent life, and with joy have now looked back upon those days, and seen
the good I had done to others, and the honor I had brought to God: whereas I
must now look back upon all those years with sorrow, and shame, and anguish of
mind. You will think to your selves then a hundred times, O that* I had but
that time again to spend for God, which I spent for sin! and to use for my
Soul, which I wasted for my brutish flesh. Believe it, Sirs, if ever you be
converted, you must look for these Repenting sorrows for all your Delays. (and
that is the best that can come of it) And who would now wilfully make work for
sorrow?

38 And I pray you consider, whether it belongs of right to God or you, to
determine of the day and hour of your coming in? It is he that must give you
the pardon of your sins; and does it not then belong to him to appoint the
time of your receiving it? You cannot have Christ, and life without him: It is
he that must give you the Kingdom of Heaven: And is he not worthy then to
appoint the time of your Conversion, that you may be made partakers of it? But
if he say, To day, dare you say, I Will stay till to morrow.

30. Nay consider, whether God or you be likelier to know the meetest time.
Dare you say that you know better when to turn, then God does. I suppose you
dare not: And if you dare not say so; for shame let not your practice say so
God says, To day, while it is called to day, hear my voice, and harden not
your hearts. And dare you say, It Is better stay one month longer, or one day
longer, God says, Behold this is the accepted time* behold this is the day of
Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. And will you say, It Is time enough to morrow? Do you
know better then God? If your Physician do but tell you in a plurisie, or a
fever, you must let blood this day before to morrow; you will have so much
reason as to submit to his understanding, and think that he knows better then
you: And cannot you allow as much to the God of Wisdom?

40. Consider also, that the speediness of your Conversion when God first calls
you, does make you the more welcome, and is a thing exceeding pleasing to God.
Our Proverb is, A speedy gift is a double gift: If you ask any thing of a
friend, and he give it you presently, and cheerfully at the first asking, you
will think you have it with a good will: but if he stand long delaying first
and demurring upon it, you will think you have it with an ill will, and that
you owe him the smaller thanks. If a very beggar at your door must stay long
for an alms, he will think he is the less beholden to you. How much more may
God be displeased, when he must stay so long for his own, and that for your
benefit? God loves a cheerful giver; and consequently a cheerful Obeyer of
his call: And if it be hearty and cheerful, it is the liker to be speedy,
without such delays.

41. And I would desire you but to do with God as you would be done by* Would
you take it well of your Children if they should tear all their clothes, and
cast their meat to the dogs, and tread it in the dirt, and when you entreat
them to give over, they will not regard you? Would you stand month after month,
entreating and waiting on them, as God does on you, in a foolisher course? Or
rather would you not either soundly whip them, or take their meat from them,
till hunger teach them to use it better? If your servant will spend the whole
day and year, in drinking and playing, when he should do your work, will you
wait on him all the year with entreaties, and pay him at last, as if he had
served you? And can you expect that God should deal so by you?

42 And consider I pray you, that your Delay is a Denial, and so may God
interpret it. For the Time of your Turning, is part of the Command. He that
says Turn, says Now, even To day, without delay. He gives you no longer day:
If time be lengthned, and the of^er made again and again, that is more then he
promised you, or you could have promised your selves. His Command is, Now
Return and Live. And if you refuse the Time, the Present Time, you refuse the
offer, and forfeit the benefit. And if you knew but what it is, to give God a
denial in such a case as this, and what a case you were in if he should turn
away in wrath, and never come near you more, you would then be afraid of
jesting with his hot displeasure, or dallying with the Lord.

43. And me thinks you should remember, that God does not stay thus on all as
he does on you. Thousands are under burning and despair, and past all remedy,
while patience is waiting yet upon you. Can you forget that others are in Hell
at this very hour, for as small sins as those that you are yet entangled, and
linger in? Good Lord, what a thing is a senseless heart? That at the same time
when millions are in misery, for delaying or refusing to be Converted, their
successors should fearlesly venture in their steps. Surely if Faith had but
opened your ears, to hear the cries of those damned Souls, you durst not
imitate them by your Delays.

44. And I must tell you, that God will not always thus wait on you, and
attend you by his patience, as hitherto he has done. Patience has his
appointed time. And if you outstay that time, you are miserable wretches. I can
assure you Sirs, the glass is turned upon you; and when it is run out, you
shall never have an hour of patience more: Then God will no more entreat you
to be converted. He will not always stand over you with Salvation, and say, O
that this sinner would Repent and live! O that he would take the Mercies that I
have provided for him! Do not expect that God should do thus always with you:
for it will not be.

45. Your Delays do weary the Servants of Christ, that are employed for your
recovery. Ministers will grow weary of preaching to you, and persuading you:
When we come to men that were never warned before, we come in hopes, that they
will hear and obey: and this hope puts life, and earnestness into our
persuasions: But when we have persuaded men but a few times in vain, and leave
them as we found them, our spirits begin to droop and flag: Much more when we
have preached and persuaded you many years, and still you are the same, and are
but where you were: This dulls a Ministers spirit, and makes him preach heavily
and coldly, when he is almost out of heart and hope. I do not justify
Ministers in this, and say, they should do thus: I know they should not; and if
they were perfect they would not: but they are but men, and imperfect
themselves: and what man is able to be as lively and fervent in his work, when
people stir not, and he sees no good done on the miserable hearers, as if he
had the encouragement of success? O when we do but see the hearts of hardened,
stubborn sinners relent, and break, and melt before the power of the Word, and
when we hear them cry out for Christ and Mercy, and cry out against themselves
for their former folly, and confess their sins, and ask us what they shall do
to be saved? and are but willing to be ruled by Christ the Physician of their
Souls; this would put life into a Preacher that was cold and dull; this would
even make a stone to speak. But when we tell men of Gods threatenings till they
are past believing them, and tell you of Gods Anger till they seem to be past
fearing it, and tell them of the plague of sin, till they are past feeling;
when in stead of preaching men to Faith, and Repentance, and fear, and
tenderness of heart, we preach them into greater unbelief and carelessness, and
dead stupidity, this is enough to dull or break the heart of almost any
Preacher in the world: What man is able to sollow so fruitless a work with
liveliness? And then it is you that will have the loss, and danger of it: When
you have dried the breasts, the child may famish: If your Preachers could not
awake, and change you with all their convincing arguments, and fervency, how
quietly may you sleep on when you have flatted them by discouragements: If
Satan can either dismount, or make useless these Cannons, that were wont to
batter his garrison, he may then possess you Souls in peace. You talk against
persecutors that silenced Ministers: But O Sirs, it is you that are our
greatest persecutours, that refuse and delay to yield to the calls of Christ by
our Ministry, and make us labor so much in vain: Though it be not in vain as
to our own Souls, yet you make it in vain as to yours: When we have studied
till we almost break our brains, and preached till we have quite broke our
strength, and we are consumed, and worn away with labor, and bodily pains
that it procures, then you come after, and make us requital by breaking our
hearts, by your delays, and refusing to turn and live. Truly Sirs, I must tell
you for my own part, that if it had not been for those that gave me better
encouragment by their obedience, I should never have held out with you a
quarter of this time: If all had profited as little as some, and all had stuck
as fast in an unconverted state as some; if the humble penitent, obedient ones
among you, had not been my comfort, and encouragment under Christ, I had been
gone from you many a year ago; I could never have held out till now: either my
corruption would have made me run away with Jonas; or my judgment would have
commanded me to shake the dust of my feet, as a witness against you, and
depart: But to what end do I speak all this to you? To what end? Why? to let
you see how you abuse both God and man, by your Delays and disobedience. You
cannot possibly do us that are your Teachers, a greater injury or mischief in
the world. It is not in your power to wrong us more. Are our studies, and our
labors worth nothing, think you? Are our watchings and waiting, worth nothing?
Are our Prayers, and tears, and groan; to be despised? God will not despise
them if you do: Believe it, he will see them all on your score, and you will
on^ day have a heavy reconing of them, and pay full dear for them. Is it equal
dealing with us, that when we are watching for your Souls, as men that know we
must give an account, you should rob us of our comfort, and make us do it with
sighs and sorrow? Heb. 13. 17. Yea that you should undo all that we are doing,
and make us lose our labor and our hopes: And yet do you not think to pay for
this? I tell you again, unconverted sinners, we are wearied with your delays:
Many years we have been persuading you but to Turn and live, and yet you are
unturned: You have been convinced long, and thinking on it, and wishing long,
and talking of it, and promising long, and yet it is undone, and here is
nothing but delays. We see while you delay, death takes away one this week,
and another the next week, and you are passing into another world apase; and
yet those that are left behind will take no warning, but still delay: We see
that Satan delays not while you delay: He is day and night at work against
you: if he seem to make a truce with you, it is that he may be doing secretly
while you suspect him not: We see that sin delaieth not while you delay: It
is working like poison, or infection in your bodies, and seazing upon your
vital powers; it is every day blinding you more and more; it is hardening your
hearts more, and searing up your Consciences, to bring you past all feeling and
hope: And must we stand by, and see this miserable work with our peoples Souls,
and all be frustrate, and rejected by themselves, that we do for their
deliverance? How long must we stand by with the light in our hands, while you
are serving the flesh, and neglecting that which we are sent to call you to? It
is not our business to hold you the candle to play by, or to sleep by, or to
sin by: these are works that better agree with the dark: But God sent us to
you on another message; even to Light you out of your sins to him, that you
might be saved. Truly beloved hearers, I must needs say, that the time seems
long, and very long to me, that I have been preaching so many years to you for
Conversion, and for an Holy, Heavenly life, even since I first knew you, and
that yet so many of you are drowned in sin, and ignorance, and are
unconverted; when I think your very Consciences tell you that it is a thing
that must be done: I tell you all these years do seem to me a long time to wait
on you in vain: Blessed be the Lord that it has not been in vain with some;
or else I would scarce preach any more then one other Sermon to you, even to
bid you farewell. I pray you deal but fairly with us, and tell us whether ever
you will turn or not: If you will not, but are resolved for sin and Hell, say
so that we may know the worst; speak out your minds, that we may know what to
trust to: For if we once knew you would not turn, we would soon have done with
you, and leave you to the Justice of God. But if still you say, you will turn,
when will you do it? You will do it, and you hope you shall, but when? How long
would you have us wait yet? Have you not abused us enough? Nay I must tell you,
that you even weary God himself. It is his own expression, Mal. 2. 17. Isa. 43.
24. Thou have wearied me with thine iniquities, Isa. 1. 14. And I must say to
you as the Prophet, Isa. 7. 13. Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but
you will weary my God also? Consider what it is that you do.

46. Consider also that you are at a constant unspeakable loss every day and
hour that you Delay your Conversion. O little do you know what you deprive your
selves of every day. If a slave in the Galleys, or prison, might live at Court
as a favorite of the Prince, in honor, and delight, and ease, would he delay
either years, or hours? Or would he not rather think with himself, Is it not
better to be at ease, and in honor, then to be here. As the Prodigal said, How
many hired servants of my fathers have bread enough and to spare, and I perish
with hunger? All this while I might be in plenty, and delight. All the while
that you live in sin, you might be in the favor of God; in the high and
Heavenly employments of the Sants; you might have the comforts of daily
Communion with Christ, and with the Saints; you might be laying up for another
world, and might look death in the face, with Faith and confidence, as one that
cannot be conquered by it; you might live as the Heirs of Heaven on Earth: All
this and more then this, you lose by your delays: All the Mercies of God are
lost upon you: Your food and raiment, you health and wealth, which you set so
much by, all is but lost and worse then lost, for they turn to your greater
hurt: All our pains with you; and all the Ordinances of God which you possess;
and all your time, is lost and worss. And do you think it indeed a wise man's
part to live any longer at such a loss as this, and that wilfully and for
nothing? If you knew your loss, you would not think so.

47. Nay more, you are all this while doing that which must be undone again,
or you will be undone for ever. You are running from God; but you must come
back again or perish when all is done. You are learning an hundred carnal
lessons, and false conceits, that must be all unlearnt again: You are shutting
up your eyes in wilful ignorance; which must be opened again: You must lean the
Doctrine of Christ, the great Teacher of the Church, if you stay never so long,
or else you shall be cut of from his people, Acts 3. 22. and 7. 37. When you
have been long accustoming your selves to sin, you must unlearn, and break
all those customs again: You are hardening your hearts daily, and they must
again be softened. And I must tell you that though a little time, and labor may
serve to do mischief, yet it is not quickly undone again. You may sooner set
your house on fire, than quench it when you have done. You may sooner cut and
wound your bodies, then heal them again: And sooner catch a cold, or a disease,
then cure it: You may quickly do that which must be longer a undoing. Besides;
the cure is accompanied with pain: You must take many a bitter draught, in
groans or tears of godly sorrow, for these delays: The wounds that you are
now giving your Souls, must smart, and smart again, before they are searched and
healed to the bottom. And what man of wisdom would make himself such work and
sorrow. Who would travail on an hour longer, that knows he is out of his way,
and must come back again? Would you not think him a mad man that would say, I
will go on a little further, and then I will turn back?

I know Mr. Bilney the Martyr was offended with this comparison, because he
thought it was against Free Grace. But comparisons extend not to every respect:
There are two things in your sins to be undone: the one is the Guilt, and the
other is the Habit and power of sin: the first indeed is done away, when you
are Converted: but at the cost of Christ, which should not be made light of:
And yet some scarres may be left behind, and such twigs of Gods Rod may fall
upon you as shall make you wish you had come sooner in. And for the habit of
sin, though Conversion break the heart of it, yet will it live and trouble
you while you live: and those sins that now you are strengthening by your
delays, will be thorns in your sides, and rebels in your Country, and find you
work as long as you live. And thus I may well say that you are doing that while
you delay, that must be long in undoing, and will not be undone so easily as it
is done; and you are going on that way, that must be all trod backward.

48. And me thinks if it were but this, it should terrify you from your
Delays; that it is likely to make your Conversion more grievous, if you should
have so great Mercy from God, as after all to be Converted. There is very few
escape that are so exceeding long in travail: but if you come to the birth,
it is like to be with double pain. For God must send either some grievous
affliction to fire and frighten you out of your sins, or else some terrible
gripes of Conscience, that shall make you groan, and groan again, in the
feeling of your folly. The pangs and throws of Conscience, in the work of
Conversion, are far more grievous in some then in others. Some are even on the
wrack, and almost brought besides their wits, and the next step to desperation,
with horror of Soul, and the sense of the Wrath of God; so that they lie in
doubts and complaints many a year together; and think that they are even
forsaken of God. And to Delay your Conversion, is the way to draw on either
this or worse.

49. Consider also, that Delays are contrary to the very nature of the work,
and the nature of your Souls themselves. If indeed you ever mean to turn, it is
a work of have, and violence, and diligence that you must needs set upon: You
must strive to enter in, for the gate is strait, the way is narrow that leads
to life, and few there be that find it. Many shall seek to enter, and shall not
be able, Luke 33. 24, 25. When once the master of the house is risen up, and
has shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and knock at the door,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, he shall answer, I know you not whence you are:
depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity, verse. 27. It is a race that you are
to run, and Heaven is the prize. And you know that they which run in a race,
run all: but one receives the prize: and therefore you must so run, as that
you may win and obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. And what is more contrary to this
then Delay? You are Soldiers in fight, and your Salvation lies on the
victory: and will you trifle in such a case, when death or life is even at
hand? You are travailers to another world, and will you stay till the day is
almost past, before you will begin your journey? Christianity is a work of that
infinite consequence, and requires such speedy, and vigorous dispatch, that
Delay is more unreasonable in this then in any thing in all the world.

And besides, your Souls are Spirits, of an excellent active nature; that will
not be kept idle: and therefore Delay is unsuitable to their excellency. The
best and noblest creatures are most active: The basest are most dull, and unfit
for action: The earth will stand still: You may easily keep clods and stones
from moving: But fire and winds that are purer things, and the Sun, and such
nobler sublimer creatures, you are not able to keep idle for an hour. Who can
cause the Sun to delay its Course? or who can stay the ascending flames? And
therefore to your more excellent immortal Souls, and that in a work that must
needs be done, how exceeding unsuitable are Delays?

50. If all this will not serve turn, let me tell you, that while you are
Delaying, your Judgment does not delay; and that when it comes, these Delays
will multiply your misery, and the remembrance of them, will be your
Everlasting torment. What ever you are thinking of, or what ever you are doing,
your dreadful doom is drawing on apace; and misery will overtake you, before
you are aware. When you are in the Alehouse little thinking of damnation, even
then is your damnation coming in have: when you are drowned in the pleasures,
or cares of the world, your judgment is still hastening. You may delay, but it
will not delay. It is the saying of the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 2. 3. Whose judgment
now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbreth not. You may
slumber, and that so carelessly that we cannot awake you: but your damnation
slumbreth not, nor has not done of a long time, while you thought it slumbred;
and when it comes, it will awaken you. As a man that is in a coach on the road,
or a boat on the water, what ever he is speaking, or thinking, or doing, he is
still going on, and hastening to his journeies end, or going down the stream:
So what ever you think, or speak, or do, whether you believe it, or mock at it,
whether you sleep or wake, whether you remember it or forget it, you are
hastening to damnation, and you are every day a day nearer to it then before:
and it is but a little while till you shall feel it. Behold the Judge stands
before the door, Jam. 5. 9. The Holy Ghost has told you, The Lord is at hand,
Phil. 4. 5. The day is at hand; the time is at hand; the end of all things is
at hand, Romans 13. 12. Rev. 22. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 7. Behold, says the Lord, I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man according as his work
shall be, Rev. 22. 12. And do you as it were see the Judge approaching, and
damnation hasting on, and yet will you delay?

And withal consider, that when it comes, it will be most sore to such as you:
and then what thoughts do you think you shall have of these Delays? You are
unable to conceive how it will torment your Consciences, when you see that all
your hopes are gone, to think what you have brought your selves to, by your
trifling: To feel your selves in remediless misery, and remember how long the
Remedy was offered you, and you Delaied to use it, till it was too late. To see
that you are for ever shut out of Heaven, and remember that you might have had
it as well as others; but you lost it by Delay. Oh then it will come with
horror into your mind, How often was I persuaded, and told of this? how often had
I inward motions to return? how often was I purposed to be holy, and to give up
my heart and life to God? I was even ready to have yielded; but I still
delaied, and now it is too late. Then you shall pay for all our warnings, and
all the Sermons and motions which you lost.

And now having laid you down no less then fifty moving Considerations, if it
be possible to save you from these Delays, I conclude with this Request to you
whoever you be that read these words; that you would but consider of all these
Reasons, and then entertain them as they deserve. There is not one of them
that you are able to gainsay; much less all of them. If after the reading of
all these, you can yet believe that you have reason to delay, your
understandings are forsaken of God: But if you are forced to confess that you
should not Delay, what will you do then? Will you obey God, and your own
Consciences, or will you not? Will you Turn this hour without delay? Take heed
of denying it, lest you have never such a motion more: You know not, but God
that calls you to it, may be resolved, that it should be now or never. I do
beseech you, yea as his messenger I charge you in his Name, that you Delay not
an hour longer, but presently be resolved, and make an unchangeable Covenant
with God; and as ever you would have favor in that day of your distress, delay
not now to accept his favor, in the day of your visitation. O what a blessed
family were that, which upon the Reading of this, would presently say, We have
done exceeding foolishly in Delaying so great a matter so long: Let us agree
together to give up our selves to God without any more Delay. This shall be the
day: we will stay no longer. The flesh, and the world, and the Devil, have had too
much already: It Is a wonder of patience that has borne with us so long: we
will abuse the patience of God no longer; but begin to be absolutely his this
day. If this may be the effect of these exhortations, you shall have the
everlasting blessing: But if still you Delay, I hope I am free from the guilt
of your blood.

DIRECT. XII. The last Direction that I shall give you, for preventing your
miscarriage in the work of Conversion is this: Stop not in weak and wavering
Purposes, and faint attempts: but see that you be groundedly, unreservedly, and
habitually (or firmly) Resolved.

There are many good thoughts, and meanings in the Soul, before Resolution: but
you are not truly Converted, till you are Resolved, and thus Resolved as is
here expressed. Here I shall show you, 1. What this Resolution is. 2. Why it is
so necessary: and 3. I shall urge you to resolve: and 4. I shall Direct you in
it.

1. Resolution is the firm or prevalent Determination of the Will upon
Deliberation,

In opening this Definition, I shall first show you how we are led up to
Resolution by Deliberation: and 2. What is this Determination of the will.

There are several steps, by which the will does rise up to Resolution, which I
shall set before you. And first it is presupposed that in the state of
corrupted Nature, the Soul is unresolved for God, if not (in many that are
exceeding wicked) Resolved against him. At first the sinner does either Resolve
to be as he is, or else he has no Resolution to Return. But God breaks many a
wicked Resolution, or else woe to the ungodly; for there were no hope. Many
wicked wretches, have not only neglected their Souls; but also Resolved that
they would never lead a Holy life, nor never join themselves to the Communion
of Saints, nor never leave their drunken company, or be so precise, and make so
great a matter of sin, as the Godly do* When we urge them with the plainest
Words of God, and the most unquestionable Reasons, so that they have not a word
of sense to speak against it. When we have told them of the Command of God, and
told them of the certain danger of their Souls, they will plainly tell us that
they are Resolved never to be so precise: When they have nothing else to say,
but nonsense, they will put us off with this, that they are Resolved to venture
their Souls without so much ado. But as Resolute as they are, God will break
and chang their Resolution, and make them as much Resolved of the clean
contrary, if ever he will save them. For woe to them that ever they were born,
if he should take them at their word, and Resolve as they Resolve!

Now in this case there are many degrees that men go through, before they come
to be Resolved for God.

1. The first thing usually that befalls such a Soul, is some further Light,
which shows him that which before he understood not. 2. This Light causes him
to begin to Doubt, whether all be so well with him as he thought it had been;
and whether he were so wise in his former Resolutions as he thought himself. 3.
When Light has bred these Doubtings in his mind, these Doubtings breed some
Fears within him, and he begins to be a little awakened. Lest evil be nearer
him then he was aware of, and lest the threatenings of God, and his Ministers
should prove true. 4. These Fears do drive him to Consider of the matter, and
to Deliberate what he is best to do: To consider whether these things be so or
not, and what course he must take if they should prove true. 5. Though
sometimes God may bless the very first Considerations to be the present means
of true conversion, yet that is no usual thing; but ordinarily the first
Considerations do help the mind to some slight convictions, so that the man
begins to see a great deal more then he did before; and so much as puts him now
past doubt that he was before mistaken; and out of the way. 6. Finding himself,
in this case, his fears increase, and his grief comes on for his former folly,
and he finds himself in a miserable case, and at a loss for a Remedy. 7. By
this much he is quickened to a purpose or resolution, to hearken to those that
can instruct him, and enquire of them that he thinks are in the right, and to
use such means as he is acquainted with, to find out what he must do to be
saved. And accordingly he goes among good company, and begins to hear more
diligently, and sensibly, and to mark, and regard what he hears, and reads; and
also to cry to God in Prayer for mercy and relief. But all this is but from the
Natural Fears of misery, awakened in him by Common preparing Grace. 8. In the
use of these Means of Grace, he begins better to understand, and relish the
Doctrine of Redemption by Jesus Christ, and the nature and necessity of true
Sanctification by the Holy Ghost. And though sometime these Evangelical
Illuminations may be special saving works at the very first, yet it is more
usual, especially with us that are bred up under the Gospel, to have a more
superficial common Illumination, before the saving Light come in. And by this
common Light, men have at first but a general glimmering, and confused Knowledge
of a Savior, and of Redemption, and of Mercy to be had by him. And sometime
they have a distinct Knowledge of some parts only of the Christian Faith; and
sometime a distinct Knowledge, and belief of every Article; but only
superficial, and not savingly effectual. 9. By this general, or superficial
Knowledge of Christ, and Mercy, a kind of Hope arises in the heart, that yet
there is a possibility of escape: and a kind of comfort answerable to this
Hope. 10. These Hopes are accompanied with some Desires to understand yet more
of the Mystery of the Gospel; and to be made partakers of the saving Mercy of
which he has had a confused light. 11. And hereupon there is further kindled
in the will, a Purpose, or Resolution to go further on in learning, and
enquiring into the Will of God, and using his means: And 12. This purpose is
performed, and means are further used. And thus far the Soul is but in
Preparation, and under the common works of Grace, and possibly may fall off
and perish. The first degree may be so stifled, that it shall not reach unto
the second; or the second so stifled that it shall not reach unto the third:
But the most common stop is at the third degree: when men are a little
frightened, they will not follow it on to Consideration: And they that follow
Consideration diligently, do usually speed well, and get through all the rest.

But when the Soul is brought thus far, if God will save it, he next proc^eds
to this much more: 1. He gives a clearer Light into the Soul, which gives a
more distinct, or at least a more piercing, convincing, deep and savoury
apprehension of the essentials of Christianity then he ever had before.

Where note of this special Heavenly light, 1. The being, usually the
Consequent of a more common knowledge, therefore most ordinarily the sum of
Christian Doctrine is in some manner known before. 2. That it does not reveal
only some one point of Faith alone, and then another, and so on: as if we
savingly knew one essential point of Faith, when we have no saving Knowledge of
the rest: For that is a Contradiction. But finding all these Truths received in
the mind before by a common Knowledge, the special Light comes in upon them all
at once; and so shows us the Anatomy of Christianity, or the parts of Gods
Image in one frame, as to the essentials. 3. For the understanding of which you
must further know, that there is such an inseparable connection of these
Truths, and such a dependence of one upon another, that it is not possible to
know one of them truly, and not know all. For example, Believing in Jesus
Christ, is an act so inseparable from the rest, that (if the essentials of
Christianity be not essential to it) certainly you cannot do this without them.
For to Believe in Christ, is essentially to believe in him as God and man, two
Natures in one Person, by Office the Mediator, our Redeemer and Savior, to
save us from guilt and sin, from punishment, and pollution, and to give us by
the Holy Ghost, a Holy nature and life, and to give us the forgiveness of
sin, and Everlasting life, and so to restore us to the mutual Love of God
here, and fruition of him hereafter: and all this as merited and procured by
his Death, Obedience, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession for his Church.
Whether here be all that is Essential to Christianity, and absolutely necessary
to Salvation to be believed, I leave to consideration; but sure I am that all
this is Essential to saving Justifying Faith. And Christ is not taken as
Christ, if he be not thus taken: For the Ends thus enter the definition of his
Relation as the Redeemer, and Savior, and Lord.

So that the Love of God as our felicity and End, and the belief in Christ, as
the way, are both together in the same minute of time, which soever of them be
first in order of nature: (which is a question that I dare not here so
unseasonably handle)

2. Upon this special Illumination of the Soul, and the special Consideration
with which it does concur; the Deliberating Soul is presently Resolved. And
in these two Acts which always go together, consists the special Sanctifying
Work: Even in the Illumination, and Estimation of the Understanding, and in the
true Resolution of the Will.

2. The Determination of the Will, is its own free act, performed by its
natural self determining power, procured by the special Grace of God (I mean in
this special case) It follows Deliberation. While we are unresolved, we
Deliberate what to Resolve upon; that is, we are considering which is best and
most eligible, and which not; and as we practically judge, we use to Determine,
and to choose. And when this choice after Deliberation is peremtory and full,
it is called Resolution.

So that my meaning is to let you understand, that when the Matter of our Faith
is set open to the Soul, it is not a wavering fickle purpose, that is a saving
closure with it, but it must be a firm Resolution. Much less will it ever bring
a man to Heaven, to be thinking and deliberating what to do, as long as he is
unresolved. And now I shall prove the Necessity of this.

II. Till you are Resolved, you are not Converted, and that appears by these
Evidences. 1. If you are not firmly Resolved, it is certain that you do not
firmly believe. For such as your Belief is, such will be the effects of it upon
the Will. An unsound Opinionative belief, will produce but tottering,
languishing purposes: but a firm belief will cause a firm Resolution of the
Will. And if your belief be unsound, you must confess you are unconverted.

2. Moreover, if you do not esteem God above all Creatures, and Heaven above
Earth, and Christ and Grace above sin, you are certainly unconverted. But if
you have such a true estimation, you will certainly have a firm Resolution. For
you will Resolve for that which you highly esteem.

3. If God have not your firm Resolution, he has not indeed your Heart and
Will: For to give God your Hearts and Wills, is principally by firm Resolving
for him. And if God have not your Hearts, you are sure unconverted.

4. Moreover, if you are not firmly Resolved, your Affections will not be
sincere and steadfast. For all the Affections are such as to their sincerity, as
the Will is, which does excite or command them And nothing is more mutable then
the Affections in themselves considered: They will be hot to day, and cold to
morrow, if they be not rooted in the firm Resolution of the Will, which is the
life of them.

5. Lastly, Without a firm Resolution, there can be no faithful obedience and
execution, of the Will of God. For if men be not Resolved, they will heavily go
on, and lazilie proceed, and easily come off: For their hands go to work
without their hearts. It is the greatest work in all the world, that God calls
you to; and none but the Resolved are able to go through with it. Of which we
shall give you a fuller account anon.

III. In the next place, let me entreat you, in the fear of God, to look after
this great and Necessary part of your Conversion. There are many degrees of
good motions in the mind; but all that falls short of Resolution is un^ound.
Many are brought to Doubt whether all be well with them, and to have some fears
thereupon* that yet will not be brought so far as to consider soberly of the
matter, and deliberate what is best to be done, and to advise with their
Ministers for the furthering of their Salvation. Many that are persuaded so far
as to consider, and deliberate, and take advice, yet go no further then some
cold wishes, or purposes, which are all overcome by the love of the world, and
the power of their sins Many that do proceed to some kind of Practice, do
only take a taste, or an essay of Religion, to try how they can like it; and
begin some kind of outward Reformation, without any firm Resolution to go
through with it: Or if their purposes seem strong, it is but occasioned by
something without, and not from a settled habit within. All these are short of a
state of special Saving Grace, and must be numbered with the unconverted.

It is a common, and very dangerous mistake, that many are undone by, to think
that every good Desire is a certain sign of Saving Grace: Whereas you may have
more then bare Desires, even purposes, and promises, and some performances, and
yet perish for want of Resolution, and Regeneration. (...) Do you think that
Judas himself had not some good Desires, that followed Christ so long, and
preached the Gospel? Do you think that Herod had not some good Desires, that
heard John gladly, and did many things accordingly? Agrippa had some good
Desires, when he was almost persuaded to be a Christian. They that for a time
believe have sure some good Desires, and more, Matthew. 13. 20. And so had the
young man, that went away sorrowful from Christ, when he could not be his
Disciple; unless he would part with all that he had, Luke 18. 23. Matthew. 19.
22. And doubtless those had more then good Desires, that had known the way of
Righteousness, and had escaped the pollutions of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. And so had
those, Heb. 10. 26, 29. That had received the knowledge of the Truth, and were
Sanctified by the blood of the Covenant. And those Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. That were
once enlightened, and tafted of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to
come. And sure Ananias and Saphira had more then some good Desires, when they
sold all, and brought half the price to the Apostles.

Believe it Sirs, there are none of your Desires, or Endeavors, that will
serve turn, to prove you in a state of Grace, unless they be accompanied with
firm Resolution. Be it known to you that you are unconverted, if you are not
habitually Resolved. And therefore I must here entreat you all, to put the
question close to your hearts, Are you Resolved; firmly Resolved, to give up
your selves and all to Christ, and to be wholly his, and follow his conduct? or
are you not? The question is not, what good meanings, or wishes, or purposes,
you may have, but whether you are Resolved, and firmly Resolved? Take heed
Sirs, what you venture your Souls upon: God will not be dallied with, nor be
deceived. He will have no unresolved, false-hearted servants.

Before I proceed to urge you further, I shall here tell you what kind of
Resolution it must be, that will prove a man converted: and then I shall give
you such Motives as should persuade you to it.

It is not all kind of Resolution that will serve turn; but it is only that
which has these following properties, that will evidence a state of Grace.

1. As to the Matter, it must be the whole Essence of Christianity, that must
be Resolved on. It must be no less then a closing with God as your chiefest
happiness, to be Loved above all, and as your chiefest Lord to be obeyed before
all: and a closing with Jesus Christ, as your only Savior, your Teacher, and
your Lord; to bring your hearts again to God, and reconcile you to him: and a
closing with the Holy Ghost as your Sanctifier, to make you a holy people, and
cleanse you from all your sin of heart and life, and guide you by the
Ministry, Word, and Ordinances, to Everlasting life. Thus must you Resolve to
deliver up your selves to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be made a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. Should you be never so Resolute in some
point of Religion, and as Ananias to give God Half, and to become half
Religious, and half Holy, and half Heavenly, this is but to be half Christians,
and will not bring you half way to Heaven: It Is entire Christianity that must
be Resolved on.

2. You must also be Resolved for present obedience, and to turn without any
more delay; and not only Resolve to turn to morrow, or sometime hereafter. No
Resolution is sincere in this case, if it be but for the future: If you had
rather stay but one day or hour longer in the state of sin, and service of
the flesh, you are no true Disciples of Christ, though you should be Resolved
to turn to morrow.

3. And your Resolution must be Absolute and peremptory, not only without any
secret Reserves, but Positively against any such Reserves. Here it is that
Hypocrites commonly fall short: They see they must mend, and they are convinced
that a holy life is necessary, and they Resolve hereupon to change their
course, and turn religious: but either it is with this secret Reserve, Provided
always that I look to my credit, or estate, or life, what ever I do, and
provided that I go no further in Religion then will stand with these; provided
that godliness be not my undoing in the world. Or else if he have not actually
such thougths, he has them always virtually, and habitually: He is not
Resolved against such Reserves: He has not considered that Christ will have no
Disciples that cannot and will not part with all; and that if he hope for
Heaven, he must not look for a treasure on earth, but only pass through the
world as a travailer, or labor in it as the harvest of the Lord, in
expectation of a Reward and Rest hereafter; and so Resolved to take Christ on
these self denying terms. But he that will be saved must be thus resolved: Even
to sell all, to buy the unvaluable pearl, Matthew. 13. 46, 47. To make sure of
Heaven, though he lose all on Earth by it: to lay up his hopes in the life to
come, and venture, and let go all rather then those hopes: to take Christ
absolutely upon his own terms, for better and worse, as being certain that
there is no other way to life, and that there is no danger of losing by him.
The Hypocrite is like a man that when he delivers up the possession of his
house, will make his bargain, that he will keep this room, or that room to
himself, for his own use. Or like a servant that will not be hired but on
Condition that his Master shall not set him to such or such work that he loves
not: But Christ will have no such servants: You must deliver up all to him, or
he will accept of none: You must give him leave to make his Conditions for you,
and tell you on what terms you must serve him, and wholly refer the matter to
him, even for life it self, and not offer to put Conditions upon him, and think
to bring him to any terms of yours. It is not true Resolution unless it be
Absolute, and unreserved, and against all reserves: Yea, and that also as to
perseverance; that you Resolve to give up your selves finally as well as
totally, not only without any Reserve of a Revocation, but against any such
Revocation: It must not be a coming to Christ upon essay, or mere trial, that
if you do not like you may leave again: But you must make an unchangable
everlasting Covenant: It must be part of your Covenant, that you will never
revoke it.

4. Moreover, your Resolution must be well grounded: You must know what the
Essentials are of that Religion which you Resolve on, and you must be moved to
it by right and weighty Considerations; and go upon reasons that will hold up
your Resolution. For should you Resolve on the most necessary work (as this is)
upon mistakes, and wrong, or insufficient Reasons, as the will of man, the
custom of the country, the reputation of Christianity, or only such like; there
is no likelihood that your Resolution should endure, and it is not sincere
while it does endure.

5. Your Resolution must be accompanied with a sense of your own insufficiency,
to stand to it immutably, and execute it faithfully by your own strength; as
knowing the corruption, and deceitfullness of our own heart: And it must be
strengthened, and supported by a confidence, or dependence on the sufficiency of
Christ. on whose Grace, and Spirit you must rely, both for the continuing, and
the performing of your Resolutions; as knowing that without him you can do
nothing, but that you can do all things (necessary) through Christ strengthening
you.

6. Lastly, Your Resolution is not Savingly sincere, unless it be habitually.
It is a very hard question, how far some moving exhortation, or the approach of
death in sickness, may prevail with the unsanctified for an Actual Resolution:
Undoubtedly very far: But that is a man's mind and will which is Habitually his
mind and will: When the very Inclination, and bent of your will is Right, then
only is your heart right. A bowl may by a rub, or banck, be turned contrary to
the byas: but when it is over the rub it will follow the byas again in its
ordinary course. The flame may be hindered from assending a little while, but
when it is got over the stop, it will be mounting upward. A stone will move
upwards against its Nature, while it is followed by the strength of the hand
that cast it; but when the strength is spent, it will quickly fall again. It is
not an extraordinary act, that you can try your selves by, but such a free
course and tenor of your lives, as will prove that you have a new Nature, or a
heart Inclined and Habituated to God. The main business therefore is to prove
that you are Habituallly Resolved. Set all these together now, and you may see
what Resolution it is, that must prove you to be Converted. 1. It must be a
Resolution for all the Essence of Christianity, and not only some part. 2. It
must be a Resolution for present Obedience, and not only for some distant time
to come: 3. It must be an Absolute, peremptory Resolution, without and against
Reserves for the flesh: both Total, and final; without and against any
Revocation. 4. It must be soundly grounded; and moved by right Principles: 5.
It must be joined with a humble sense of your insufficiency, and a dependence
on Christ, for continuing, and performing it. And 6. It must be Habitual, and
such as sets right the bent and drift of heart and life. All this is of
Necessity.

Well Sirs; you see now what you must do: the next question then is, what you
will do? A great many of motions God has made to you, to let go your
worldliness, and wickedness, and become New Creatures, and live to God, and
never could you be got to Resolve, and obey them. Many thoughts you have had of
it, I suppose; and long you have been purposing that: Turn you would; but all
have come to little or nothing, because you were never fully Resolved. I am
once more sent to you on this message from God, to see whether yet you will
Resolve: Whether after all you trifling delays, and after all your wilful
sinning, and abuse of Gods Patience, against your own knowledge and Consciences,
you will yet Resolve. What say you? Shall God be your Master indeed, and shall
Christ be your Savior and Lord? Shall Heaven be your happiness, and have your
hearts indeed? Shall Holiness be your business indeed? and shall sin be your
hatred, and the flesh and the world be your enemies indeed, and used
accordingly from this day forward, without any more ado? I beseech you Sirs
Resolve, and fully Resolve.

And because I know if we prevail not with you in this you are undone for
ever, and therefore I am loath to let you go before we have brought you, if it
may be, to Resolve: I will give you here some Considerations to turn the
scales, and if you will but read them, and soberly consider of them, I shall
have great hope to prevail with you, yet after all. One would think that the
fifty Considerations under the last Direction might suffice: But lest all
should be too little, I will add these following.

1. Consider I beseech you, what leisure you have had to think of the matter.
You have lived many years in the world already; and you have had nothing to do
in it, but to seek after true Happiness: Even your worldly labors ought to
have been all but in order to this. And yet are you unresolved? Alas Sirs, have
you lived some twenty some thirty years and more in the world, and yet are you
not Resolved, what you came hither for, or what you have to do here? Is it
twenty, or thirty, or forty years, since you set out, and should by this time
have been far on your journey, and are you yet unresolved whither to go, or
which way to go? As if you were newly entering the world, or as if you had
never heard of your business. I think so many years are a fair time of
Consideration, and it is time to be Resolved, if you will Resolve at all.

2. And I pray you consider, what Helps you have had to have Resolved you
before this. If you did not know what you had to look after, and which way to
take, you should have enquired: You had the Word of God to advise with; and you
had your Teachers to advise with; and many experienced Christians to advise
with. You wanted not for the wisest faithfulest Counsailers; if you had been
but willing and diligent, certainly you might have been Resolved long ago.

3 And consider I beseech you, what a case it is that you are unresolved in: Is
it so hard a question that all this time, and all these helps cannot Resolve
you? What? whether God or the flesh should be first obeyed, and loved? Whether
Heaven or Earth* Eternal Glory or the transitory pleasures of sin should be
preferred? Whether you should care and labor more to be saved from sin and
Hell, or from poverty and worldly crosses, and reproaches? These, and such like
are the questions to be Resolved: And are these so hard, that all your wit, and
all the advice you can have from Scripture and Ministers, would not serve turn
to help you to a Resolution, no not in twenty or thirty years time? O
wonderful! that ever the Devil should be able so to befool men! That Reasonable
Creatures should be so phrenet^ck, that they cannot be resolved whether it be
better be saved, or be damned? or whether sin with Hell after it, be better
than Holiness with Heaven after? The Lord have Mercy upon the poor distracted
world, and bring some more of them to their wits! We have Wise men, if
themselves may be judges; very wise in their own conceit, that know many great
matters in the world, and yet do not practically know whether God or the Devil
be the better master; whether sin or Holiness be the better work; and whether
Heaven or Hell be the betther wages? If they say They know these things, judge
by their lives whether they know them Practically or not? Resolve they will not
for God, and Holiness, and Heaven, nor against the flesh, the world, and sin;
whatever they may be brought to confess to their self-condemnation. Is it not a
pitiful case, that such points as these, should seem so hard to reasonable
men, as to be so long in Resolving of them?

4. And I pray you Consider, How horribly by this you disgrace your
understandings. You that cannot abide to be derided as sots and fools in the
world, do yet abuse your selves thus grossly, as i^ there were never greater
sots scarce upon the Earth. We have proud men that are so high in their now
eyes, that they can hardly endure contempt from others, and love almost none
that think but meanly or dishonourably of them; and yet what a horrible
contempt and dishonor do they cast upon themselves? If one of these our wise
neighbors, should study seven years, to know whether the Sea be fire or
water, whether a mountain be heavy? Whether the fire be hot or cold? and could
not be Resolved after so many years Consideration; what would you think and say
of these wise men? Why Sirs, it is far grosser folly, I tell you again, it is
far grosser folly, to be unresolved whether you should be Holy or unholy? which
is in plain English, whether it be better go to Heaven or to Hell? For Faith
and Holiness is the way to Heaven; and an unholy life is the way to Hell: And
if you will needs forsake the way to Heaven, you may hope to come thither as
long as you will; but you may as well hope to touch the Moon with your finger,
or to run up and down with a mountain on your backs. And if you will hold on
in the way to Hell, that is, in an unsanctified state, you may say you hope for
all that to escape Hell, even as wisely as to leap into the Sea, and say I hope
to escape drowning, or to throw down your selves headlong from the top of the
steeple, and say I hope to escape hurting me, as well as you. Sirs, I beseech
you do not abuse God, and abuse Christ, and the Spirit, and Scripture, and
withal abuse your immortal Souls, for I know not what; for a stinking sin; for
a thing of naught: Your Souls are noble Creatures, and your understandings are
noble faculties: Why will you expose them to be the scorn of Satan, and make
them so base and sottish as you do? You can see the folly of a poor drunkard,
that will make a beast of himself, and go reeling and talking nonsense about
the street, for the boys to hoot at him, and make himself the laughing stock
of the town: And I pray you why do you not understand, that till you are
Resolved for a Holy, Heavenly life, you are all drunk, while you think your
selves to be sober? You are as miserable as the other, and more in this, that
yours is in your natures, and theirs is but an accident; yours is continued,
and theirs (in that particular) but by fits. In the Name of God Sirs, bethink
you, whether you can possibly more disgrace your wits, then to be unresolved of
a case as plain as the high way, and which your Everlasting Salvation or
damnation lies on? If one of you could not in twenty years be Resolved;
whether the the Sun be light or dark, or whether the day or the night be
fitter for rest; or whether it be better plow and sow, or let all alone, and
hope God will give you a crop without labor; would you take this for a wise
man? Again I tell you, your folly is more gross, that cannot all this while be
Resolved, whether you should cast away your wilful sins, and give up your
selves to Christ, and a Holy life, to obtain the Glory, and escape the misery
that is hard at hand. If you stood up to the neck in the water, or stood but in
a storm of rain, you would not be so long in deliberating, whether it were
better for you to stay there longer or come out. If your finger were but in the
fire, you need not so long a deliberation, whether you should take it out. Any
yet these wise men, are under many thousand unpardoned sins, and under the
curse of the Law of God, and within a step of everlasting fire, and have no way
possible to escape, but by Conversion, Faith and Holiness; and this God has
told them, as plain as the tongue of man can speak, and yet they are
Considering of it, whether it be best to come out of it; and yet they cannot be
Resolved? Did I say They are Consid^ring? Nay, the Lord be merciful to them,
they are so deadhearted and besotted, that they do not so much as seriously
Consider of it: But even run on without Consideration: Ah poor wretches! They
are ready to go to another world, and may look every day when the bell toles
for them, and when death will bring them to their endless life, and yet they
have not wit enough, to Resolve whether they should make ready: no nor with
enough in their most carless, worldly state, to know that they are unready.
Death is coming, and Judgment is coming, and the burning Wrath of God is
coming, and are even at the door; and yet these wise men are unresolved of
that only way that is of absolute necessity to their safety; They must have
more time yet to consider of the matter, whether it be best for them to turn or
no? They stand at the very brink of Hell; and yet they must further consider of
it, whether it be better to turn back or to go on: Nay they will go on without
Consideration! And yet these men would take it ^aynously, if one should lay
hands on them, and carry them to Bedlam; or but tell them of the hundredth part
of the sottishness that they are guilty of.

5. And it is further considerable, that these men that are all this while
unresolved, about their Conversion and Sanctification, have wit enough to
resolve of doubtfuller, and less necessary matters, without any such advising
or delays: And they are men of ordinary parts and capacities, for the matters
of this world. They can eat when they are hungry, and drink when they are
thirsty, without a twelve-months tim^ to advise first on it: They can resolve
to go to bed at night, and to rise in the morning, without a years or a days
deliberation. If they have any thing to buy or sell, they will not deliberate
upon it till the market be past: If they have their land to plow, or their ^orn
to sow, or reap, or mow, they will not take a twelve months time to pause upon
it. They can quicky Resolve upon their every-daies business, their travails,
their labors, and all their ordinary affairs. And yet these same men cannot
Resolve in seven years time, and seven to that, whether Heaven or Earth
should be more loved and labored for? Or whether a corruptible flesh, a wicked
fancy, a greedy throat, should be pleased before the God of Heaven, though the
pleasing of it cost them the loss of their Salvation?

Why Sirs, a man that is well in his wits, would think that these matters
should be more out of doubt then the former, and speedilier resolved on? One
would think it should be an easier question, whether you should turn to God and
a Holy life, for the saving of your immortal Souls? then whether you should
eat, or drink, or sleep, for the preservation of your bodies? For I can in
many cases bring some reason that should persuade you to forbear eating, or
drinking, or sleeping for a considerable time: but no man breathing can speak a
word of reason (except men's folly should be called Reason,) that should
persuade you to forbear your Conversion for a minute. And if you mistake about
these bodily matters, the loss may be repaired, at least in the world to come:
but if you die before you are Resolved, and firmly Resolved, to give up your
Soul and body to Christ, and live a Holy, Heavenly life, you are undone body
and Soul for ever, and all the world can never save you.

Oh what a strange and horrible thing is it, that a man that has the wit to
manage his affairs as plausibly as any of his neighbors, that can overwit
others in the matters of the world; that can govern Towns and Countries; that
is learned in his Profession, in Law, in Physic, in Merchandise, in
Navigation, or any the like; I say, that a man of so deep a reach, so plodding
and active a wit as this, should yet be unresolved, yea at 30 or 40 years old
be unresolved, whether to be Sanctified or unsanctified; whether to be Holy and
be Saved, or to be unholy, though God has professed expressly that such shall
not see the face of God, Heb. 12. 14. These are our wise men, these are too
many (besides the ignorant country men) of our Gentlemen, our Worshipful, and
Honorable men, our great Scholars, and men of noble or reverend esteem; that
yet are unresolved, whether to be saved or to be damned. Though God has
written a Bible to Resolve them, and a thousand books are written to Resolve
them; and Preachers are studying, and preaching to Resolve them; and a thousand
mercies are cast into the scales, that one would think should help to turn
them; and some sharp afflictions are helping to Resolve them; and twenty, or
forty years certain experience, of the vanity of this world, the
deceitfullness of riches, and honor, and pleasure, and the unprofitableness of
sin, one would think should Resolve them; yet after all this they are
unresolved, whether they should presently let go their sin, and whether God,
or the flesh should be pleased or displeased? If this be the wisdom of these
men, the Lord bless me, and all his chosen, from such wisdom!

6. Nay consider further of your unreasonable wickedness: Are not many of your
Judgments Resolved, when yet your hearts and wills are unresolved. I am
confident, nay I am certain it is so. You are at once both Resolved and
unresolved. What a confusion and war do you thus make in your own Souls? The
Judgment is for one thing, and the Will and Affections are for another thing.
What? are you not led by Reason? Will you let out your Affections, and lead
your lives, quite contrary to your knowledge. Would not most of you give it me
as your Judgments under your hands, that it is a thousand times better to cast
away your drunkenness, your filthiness, your worldliness, and other known
sins, then to keep them any longer? What say you? are you not Convinced that
it were your wisest course to part with them this very day and hour?
Undoubtedly many of you are. And yet for all this will you not Resolve to do
it? Are you not persuaded in your Consciences, that it is better to dye in a
Holy and Heavenly state, then in a loose and careless worldly state? And that it
were your safest, and wisest course to become New men, and lead a Holy Heavenly
life without delay. Dare you deny this? Is it not your Judgment? And yet will
you not do it? Are you Resolved that it should be done, and must be done, and
yet will you not Resolve to do it? Why what is this but to be condemners of
your selves? to carry a Judge about with you in your own breasts, that is still
passing sentence against you? Happy is he (says the Spirit of God, Romans 14.
22.) that condemns not himself in that which he allows. If your Judgments
be Resolved, let your Wills Resolve, or else you are wilful adersaries of the
light, and fight against Reason, and unman your selves, and sinning wilfully
against your Knowledge, shall be beaten with many stripes.

7. Me thinks also it should somewhat quicken you to Resolve, when you consider
what a case you had now been in, if death had found you unresolved. For if you
are unresolved, you are unsanctified; and if not Sanctified, you are not
pardoned, or justified, and therefore undoubtedly you had been past all help,
in endless misery, if you had died all this while, before you were firmly
Rosolved for God. O what a dangerous ticklish condition have you stood in all
this while? What wise man would live an hour in such a case for all the world?
For fear lest that hour should be his last. And yet would you stay longer in
it? and still are you unresolved?

8. Believe it, Christ will not own you as his servants, nor trust you what
ever promises you may make him, as long as you are unresolved. Who will take a
servant that is not resolved to do any service? Who will take an unresolved
person if he knows it, as a wife, or friend into his intimate love? And indeed
you are not truly Christians till you are Resolved to take Christ for better
and worse. What ever state is short of this, is also short of true
Sanctification, and will fall short of Heaven. Christ is Resolved to stick to
his servants, and he will have no servants, that be not resolved to stick to
him.

9. And indeed if you be unresolved; as you are falshearted at the first
setting out, so it is certain that you wll never go well on, nor endure to the
end in case of trial, nor can you do the business of a Christian life, without
Resolution. If you will be Christ's Disciples, you must reckon upon
persecutions: You must take up your Cross and follow him: You must be hated of
all men for his sake and the Gospels; and you must prepare for prison, and
fire, and sword. There Is no hope of being saved, while you purpose to save your
pleasures, riches, liberties, or lives, Matthew. 16. 25. Mark 8. 35. Luke 9. 24.
And will a man that is unresolved forsake his friends, estate, and life, for
the sake of Christ, and the hopes of Glory? He cannot do it. I know that a
carnal ungrounded Resolution, may decive a man in the day of trial; when the
self-suspecting, fearful Christian may hold out: But yet without a humble
self-denying Resolution, joined with an adherence to Christ for strength,
there is no man will hold out. If thou be a wavering minded man, thou will be
unstedfast in all thy ways, Jam. 1. 8. If thou be not Resolved, the words of a
man's mouth will turn thee out of the way; the very mocks and scorns of a
drunkard, or a fool that has no understanding in the matters of Salvation,
will make thee shrink, and hide thy profession, and be ashamed of Christ, in
whom alone thou have cause to Glory. If thou be not a Resolved man, what better
can be expected, but that thou turn as the weathercock with every wind, and
fit thy Religion to thy worldly ends, and as another Judas sell thy Lord for a
little money. If thou fall not away, it will be but for want of a trial to
procure it; and therefore in Gods account thou art gone already; because thy
Resolution was never with him.

When you turn to God, there will remain within you the remnants of your
corruption, a body of death, a rebelling flesh: and this will be still tempting
you, and drawing you from God: And O how strong do these temptations seem to
the Soul that is unresolved? Yea without a firm habituate Resolution, it is
impossible to overcome them. Your whole way to Heaven is a continual warfare:
You have enemies that will dispute every foot of the way with you. There Is no
going a step forward, but as the ship does in the Sea, by cutting its way
through the waves, and billows; and as the plow does in the earth, by cutting
through the resisting soil: There is self which is your principal enemy, and
there is Satan, and the world, and almost all that you meet with in it, will
prove your hinderers: And you must make your way by valor, and Holy Violence
through all: And will an unresolved man do this? You will scarce ever how your
knee to God in secret prayer, nor set your selves upon serious Meditations, but
the flesh and the Devil will be drawing you off; You will never attempt, a
faithful reproof, a liberal work of Charity, a hazardous confession of Christ,
or any dangerous or costly duty, but the flesh and the Devil will plead against
it, and put you to it: And in these and many such cases of your lives, you will
never break through, nor do any good on it, without Resolution. Do I need to
tell you how hard the way of Salvation is, that fly from it on mistake, because
you think it harder then it is? Do I need to tell you how false you will prove
to Christ, if you have not Resolution, that know it by your ordinary, miserable
experience, that a poor temptation will make you sin against your knowledge?
How many good wishes and purposes have you had already, in sickness or at a
lively Sermon, that are all come to nothing, for want of a firm Habituate
Resolution? What abundance of time-servers, and of chaffie professors are
lately fallen off, to the way of rising and riches in the world, or to the
pride, and giddy levity of dividers, that oppose the Truth of God, and their
Teachers, and trouble the Church, and all because they were never well rooted
by a sound Resolution. They that take Christ but upon liking, do usually
mislike him, when he calls them to self-denial. For they had never that
connatural principle that should effectually dispose their Souls to like him;
nor had they ever the inward experiences of power and sweetness, which are
proper to the sincere, and should increase their liking of him. Either Resolve
therefore, or stand by and perish.

10. I beseech you consider also, what abundance of clear undeniable Reasons,
does God give in to thee, to turn the Scales, and cause thee to Resolve. He
fetches Reasons from his own Dominion, and Sovereignty? Should not a creature
obey the Lord that made him? He reasons with you from his daily
preservations. Do you live upon him, and should you not obey him? He reasons
with you from his Almightiness: You are all at his Mercy, and wholly in his
hands; and yet dare you disobey him? He reasons with you from his Love and
Goodness: Never did evil come from him; nor did he ever do any wrong: Never was
there man or Angel that was a loser by him; it is not possible to have so good
a master, and yet will you not obey him? He fetches reasons from all his
Mercies: Every bit of bread is from him, and should be an Argument with thee to
obey him: Every days health, and strength, and comforts; and every nights rest
and ease, thy Mercies at home, and thy Mercies abroad; in private and in
public; all should be so many Arguments with thee to Resolve. You cannot look
upon a plant, or a flower under your feet, upon the Sun, or a Star that is
over your heads; or upon any creature, but you may see so many Reasons that
should move you to Resolve. If all these will not serve, he fetches yet
stronger Reasons from the Incarnation, example, and blood of the Son of God:
Can thou look on God incarnate for sin, combating with Satan, and
conquering for thee, and dying, and bleeding, and buried for thy sin, and yet
be unresolved to leave that sin, and turn to him that has bought thee by his
blood? If all this will not serve, he Reasons with thee from thy own benefit.
If thou care not for God, do thou care for thy self? Do thou regard thy own
Soul? If thou do, it is high time to Resolve. He reasons with thee from
Everlasting Glory. Is a certain Kingdom, an Everlasting, glorious Kingdom,
nothing to thee? Art thou content to be thrust out of that Eternal Inheritance?
Is the filthy pleasure of the flesh for a few hours, better then the endless
joys of the Saints? He pleads also with thee from the danger that thou art
near. Poor Soul, thou little see what others see, that are dead before thee.
Thou little know what they feel that died before they were Resolved for God.
He fetches his Reasons from the certain, everlasting flames of Hell: and is
there not force enough in these for to Resolve thee? Good Lord, what a thing is
a senseless sinner? Do thou believe Heaven and Hell as thou take on thee to
do? If thou do believe them, is it possible for thee believingly to think of
Heaven, and its Eternal Glory, and yet to be unresolved whether to turn or not?
Or can thou think of the endless miseries of the damned, and yet be
unresolved whether to turn or not? Can any heart be so senseless, or deluded?

Moreover he pleads with thee from the equity and sweetness of his Service.
It is but to Love him, and to seek his Kingdom, and forbear those things that
hurt thy Soul. His Commands are not unreasonable nor grievous. Dare thou
speak out and say that sin is better; and that Satan has provided thee a
better work then God has done? He reasons with thee also from his Wisdom and
his Justice. He tells thee that as Satan has nothing to do with thee, and as he
is none of thy friends, and means thee not so well as God does; so he is not
able to prescribe thee a more just and perfect law then God has done. Follow
God and thou art sure thou shall never be deceived or misled. For he wants
not Wisdom, or Power, or Goodness to be a meet Lawgiver and Guide: But if thou
follow the Devil, the world, or the flesh, thou followest a blind and a
deceifull guide. And yet after all these Reasons art thou not Resolved?

He Reasons with thee also from thy own experience: What good has sin done
thee? And what hurt would Holiness do thee? Yea he reasons with thee from the
experience of all the world: Who was ever the b^tter for sinning? And who was
ever the worse for Holiness? How long will thy fleshly delights endure? What
will this do for thee in thy extremity? Was ever man made Happy by it? Thou
know well enough thou must shorty leave it; and that it will forsake thee in
thy greatest need: But so would not God, if thou had Resolvedly given up thy
self to him. All men that refuse a Heavenly life, do sooner or later wish that
they had chosen it.

Abundance of such Reasonings God uses with thee in his Word, and by his
Ministers; and do thou think indeed that there is not weight enough in these
to give thee cause immediately to Resolve? How little or nothing can thou say
against them? Can thou bring any Reason, that is Reason indeed, against these
or any of these Reasons of the Lord? Dare thou say that ever a one of them is
false, or insufficient? And what are the Reasons which you have on the contrary
to hinder you from Resolving? Forsooth, because your sins are sweet, you
would fain have the pleasure of them a little longer yet: O wretched Souls!
that find more pleasure in the abusing of your Maker and Redeemer, then in
loving, honoring, and pleasing him: That delight more in serving the flesh, and
the Devil, then in serving God and seeking after his Favor and your own
Salvation. You are a hundred times madder then a man that lies tumbling
himself in his dung, and will not rise out of it to receive a Kingdom, because
it is so soft and so sweet that he is loath yet to leave it: You are foolisher
then Nebu^hadnezzar had been, if he had been loath to return again to his
Kingdom, because he would fain stay longer among the beasts of the fields;
among whom in his distraction he had betaken himself, Dan. 4. 31, 32, 33. And
what other Reasons have you against Resolving? Forsooth you shall be mocked or
jested at by others: By whom I pray you? Not a man but a miserable fool will do
it? Yea but you are told you must forsake ^ll, and be ready to die for Christ,
if he ^all you to it. Very true! and can you ^eep that which he calls you to
forsake? How long will you keep it? Silly Souls! do you not know that you
forsake it by not for saking it, and lose all, by saving any thing? and that
you have no way to save it but by losing and forsakeing it. Suppse you were by
enemies banished out of England, and upon pain of death you must be gone within
a twelvemonth: And a King that loves you inviteth you to his Country, and
tells you for the poor livings that you have lost, he will make you Lords and
Princes, so you will bring with you the little goods you have, and leave
nothing behind you. Hereupon one man takes the next wind, and ships over all
his riches, that he may have it when he comes there: Another says, I am loath
to leave my goods; I have a while longer to stay here, and what shall I do
without them? I am loath to see the habitation of my Ancestors impoverished:
And so when his time is expired, he is fain to leave them all behind him, and
has none that will receive him in the Country where he must abide. Which of
these think you is the wiser man? Which of them was it that lost his goods, and
which did save them? I speak to you but such another parable as Christ used to
you himself, Luke 16. 2, 3, 4, 9. Where you are advised to send your riches
before you; and to make you friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when
you dye you may be received into the everlasting habitations.

I know there are other vain delusions that hinder you from Resolving: I will
not call them Reasons; for they are unreasonable. I shall only say this to you,
that if there be ever a man of you that hears his words, that dare be such a
Blasphemer, as to reproach the Laws and Image of his maker, and say that he
has made you too strict a Law, and laid too heavy a task upon you, and a
Heavenly life is troublesome and unnecessary: If there be a man of you, that is
so devilish, as that you dare plead the Devils cause, and justify his work
before the Lord's, and say that it is better to please the flesh; let that man
prepare himself to make good these words before the Lord, and his Holy Angels;
and be sure that he shall be there put to it in another manner then he is here
by me: And if you have such Reasons as you will stand to before the Bar of
God, to prove the Devil the better Master, and an unholy life to be better then
a Heavenly; see then that you look them up, and there make your best of them;
and expect to live with the Master that you served, and to reap as you sowed,
and eat the fruit of your fleshly ways, which you took to be the best. But if
you have no such Reasons, but your Consciences are convinced that God should be
served, and sin should be speedily forsaken, and Heaven should be provided
for above all; Resolve then to do it before you stir? Or else say plainly, I
have no Reason to be wicked, but because I will be wicked: I will forseke God,
and damn my own Soul without any Reason because I will do it. And if you are at
this pass, you may take your course.

11. Another thing that I would entreat you to consider of is this: It is a
most base and treacherous abuse of God, to make any question of this which you
are so long unresolved of. I confess when a blind mind haith raised such a
question, it is lawful for a reasonable man to answer it. But in him that
makes a doubt of such a thing, as its a shame to himself, so it is a heinous
indignity to God. If you had a chaste and modest woman to your wife, I think
she would take it for an injury, if you should but make a question of it,
whether she or a common whore be the honester woman? If your wife or children
should bring before you a Hobbyhorse or an Ass, and make a great question of
it, whether you or the Ass be the comlier, or the wiser; How would you take
this of them? If you should bring an idiot or a mad man before your Prince, and
make a question whether he or they be the wiser man: or if you set a Rebel
before him, and make a question which of them has the better title to the
Crown; what entertainment might you expect? I tell you it is ten thousand
thousand times a baser affront and wrong to God, to set the pleasure of sin
before him, and make a question which of them is the better; and to set your
riches, and your sports, and your drunkenness and gluttonny, and your whoredom,
and your revenge, in competition with your Redeemer, and Everlasting Glory, and
to make a question which of them is to be preferred. To make once a question
whether God or flesh should be pleased; whether Christ or the world should be
loved, and followed? Whether the Holy Ghost or the Devil should dwell in us,
and guide us? Whether the Saints of God, or the servants of the Devil should be
our chosen company? Whether the Word and Minsiters of Christ, or the examples
and words of wicked men, should more prevail with us? Whether Heaven or Earth
should be more carefully sought after? Whether a Holy, or a careless, wicked
life be more to be desired? Or whether it be better to turn to God, or not? I
say, to make such a question as this, or one of these, is little better then to
put a scorn upon the God of Heaven? and savoureth of such malice as is more
like a Devil then a reasonable man; or else of such folly, as is below the
Devil, and as none of you would be guilty of, in the matters of this world; If
one should but make a comparison between you and some deformed monster, or
between your house and a swine-stie, though he gave you the better, I think you
would take it as a scorn, that he should make such a comparison, or question?
Much more may God so take it, when you make a question betwixt sin and him.
There is but one Infinite, unconceivable, perfect Good; and shall he be abased
by such a question? There is but one thing that is contrary to God in all the
world, that is worse then the Devil himself, and that is sin; and shall this
be put in question or comparison with God? There is but One that has Loved us
to the death, with a matchless, unconceivable, saving Love, and that is Jesus
Christ: And there is but one thing that is a deadly enemy to us and him, and
that would damn us, when he is endeavoring to save us; and that is sin: And
must there be a question or comparison between these? There is One Sanctifying
Spirit, that would cleanse, and heal, and save us; and there is a malicious
spirit that would deceive us, defile us, and destroy us: And must there be any
question or comparison made between these? There is but one Eternal Happiness,
and One Holy way to it: and there is but One everlasting misery, and a fleshly,
filthy, sinful way to it: And must there be made any question which of these
should be preferred? Consider I beseech you what you do; And if it be so vile a
thing to make any question of it, what is it then to be still unresolved? Yea
and to choose the worser part, and stick to it in your heart and life?

12. Consider also that Present Resolution would put an end to a great many
fruitles, troublesome deliberatiens, and delays. If a man had but a weighty
business of the world upon his hand, that his estate or life lies on, it is a
perplexity to him as long as he is unresolved, what course he should take: It
will be troubling him when he should rest, and break his sleep; it will fill
him with musings, and disturb and distract his mind, and even make him
Melancholy. And how can it choose but be a troublesome distracting thing to
your mind, to be unresolved what course to take for your Everlasting state? I
know some hearts are so desperately hardened, and past feeling, (Epes. 4. 19.)
and some men's Consciences so seared as with an hot iron, (1 Timothy 4. 2.) that
they can throw away all thoughts of Resolution, and never be much troubled: But
I hope that many are not so desperate: It is not thus with all that are
unconverted. How long have some of your minds been troubled whether to turn or
not? Resolve man, if thou love thy Soul, and put an end to such troubles.

13. Consider also, that Resolving will put an end to a great many of
troublesome Temptations, that do assault you, and will break the heart of
Satan's hopes. As long as you are unresolved, he has still possession of you,
and is still in hopes to keep possession. And as long as he has any hope he
will never give over, but will be repairing his Garrison, and making up all the
breaches that the Ordinances of God had made. When one temptation takes not, he
will be offering you another; and will be following and disquieting you day and
night: But if once he see you firmly Resolved, his hopes will fail him, and
you may be much freer from his temptations then you were before. I do not say
he will give over: For even when you are broken away from him, he will make
after you again. But it is a greater advantage to you to fight against him in
the open field, under such a Captain as Jesus Christ, that will assure you of
the victory, then to be in his own prison with his fetters on your heels. You
know the way to be troubled with an unwelcome suitor, is to delay your answer,
and take time to consider of it: and the way to be eased of him, is to give him
a peremptory Resolute answer. And when he sees you Resolved, he will cease.

14. Moreover, till you are Resolved of your Conversion, you cannot Rationally
Resolve of any one word or action of your lives: Nay till they are all
misemployed to your hurt. For no man can Resolve of the Means till he is
Resolved of the End. You must Resolve whither to go, before you can Resolve
which way to go. Before Conversion men's End is wrong: Their Intention and
business is to please the flesh: And all their thoughts, and words, and
actions, that have such an End, are wicked and pernicious. Till you are
Resolved by Conversion to be for God, you have never a right End (in a
prevailing sense;) and therefore you cannot order one thought, nor word, nor
deed aright. I tell you, every thought you think, and every word you speak, and
every deed you do while you are unconverted, are so many steps toward Hell,
except only those that tend toward Conversion, and some way further it.
Resolve therefore of this, or you can Resolve of nothing.

15. Moreover, if you would presently and firmly Resolve, you would ease your
friends and the Ministers of Christ of much of their sorrows, and fears, and
cares for you; and of much of the most troublesome part of their work. As long
as you are unconverted, they can look on you but as the heirs of Hell, that
will be quickly in those torments, if conversion prevent it not: and therefore
their hearts are full of sorrow for you, when you sorrow not for your selves;
and their care is how they might prevent your damnation, which they know
without Conversion can never be done. Many a groan does your Misery cost them!
and many a thought have they of your danger, which you are not aware of. O what
a grief is it to believing Ministers, to see so many of their people in the
power of Satan, and the highway to Hell, after all their care and labor for
their recovery? We cannot say that the unconverted shall certainly perish,
because we have yet hopes that they may be Converted, though they be not: But
we know that if they die in the case that they are in, there is no hope of them
at all; and we know they are uncertin to live an hour: And therefore as long as
they are in this Condition, how can we choose but be filled with fear, and
grief, and care for them? All the troubles that befall a faithful Minister, in
his worldly affairs, by crosses and persecutions, are nothing to the trouble
that your sin and misery brings to their minds. O what a comfortable life
were it for a Minister to live with bread and water among a people that would
obey the Gospel; and give us hopes that we should live with them in Heaven? O
how cheerfully may we study for them, and preach to them, when we see that it
is not lost upon them! How willingly should we prepare them the bread of life,
when we see they feed and live upon it? How joyfully may we pray and praise God
with them, when we think how they must join with us in the Celestial Praises? O
Sirs, I beseech you grudg not your Ministers this comfort: Do not destroy your
selves to grieve and trouble them. O put them once out of their fears and grief
for you, by your Resolving, ad speedy return to God: That they that have many a
time thought in their hearts, I am afraid this poor sinner will never be
recovered; I am afraid he will be a firebrand in Hell, may now rejoice with you
when they see you coming home, and may meet you as the Father himself does meet
his prodigal children, and weep over you for joy, as they were wont to do in
sorrow. You would ease our hearts of abundance of sad thoughts, if we could but
perceive you once Resolved, and see you come home. Now you think our preaching
harsh to you, because we tell you so much of sin and of damnation: and you
think our discipline more harsh, when we refuse to have communion with you. But
if you would once Resolve and Turn, how gladly should we open our doors and
our hearts to you: and how gladly should we turn the stream of our preaching,
and tell you of nothing but Christ, and Heaven, and peace, and comfort, further
then your own necessities should require it. What say you Sirs to this
reasonable request? Will you Resolve without any more ado, and ease us of our
grief and fears, and give us but leave to preach more comfortable Doctrine to
you?

16. Moreover consider, that you have much work to do when you are Resolved and
Converted; and a great way to go when you have begun your journey toward
Heaven: and till you are Resolved, none of this can be done. You can go no
further, till Conversion have set you in the right way. Till then, the further
you go, the further you are out of the way. Will you be unresolved till the
night come on? Shall all the rest of your work be undone? Will you begin your
race when you should be at the end. Alas you should be able to say as Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 8. I have fought a good fight: I have finished my course: henceforth is
laid up for me a crown of righteousness: when as you cannot yet say, I have
begun my course; I am set in the right way.

17. Consider also that Rosolution makes works easy and successful. The
resolute Army is seldom couquered.. A resolute travailer will go through with
his journey; and it is easier to himself: His spirits are excited; and doing it
with vivacity, he finds less trouble in it. A slow and lazy pase does
sometime soonest weary us. A slow motion is most easily stopped, when a swift one
bears down that which would resist it. A man that Resolvedly sets himself to
the Work of God, and is past any further deliberating of the matter, and is at
a point with all the world, will make a pleasure of that which will stop and
stall an unresolved professor. Resolve therefore for your own success and ease.

I tell you, by Resolving it is that you must conquer, and by conquering, you
must obtain the Crown. The unresolved are wavering at every assault, like
cowardly soldiers, even ready to run before they fight. They will not bear
the cost or labor: they are soon aweary: They cannot say Nay to an old
Companion, or a tempting bait. But the Resolved breaks through all, and treads
that under his feet as dirt, which another sells his Soul for. If he meet with
reproaches and scorns from men, he remembers that Christ foretold him this,
and suffered much more of the like before him. If his friends turn enemies for
the Gospel sake, he says, I was told of this before, even that I must be hated
of all men for Christ. If he be ticed by lewd and wanton company, he says as
David, Psalm. 119. 115. Depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the
Commandments of my God. If he be tempted with rewards and honors in the
world, he will not stand wavering and longing after it, as Balaam; but he will
say as the same Balaam was forced to do: If you will give me a handful of Gold
and Silver, I cannot go beyond the Word of the Lord. And let their money perish
with them, that think all the Gold in the world, worth the peace of a good
Conscience and the favor of God. If he be threathened by men, to move him to
forsake his duty, he says, Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye?
If he hear seducers, he is rooted in the Spirit, and the infallible Word, and
is not shaken by every wind. If he see never so many fall off by backsliding;
he says; It was not only for their company that I chose the holy way; God is
still the same; and Heaven is the same; and Scripture is the same; and
therefore I am Resolved to be the same. If God afflict him by poverty,
sickness, or other trials, he says; I did not become a Christian to escape
affliction, but to escape damnation! If he kill me yet will I trust in him:
Shall I receive good at the hands of God, and not evil: Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked must I return to dust: the Lord gives, the Lord
takes away: blessed be his name. If oppressing enemies insult over him, he can
say as Mic. 7. 8, 9. Rejoice not against me O mine enemy: when I fall I shall
arise: when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be a light to me: I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause, and execute Judgment for me: He will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his Righteousness. If the wicked cast in his teeth his profession,
and the name of his God, he rejoiceth that he is counted worthy to suffer for
that Name, and yet he will hope to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of
the living. And if he must go to Heaven through poverty, and a mean estate, he
has learned to want, as well as to abound, and in what estate soever he be,
therewith to be contented. And so in the work of Conversion it self, for want
of Resolution, many stick long in the birth, and they are hanging so long
between Heaven and Hell, that it is a wonder of Mercy that God does not cut them
off and let them perish. But the well Resolved Soul does deal more faithfully
with the light that is revealed to him, and does not stand struggling so long
against it, nor hold Christ and his Spirit so long in hand; but is glad to make
sure work in so great a business, and take so good a match while it is offered:
And being engaged once, he is firm as Mount Zion, that cannot be moved. Resolve
therefore that your work may be the more easy, and successful; and conquer by
Resolving.

18. I suppose you dare not Resolve against Conversion, and a Heavenly life!
And why then will you not Resolve for it? What purpose you to do for the time
to come? Is it your Resolution to live and die as you are? Have you not
purposes in your mind to Repent hereafter? Dare you say, I am Resolved never to
be Converted? Some may be so desperate; but I think it is but few even of the
ungodly. Why this shows that there is a secret conviction in your consciences;
O do not stifle it: Neutrality never saved Soul. Seeing you dare not Resolve
against it, Resolve for it.

19. Consider I beseech you, how much it does concern your selves, to have this
question well and speedily Resolved. God asks you, whether you will be
Converted and Sanctisied or not? Resolve this question, and you Resolve your
selves of a great many more that depend upon it. The answer to this, must be
the answer to the rest. If the question were, whether you will be pardoned or
no? Whether you will live in Heaven or Hell for ever? Whether you will dwell
with God and Angels, or with Devils? You would not be long in answering this.
You would Resolve without an hours delay. Why? this is the question Sirs: but
the answer to it, must be the answer to the first question: For without
Sanctification, there is no Salvation: If you will not be Converted, you shall
be condemned whether you will or no: For God has Resolved of this already, and
there is no resisting the Resolution of God. The true state of the question is,
Whether you will Turn, or burn: choose you whether; for it must be one. O
therefore if you will but Resolve Christ and us this one question, that you
will be Converted, Christ will Resolve you the principal questions, that
concern you in the world, even whether you shall be pardoned or saved, and
where, and with whom, you must live for ever.

20. Lastly consider, that if you stay till you receive the sentence of death,
it is two to one but that will force you to Resolve: But a forced Resolution
will not serve turn: and then it will be very hard for you to discern whether
it be any better then merely from your fears. You put off all till sickness
come, and you see once that you must die; there is no Remedy; and then you will
cry, O if the Lord would but recover me, and try me once again with life, I
would delay no longer, but I would become a new man, and live a Holy, and
Heavenly life; I am resolved of it by the Grace of God. Yea; but who knows
whether these last Resolutions be sincere? We hear abundance speak this in
their sickness, that ^^ver turn when they come to health, but forget all, and
live in a manner as they did before. Is it not most likely to be only the fear
of death that makes you take up these Resolutions? If it be so, they will never
save you if you die, nor hold you to your promises if you live: For it is not
bare Fear that is true Conversion; but it is a changed heart, that is fallen in
Love with God and Holiness, and into a settled hatred of former sins. No late
Repentance and Resolutions but these, will be any thing worth as to the saving
of your Souls: And therefore if you should have true Resolutions at the last
(which is too rare) you cannot choose but be much in doubt of them, when you
find so much of fear upon your spirit, and consider that you never would
Resolve till then. And therefore if you would have a Comfortable change,
Resolve now in your prosperity, before the face of death affright you to it,
and those fears and the lateness do make you question the truth, and soundness
of it, and so deprive you of the comfort, which you have so much need of at a
dying hour.

And thus I have given you twenty Considerations to persuade you, if it may be,
presently to Resolve. I am sure there is truth, and reason, and weight in them;
but what good they will do you I am not sure, because I know not how you will
receive them.

IV. And now I come to the last part of my task; which is to Direct you how to
perform the work that I have persuaded you to. But because it is merely the
Determination of the Will, it is presuasion that must do more to the work then
Direction. And therefore I shall only desire you to look back upon the
qualifications of sound Resolution, which I before laid down to you, and then
take heed of the hindrances in your way, and so set your selves to do your
duty.

Remember that I before told you, that it it is not a holy, saving Resolution,
unless it be 1. Entire, for the matter of it, comprehending all that is
Essential to Christianity: 2. And unless you Resolve upon present obedience
without delay: 3. And also unless it be Absolute and peremptory, taking Christ
for better and worse, without any reserve: 4. And unless it be well grounded:
5. And unless it be built on the strength of Christ, and not only a carnal
confidence of your own: 6. And unless it be habitual and firm, and become your
ordinary frame and byas, and as it were the new Nature, and inclination of your
Souls. By this much you see already what manner of Resolution it is that you
must have.

The next thing is, to advise you of the hindrances that you may avoid them.
1. The principal hinderance of Resolution is Secret Unbelief; when Everlasting
life is taken but as an uncertainty, or men have no more but a slight Opinion
of it. The Cure of this disease, I have often, and a little before delivered
you.

2. Another thing that hinders Resolution is Inconsideratness, of which also
I have spoken purposely before.

3. Another hinderance is a sleepy Insensibility; when the heart is hardened,
and men are past feeling. We cannot tell how to awaken these men to be sensible
of the things that should move them to Resolve. Of this also I have spoken by
it self.

4. Another great hinderance is the natural strangness and aversness of the
mind of corrupted man, to these high and Spiritual things. So that we drive men
by all our Arguments against the byas of their sinful habits. And those habits
plead against us more forcibly without a word of reason, then all the reason in
the world could do. See therefore that you keep under changing means till your
hearts be changed; And the perusing of such weighty Arguments as we offer you,
may be of use to the changing of your hearts: For God uses to work on the
Will, by the Understanding: And therefore Light has an aptitude to change the
Will it self.

5. Moreover, the rooted Interest of this world, does much hinder men from
Resolving to turn: It Is always drawing them another way, or putting objections
and eavils into their minds; and if they will needs Resolve, it is this that
secretly enticeth them to reserves, and to resign themselves to God but with
conditions and exceptions; and so makes them Hypocrites when they think
themselves Converts; and cheats them with a half deceitful Resolution,
instead of one that is absolute and firm. Against this impediment also I have
spoken before.

6. Another hinderance is, The neerness of fleshly enticing objects. When the
Covetous man sees his houses and lands, his goods and money, the very sight of
them breaks the heart of all his better Resolutions. The drunkard seems to be
Resolved till he sees the cup, and then his Resolution is broken. The
Whoremonger seems to be Resolved, till the bait is brought near him, and then
he goes as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of the
stocks. Certainly if these Resolutions were sound, they would either cause men
to fly from the bait, and not come near it, or else to refuse it when it is
presented them: In the course of their lives their Resolutions would govern
them, if they were sincere.

7. And Satan himself will do all that he can to hinder you when he sees you
ready to Resolve. He knows that he must bestirre him now or never. You never
put him to it indeed till you are Resolving to forsake him. One block or other
he will be sure then to cast in your way; Either he tells you, it is but folly
and melancholy to trouble your self with these matters: or that you may be
saved without all this ado: or that God is more merciful then to cast away all
that be not Sanctified: or that Godliness does but trouble and distract people:
and that the professors of it are secretly no better then others; and that it
is but Hypocrisy for them to make such a stir with their Religion; and that we
must be moderate in our Godliness, and take heed of being Godly over much: A
hundred such foolish suggestions as these, the Devil has at hand to cast in
your way, when he sees you ready to Resolve.

If these will not serve, he will set some of his wicked Disciples on railing
or deriding you! And perhaps some cunning fool a caveling with you, to see if
they can overwit you, and draw you back.

If that will not do, perhaps he will open the falls of professors to you, and
labor to persuade you that all are such: Or he will show you what divisions
and differences are among them; or he will take advantage of some difficulties
in Religion, or some controversies in which he sees you already engaged to a
party; or he will tell you of some false doctrine that some forward professors
may be tainted with, to make them, and consequently Godliness it self more
odious, or at least suspected to you. If all this will not do, he will
endeavor to set your very parents, or natural kindred against you; that those
that should most promote your Salvation, and on whom your livelihood much
depends, shall become your enemies, and hate you for offering to give up your
selves to Christ: If that will not do, he will endeavor to entice you with the
baits of fleshly pleasure, or of preferments, or much business, or merry
company, or some great matters that you may hope for in the world. And usually
this snare is the strongest of all. Or else he will tell you that if needs you
wll Resolve it is time enough hereafter: You may yet take more of your pleasure
or commodity before you leave it: Yet you may suck the breasts of the world a
little dryer, and then turn to God and cast it off. If all this will not
prevail with you, he will tell you it is now too late; you have sinned so long,
or such heinous sins that God will not have mercy on you: he will make you
believe that God has utterly forsaken you, and there is no remedy; and you may
as well spare your thoughts of Turning now, for Christ will not receive or
welcome you: and therefore it is even as good go on, and take up the rest that
the world can afford you, for there is no hope of better. But the most
desperate temptation of all the rest is, to put some blasphemous, unbelieving
thoughts into your mind; especially if you fall into company with infidels,
that will draw you to question the Word of God, and the Immortality of the
Soul, and the truth of Christianity, or the life to come, whether there be any
such things or not: Where these once take, and are received with approbation,
the Soul is in a miserable case: Though I know many tempted, melancholy
Christians, are haunted with such temptations, who yet abhor them, and do
well at last, for all this. Some times also when he cannot take you off from
Resolving, he will lead you among some disputing Opinionists, and they shall
tise you to take up with their Opinionative Religiousness instead of true
Sanctification, of which I have spoke in the eighth Direction. By these and
many such wiles as these, does the old serpent do all that possibly he can, to
hinder you from sound Resolution and Conversion. And therefore you must be
armed against his temptations, and meet them with abhorrence; and if you feel
them too hard for you, go daily to Christ by Faith and Prayer for renewed
strength: and call to your faithful friends, and Ministers for help. Open
your case to some one that is able, experienced, and faithful; that he may help
you with Arguments to resist those temptations, which you know not how your
selves to deal with. God has appointed Pastors in his Church to be Spiritual
Fathers in the Lord; and when they have sowed in you the seed of eternal life,
they watch over it till they see the blade and fruit: They travail as in birth
of you, till Christ be formed in you. It is their offer to help you; and God
gives to them that are faithful abilitis and affections agreeable to their
office. And therefore lean upon the hand of your faithful guides, and think
not to break through temptations alone, and get to Heaven without the means
that God has appointed you.

Having told you the Hindrances, and what to do against them, I shall add but
these two words more of Direction. 1. When you are Resolving, give up your
selves to God with a Holy Covenant or Vow. I mean not any rash vow, nor any
unnecessary vow; but the same that you made in Baptism, which your age it self
does call you to renew, but your sins against it do call you more.

Perhaps you will say, that you are not able to perform it by your own strength,
and you are uncertain of Gods assistance, and therefore how can you promise or
vow?

To this I answer: 1. You may be sure that this Objection is frivolous, because
it makes against the frequent, express Commands of God, the practice of his
Church in all ages, and the nature of Christianity it self: God has in all
Ages been pleased to receive men into his service and Church in a Covenant way;
and Baptism it self is our solemn Covenanting with him: and the Lords Supper is
appointed for a solemn renewing of it. And indeed it is implicitly and
virtually renewed by a true Christian every day of his life. In every duty he
gives up himself to God: And if he should cease this Heart-covenant, he would
cease to be a Christian: For the very essence of his Christianity consists in
it. It is his Faith it self.

2. And when you covenant for the time to come, you do not take on you to
foretell infallibly your own perseverance; but you Profess your present consent
to be Christ's, and to continue his, and you engage your selves thereto. And
should you not choose the strictest engagements: 1. Where there is the greatest
need of them, because of the looseness of the heart, and the strength of
temptations, that would draw us away; and 2. Where there is the most absolute
necessity, because if we miscarry we are undone: 3. And where you are already
obliged by Gods Commands whether you vow or not: 4. And where God has made
your consent to the Obligation of necessity to Salvation. He that intends to
keep Covenant, and knows that he must keep it, or be condemned; has little
reason to be loath to make it.

3. And for Gods assistance, you have much more cause to expect it in the way
of Covenanting, which himself has appointed you, then in the neglect of his
appointed means.

Object. But if I did it in Baptism, what need I do it again?

Answ. I told you the Covenant must be continued and renewed through the whole
course of our lives, but especially after a notorious violation of your former
promise: You once gave up your selves to God, and you have proved false to him,
and it is a wonder of Mercy that ever he will trust you more, or enter any more
into Covenant with you: and will you draw back from such Mercy, and such a duty
as this?

Object. But I am afraid of breaking my vows again, and it is better to forbear
them, then not to perform them.

Answ. 1. This Reason makes as much against the inward Vow and Resoluion of the
heart; so that by this rule you would never be Christians for fear of falling
away, and being worse. 2. There is an absolute necessity of your Resolving, and
Covenanting, and of Keeping your Resolutions and Covenants: And when it must be
kept, or you are utterly undone; it is but a madness to refuse to make the
Covenant for fear of breaking it: For that is but to make choice of an easier
place in Hell, for fear of having a worse, if you should resolve for Heaven:
When as Heaven is set open before you, and you thus wilfully cast away your
hopes. Nay your place in Hell is not like to be the easier, when you thus
deliberately, and wilfully refuse the Covenant. 3. Your Resolutions and Holy
Vows, are means of Gods appointment to keep you from breaking his imposed
Covenant. Is not a Resolved, Engaged, Devoted Cristian liker to be accepted,
and to persevere, then a waverer that says, I dare not vow, for fear lest I
perform not.

In unnecessary matters I had rather you were too backward to vow. Some will
vow poverty, and some a single life, and some will vow that they will never
drink wine or strong drink more; such vows as these may be good for some, in
cases of special necessity, as the last remedies of a dangerous disease; but
they are not for all, nor rashly to be made. But the Resolution and vow of
cleaving unto God in Faith and Holy Obedience, and of renouncing the flesh, the
world, and the Devil; this is for all, and must be made and kept by all that
will be saved.

2. Direct. And as I would have you second your Resolution by a Covenant with
God, so would advise you (ordinarily) to go further and openly Profess the
Resolution and Covenant that you have made. For as with the heart men believe
unto Righteousness, so with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans
10. 10. Christ will confess those that confess him, and disown, and be ashamed
of those that are ashamed of him. When you have escaped the greatest misery in
the world, and obtained the greatest Mercy in the world, the greatness of it
calls you to acknowledge it, and give Glory to God. Go to your old Companions
in sin, and tell them what God has revealed to you and done for you! Tell
them, O Sirs, I see now that which I never saw before: I wonder how I could
venture so madly upon sin! and how I could make light of God, of Christ, of
death, of Judgment, and Everlasting life* I have been hitherto your Companion
in sin, but I would not take the same course again for all the world: I see
now there is a better portion hereafter to be obtained, which I was mindless
of: I see now we were all this while making merry at the brink of Hell, and
there was but a step between us and death: Now I see, that the course that we
have taken is wicked and deceitful, and will not serve turn: If I serve the
flesh, it will reward me but with rottonness: I will therefore hereafter serve
that God, that will certainly reward me with Evorlasting life. I beseech you
Sirs, come away with me, and see and try what I have seen and tried: I have
lived with you in sin, O now let us join together in Repentance, and a Holy
life: I shall be glad of your company to Heaven: but if you will not do it,
take your course: For my part I am Resolved; by the Grace of God I am fully
Resolved to be from this day forward a New man, and never to join with you more
in a fleshly and ungodly life. Never tempt me or persuade me to it; for I am
Resolved.

Thus if you will declare your Resolutions to others, and seek to win them, you
may possibly do them good; but however you will be the deeper engaged to God
your selves.

Yea, though I would have no ostentation of Conversion, nothing done rashly in
public, nor without the advice of a faithful Minister beforehand; yet with
these Cautions, I must say, that it is a shame that we hear no more in public
of the Conversion of sinners. As Baptism is to be in public, that the
Congregation may witness your engagement, and pray for you, and rejoice at the
receiving of a member; So the solemn renewing of the same Covenant by
Repentance after a wicked life, should ordinarily be in public, to give
warning to others to avoid the sin, and to give God the honor, and to have
the Prayers of the Church, and to satisfy them of our Repentance, that they may
have Communion with us. The Papists do more offend (of the two) in so much
confining Confession and Penitence, to the Priests ear in secret, and not
bringing it before the Church, then they do in making a Sacrament of it. I
wonder that people should every day thrust into our hands their requests to
pray for them when they are sick, and that it is so rare a matter to have any
desire our Prayers, for the pardon of all the sins of their natural,
unconverted state.

I would here seriously advise all those that it concerns that when God has
showed them so great a Mercy as to Convert them, and make them New Creatures,
they would go to their faithful Minister, and by his advice, put up such a
bill as this, Such a man of this parish, having long lived in blindness, and
deadness, and ungodliness, (and name the particular sins, if they were
publicly known,) and being by the great Mercy of God convinced of his sin,
and misery; and sustained with some hopes of Mercy by the Blood and Merits of
Jesus Christ, and being now Resolved by the Grace of God, to forsake this
fleshly, worldly life, and to give up himself to Christ and Holiness, does
earnestly entreat the Church to pray for him, that his many, and heinous sins
may be all forgiven, and that God would again receive him into Mercy, and that
he may hold on in Faith and Holiness to the last, and never turn again to the
course of his iniquity.

And if the Minister think it meet, refuse not to make your selves an open
Confession of your former life of sin and misery, and to Profess openly your
Resolution to walk with God for the time to come.

This course should be more ordinary with us: and if Convers^ion it self were
not so rare, or else so defective, that it does too little quicken men to a
sense of duty, and sin, and Mercy, or so doubtful, and by slow degrees, that
it is scarce discerned by many that have it; were it not for some of these;
more ordinary would it be, to the great rejoicing and benefit of the Church.

The Conclusion, And now I have given you Directions in the most great and
necessary business in this world; They are such as I received of God, and if
Faithfully practiced will put your Salvation past all hazard. But what they
have done, or what they will do, I cannot tell; but must leave the Issue to God
and you. Its pity eternal Glory should be lost, for want of yielding to so
holy, and sweet, and reasonable a course. It is lamentable to observe, what
ignorant, base, unworthy thoughts the most have of the very Office of the holy
Ghost, who is the sanctifier of all that God will save. The very name of
Regeneration and Sanctification is not understood by some, and is but matter of
derision to others; and the most think that it is another kind of matter then
indeed it is. To be baptized, and come to Church, and to say some cold and
heartless Prayers, and to forbear some gross disgraceful sins, is all the
Sanctification that most are acquainted with: (and all have not this:) And thus
they debase the work of the holy Ghost. If a Prince have built a sumptuous
Palace, and you will show men a Swine-stie, and say, [This is the Palace that
the Prince has bin so long a building] were not this to abuse him by contempt?
If he build a Navy, and you show a man two or three pig-troughs and say, [These
are the Kings ships] would he not take it for a scorn? Take heed of such
dealing with the holy Ghost. Remember what it is to believe in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and remember that you were Baptized into the name
of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost? And do you not yet know why? nor know the
meaning of your Baptismall Covenant? It is not only to believe that there are
three Persons in the Trinity, but to consent to the Relations and duty to them,
in respect to their several Relations and works* If the Father had not Created
you, how could you have been men? The Lord of nature must be acknowledged as
the End and the governor of nature, and accordingly obeyed. And this is to
believe and be Baptized into the Name of God the Father. If the Son had not
Redeemed you, you had bin as the Devils were, forsaken and given over to
despair. The Purchaser, Procurer, and Author of Grace, of Pardon, and
Salvation must be acknoledged to be such, and himself and his Salvation
accordingly accepted, and his terms submitted to. And this is to believe in the
name of the Son, and in baptism we make profession hereof. And certainly the
work of the holy Ghost is as necessary to your Salvation. Without the
sanctifying work of the Spirit, you could never be delivered from sin and
Satan, nor restored to Gods Image, and consepuently could never be the Members
of Christ, nor have any saving benefit by his Sufferings. Would you not think
him unworthy to live, that would reproach the Fathers work of nature, and say
that the whole Creation is but some poor contemptible work? And would you not
think him unworthy the name of a Christian that had contemptible thoughts of
the Sons Redemption, as if we could be saved as well without a Savior, or as
if it were but some poor and trivial commodity that Christ had purchased us? I
know you would confess the mystery of that man, that believes no better in the
Father, and the Son. And how comes it to pass that you think not of your own
misery, that believe no better in the holy Ghost? Do not you debase the
Sanctifying office of the holy Spirit, when you show us your knowledge, and
parts and outward duties and civility, and tell us that these are the work of
sanctification? What? is Sanctification but such a thing as this? Why?
Holiliness is a new Life and Spirit in us: and these that you talk of are but a
few flowers that are stickt upon a Corpse to keep it a while from stinking among
men, till death convey it to a burial in Hell. O Sirs, Sanctification is
another kind of matter, then the forsaking of some of your fouler vices, and
speaking well of a Godly life. It is not the patching up of the Old man, but
the Creating of a New man. I give you warning therefore from God that you think
not basely of the work of the holy Ghost; and that you think no more to be
saved without the Sanctifying work of the Spirit, then without the redeeming
work of the Son, or Creation, Government, or Love of the Father. Sanctification
must turn the very bent and stream of heart and life to God, to Christ, to
Heaven; it must mortify Carnal Self, and the world to you; it must make you a
people Devoted, Consecrated, and Resigned up to God, with all that you have: it
must make all sin odious to you, and make God the Love and Desire of your
Souls; so that it must give you a new Heart, a new End, a new Master, a new
Law, and a new Conversation. This is that noble Heavenly work which the holy
Ghost has vouchsafed to make the business of his office: To slight and despise
this, is to slight and despise the holy Ghost: To refuse this, is to refuse the
holy Ghost, and not to believe in him: to be without this work, is to be
without the holy Ghost: and if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same
is none of his, Romans 8. 9. The holy Catholic Church, is composed of all
through the world that have this work upon them, and therefore it is called
Holy. The Communion of Saints, is the blessed Vital fellowship of these
Sanctified Ones: For these only is the Resurrection unto blessedness, and the
life everlasting with the Lord of life: for all others is the Resurrection of
Condemnation, and the everlasting punishment.

But if the other two Articles of our Faith, have been so denied by the blind,
it is less wonder if this be so. Some Heretics denied God to be the Creator
of the world; and because they saw so much evil in the world, they said that
it was made by Devils or evil Angels (who indeed made the sin, but not the
world,) So dealt the Jews by the Son, and the Second Article of our Faith: The
Sacrifice of Bulls and Goats, and such Beasts, was all the Sacrifice for sin
that they believed in. And thus deal the multitude of the ungodly by the
Spirit. Indeed they know not themselves sufficiently to know the need and worth
of Sanctification. They are too whole to value the skill and care of Christ or
the holy Ghost. The insensibility of spiritual death and misery, and thinking
too lightly of Original Corruption, and too well of our depraved nature, is
both the cause of many of the Heresies of the learned, and of the common
contempt of Christ, and the Spirit and recovering grace, in all the
unregenerate. For it is not possible that men should have any deeper sense of
the need or worth of the remedy, then they have of the greatness of their sin
and misery.

O Sirs, did we not come upon this great disadvantage to you, that we speak to
dead men, that have indeed a natural life, which does but take pleasure in
their spiritual death; how confidently should we expect to prevail with you
all. But while you think lightly of your disease, we can expect no better, but
that you think as lightly of Christ and holiness, and all the means that tend
to your recovery, and think of the new man, as the Poets fabled of the
Promethean race, that it grows out of the earth (of your own poor, sorry
purposes and performances) like ordinary plants.

Truly Sirs, I have led you even as far as I can; and what more to say to
you, or what more to do for you to procure your Conversion I do not know. If it
had been in my power to have showed you Heaven and Hell it self, that you might
better have known the matters that we speak of, I think I should have done it.
But God will not have men live by sense in this life, but by Faith. If I could
but help you all to such a knowledge and apprehension of these in visible
things, as the worst of you shall have as soon as you are dead, then I should
make but little doubt of your Conversion and Salvation. Sure if you had but
such a sight, the force of it would so work upon you, that before I went out of
the Congregation, you would all cry out that you are resolved to be new
Creatures. But though this be beyond my power, and though I cannot show you
your great and wonderful things that every eye here must shortly see; yet I
come not to you without a glass of Gods own making, and in that glass you may
see them. There if you have but an eye of Faith, you may see that God that you
have so long offended, and that now so earnestly inviteth you to return: There
you may see that Crucified Christ that has opened you a way for Repentance by
his Blood, and pleads that Blood with you for the melting of your impenitent,
obstinate hearts. There you may see the odious face of sin, and the amiable
face of Holiness, which is the Image of God: There you may see both Heaven and
Hell for all that they are invisible; and may know what will be, and that to
all Eternity, as well as what is.

And will not such a sight in the glass of Gods Word, serve turn to move thee
presently to give up the trade of sinning, and to Resolve before thou stir for
God? I am now come to the End of this part of my work: if the reading of it
have brought thee to the End of thy ungodly, careless life, it will be happy
for thee, and I shall so far attain the End of my labor. I have purposely put
this Direction of the Necessity of Resolution in the last place, that I might
leave upon thy spirit the Reasons for Resolution, that here I have laid down.
And now I beseech thee Reader whoever thou art; with all the earnestness that I
am able to use with thee, as ever thou would escape the fruits of all thy
sin, as ever thou would see the face of God with comfort, and have him thy
reconciled Father in Christ; as ever thou would have a saving part in
Christ, and have him stand thy friend in thy extremities; as ever thou would
have hope in thy death, and stand on the right hand, and be justified at
Judgment; as ever thou would escape the day of Vengeance, prepared for the
unconverted, and the endless misery that will fall upon all unsanctified Souls,
as sure as the Heaven is over thy head: See that thou Resolve and Turn to God,
and trifle with him no more. Away with thy old transgressions; away with thy
careless, worldly life; away with thy ungodly company; and set thy self
presently to seek after thy Salvation with all thy heart, and mind, and might.
I tell thee once more, that Heaven and Hell are not matters to be jested with;
nor to be carelessly thought of, or spoken of, or regarded. The God of Heaven
stands over thee now while thou art reading all these words, and he sees thy
heart whether thou art Resolved to turn or not. Shall he see thee read such
urgent Reasons, and yet wilt not Resolve? Shall he see thee read these earnest
requests, and yet not Resolve? What? not to come home to thy God, to thy
Father, to thy Savior, to to thy self, after so long and wilful sinning?
What? not to accept of Mercy, now it is even thrust into thy hands; when thou
have neglected, and abused Mercy so long. O let not the Just and Jealous God
stand over thee, and see thee guilty of such wickedness? If thou be a Christian
show thy self a Christian, and use thy belief, and come to God. If thou be a
man, show thy self a man, and use thy Reason, and come away to God. I beseech
thee read over and over again the Reasons that I have here offered thee, and
judge whether a reasonable man should resist them, and delay an hour to come in
to God. I that am now writing these lines of Exhortatation to thee, must
shortly meet thee at the bar of Christ. I do now adjure thee, and charge thee
in the Name of the living God, that thou do not thy self and me that wrong, as
to make me lose this labor with thee, and that thou put me not to come in as a
witness against thee, to thy coufusion and condemnation. Resolve therefore
presently in the strength of Christ, and strik an unchangeable Covenant with
him: Get thee to thy knees, and bewail with tears thy former life, and deliver
up thy self wholly now to Christ; and never break this Covenant more.

If thou lay by the Book, and go away the same, and no persuasion will do any
good upon thee, but unholy thou will still be, and sensual, and worldly still
thou will be; I call thy Conscience to witness, that thou wast warned of the
evil that is near thee; and Conscience shall obey this call, and bear me
witness whether thou will or not: And this Book which thou have read, which I
intended for thy Conversion and Salvation, shall be a witness against thee:
Though age or fire consume the leaves and lines of it, yet God and Conscience
shall bring it to thy memory, and thou shall then be the more confounded to
think what Reasons, and earnest persuasions thou did reject in so plain, so
great, and necessary a case.

But if the Holy Ghost will now become thy tutor, and at once both put this
Book into thy hand, and his Heavenly light into thy understanding, and his life
into thy heart, and effectually persuade thee to Resolve and Turn, how happy
will thou be to all Eternity? Make no more words on it; but answer my request,
as thou would do if thou were in a burning fire, and I entreated thee to
come out. Thou have long enough grieved Christ and his Spirit, and long enough
grieved thy friends and Teachers: Resolve this hour, and Rejoice them that thou
have grieved; and now grieve the Devil, that thou have hitherto rejoiced; and
hereafter grieve the wicked, and thy own deceitful flesh, whose sinful
desires thou have hitherto followed: And if thou also grieve thy self a little
while, by that moderate sorrow that thy sin has made necessary for thee, it
will be but a preparative to thy endless joys, and the day is promised, and
coming apace, when Satan that thou turnost from, shall trouble thee no more,
and God that thou turn^st to, shall wipe away all tears from thy eyes. And if
the reading of this Book, may be but a means of so blessed an End, as God shall
have the Glory* so when Christ comes to be glorified in his Saints, and
adm^red in all them that do believe, (2 These 1. 10.) both thou and I shall then
partake of the Communication of his Glory; if so be that I be sincere in
writing, and thou and I sincere in obeying the Doctrine of this Book. Amen.

July 5. 1657.
FINIS.

