An END of Doctrinal CONTROVERSIES Which have Lately Troubled the Churches BY
Reconciling Explication, WITHOUT MUCH DISPUTING.

Written by RICHARD BAXTER,

Psalm. 120. 6, 7. My Soul has long dwelt with him that hates Peace: I am for
Peace; but when I speak, they are for War.

Luke 9. 46, 49, 50, 54, 55. There arose a reasoning among them, which of them
should be greatest, etc.

LONDON, Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising SUN in Cornhil, M. DC. XCI.

THE PREFACE.
WARS are most dreaded and hated by the Country where they are; but not so much
by the Soldiers, who by them seek their Prey and Glory, as by the suffering
Inhabitants that lose thereby their Prosperity and Peace, who yet are forced,
or drawn to be siders, lest they suffer for Neutrality.

Religious (irreligious) Wars are of no less dismal Consequence, being about
God himself, his Will, and Word, and that which more nearly touches our Souls
and everlasting state, than our Houses and worldly Welfare does: And yet
because Men are more sensible of their corporal than their spiritual Concerns,
these Dogmatical Wars are far less feared, and too commonly made the Study, and
Delight, not only of the Military Clergy, but also of the seduced and
sequacious Laity: Though those that have the Wisdom from above, which is pure
and peaceable, condole the Church's Calamity hereby; knowing that Envy and
Strife, the earthly sensual and devilish Wisdom, causes Confusion, and every
evil Work: And it is a heinous Aggravation, that the Militants, being Men
consecrated to Love and Peace, profanely father their Mischiefs upon God, and
do all as for Religion and Church.

Having these four and forty Years at least, been deeply sensible of this Sin,
Danger, and Misery of Christians, I have preached much, and written more
against it: To confute those Extremes which cause Divisions, and to reconcile
those that think they differ where they do not; sometime also using importunate
Petitions and Pleas for Peace, to those that have power to give it, or promote
it, and that use either Word or Sword against it. And with the Sons of Peace it
has not been in vain: But with those that are engaged in Faction and malicious
strife, I am proclaimed to be the militant Enemy of Concord, for persuading
them to Concord, and writing many Books for Peace and Love, is taken for
writing them against these. Controversies I have written of, but only to end
them, and not to make them: And who can reconcile them that never mentions
them? or arbitrate in a Cause unheard and not opened?

But, Readers, I must tell you, that my title An End of Doctrinal
Controversies] is ^ot intended as prognostic, but as ded^ctical and directive.
I am far from expecting an end ^f Controversies, while consecrated Ignorance is
^y worldly Interest, Faction, and Malice, mix^d with Pride sublimated to an
envious Zeael ( Jam. 3. 15, 16.) and has set up a Trade of slandering all
those that are true Peace-ma(...)ers, and concur not with them to destroy it,
on ^retence of defending it, by their impossible per^icious terms. He that will
now be taken for a Peacemaker, must be content to be so called by a few, even
by the Sect that he chooses to please, and be contrarily judged of by all the
rest. And this satisfies some, because their Faction seems better than
others, be they never so few; and others, because their Faction is great, or
rich, or uppermost, how noxious and unpeaceable soever: For vespae habent
favos, says Tertullian, and Marcionitae Ecclesias: We could wish the Bees
seldom used their stings, for it is their Death; but those of Wasps and
Hornets, that make no Honey, are less sufferable.

It is partly for unprejudiced Students that I write, and partly for the times
to come, when the Fruits of malignant Faction and Wars, have disgraced them,
and made the world a weary of them.

I am blamed by Dissenters, as coming too near by Conciliatory Explications, to
some things which they call dangerous Points of Popery, Arminianism and
Prelacy; but whether it be by Truth or by Error, I leave to trial: Sure our
English Universities and Canonists are not like to receive any hurt by it, who
will not read a Book that they see my Name to, though the Doctrine would never
so much gratify them. And others (at home and Foreigners) are satisfied by
Knowledge and Prepossession against such seeming Danger.

The great blemish of this, and other of my Writings is, That I say often the
same thing which I have said before. Much of this Book is in my Catholic
Theology, and my Meth. Theol. and my Treatise of Justifying Righteousness. But,
1. Forgetfulness in Old Men that have written so much, is no wonder. 2. But it
shows that I have not forgotten the Matter, nor take it up suddenly and
superficially, which I so often repeat. 3. And there may be great use for such
Repetitions, when it is for clearer Method, or for epitomizing larger Writings,
which many cannot, or will not read; but those that can, may have the benefit
of more Explicatory Copiousness. If it profit the Reader, I am not sollicitous
for the Reputation of the Writer.

You will find here one Chapter answering Exceptions about Futurity; concerning
which you must know, that my Catholic Theology was so bold and large an
attempt to reconcile the Calvinist, and Lutheran or Arminian, and the Dominican
and Jesuit, etc. that I looked to have been sharply assaulted for it by many:
But after many Years expectation I have heard of nothing written or spoken
against it, save one MS. Paper of Objections about the Cause of Futurity, and
Physical Predetermination to sin, by Mr. Polhill a Councellor, a Man of
extraordinary Knowledge, and Godliness, (now enjoying the Fruit of it with
Christ; O Blessed England, if its Rulers, Senators and Lawyers, yea, or Bishops
and Teachers, were all such men) having many Years past sent him my Answer,
(and having no Reply) as to the question, I refused to answer the second,
having said so much to it in my Methodus Theol. and lest the quality of the
Subject should make my Reply seem sharp to so good a man: And I thought it meet
to publish this, because it is an unusual Dispute; and as no one else has
called me to it, so I know not where the Reader that differs from me, will
find so much for him; nor whither to refer him for an Answer. I publish not Mr.
Polhill's Paper, because I recite so much of it as may tell the Reader what it
was; and I must not swell the Book too much.

The Glorious Light will soon end all our Controversies, and reconcile those
that by unfeigned Faith and Love are united in the Prince of Peace, our Head,
by love dwelling in God, and God in them: But falsehearted, malignant, carnal
Worldlings that live in the fire of wrath and strife, will find (so dying) the
woeful maturity of their Enmity to holy Unity, Love, and Peace; and the
causeless shutting the true Servants of Christ out of their Churches, which
should be the Porch of Heaven, is the way to be shut out themselves of the
heavenly Jerusalem.

If those that have long reproached me as unfit to be in their Church (and
said, ex uno disce omnes, with their Leader) find any unsound or unprofitable
Doctrine here, I shall take it for a great favor to be confuted, even for the
good of others excluded with me, when I am dead.

Jan. 21. 1691. Richard Baxter.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. HOW to conceive of GOD. Page i. Chap. 2. How to conceive of the
Trinity in Unity. p. vii. Chap. 3. How to conceive of the Hypostatical Union
and Incarnation. p. xxiii. Chap. 4. How to conceive of the Diversity of God's
Transient Operations. p. xxx. Chap. 5. Whether any point of Faith be above
(...) contrary to Reason. p. xxxii.
Chap. I. Prefatory. Who must be the Judge of Controversies. The true Causes of
the Divisions of Christians about Religion. p. 1^ Chap. 2. The Doctrines
enumerated about which they chiefly disagree. p. 22 Chap. III. Of God's Will
and Decrees in general. Th. Terms and several Cases opened. p. 2^ Chap. IV. Of
God's Knowledge, and the Differenc^ about it. p. 4^ Chap. V. Of Election; and
the Order of Intention and Execution. p. 3^ Chap. VI. Of Reprobation, or the
Decree of Damnation; the Objects and their Order. p. 4^ An Answer to Mr.
Polhill of Futurition. p. 4^ Chap. VII. Of God's Providence and predetermining
Premotion: Of Durandus's way. p. 7^ Chap. VIII. Of the Cause of Sin: What God
does and does not about it. p. 82 Chap. IX. Of Natural Power and Free Will. p.
89 Chap. X. Of Original Sin; as from Adam and nearer Parents. p. 94 Chap. XI.
Of our Redemption by Christ, what it does; how necessary. p. 89 Chap. XII. Of
the several Laws and Covenants of God. p. 99 Sect. 1. Of the Law or Covenant of
Innocence made to Adam: Diverse Cases. p. 113 Sect. 2. Of the Law of Mediation
or Covenant with Christ: When and what it was. p. 121 Sect. 3. Of the Law or
Covenant of Grace in the first edition: What it was. p. 126 Sect. 4. Of the
same Law with Abraham's Covenant of Peculiarity, and the Mosaical Jewish Law of
Works. p. 132 Sect. 5. Of the Law or Covenant of Grace in the last edition; the
Gospel: Diverse Cases about it opened. p. 138
Chap. XIII. Of the universality and sufficiency of Grace. What Grace is: How
far universal and sufficient. p. 154 Chap. XIV. Of Man's Power and Free Will
since the Fall. Adrian's Saying, That an unjustified man may love or choose
God's Being before his own. What to ascribe to Grace, and what to Free Will in
good. p. 173 Chap. XV. Of Effectual Grace; and how God gives it. Doubts
resolved. p. 181 Chap. XVI. Of the state of Heathens, and such others as have
not the Gospel: What Law the Heathen World is under, and to be judged by:
Whether any of them are justified or saved: The Heathens were the Corrupters of
the old Religion, and the Jews of the Reformed Church, Mal. 1. 14, 15. and
Sodom's Case, etc. considered. p. 188 Chap. XVII. Of the necessity of Holiness
and of Moral Virtue. p. 203 Chap. XVIII. Of the necessity of Faith in Christ,
where the Gospel is made known. p. 212 Chap. XIX. Of the state of Infants as to
Salvation and Church Membership. p. 216 Chap. XX. Of the nature of
Saving-Faith; its Description and Causes. p. 226 Chap. XXI. Of justifying
Righteousness, Justification and Pardon. The several senses of the words, and
several sorts of them: Our common Agreement about them. p. 238 Chap. XXII. Of
the Imputation of Righteousness. Christ's righteousness, in what sense ours and
imputed; and in what sense not. p. 256 Chap. XXIII. How Faith justifies, and
how it is imputed for Righteousness. Several questions about it; Repentance,
etc. resolved. p. 267 Chap. XXIV. Of Assurance of our Justification, and of
Hope. What Assurance is desirable: What attainable: What Assurance we actually
have: Who have it: The nature and grounds of it: Whether it be Divine Faith. p.
279 Chap. XXV. Of Good works and Merit: And whether we may trust to any thing
of our own. 1. What are Good Works: 2. Whether they are necessary to our
Justification or Salvation: 3. Whether they are rewardable or meritorious: 4.
What is their place, use and necessity: 5. Whether to be trusted to. p. 282
Chap. XXVI. Of Confirmation, Perseverance, and danger of falling away. 1.
Whether all Grace given by Christ be such as is never lost. 2. Whether that
degree be ever lost which (to Infants or Adult) gives but the posse credere.
3. Whether any lose actual justifying Faith. 4. Or the Habit of Divine Love and
Holiness. 5. Whether some degree of this may be lost. 6. If Holiness be not
actually lost, is the loss possible? 7. Whether there be a state of
Confirmation above the lowest Holiness, which secureth Perseverance. 8. Or does
Perseverance depend only on Election and God's Will. 9. Whether all, most or
many Christians are themselves certain of their Perseverance. 10. I^ such
Certainty fit for all the justified? 11. Is it unfit for all, and doubting a
more safe condition? 12. Does the Comfort of most Christians rest upon the
Doctrine of Certainty to persevere? 13. Does the Doctrine of eventual Apostasy
infer Mutability in God? 14. Why God has left the point so dark. 15. What was
the Judgment of the ancient Churches herein. 16. Is it of such weight as to be
necessary to our Church Communion* Love and Concord. p. 300 Chap. XXVII. Of
Repentance; late Repentance; the time of Grace, and the unpardonable sin. p.
314
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by John Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhil.
A Rational Defense of Nonconformity, wherein the Practice of Nonconformists is
vindicated from promoting Popery, and ruining the Church, imputed to them by
Dr. Stillingfleet Bishop of Worcester, in his Unreasonableness of Separation.
Also his Arguments from the Principles and Way of the Reformers and first
Dissenters are answered: And the case of the present Separation truly stated;
and the blame of it laid where it ought to be; and the way to Union among
Protestants is pointed at. By Gilbert Rule, D. D.

The Christian Laver: Being two Sermons on John 13. 8. opening the nature of
Participation with, and demonstrating the necessity of Purification by Christ.
By T. Cruso.

Six Sermons on various occasions. By T. Cruso, in 4^.

The Conformists Sayings; or, the Opinion and Arguments of Kings, Bishops, and
several Divines, assembled in Convocation.

A new Survey of the Book of Common Prayer.

An END of Doctrinal Controversies, etc.
CHAP. 1. How we may and must conceive of GOD.
. 1. A True Knowledge of God is necessary to the Being of Religion, and to
Holiness and Glory. No man can love, obey, trust, or hope beyond his knowledge:
Nothing is so certainly known as God, and yet nothing so defectively known:
Like our Knowledge of the Sun, of which no man doubts, Whether it be a
glorious igneous Substance, endowed with the Power of Motion, Light and Heats:
And yet what is less comprehended? And no man has an adequate knowledge of it,
or of the least part of it.

. 2. There are three things that must concur to our Conceivings of God: 1. Our
General Conceptions. 2. Our Metaphorical Conceptions by way of Similitude. 3.
Our Negative Conceptions; what God is not.

. 3. I have opened this as distinctly as I am able in my Methodus Theologiae,
Cap. 4. in the Table called Ontologia, the beginning to which I must referr the
Reader that would be accurate and clear. I. We must conceive of God as a
Substance, lest we think him to be nothing: And as a spiritual transcendent
Substance, not univocally the same with created Substance, nor such as Man can
reach to any sensible, or immediate or formal Conception of: But by the
Similitude of created Substance our Conceptions may get some help.

This we call the Fundamental Conception; but it is but a Conception partial
and inadequate; yet necessary, fetched from the Similitude of the Creature,
whose Matter or Substance is the first constitutive Conception.

. 4. II. We must conceive of God as the prime Essential LIFE: And though God be
not compounded of Substance and Form, yet from Similitude of Creatures, we must
as inadequate Conceptions, think of his being LIFE, as the form of his
Substance, not divisible or compounding, but as a distinguishing Conception.
And formadat esse and noment.

. 5. III. Though in God's Essence there be no Parts, Degrees or Accidents, yet
to answer the Similitude of Parts, Degrees or Accidents in Man, we must put in
general Transcendent Perfection: And this includes abundance of his Perfective
Attributes; as that He is One, infinite, eternal, necessary, independent,
uncompounded, unchangeable, and all the rest that are contained in Absolute
Perfection.

. 6. IV. When we say, That God is the prime essential LIFE, we mean a Life of
Eminency above all that is created: But yet such as must be known by
Creature-similitude: And therefore from the Similitude of Man, we must think of
the Formal Divine LIFE by a threefold Conception, 1. As Vital Power in Act, 2.
As Eminent Intellect and Will, called Omnipotency in Act, Wisdom and Goodness,
or Love. Whether these be the FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, is after to be
opened: But as FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, the Scripture teaches us to
conceive of God; As Three in One God, and One God and Substance in these Three.

. 7. V. God is to be conceived of in relation to the Creation in general, as OF
HIM, and THROUGH HIM, and TO HIM are all things: As He is the Divine Efficient,
the more than Constitutive, and the final Cause of all.

. 8. VI. He is especially to be conceived of in his Relations to the Reasonable
Creatures, as their absolute Owner, supreme Ruler and chief Benefactor and
amiable attractive Good and End.

. 9. VII. He is especially to be conceived of ^s related to Man; As our Creator
and Conserver, as the God of Nature. 2. As our Redeemer by Christ and the God
of Grace. 3. And as our Perfecter by his Spirit, and the God of Glory: And as
related to his Kingdom of Nature, Grace and Glory.

. 10. VIII. He being without Passivity a pure Act, must be conceived of, as, 1.
In virtute seu potentia Activa. 2. In his Acts objectively immanent, 1.
Self-living, 2. Self-knowing, 3. Self-loving. 3. In his transient Acts or
Works, considered both ex part agentis, and as the Effects.

. 11. IX. He is negatively to be known, by the d^nial of all that notes
Imperfection.

. 12. X. When I say, that God is to be known by Similitudes, I mean, that
though nothing be fully like to God, yet somewhat in which he may be partly
known, appears on the whole frame of Nature; but especially on the Soul of
Man, which is his Image. Therefore he that would know how to conceive of God,
must first know himself, and what his own Soul is: The true Conceptions of your
Souls must be the prime Helps to conceive of God by similitude.

And here you first find Intellective, Volitive, and Executive Acts. 2. And by
these you know that you have the Power so to act; for no one does that which he
cannot do. 3. And hereby you know that your Souls are Substance: For all Power
is the Power of some Substance: Nothing can do nothing. 4. And by this you know
that an intellectual Spirit is a Substance so empowered: And that others are
such as well as you: And knowing what a Spirit is, you know what God the Father
is transcendently and eminently. And though all God's Works notify him, you
have thus the most intelligible Similitude within you.

. 13. Therefore I know not how you can better conceive of God, than as MORE
THAN A SOUL TO ALL THE WORLD, but especially to Saints.

I say, More than a Soul: For a Soul is but a Part and C^^^^i^utive; but God
can be no Part, and is more than Constitutive: The World is finite, but God is
infinite, therefore he is more than a Soul of the World: ^ass^ndus calls the
World Indefinite, but seems to mean Infinite, and so to make God but the Soul
of the World: But that cannot be proved: Not but that there be created Souls
under God: But while God is more than a Soul to all those Souls, he is more
than a Soul to all the World.

. 14. It is lawful and useful to think of God, by such similitudes as he has
used of himself in his Word, how low soever. Even by his particular Works.

Three Names he assumeth; Life, Light, and Love: He is the Living God; He is
Light, and with Him is no Darkness: God is Love; says the beloved Apostle. GOD
is said to cloth himself with LIGHT as with a Garment: And a man will say, I
have seen the KING to day, who saw him but in his Garments: And if he saw the
Skin of his Face, how little of the King did he see? In Scripture, they that
have seen Angels are said to have seen God, and heard his Voice by them.

When we see the Glory of the Sun, that diffuseth its Beams to all the surface
of the Earth, and uniteth it self with every Eye, even of the smallest Worms,
and quickens every thing that lives; this gives us by similitude some low
resemblance of the Divine Life and Light and Glory. When he is called Our
FATHER, and he is said to love us as a FATHER his Children, this is some help
to our Conceptions of him: When we read of all those Visions which John had in
the Revelations, of Christ's glorious Appearance (as before on the Mount) and
of God on the Throne, with the four Beasts and seven Spirits, and the thousand
thousands of glorious Attendants, and of the metaphorical Description of the
Heavenly Jerusalem: It is not unlawful nor unuseful to us to make use of such
Spectacles of Similitudes in our Thoughts of God, while we exclude all the
Imperfections of such Similitudes.

. 15. But after all, till the Love of God be shed abroad on our Hearts by the
Holy Ghost, and God as LOVE look on us with his attracting and exhilarating
Aspect or Communication, all these notions will be dull and barren, and will
leave the Soul under fears and despondency: It is Love by vital Influence
warming the Affections, that must give us a sweet taste of what we know, and
overcome the fear of Death and Wrath, and give us comfortable Boldness and
Courage in all the Dangers that we must go through.

And seeing Christ tells Philip, If thou have seen or known me, thou have
known the Father; we must by Faith see the Father in the Son incarnate, who
came into our Nature, to be a Mediator of our Thoughts and Conceptions of God,
and especially as he is LIFE and LIGHT and LOVE: and I think in his GLORY will
in Heaven be the Mediator of our LIFE, INTUITION and FRUITION. Come Lord Jesus,

Amen.
CHAP. 2. Of Trinity in Unity.
. 1. WHen I wrote the foregoing Treatise, I found the generality of Christians
(Protestants and Papists) agreed about the Trinity; but Heresy and Debauchery
increasing together, the Case seems partly altered; And the ambitious, rich
and worldly sort being from their Childhood bred up in fleshly pleasure, and in
ignorance and contempt of serious Christianity, having really no true Religion,
but a Name and Image of it, at last by their Tongues declare what is in their
Hearts; and living in a Land where Atheists and Sadducees are in splendid
Dwellings, whilst fear of sinning makes Confiscations, Jails and Ruin the Lot
of multitudes who are zealous Protestants, they take the advantage, decrying
what they never had: But before they disown all true Religion, and declare
themselves Sadducees or Brutes, they begin as Disputers, at the points where
they think Difficulty will excuse them; and especially at the Trinity, and the
Godhead of Christ, and Socinian Errors.

. 2. I have perhaps over-tediously and prolixly handled the Doctrine of the
sacred Trinity in my Latin Methodus Theologiae, opening the various Opinions
about it, reciting the words of the Fathers, School-Doctors, and Protestants
who handle it: And through the whole Book I have showed, That the Image of
Trinity in Unity is imprinted by God, on the whole known frame of Nature and
Government, or Morality* and that Doctrine of the Trinity, which to the
ignorant is a Stumbling Block, greatly helps to confirm my Belief of the
truth of the Gospel and Christianity, while I find it so congruous, to the
foresaid Impress, and attested so much by all God's Works; especially on Man.

. 3. It is a truth unquestionable, that without some knowledge of God there can
be no true Religion, no Love to God, no Trust, no Hope, no Obedience, no true
Worship of him, Prayer or Praise.

. 4. And it is as certain that no man can have an adequate knowledge of God;
that is adequate which comprehends the whole Object, knowing it perfectly,
and leaving nothing of it unknown. And with such an adequate Knowledge we know
nothing, not a pile of Grass, nor a Worm or a Hair: Much less God: With such a
proper Knowledge nihil scitur is true, and yet aliquid rerum is known of all.

. 5. Yea, it is certain, that of God, who is incomprehensible, we have here no
partial Conception that reaches so high as to be strictly FORMAL, but only
such as are called analogical, aequivocal, metaphorical, or by similitude.
Neither Substantia, Vita, Perfectio, Potentia, Actus, Intellectus, Voluntas,
Love, Truth, Goodness, Mercy, etc. are formally and univocally the same in God
and in the Creature: Scotus excepteth only ENS. Which is true, as ENS is only a
Logical term, signifying no more than EST or Quoddity, and not QUID est, or
Quiddity.

. 6. Yet this Knowledge by similitude is not ^ull or vain; but the greatest
advancement of Man's Understanding: All that which is formally excellent in the
Creature, is EMINENTLY and transcendently in God. Though he have not that which
we call Knowledge, Will, Love, etc. he has that which is infinitely more
excellent, which these in Man have some likeness to, whereby we know him.

. 7. Man's Knowledge begins at our selves and not at God: We do not first
know God: But first we perceive our own Souls Acts, and thereby we know our
Power, and our Substance, and thereby we know what all is that is such as we;
and so what a Spirit is, and so what GOD is. As by seeing, hearing, feeling we
perceive that we see, hear, feel, etc. every Sense having essentially a
self-perception: So by thinking, knowing, willing, ^illing, loving, joying, we
perceive that we do it essentially; yet though the famosius significatum be our
own Act as to formality and priority, it is God's as to Eminency and Perfection.

. 8. It is certain, that as all God's Works bear some notifying Impress of his
own Perfection, so Man is especially made in his Image; and therefore our
Knowledge of God must there begin seeing we have no immediate and formal
knowledge of him.

. 9. As God is the God of Nature, Grace, and Glory, so he has made on Man the
Image of these three: 1. The natural Faculties of his Soul, are his natural
Image on Man as Man: For which it is said, Genesis 9. that blood shall be punished
with blood, because Man is made in the Image of God. 2. His moral gracious
Image is Holiness, of Intellect, Will and executive Power. 3. The Image of his
Majesty, Glory and Greatness, is, 1. in all men the Dominion over the lower
Creatures: 2. And in Governors a Power over Subjects or Inferiors.

. 10. To begin where our Perception begins, 1. It is certain, that the
mental Nature in Man has three distinct Faculties in one undivided Substance;
That is, 1. Vital Active Power, Intellect and Will: (The Vital Power being
considerable, first as exciting Intellection and Will, and after as Executive).
The same Essence or Substance is this vital Activity, Intellect and Will: But
the Active Power is not the Intellect, nor the Intellect the Will, nor the Will
the Intellect, etc. And as Melanchton told his Hearers, Vid. Vit. Georg.
Anhalt. and Buchaltrin in M^lc. Adam.
(to the admiration of George Prince of Anhalt, and the Duke of Saxony) That
the Concrete and Abstract were here differently to be used, we may say, that
the Intellect may be said to be willing, but not to be the Will, the Will to be
Intellectual, but not to be the Intellect, etc.

. 11. I have fully proved in Methodo Theol. part 1. in a peculiar Disputation,
that these three Faculties are not Accidents of the Soul, but its essential
form in a triple, inadequate Conception, and fully confuted all that Zubarel
says to the contrary, who epitomizeth all the Thomists Arguments, and
vindicated Scotus, and added many Arguments of my own, and therefore must
thither referr the doubtful.

. 12. Not that Man's Soul is there by three forms; for all are but one form:
But Man's narrow Mind cannot conceive of them but by three Conceptions; which
yet are not Fictions, but as Scotus calis them, FORMALITATES, and as
Campanella, Primalities or Essentialities; or as the Nominals extrinseck
Denominations, and Relative by connotation of the Objects and Effects: He that
has a Wit subtle enough to conceive of Scotus his FORMALITIES, as noting only
a fundamentum objectivum distinguendi, will not wonder that a Soul made in
God's Image, should be of difficult Conception.

. 13. II. The same Soul of Man has three more general Faculties, that is,
mental, sensitive, and vegetative (or igneous): These are distinct, but not
divided, yet are not three Souls, but one; though the inferior Operations (at
least) may be alterable according to Organs and Objects; and some uses of
Senses and Vegetation cease.

. 14. III. The sensitive Soul in Brutes hatk the Faculties, 1 Vitally active,
2. Sensibly apprehensive, 3. Sensibly appetitive; one of these Faculties is not
the other, yet all are but one sensitive Soul.

. 15. IV. The igneous Nature in Plants called Vegetative, has three Faculties,
Motive, Discretive (differencing its proper Nutriment from other things) and
Attractive (which is assimilative) yet all are but one substance.

. 16. V. The Sun and all igneous substances, have their formal Powers, that is,
Motive, Illuminative, and Calefactive: The motion (in power or act) is not
formally the Light, nor is the Light the Heat, nor is the Heat the Light or
Motion: Nor are these three Suns or Substances, but one Substance is in all
three, whose form we necessarily conceive of by this triple inadequate
Conception. And thus it is in all the Creatures of Active Nature, which the
Receptivity of the Passive also answer; and as I have proved elsewhere through
all Morality also.

Melancthon, Loc. Com. per Maulium, p. 3, 4. mentions many such instances in
the Sun, in Astronomy, in Music, in Geometry, in Grammar, in Arithmetic; to
which Logic and Politics might be added, All Effects have only three Causes,
which in the general of Causality are one; that is, the Cause efficient,
Constitutive, and Final. For Matter, Receptive-disposition (called Privation)
and Form, are but the three parts of the Constitutive Cause. My M^th. Theol.
instanceth in many more.

. 17. It is certain that the three grand Attributes, Principles, Primalities,
Essentialities, or Formalities (as men diversely call them) of which the three
Faculties of the Soul are an Image, are in God, not univocally the same as in
Man, but eminently and transcendently. And his other Attributes (of Truth,
Mercy, Justice, etc.) are these variously exercised and related; that is,
Vital-act, Intellect, and Will, called as Perfect, Omnipotent Activity,
Omniscience (or Wisdom) and Goodness or Love. And I have proved ( ubi supra)
that these are not Accidents in God, but his Essence, in a threefold formal
Conception, truly distinguishable; some say Ratione rationata; some say
formaliter, and some, ex connotatione and relatione ad objecta, and perhaps all
little differ in Sense.

. 18. All Theologue* agree, That GOD must be said to be essential Life,
Self-knowledge and Selflove, to be essentially sui-vita, se-scire, and
se-amare; and that these are best expressed by Substantives abstractly, and not
only in the Concrete by Adjectives or Verbs, sui-vita, sui-scientia, sui-amor.
Thus far ^^ere is no doubtfulness.

. 19. As in man we must conceive inadequate^^ of the three prime Faculties
distinctly (not ^^paratingly) 1. As in virtute vel potentia. 2. As (...) actu
immanente ad se. 3. In actu trans^unte ad (...)ia, so must we inadequately
conceive of them as (...)inently in God.

. 20. It is undeniable, that GOD is CREATOR, REDEEMER and SANCTIFIER; the God
of Nature, Grace, and Glory: Vitae, Medicinae, Salu(...)s. And though Father,
Son and Holy Ghost are all these, yet usually in Scripture, Creation is said to
be the Work of the Father (by the Son and Spirit, and Redemption the Work of
the Son (sent by the Father) and Perfection or Sanctification the Work of the
Holy Ghost (as sent by the Father and the Son.) Therefore Baptism, which is our
Christening, binds us in Covenant to God, as in these three Relations (which
I hope may be easilier understood, than all the Schoolmens Disputes of the
Trinity.) And no doubt, but our Baptism is a practical Covenant.

Thus the Trinity of Principles in Unity, is considerable (as is aforesaid) 1.
Radically in virtute Essentiae. 2. In the immanent acts of self-living,
self-knowing and self-loving. 3. And exeunter transiently in Creation,
Redemption and Sanctification, considered not as Effects, but ex part agentis,
as acting them.

. 21. The word PERSON, by the custom of the Church, having been so commonly
used, is not to be disused while it is well expounded, lest we seem by changing
the word to change the Doctrine. But the Church had the same Faith before that
word was applied to the Trinity; and it was long before the use of it was
agreed on; some being for Hypostasis, and some for Persona, and some excepting
against both, but not knowing what word to substitute. And is it any Wonder
that Humane Language wants proper words to signify that of God, which is so
far above our comprehension? So that it is not because they are wiser than he,
that some except against the judicious Dr. Wallis for being no more zealous for
this Name, nor peremptory for any substitute, but because they understand not
so well how unfit man is to make Names for God, which he has not made himself,
and taught us.

. 22. The bare use of the name [ Person] by one that knows not what that word
signifies, does prove no man Orthodox, but only that he uses Orthodox words;
it will save no man to use a word which he understands not. And the dislike of
that word (or the word Hypostafis, as Hierome did) will condemn no man who
believes the thing, which those that understandingly use the word, do believe:
The Scripture has all necessary names of the Trinity.

. 23. Doubtless the word PERSON of the Trinity, is of very different
signification from the same word applied to Man. And what constituteth a PERSON
in the Trinity, none have so curiously searched and disputed, as the Schoolmen;
yet he that shall read but what I have recited out of them (in Method. Theol.)
will find it past the capacity of an ordinary Student to know what they mean,
and impossible to reconcile them with each other. Certainly their sense of the
word PERSON was never made necessary to the Christian Faith.

. 24. Many Protestant Doctors take up with the word (...); whenas the usual
sense both of that Word, and of Persona, is but a Relative Person, (not Aquinas
and such others Relation, which is a substance, but) properly the same Person
Natural, as related diversely: And if this were all, no man that owneth One God,
would question a Plurality of Persons; so one man may have the relative Person
of a King, a Husband, a Father, a Captain, General, a Physician, an Astronomer,
etc.

And though I hold not this Relative Personality is all that we are to
acknowledge in the Trinity, yet I see no reason but in the second place it is
included; that is, 1. The Relations which the Divine Vitality, Intellect and
Will have to the substantiality, and to each other. 2. And the Relation which
they have ad extra to Effects. And whereas it may be objected, that so God has
thousands of Relations to thousands of his Works; I answer, But he has three
grand Relations, which comprehend all the rest, as he is the God of Nature,
Grace, and Clory, Creator, Redeemer, and Perfecter: As he has the three grand
Attributes, which comprehend the rest. But undoubtedly this Trinity of
essential Attributes which are said to be related to the substantiality, and to
each other, is here in the prime Conceptus.

. 25. He that places Personality in the Trinity in SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS, leaves
us to enquire of him: Q. 1. Whether it be by him presupposed or not, that there
are the three foresaid Attributes called Essentialities or Formalities in one
Divine (...), which we commonly call Substance or Spirit? Q. 2. Whether
Conscire being scire, is not the proper Act of an Intellect, and not of a Will,
or executive Power, as such? Q. 3. Self-perception indeed is a first and
essential Act of every sensible Agent: But does not that among men only prove
sensible Life, which is in many* Faculties, and is as numerous as the Acts, and
not prove many persons, seeing he must be first a Person who shall thus act? By
seeing, I perceive that I see, and by hearing, that I hear, and by tasting,
smelling, touching, that I taste, smell, and touch: I know these by
Intellection, but I perceive them first by essential Sensation; and so by
understanding, I immediately perceive that I understand and think: And by
willing I immediately (not know, but) by a sort of eminent Sensation perceive
that I will: And by vital Action I perceive that I act. Yet these are not
distinct Persons, but the acts of one Person. Perception is essential to
Vitality or Sense, but not constitutive of Personality.

Q. 4. Is it knowing ones self, or knowing another, or another's knowing me,
that constituteth Personality? I know not my self to be what I am in pri^^
(...); I first perceive my acts, and by the Acts I know that I have an active
Power, and by that I know that I am a Substance, etc. Which of these makes me
a Person? 2. God knows the Acts of every Creature better than each knows
his own; yet that is not God's Personality, as distinct from his Life: And that
the Creature does not equally know God, can be no privation of Personality to
God, whatever it be to the Creature: And God's Personality was before there was
any Creature.

Q. 5. To say, That they are three Minds, or Spirits, or Substances that do
invicem conscire, is to say, That they are three Gods: And because every mental
Substance has its own active Power, Intellect and Will, it supposes three
Trinities instead of one.

Q. Though God be said to be purus Actus, it is Actus entit^tivus including
potentiam se^ virtutem agendi; and (...) or Substantiality, is a necessary
prior fundamental Conception; for it does superare captum humanum to conceive
of an Act that is not alicujus actus. He that causes all substantiality and
existence, is eminently existent Substance. Many have made it a Dispute,
Whether the Creature have any Entity, or be a Shadow; but none whether God be
so.

Obj. To be self-conscious, proves Personality; and to be conscious of the act
of another, proves one the same Person with the other.

Ans. To be self-perceptive, is a good proof of a Vital Act; and to be
self-conscious, is a proof of an Intellect: Indeed in GOD the Substance and
Act, and so the Personality and Self-perception are not two things, but the
same: But yet inadequate Conceptions must be orderly, and so the act conceived
as the act of a Power and of a Person: And as is said, every act or faculty
that has self-perception, is not a Person.

2. And God's consciousness of the acts of Judas, Herod, Nero, proves him not
to be the same person with each of them (though he be infinitely more.)

. 26. GOD being essential Life in ^ure Act, without any passive Power, meant by
the word PERSON by the Orthodox, may be better spoken of his Essential Acts
(the active Virtue included) than of Man's. If it be the Essence, why may not
the proved Trinity of objective Conceptions, as formal, be called Persons or
Hypostases? (Though many wise Men wish that a Name less liable to mistake, had
been used.)

. 27. But though I am past doubt, that in God is this Trinity of essential,
formal, inadequate Conceptions or Primalities, and that the impress of them is
on the Soul of Man, which is his image, and on the whole frame of Nature and
Grace; yet far be it from me to say, That nothing else is meant by the Trinity
of Persons; thus much we are sure of: There may be more to constitute that
personality, than is to us comprehensible; and I doubt not but there is more,
because thus much is so intelligible; seeing the Divine Nature is so infinitely
far above the Comprehension of us poor Worms: But what we know not, we cannot
describe, or notify to others.

. 28. There are of late some of great Wit and Learning, who have adventured
upon another sort of Description of the Trinity; Men whose parts I greatly
value: ( Peter Sterry, Dr. H. More, Mr. John Turner of St. Thomas Hospital; and
before them some in Germany went some such way*) They say, that from the prime
Being emaneth, say some, or is created, say others; the (...) which is the
second Hypostasis or person, and Matter which is the third; and this caused
Life and Matter (the Son and Holy Ghost) are one indivisible, (though
distinguishable) Being, there being no Spirit (says Dr. M.) save God, that is
not a Soul to some Body. Some of them tell us not whether this first produced
LIFE and MATTER, be the Universal Matter of the World, animated by an universal
Soul; or whether they mean only some prime Soul and Matter, that was made or
caused before the rest: But others let us know, that it is the universal that
they mean: And if so, they must needs hold the World, as to all its Spirit and
Matter, to be eternal, (though in Particles alterable) and to be God himself:
The prime Entity, the Life and the Matter, being the Father, Son and Spirit:
But they that hold not this universal Life and Matter, do think that God by a
most eminent Life and Spirit that was eternal, did create all the rest, as
inferior to them.

Dr. More's Book of Transubstantiation (and Mr. Tho. Beverley's) drew me to
write some Animadversions on this Doctrine, as moderating between Extremes; but
on further consideration, I am very Ioth to be so venturous in a Case of such
tremendous Mystery, as to meddle for or against them, left etiam vera dicere de
Deo si incerta, sit periculosum. Though I doubt not but their exposition of
Ioh. 6. is unsound, while they make the Flesh and Blood of Christ, which is
Transubstantiated, and eaten and drunk, to be the eternal Flesh and Blood of
Christ, a Man from Eternity.

. 29. The difficulty of the Controversy which this leads to, Whether the
World be an eternal Effect of an eternal Cause, or God from all Eternity, till
the forming of this lower World and Adam, had no Being but Himself? Does deterr
me from meddling with it, lest I be blinded by presuming too nearly to gaze on
the Light that should guide me; and God, that is Love, should for my boldness
be to me a Consuming Fire: Things revealed only as for our search.

. 30. But the Conclusion which all this prepares for, is this; That whatever
else besides the Trinity of Primalities before described, does constitute the
Trinity of Persons, it is rendered altogether credible to an implicit Faith, by
the full Evidence and Certainty of the aforesaid Trinity of Faculties or
Primalities, which are God's Image on Man's Soul, and the like imprinted on the
whole Creation; which certainly is not done in vain.

. 31. I pass by the rest, because I have so largely handled it in Method.
Theolog. And among the numerous Authors there cited, I desire the Reader
especially to peruse the words of Guitmundus (A. B.) Aversanus, Edmund.
Cantuariensis, Richardi ad Bernard, Pothonis Prumensis, with whose words I will
conclude (cited page 103.) There are three invisibles of God, Power, Wisdom and
Benignity, of which all things proceed, in which all things subsist, by which
all things are ruled. The Father is Power, the Son is Wisdom, the Holy Ghost is
Benignity. Power creates, Wisdom governs, Benignity conserveth. Power by
Benignity wisely creates, Wisdom by Power benignly governs. Benignity by
Wisdom powerfully conserveth; As the Image is seen in the Glass, so in the
state of the Soul by Humane Nature, etc. To this Similitude of God against Man
approaches nearly, to whom God's Power gives Power to Good, and his Wisdom to
Know, and his Benignity ^iveth to Will. This is the threefold Force of the
Rational Soul, posse, scire, velle, to be able, to know, to will; which
cooperate to Faith, Hope, and Love (or Charity).

. 32. Among all the Attempts that are published for our Conceptions of the
Deity and Trinity, I know of none that give us their Notions with greater
Confidence and Pretense of Revelation, than I. P. M. D. [Dr. Pordage] and his
Leader Jacob Behmen. Many other of the German Prophets, going near the same
way; as C. Beckman describes them. I. P. his Mystica Theologia pretends to
far greater discovery of the Deity and Trinity, and the World, than ever
Christ, Prophets or Apostles gave us. First, In his Globe of Eternity, or the
Divine Essential World pictured by, 1. An Eye (the Father), 2. A Heart (the
Son); 3. And the Effluvia or breathed Beams (the Holy Ghost) with the
innumerable Progeny of such Eyes flowing from that pregnant Essence, differing
from it only as lesser from greater, each an Individual, yet making no
Composition (but Unity) in the Deity.

Secondly, In his Abyssal Nothing, or World of Potentialities.

Thirdly, In his Eternal Nature, and the septenary included Worlds, etc.

But, 1. I consess there are many things in him (and in Peter Sterry) which
Reason left to its conjectures, would think plausible; but short of Aristotle
and Plato.

2. And he is so high in his Description and Defense of Trine-Unity, that even
where I consent not, I dare not call him therein unsound.

3. But many Passages in his Description of Eternal Nature are apparently the
effects of Ignorance, and erroneous.

4. And he goes further in his making this Nature eternal, and a World, that
is the Body of God, than I dare do.

5. And though I would not be too forward, to contemn men that pretend to know
such Mysteries by Vision and Revelation, yet I resolve to take Christ for my
sufficient and infallible Teacher; and to pretend to know no more of the Deity
and unseen World, than he has thought meet to reveal: For no man has seen the
Father at any time, but the only begotten Son; nor does any else know him but
he, and those to whom he reveals him: And what Christ has not revealed of
God, I think it is because it is fittest for us to be yet ignorant of it, as a
necessary difference between our present and our future state. To search for
more will but confound and lose us, and resting practically in what Christ has
revealed, and for the rest, trusting our selves fully in his Knowing for us,
his Love to us, and his Promise for us, may safely and sufficiently quiet the
Mind that can be well quieted no other way.

CHAP. 3. Of the Incarnation and Hypostatical Union.
. 1. NO wonder that it seems hard to Man, to understand how the Divine Nature
assumeth the Humane into Union, when it is so far beyond our reach to conceive
how God is near to all his Works, and how he operateth on every man. Christ
has told us, That we know not how a man is born of the Spirit, no more than we
know whence the Wind comes and whither it goes: And can we easilier know how
God became Man?

. 2. It is certain, that God being infinite, is as near to us as is possible;
our Souls can be no nearer to our Bodies, nor perhaps to themselves. And though
Philosophers dispute, Whether Spirits be in loco, and whether God be in us, or
we in him, and whether he be quasi locus and spatium to the World; yet it is
past question, that he is omnipresent, and intimately proximus to all things.

. 3. It is not therefore his mere Presence or Proximity of being that is this
Hypostatical Union; else it would extend to all the World. It is harder
therefore to prove, that God is not as nearly united to all, than to prove,
that he is not so united to the Humane Nature of Christ. Which caused Peter
Sterry and such others, to hold, That Christ has three Natures; that is, That
the Divine Nature first produced the prime, superangelical, emanant Nature, (by
which he seems to mean an universal Soul to the Matter of the World*) and
that this superangelical Nature did unite it self to all, but eminently to the
humane Nature of Christ, which he calls One top-Branch in the Tree of Beings.
Some say the superangelical Nature being Christ's only Soul assuming but a
Body; others, that it assumed a Body and Soul.

. 4. The grand difficulty about God's Unity with the World, and the World with
God, is how to solve the difficulty that has stalled the School-Doctors; That
if the Creature have no Entity distinct from God's, it is either part of God,
or nothing: But it is not nothing, or no Substance (though some call it a
shadow.) And it is not a part of God; for to be pars, is to be imperfect, and
so to be no God. And if it have a real Entity distinct from God's Entity, then
there would be more Entity in God and the Creature, than GOD alone: For two is
numerally more than one; and two Entia have more Entity than one, how small
soever the lesser be. And then God should be put part of Universal Entity,
which is Imperfection. To say that the Creature has part of Created Entity,
but not of Divine Entity, seems to yield, that God is but part of Universal
Entity. To avoid which, many Philosophers take up the Opinion, that the whole
being of all Worlds is GOD, the material Part being his Body, and the eternal
Spirit the Soul.

What shall we say to this? To silence it will not silence the Objectors. And
sure we must not grant them, That the World is God; or that it is part of God;
or that God is but a part of Real Substance or Entity; or that to be so is no
Imperfection. Is there no other sounder way?

Though Divines say, that Dei non sunt accidentiae, and it is true, That God is
all Essence and per essentiam operatur, yet I dread to assert, but humbly ask,
Whether rather than fall into any of the former Opinions, it be not less
dangerous to say, That as God has made his Works in his likeness, and no
Substance is without all Accidents, so the World be not quasi accidens Dei. And
if so, it is no Part of Him, essential or integral: And as its Substance is not
univocally such as God's, so such as it is, it is so totally caused by and
dependent on God's continual Creatingwill and Emanation, that its Substance and
Being is more GOD's (though not GOD) than its own, and so is no Addition of
Being to God's Being, but contained in him, and flowing from him: A man's
actual thought, words or sensation is no Addition to a man's substance as such;
and yet they are not nothing. A man's Hair and Nails that have no life, but
vegetative, are substantial Accidents, and yet no part of the man: And yet are
so wholly his own, caused by his Soul, as heat and moisture, that we use not to
call them any addition to the man's being.

. 5. Q. But wherein then lies the Hypostatical Union, if God be equally near
to all things?

Ans. He does not equally operate on all: As the God of Nature, he sustaineth
and operateth on all his Creatures: As the God of Grace, he works Holiness on
Believers Souls: As the God of Glory, he is present demonstratively and
gloriously to the Blessed: But he works on none as he did on the humane
nature of Christ: These three differences I conceive make this proper sort of
Union. 1. Some Works God does, though by essential Proximity, yet not without
the use and operation of second Causes: But Christ's assuming the humane nature
by the divine, was by Conception by the Holy Ghost, as the immediate Efficient,
without the Causality of Man or Angel, the Mother affording Matter and Aliment
to the foetus.

2. Divine Operations being various, the Divine Nature did that on the Humane
Nature of Christ, which it did not on any other Creature: He having such Work
to do, as no other Creature was to do, the divine nature fitted the humane for
its part. No Angel was to be Mediator between God and Man, and to work Miracles
as he did, and in our nature to fulfill all Righteousness, and be a Sacrifice
for Sin, and to rise from the Dead, and to send down the Spirit, and ascend to
Glory, and there to reign and to judge the World: Therefore he was qualified
for all this work.

3. And so there is also a relative difference, in that the Divine Nature, by a
fixed Decree and Will, united it self for this work, to this one humane nature,
even for all futurity. It may be some that are wiser can better tell wherein
the Hypostatical Union consists.

. 6. As to the Question, Whether the divine and humane nature be two or one, it
is to ask, Whether the nature of God and his Creatures be two or one? They may
be called one as we are one with Christ, as conjunct, related and consenting:
But not one and the same essential nature.

. 7. But the great difficulty is, whether the two natures constitute one
Person, or two. Nestorius is accused ( Derodon says falsely, citing his own
plain words) to have held, That Christ was two Persons, divine and humane. But
what is to be held, the School-Doctors make a difficult question; that is,
whether the humane nature be either a Person, or any part of the Person of
Christ. 1. They say, that Christ was a divine Person from Eternity, and
therefore began not to be such at his Incarnation. 2. That the divine nature
cannot be pars personae, for that would be to be imperfect and not divine:
Therefore that the humane nature is no part, but an adjunct to the Person of
Christ. (And if the humane nature be an Accident to the divine in Christ, why
must we deny Creatures to be Accidents of God?) But most plain Christians would
be star^l^d to hear a Preacher say, that the Humanity is no part of the Person
of Christ.

. 8. I have no answer to the difficulty, unless I may distinguish of the sense
of the word PERSON, and say, that in the sense as it signifies a Person in the
Essence of God, the humane nature is no part Such a noise do the Histories of
Church-Faction make about Nestorians, Eurychians, Monothelites, etc. that will
not permit ^s to pass by these points.
of it. But as to a Relative Personality, (as a King, a Priest, a Prophet, etc.
as a Husband, a Father, etc. are Persons) so there is one Mediator between GOD
and Man, the Man Christ Jesus: And the humane is not here excluded.

But is the Divine a part of the Person of a Mediator? I handle such things
with fear; The Lord pardon our weakness: But we are called to handle them by
men's Presumptions.

1. As God is not a part of the World, or universal Substance, and yet is
eminenter more than a part, what if it be so answered here?

2. But if, as great Doctors now maintain, Relations may be ascribed to God,
without any Composition, because they have no proper reality, but a mere
objective comparability, why may not the divine nature have a relative part in
the Relation of Mediator, as assuming and advancing the humane, and operating
in it, without composition? And as according to this ambiguity, Christ may have
two persons (not univocally) divine and mediatorial, so the divine and humane
may make one Mediator: And in the one Person of a Mediator are contained many
Relative Persons of Christ, as King, Priest, Prophet, Son of Mary, etc. The
Lord pardon what is amiss in these Conceptions, and rectify my Judgment, and
give me that practical Faith and Knowledge of Him, which constituteth
Christianity, according to the Baptismal Covenant, and which is it that He
calls Eternal Life.

Amen.
CHAP. 4. How to conceive of the Diversity of God's Operations, seeing he is
immutable, and intimately near to every Patient.
. 1. IT is certain, That no Change wrought by God, signifies any Change in
God; and that no diversity of Effects signifies any real Multiplicity or
Diversity in God: But all Diversity ^loweth from Unity, and Change from
Immut^bil^ty.

. 2. It is certain, That God is intimately present in Essence with every
Creature, and every Effect, and so all his Effects are immediatione
proxim^tatis immediately from God, he being as near the Effect, when he uses
second Causes, and having as much Causality in producing what is done, as when
he uses none.

. 3. Yet it is certain, That God uses second Causes, and therefore that all
Effects are not so ^mmediately from him, as to be sine med^is: and the highest
usually work on the lower.

. 4. Therefore it seems plain, that Energy, ^r utmost transient Operations go
not as far as his Essential Presence; nor are equal to his Omnipotency: He does
not all that in primo instan^^ he can do; but suspendeth freely such Acts.

. 5. Therefore God may so far suspend some Operations on inferior Patients, as
to confine them to the Capacity or Aptitude of the superior created Causes, as
he does in the ordinary Course of Nature: He shines not by the Moon so much as
by the Sun; nor in a cloudy day so much as in a clear; nor in the night as in
the day; and nourishes us not by every sort of Food alike, nor cures alike by
all Medicines.

. 6. As God does thus in Naturals, so may he do in Morals, or spiritual
Changes: As he is the God of Kingdoms and People, he may use its Mercies and
Judgments by Kings and Magistrates, and according to their good or bad
Dispositions, as he did in the Death of Christ. He does not use to govern
Nations as happily by wicked, tyrannical, in^i^el Rulers, as by the good and
faithful: Pagan Rome was more unhappy under Nero, Domitian, Commodus,
He^iogabulus, etc. than under N^rva, Trajan, Adrian, Antonine, Alexander
Severus: And the Empire was delivered by the fall of seven Tyrants, by a
Constantine.

. 7. So God usually prospers or afflicts Churches and particular Souls,
working his Grace according to the qualifications of the Pastors and Teachers;
and fitting them to be meet Instruments of the intended Good, though he do not
always so confine his Operations. This is evide(...) in the different successes
of Ministers that are skilful or unskilful, wise or ignorant, good or bad*
concordant, or schismatical: And it is notoriou^ in the success of the
Education of Youth, in Schools Universities, and Families.

. 8. According to this Method, we may judge also of God's working according to
variety of Company-helps, Temptations, and Hindrances, and how much of God's
Work of Grace is thus sapientially and mediately exercised; though as to the
internal manner of the Agency of his Spirit, we are told by Christ, That every
one that is born of the Spirit, is as the Wind blows where it lists, and we
hear the sound, but know not whence it comes, and whither it goes. It is much
herein to know a little.

. 9. It greatly darkeneth us in judging of God's Providence on Earth, as to
the Welfare or Misery of Nations and Souls, Believers and Insidels, Peace and
War, etc. that we know not how much God does here by Spirits good and bad; and
how far such Spirits are left to their Free Will, as Adam was, in their
Ministration and Executions here below. God gave Satan power over Job, and
power on the Sabeans that robbed him, and power on the Fire that fell from
Heaven on his Estate. Christ said, This is their Day, and of the Power of
Darkness. What Laws the superior Worlds are under, as to us, and one another,
is much unknown to us; yea, what power for our sins Satan may have against (not
only the wicked, but) even those that fear God, both on their Bodies by
Diseases, and on their minds by troubling and seducing Temptations Sad
experience ^elleth us, that yielding to former Temptations, gives him
advantage for easier access to our imaginations, and to more dangerous fresh
Assaults.

. 10. But yet we may be sure, that all God's Promises shall be fulfilled, and
that he will never give Satan power to break them, nor suspend his Operations
so much on any second Causes, as to violate any word of safety, and hope that
he has given us to trust to; which Assurance may serve to keep us in Faith,
and Hope; and Comfort.

CHAP. 5. Is any point of Faith above Reason, or contrary to it?
. 1. I Have answered this at large in Method. Theol. It is a confused and
ill-worded Question.

Distinguish, 1. between Faith taken objectively, and Faith subjectively as an
Act, or Quality.

2. Between that which is required of all men to be believed, and that which is
required but of some.

3. Between Reason in Faculty, and Reason in Act and Habit.

4. Between Reason advanced by improvement, and Reason unimproved and buried in
Ignorance.

5. Between Reason that has only the Revelation of common Nature, and Reason
that has supernatural Revelation.

. 2. I. It being only objective Faith that is meant in the Question; that is no
Object of Faith which for want of Revelation, a man is not bound to believe.
There are Millions of Things above our Reason, which are no Objects of our
Faith. And more may be the Object of one Man's Faith, than of another that had
it no way revealed to him.

. 3. II. Almost all the matter of Faith is above the Reason of ignorant Sots
that never improved their Reason, or studied the Evidences of Truth: It is
above their Reason, as dispositive and active, though not above the possibility
of their Faculties being better cultivated and disposed hereafter.

. 4. III. The Doctrine of Faith is not only above, but centrary to the false
reasoning of ignorant deceived Fools; for so is the very Being of God, and such
are many that boast of Reason.

. 5. IV. The Gospel of Christ, and many points of Faith are above his Reason
that has only such natural Light as the Creation can give him, without any
Gospel supernatural Revelation. Who can know in India that never heard of
Christ, that he was incarnate, and rose from the dead, and ascended, etc.?

. 6. V. Nothing that God commands us to believe, is either contrary to, or
above Reason (that is the reasoning Intellect) informed by Evangelical
Revelation or Notice, and honestly and soundly qualified to judge otherwise, as
Law, Physic, Astronomy, so Divinity is above the Reason of the unqualified.

. 7. This is apparent, 1. Because we have ^o Faith in us, but what is an act of
Reason and ^^tional Will; and therefore that cannot be said (...) be above
Reason, which is it self essentially ^n Act of Reason. By what Faculty do we
be^^eve, but by the rational Intellect and Will? and this Intellect has but
two sorts of Acts, ^. Immediate Self-perceptions, which some call
In(...)uitions, and some, Eminent Internal Sensation. ^. Abstrative Knowledge
by Reasoning. And ^he first way we perceive nothing but our own ^cts: Therefore
it must be the latter, or not at all.

. 8. 2. We have reason to know that God cannot lie; and reason to know by
certain Proof that Scripture is his Word; and reason to know that that Word
expresses. Therefore we have ^eason to believe that it is true, and
consequently ^o trust it.

. 9. 3. If we tell Infidels that we have no Reason our selves for our Faith,
nor any Reason ^o give them why they should believe Christ more ^han Mahomet,
and the Scripture more than the Alcor^n, this preaching is not the way to
con^ince the World, nor did such Preaching gather ^he Churches.

. 10. When the Apostles added Miracles to their Testimony of Christ's
Resurrection, what was it for, but to convince Men's Reason, that what God so
attesteth by unimitable Works, must needs be true: It is by reason (abused)
that Men talk against reason.

. 11. Those knowing Divines that tell the Socinians, That the Matters of Faith
are above Reason, can reasonably mean no more, but that mere Reason by natural
Light, could not have known them without Gospel supernatural Revelation.

. 12. This Reason is unanswerable.

That is certainly true which God obliges a(...) men of Reason, to whom it is
revealed, to believe.

But God obliges all Men of Reason, to who^ it is revealed, to believe the
Life to come, and that Christ is the Son of God, and his VVor^ true.

Therefore it is true.

The Major is proved by the very Being an^ Perfection of God; to say that God
binds the World to believe a Lie, and so is the great Liar and Deceiver, is
to describe him like Satan, and to deny him to be God.

The Minor is proved; God binds us to believe that which being of greatest
everlasting Consequence, is attested by the former Prophecies, the Essential
Impressions of God, the multitude of uncontrolled Miracles, and the continued
success of sanctifying Souls, and making the greatest amendment of the world,
when we have no Disproof of it; and to trust our Souls and Hopes on this, when
we have such sealed Promises, and no other sufficient Hopes.

But such is the Gospel of Christ, and the Life to come -- Ergo we are Sound as
reasonable, by God to believe it.

In this Belief and Hope I am writing this, under the sentence of Death, in
expectation of my approaching Change. These five preceding Chapters were, on
Emergent Occasions, written about Twenty years after the rest of the ^ook (save
one Chapter, Chap. 5)


CHAP. I. Prefatory. Who shall be Judge of Controversies, and of the Sense of
Scripture; whether all the People, or who else.
Sect. I. EXperience assuring all Men, that we are born without actual
Knowledge, and yet with Faculties made to Know, obliged to Learn, desi^ing
Knowledge, needing it, and delighting in it, ^o wonder if Men be inquisitive
after the surest and easiest way to attain it; and if they be unwil^ing to be
deceived, no wonder they love Truth as Truth, and hate Lies as Lies; though,
being de^eived, they hate that which is Truth, and love that which is a Lie.

. 2. Therefore the first Apprehensions of the mind do greatly tend to the
introduction of those that follow, to make them such as shall agree with these:
And here, 1. Sense, and 2. Education have the great advantage. 1. We exercise
Sense before Reason, and therefore, at first, without the government of our own
Reason, and this necessarily, strongly, and constantly, as the Bruites do. 2.
And being therefore governed by the Reason of our Parents, we learn Knowledge of
them, and from sensible Objects, ^ut drop by drop, by slow degrees; and Sense
being strong, inclines Children strongly to desire that sort of Knowledge,
which will most serve the pleasure of Sense and Fleshly Appetite: And so they
easily learn how to sport, and after how to seek Pro^^ssion (by Labor and
Trades, and Fla^tery* (...).) t^ s^tisfi the Desires of the Flesh. But the
(...)dg of things spiritual and everlastin^ which are beyond the reach of Sight
and all the Se ses, comes not in so soon* nor till Parents o^ other Teachers
tell them of such, or Reason grow up to m^turity, by Experience and serious
Exercise, and withal, the Grace of God to bless such Help^, and overcome the
contrary fleshly inclinations, which original Pravity and customary Sensuality,
raise up against the Desires of, Endeavors for, and Obedience to a spiritual
and more excellent Knowledge. Where God gives, 1. A Body moderately temperated
as to Sensuality and Ingenuity; 2. And Parents, or first-Teachers, wise and
faithful, to teach Children that spiritual Knowledge which they have learn^
themselves; and, 3. by His Grace exciteth Childrens Minds to love, learn, and
obey the Truth, there enter the beginnings of truest Wisdom: But where these
are wanting, they grow up, instead of saving Wisdom, to the craftiness of a
For, to get, keep, and devour his Prey, and to the valor and felicity of the
Mastisse, to be Master of the little Dogs; and at last, to the subtilty of
Devils, to oppose and destroy as a hated thing the Holy Wisdom and Practice
that should have saved them.

. 3. As Knowledge comes in by slow degree^* so there are as many degrees or
differences of it, in the World, as there are Men; it being not probeble that
any two men on Earth have just the same apprehensions and degrees of Knowledge;
but that all men's mental Complexions differ far more than their Vis^ges do. So
that if the same degree were ^he measure of necessary Church-Concord, and
^alvation, there should but one in the World be ^^e Church or be saved. The
question then is not, What measure is desirable, but what is necessary to
Church-Unity and Communion, and to Salvation. And what God will do with those
that have not the Gospel, and are not of the Christian Church, but only believe
that God is, and that he is the Re^^rder of them that (...)tly seek him, and
that in every Nation do fear God, and work righteousness] belongs not to our
present question; but only what is necessary to the Christian State and Hope.

. 4. And here it is first to be decided, Whether God has by ^y fixed Law or
Revelation determined so ^f the Measure of Christian Knowledge and Faith, as
that thereby men may know who are to be taken as Christians and of the Church?
To which I say, 1. We ^ust distinguish of Faith as objective and as Active, ^r
as to the matter believed, and as to the Act of ^elieting or knowing. 2.
Between the Inward Sincerity and the Outward Profession: And remember that
though God judge of Men according 1. to inward Sincerity, and 2. expect that
degree of Knowe^^g and Faith in Act and Habit suitable to means ^njoyed,
without which the man and his Faith are ^ot indeed sincere; yet the Church (and
all Men) ^an judge of others, but 1. By outward Profession, ^. extended to that
degree of Objective Faith, which God has made commonly necessary to
Christianity or to the acceptance of the Church

It is therefore here a deceiving Consusion, to ^onfound the two cases, what is
necessary to God's acceptance into Heaven, and what is necessary to a Man's
acceptance into the Church. And thence some conclude that no man can tell just
what is necessary to Individuals.

. 5. That Christ has stated the Essentials of Christianity, taken objectively
should be so far past question, as our Christianity it self is, at least. For
if he have not, then he is not the Author and Finisher of our Faith: And if he
be not who is* The Apostles delivered it as received from him. If it were not
then made and determined by Christ, then there was then no Christianity, and so
no Christians. And if it was made since then, who wa^ the Maker of Objective
Christianity? No Man o^ Company of Men dare or do pretend to it. If they
should, whence had they that Power? And did ^^ die with them? Or may others
after them make also a new Christianity? Paul pronounces Angel or Man accursed
that should bring another Gospel than that which he had received and preached
Gal. 1. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. etc.

2. And if the Essentials of Christianity and Church-relation and Communion
were not determined of by Christ, and notified in the Holy Scriptures, then
there could be then no Christian Church, for want of Church-Essentials. And
then when began that Church, and who made it.

3. But the Gospel has put the matter out of doubt, telling us that Christ
has actually declared and determined the Essentials of Objective Christianity
and the Church: even in his Institution o^ Baptism, which is our Christening,
which in his preaching he expounded, and so did his Apostles. 2. And as his
Baptized Disciples were called Christians, so he commanded them to Love one
another and live in Concord and Communion a^ Christians: and could any obey
this Command, of Christianity was then either unmade or a thing that could not
be known?

. 6. And if it was then made by Christ, it was sur^ly anchangeable: else men
might be still making a new Christianity, from Age to Age, and when should we
have an end? And who has power or skill to make a better than Christ made
(...) that attempted it, thereby is an accursed Antichrist?

. 7. And now we come next to enquire, I. What are the Church-Controversies to
be decided. II. And who are the Dissenters that differ herein. III. And then we
shall easily find who it is that must be the Judge of them.

. 8. And 1. it is supposed that it is no one essential part o^ Objective
Christianity that is in Controversy. 2. And that it is not among Christians
that any such point is controverted. For he that denies any essential part,
denies Christianity and the Church; and therefore is no Christian (whatever he
may be called by himself or others.) And though Confounders make a great
Controversy of it, whether a Heretic be a Christian and a part of the Church,
it is easily resolved; if we dally not with an ambiguous word: If by a Heretic
be meant one that professes not, or deny^d any essential part of Christianity
or the Church, he is no Christian nor part of that Church which he denied: But
if by a Heretic be meant one that professes not, or denies only something
that is of the melius esse of Christianity and the Church, he is a Member
though a faulty one.

. 9. But it will be said, that more than the Essentials of Christianity is
necessary to Church Communion: else we must receive Drunkards, Fornicators,
Extortioners, Railers, with whom, says St. Paul, we must net eat.

Ans. I would those that will not endure tolerable men for a different opinion
or circumstance, could as little endure Drunkards, Fornicators, Extortioners,
and Railers, and Covetous, etc. But the Objectors must understand, That as I
said, The Baptismal Covenanting Profession of Christianity is our Church-title
to its Communion. And that Christianity is more than a bare Opinion or Notional
Assent: it is a solemn giving up our selves by Vow and Covenant to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as our God and Savior and Sanctifier, to be Taught
and Ruled by Christ, as well as pardoned, adopted, and glorified; which
essentially contains Repentance and the Renunciation of the Dominion of the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, which are contrary to the Government of Christ.

And it must be remembered that a Verbal Profession proved counterfeit and false
by inconsistent contradiction in word or deed, is indeed not valid, and is no
Profession. And he that would say, I will be Ruled by Christ, but I will be a
Drunkard, a Fornicator, an Extortioner, etc. would thus nullify his Profession
by a gross Contradiction: And to live impenitently in these sins, is as sure a
proof of falsehood of a man's Profession, as contrary words would be. And if a
man once and again commit such Sins till he Repent of them, he chooses them
and lives in them: And while he chooses and lives in them, he Repents not
indeed, whatever he say: For Repentance is a change of Mind and Life.

Therefore we here distinguish of Men's Right to Church Communion as 1.
unquestioned, 2. as lost or null, 3. as doubtful and under trial. 1. A
Baptismal Profession of all the Essence of Christianity, and not disproved, is
a Title not to be questioned. 2. Apostasy, or the denial by word or deed ^f
any essential part of Christianity, justly proved, nullifieth Christianity and
Church Right. 3. But if a man speak or hold some bad opinion by a remote
u^see^. consequence, contrary to somewhat essential to Christianity, or if he
commit some Sin that is inconsistent if he Repent not, here the Church must try
whether the said Error be indeed so held, as that the contradicted truth is
really not held, or only be held on a mistake of consisten^^, the person
professing to renounce it, if inconsistent: And whether the said Sinner live
impenitently in that Sin, as that which he chooses and will not forsake: And
while the man is under this doubtful Trial, his Title is doubtful, and to be
suspended as to actual Exercise.

And therefore the Church has ever used Suspension as a thing different from a
full or proper Excommunication. Suspension and some disciplinary restraints,
have been called Excommunicatio minor, which does not cut off a man from the
Church: When the proper Excommunication called major, is but an Authoritative
Declaring that a man has cut off himself, by Apostasy at least from some
essential part of Christian Faith or Duty: without which self-abs^ision, other
men's has no place, and is but a Slander of the innocent. God has not given
others Power to unchristen, cut off or damn the guiltless.

. 10. It Is one thing to be cut off from the Church or Christ, 2. and another to
be under trial and suspense o^ actual Communion, till Repentance prove men's
Right. 3. And it is another to be at present only denied Communion (not with the
Church wholly, but) in some comfortable Ordinances, till the removing of a
Scandal have made the person capable, by satisfying the scandalized. 4. And its
another thing to be cast down from a higher to a lower station, and denied
Dignities, Preferments, and special Honor. Confound not these.

. 11. And by this time you may see how to answer the ill-stated question, Who
is the Judge of Controversies in Religion: and of the Sense of the Scripture:
and whether every ignorant Man or Woman, or Child must be Judges of it for
themselves?

And first you must understand the foresaid Distinctions necessary to the
Solution; Ambiguities and Generalities are the instruments of Deceit. And
secondly I shall apply them to the case.

. 12. 1. We must distinguish Controverted Essentials of Christianity, from
controverted Integrals, and Accidents.

2. Distinguish Controversies between Christians and no-Christians, from
Controversies among Christians.

3. Distinguish material Objective Christianity (Faith and Duty) from internal
Subjective.

4. Distinguish external valid Profession of Actual Faith not disproved, from
internal Sincerity.

5. Distinguish between what is necessary to God's accepting a man to
Justification and Salvation; and what is necessary to the Church's accepting a
man to Communion.

6. Distinguish what is necessary to that stated Union and Communion which is
our real Church Membership and Christianity, from that which is necessary to
the present actual exercise of such Right in some local Privileges and Acts;
and from that which only sits men for Dignity or Office.

7. Distinguish between the Case de esse, or real Truth, and the Case de scire,
or judging of it.

8. Distinguish between Judging what others shall Believe about things
controverted, and governing their Practice, how they shall behave themselves.

9. Distinguish a private Judgment, discerning what is or is not our own Duty,
and a public Judgment in Government of others.

10. Distinguish the Judgment of several Governors according to their diverse
Offices, and Ends.

11. Distinguish a limited Power to Judge only one way from a power of judging
obligatively in partem utram libet, this way or that.

12. Distinguish the real incomplexe Matter or Objects of Faith, from the
literal complexe words which signify them. And so these conclusions will be
clear past doubt.

Concl. 1. All Christians are agreed in the Essentials of Christianity:
Therefore these are no Church-controversies for any to be the Judges of* It Is
only Insidels and Men without our Church that differ from us in these. And
Insidels are not to be converted by the Authority of a humane Judge (nor ever
were) but by Teachers showing the Evidences of Truth.

C. II. All Christians, as such being bound by Christ to love one another, and
live in Communion as Members of one Body, notwithstanding lesser differences,
it follows that Christian Unity, Love, and Communion depend not on the
question, Who shall be Judge of Controversies; as being presupposed to it.

C. III. But the Baptizing Pastors of the Churches are by office the Judges,
whether it be indeed the Essentials of Christianity which are professed by the
Baptized.

C. IV. And therein it is the Real incomplexe Objects that are propterse
essential (God, Christ, Grace, etc.) And the ^^gnal words are only necessary to
notify to the Church what men believe: And no singular words only are
necessary: Else only men of One Language could be Christians: But any words
will serve which signify the same Matter: few will serve for some: and others
must use more. The words of Baptism suffice where they are understood: But the
Creed, Lord's Prayer, and Decalogue, as the sum of the Credenda, Petenda,
Agenda, have by the Church been judged a sufficient explication, for the
Baptized: And in these we all agree.

C. V. Though real sincerity of active Faith and Consent be necessary to
Salvation, God judging the Heart; yet Profession not disproved, must satisfy
the Church: Who therefore are not put to judge whether men's Knowledge reach the
degree of their Helps?

C. VI. The Baptizing one into the Union of the Church-Universal, obliges him
to exercise Christ's instituted Worship in particular Churches; and therefore
to know what that is: which is The Pastor's Teaching the Flock Christ's Gospel;
officiating in the administration of the Lord's Supper, Prayer and Praise, and
Disciplinary Government by the use of the Church-Keys: Of Men's fitness for
these, the Pastors are the Judges, and the Flock must obey.

C. VII. Christ has in Scripture instituted all that is of necessity to this
Communion.

C. VIII. Every Governor has a governing Judgment (called Public) suitable
to his Office. The Pastors are Judges who is capable of Baptism and
Church Communion, as far as must be executed by the Keys.

The Magistrate is Judge who is by him to be countenanced, tolerated, or
punished by force.

The Parents are Judges in cases about their Wives and Children, proper to
Family-Government

But every reasonable Creature being a Governor of himself, is necessarily the
Discerner of his own Duty. And God being the Highest Ruler, and there being no
Power but of Him, and none against Him, no Man must obey any against him: and
all must use their Reason to judge whether Men's Laws be against God or not: If
this were not so, 1. Men were governed as mere Bruites: 2. And must curse God
or Christ, or murder, or do any Evil that Rulers bid them. 3. And then God
should for this punish none but Sovereigns. 4. And then all Nations must be of
the King's Religion. 5. And then men must not judge whether it be the Just
Prince or the Usurper that they must obey. In short, this overthrows all
Religion and Humanity.

C. IX. No men have Power to Judge in partem utramlibet, or against any Article
of Faith or Divine Obedience; the Thing is True or False before they judge of
it: and if they judge against Truth, their Judgment is void: God binds as not
to believe their Lie: They have no Power to judge that there is no God, no
Christ, no Holy Ghost, that the Gospel is false, that Men may commit Idolatry,
Perjury, Murder, Adultery, etc. The contrary all may and must judge; but some
as Rulers, and some as Subjects. But in cases before indifferent, (where Man's
Authority may make Duty* or not, there they may judge it Duty or not
accordingly.

C. X. In doubtful cases no men's bare judgment can bind or make others to
Believe things Divine with a Divine Faith: man is not God. But 1. Teachers that
are credible must be believed with a human Faith according to the degree of
their credibility, which is preparatory to Divine Faith. 2. And Rulers may
Govern Subjects in the manner of expressing and using their controverted
Opinions, and restrain them from doing hurt.

C. XI. While true Union and Love are secured by common concord in things
essential and necessary, a Judge of other Controversies is not needful to these
ends before secured: Christians must live in Love that understand not many
hundred Texts or Controversies.

C. XII. It is worse than Madness to think that all Controversies will on Earth
be ended, or that any Men can do it. But they that say it do most deeply damn
such pretended Judges, that so many Volumes being written of Controversies, and
contrary textual Expositions among themselves, will not decide them to this
day. Who shall decide all the Controversies between General Councils, and all
the present Patriarchs and Churches in the World.

Thus much to answer the question, Who shall be Judge of Controversies and
Scripture Sense?

. 5. If Men did but difference points necessary to Salvation and Christianity,
from those that are only needful to a higher Stature in the Church, and from
those that are utterly uncertain and unnecessary; and, 2. If they did but know
their own ignorance and liableness to Error; and, 3. If they considered how
utterly impossible it is to make the multitude of ignorant People, yea or
Ministers, to be all of a mind, in the numerous hard Controversies, Opinions,
and dubious or indifferent things, that are striven about in the World;
certainly instead of damning, or despising, or destroying, or hateing each
other for such things, they would magni^ie the Wisdom and Mercy of Christ, who
has laid the Love, Unity and Peace of his Church on a few plain, sure and
needful things, [ Even the Covenant of Christianity, with the Creed, Lord's
Prayer and Decalogue, and so much of Christ's own Precepts, as the universal
Church has ever bin agreed in.] And they would rather honor and obey St.
Paul, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 1, to 16. than count his Dictrin to be
unpracticable or loose.

. 6. If God will take all into Heaven that practically believe the Creed, and
obey what is plainly written in the Scripture, why may not such live in Love
and Peace on Earth, and the Key-bearers of the Church (which is the Seminary of
Heaven) receive such, as Christ receives us to the Glory of God the Father,
Romans 15. 16. What if Men confess that they know no more (when millions called
Christians know not so much) will they destroy them for not knowing more than
they can know? Or is it any Virtue or Duty to lie, and say that they know or
believe what they are utterly ignorant of? What if those that with Jerome
misliked the word Hypostasis, and those that preferred it before Persona, had
forborne censuring one another? What if the questions, Whether Mary should be
called the Mother of God, or rather of Him who is God? Or whether Christ's Will
and Operations should be said to be One or Two? had been managed with mutual
forbearance, without Zeno's Henoticon, or Anastasius's forcible Amursty? What
if such forbearance had spared all the rage and bloodshed at Antioch,
Alexandria and other parts? What if Chrysostom and others had bin permitted to
silence their Thoughts of Origin? What if men had not bin put to declare
whether the tria capitula of Theodoret, I^as and Theodore Mopsuest, were sound
or unsound, and said, What is it to us? Might not the Church have lived with
such in Peace? What if when the World was in a flame about Images, they had
left them only to those that desired them? Might not they yet have lived in
Love, that agreed in all the Essentials of Christianity? What if yet one man
say that Christ's Body is locally present in the Eucharist; and another say
that, Because he knows not how far his spiritual Glorified Body is invisible,
therefore he no more knows whether it be there than whether an Angel be
there, but believes that the Sacrament is truly his crucified Body
representative; why might not both these live in peace? What if one think that
Venial Sin must be punished with Purgatory Fire, or as an English Dr. that some
men must pass a new Life of Trial, in their Aireal Vehicle, before they are
capable of an Aethere^l Vehicle, why may not such bear with one that says he
knows no such thing? What ^f one man think that he may pray to his Angel
Guardian and another says only that he owes Angels Love, Reverence and
Gratitude, and would pray to them if he knew when they heard him, and knew it
were God's will, what hurt will it do to the other man to bear with this? If we
agree of all points that put men into that state in which Christ commanded to
Love one another as his Disciples; if others differ from me about the meaning
of five hundred Texts of Scripture, why may notlbe contented with my Knowledge
and Opinion, and leave them to theirs? Why might not Nazianzene and the Council
of Constantinople, Hierome and Russinus, Chrysostom and Theophilus and
Epiphanius, Prosper and Cassianus and Vincentius, (to pass by Augustine and
Celestine and Iulianus, and Hierome and Vigilantius and Iovinian) have composed
their differences with less noise and strife, and lived in love and peace
together. (To pass by also the doleful Contentions about the Councils of
Ephesus and Calcedon, and Constable. 5, and 6. and Nice 2. and between Ignatius and
Photius, and many more worse stri^es since then) Why might not the Jesuits and
Jansenists have differed without troubling the Popes and the Church, by mutual
forbearance and gentle disputes, as many of the Schoolmen did before them? I
quarrel not with Erasmus, Faber, and abundance such, for chiding the Schoolmen
as Causers of Contention, by raising so many frivolous questions for Dispute:
But verily, as they were in my opinion the best Philosophers that ever the
World had, (and no wonder when they studied little else) so they managed their
Disputes with more Scholarlike candor and peaceable moderation than most that
went before them, or that have followed them. How many huge Volumes of subtle
Disputes do they write, with very few railing words: patiently bearing each
others copious Confutations and Contradictions, as a thing to be expected, and
no whit wondering at the Differences of Judgment among the worthiest men? How
many Volumes, or loads of Volumes are there written, of the different Opinions
of the Thomists, Scotists, Nominals, Durandists; and yet till the late times
put Virulency into the Writings of Jesuits, Dominicans and Iansenists, etc.
there was little reviling to be found in all these long Disputes.

And why might not Luther and Caerolostadius, Zuinglius and Oecolampadius; and
many Lutherans and Calvinists have lived in as much Love and Peace as
Melan^thon and Erasmus and such others, if they had but had their forbearing
Charity and Candor? How sweet are the Pacificatory Writings, yea and how
judicious, of Iunius, Ludov. Crotius, Matthew. Martinius, Georg. Calixtus,
Conrad. Bergius, Johannes Bergius, Paraeus, Amyraeedus, Hottonus, Testardus,
Camero, Lud. Capellus, Plac^us, and (above all) Vinc. le Blank: yea and of
moderate Papists, Espencaeus, Ferus, Gerson, Cassander, and especially Erasmus:
And how harsh to the Lovers of Love and Peace, are such Writings as spit Fire
and Brimstone, Reproach and bitter Censures, against those that be not just of
their Opinions? it puts the wisest Divines hard to it, how far they may
pronounce Damnation on all those Heathens, that live in Sincerity (though not
in Perfection) according to that measure of the notification of God's Will
which they are under, that come to God in the belief that God is, and that He
is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and that in every Nation they
that fear God and work Righteousness, and are no worse than such Righteous men,
as Abraham thought even wicked Sodom had had fifty of, are accepted of him. And
shall Christians damn, curse and kill all that understand not a thousand
Controversies, which perhaps the destroyers as little understand; and that know
not an hundred things to be indifferent or lawful, which the destroyers do but
say are such?

. 7. It has often grieved me to read in Dr. Heylin's Life of Archbishop Laud how
great a hand the Controversies then called Arminian, or of the Five Articles,
had in the Divisions of the Church of England, between those that he makes
Archbishop Abbot in England and Archbishop Usher in Ireland to Head on one
part; and the few that at first (and many after) that followed Archbishop Laud
in England, and Archbishop Bramhall in Ireland on the other part. And to find
what a stress the many Parliaments that feared Popery did lay on the thing that
they called Arminianism: And being carried down by the stream of many good men's
Opinions and Fears, I was my self some years confident that Arminianism was a
character of an Enemy to the Soundness and Safety of the Church. But when I had
set my self thoroughly and impartially to study it, I found that which so amazed
me, that I durst scarce believe what I could not deny; even that from the
beginning of the Quarrel between Augustine and Pelugius, all the Voluminous
Contentions of the Thomists or Dominicans, and the Jesuits, and Franciscans,
and between the Lutherans, and Zuinglians (herein) and the Synodists and
Arminians, have been mostly about either unsearchable things, which neither
side understood, or about ambiguous words, which one Party takes in one sense,
and the other in another; or about the mere methodizing and ordering of the
notions which both sides are agreed in; and that indeed the most reach not the
very point of the difficulty and controversy, but talk before they understand
as their Leaders have taught them: And that when the matter is distinctly
opened, it is found that multitudes that write, rail and plot against one
another, are really of one Opinion De rebus, and did not know it: And that the
few remaining Controversies that are real, and not only verbal, are but of such
small or dubious things, as should break no Love nor Communion among
Christians, but all should with forbearance love each other in that liberty of
judging which they cannot remedy.

The man that could cure all men's Errors (and his own) and will not, is much
to blame: And he that would but cannot, is little better, if he will kill all
that he cannot cure; and no doubt has greater than any of theirs uncured in
himself. And what! Do I in all this take part with Ignorance, Error, Heresy or
any Sin? No! he that can cure it, let him: But is he a fit person to cure it,
that has the Errors of Ungodliness, Malice, Lying, and Bloodthirstiness in
himself? Or will killing men cure them? The Charity of these men says, [ Burn,
hang or kill them le^t they infect others:] Ergo, say others, Kill these that
far so, because their Errors are the most pernicious, lest they infect others
with the Asps and Dragons killing Poison. Nature teaches Man to hate and kill
Wolves, Kites, Adders, and all that live on the Blood of harmless Creatures,
and to protect Sheep, Doves, and such other Creatures as cannot protect
themselves. My nature grudgeth to live on the Flesh of these harmless
Creatures, though God has given them to us, but I little pity a Toad, a Snake,
a Spider, or a devouring Fox: But regnante Dia^olo, where the Devil rules, he
will have his Butchers and Shambles; and as Brutes are killed for Men, honest
men shall be killed by these as for God: And because God himself will not allow
the murder of the Innocent and Just and Pious, it is but calling them, Rogues
and Knaves, and as Christ, an Enemy to Caesar, and as to Paul, A Ringleader of
a Sect, and Mover of Sedition among the People, (real crimes where there is
real Guilt) and then they may say of them and do to them what they will, and by
cheating History represent Saints as Villains to ignorant Posterity. But O
blessed be the final, Just, deciding Judge; who is as at the door. The Leech's
Religion, that cannot live without Blood, is against the relics of Humanity
in Mankind, so much, that even they that for worldly interests comply with it,
do secretly suspect it to be indeed Diabolism.

. 8. But Satan told Christ that the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them
is delivered to him, and their Power is his Gift which he gives to whomsoever
he will; and that shall be to those that obey and worship him, Luke 4. 5, 6.
Though he be a Liar, too much of this is proved by the effects. And doubtless
where he reigns, his work does denote his Power and Government; that is, 1.
Blind Ignorance, Error, Lying and Deceit. 2. Malignant Hatred of good things
and persons. 3. Bloodthirsty and destructive wolvish ways. And when he
transformeth himself into an Angel of Light, and his Ministers as into
Ministers of Righteousness, all this is done most successfully as for God, and
as by (pretended) Commission from Christ, to kill the most conscionable and
faithful Christians, as odious Villains, and that as for the Church and Christ,
and for Unity, Order and Holy ends; yea to kill them in mere Charity, (though
they love not such charity to themselves.) Such is the Cainites and Cannibal
Religion, that will dye if it be not fed with Blood. And yet is so impatient of
its own name, and to hear the recital of its own Exercise which has maintained
it a thousand years, that it is a mortal crime to tell men that they do that
which they openly do and glory in. Wonderful! that it should be a necessary
Virtue to do it, and a capital Crime to say they do it: To know what such do,
goes for worse than doing it. Inscius Acteon, etc.

. 9. The effects of these Controversies have been and still are so dismal,
among Papists and Protestants, that sure no man should be angry with a
Reconciler that is not in love with Hatred and Destruction. I confess they are
very learned men of the Church of Rome that have managed them against each
other. And so are some of the Church of England, and of foreign Protestants:
But I must testify that the most that I hear or read inveighing reproachfully
against others about them, are men that tell me they talk after their Leaders,
of things that they never understood. I am ashamed to hear often in the Pulpits:
one Party rendering the Doctrine of Predestination as odious Blasphemy, and
another Party crying down Universal Redemption and Free Will and Arminianism,
as an Enemy to God's Grace; and neither of them know what they speak against.
One Davenant, or Camero, or Le Blank, shows more insight into the
Controversies which they reconcile, than forty of these zealous Railers do.

. 10. I meddle not in this Book with the Controversies about Church Government
or Worship: A settled worldly Interest and the various mental dispositions of
the Contenders, convince me, that I can there do little for reconciliation: God
must do it, if he have not forsaken this world. But mere Doctrinal
Controversies (though of great moment) methinks should not be so linked to a
worldly Interest, but that men should be willing to know the Truth or to endure
others to know it. That which I have attempted is, by mere and clear
explication, without much argumentation, to end such Controversies: And to make
men understand one another, and the things which they dispute about; and by
abbreviating my Catholic Theology, to make the Conciliation fitter for all
Students: And the Success of that Book gives me great encouragement, which
has been unanswered to this day, when I looked that it should have brought the
Contentious of both sides about my ears. And I rejoice in the Success of Le
Blank's Theses which I published (he sent them to me to publish, and I gave
them to my Bookseller to print, and he sold his Copy to another.) For all the
dismal effects that the History of the low Countries, and Dr. Heylin in
Archbishop Laud's Life mention of these Controversies, I rejoice that these
many years last past, they have made in England less noise than ever, and are
talked of with more peace and moderation. And that I have a special share in
the Comfort of this effect. And what Names soever Peace-haters and Man-haters
and Saint-haters call men by, Christ says, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the Children of God.

CHAP. II. The Doctrines about which they chiefly disagree, enumerated.
. 1. THE forementioned causes of Divisions in general, do operate among
Christians, 1. About Church Government; 2. About God's Worship, and 3. About
Christian Doctrine in particular: All which are turned into the matters of our
Discord. The two first I intend not to meddle with in this Discourse: And as to
the third, the Controversies about Doctrine which most trouble the Churches,
are, 1. About God's Decrees and His Will in general. 2. About his
Foreknowledge. 3. About Election in particular. 4. About Reprobation. 5. About
his Providence and Predetermination of all actions in general. 6. About his
causing or not causing Sin. 7. About Natural Power and Freewill, 8. About
original Sin. 9. About Redemption by Christ. 10. About the Laws and Covenants
of Innocence, Works and Grace. 11. About Universality and Sufficiency of Grace.
12. About Man's Power and Freewill since the Fall, to obey the Gospel. 13.
About effectual Grace, and how God gives it. 14. About the state of Heathens
that have not the Gospel. 15. About the necessity of Holiness, and the state of
moral Virtue. 16. About the necessity of Faith in Christ where the Gospel is
made known. 17. About the state of Infants as to Salvation. 18. About the
nature of Saving Faith. 19. About the nature of Pardon and Justification. 20.
About the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to Believers. 21. About the
manner how Faith justifies us, and how Faith is imputed to us for
Righteousness. 22. Of Assurance of Justification and Salvation, and of Hope.
23. Of Good works and Merits, and how far we may trust to any thing in our
selves. 24. Of Confirmation, Perseverance, and of danger and falling away. 25.
Of Repentance, late Repentance and the Day of Grace, and the unpardonable Sin.
26. Of our Communion with Christ's Glorified Humanity, and with Angels and
glorified Souls. 27. Of the state of separated Souls. 28. Of the Resurrection
and Everlasting Life.

Of each of these I shall show the pacifick Truth which must unite us, and show
how far all the Reformed Churches are therein agreed; and whether the Papists
are or will be agreed with us, I shall referr to their own consideration.

CHAP. III. Of God's Will and Decrees in general.
. 1. THE Will of God] signifies either, I. His own Essence, and that, 1. under
the notion of a Power or Virtue analogically to the Faculty in Man; or 2. under
the notion of an Act, as it is considered only ex part agentis without the
effect. II. Or the said Essence as related to the Effects or Objects, and
thence denominated. III. Or the Extrinsick Objects and Effects themselves,
called his Will, because willed by him.

. 2. These later are, I. His Works of eminent Power (with Wisdom and Goodness)
viz. Creation, Preservation and Natural Motion, by God as sons naturae. II. His
Works of Eminent Wisdom (with Power and Goodness) viz. ORDER, and specially
Moral Government; the parts of which are, 1. Legislation, Antecedent to man's
actions; 2. Retribution, by Judgment and Execution, consequent to them:
especially by the Redeemer in the way of Grace. III. His Works of Eminent Love
or Goodness (with Power and Wisdom) especially Glory begun and perfected.

. 3. By [ God's Decrees] is meant his Volitions of what shall be; which are but
his Will considered as in such acts: Now concerning all these senses of God's
Will.

. 4. I. God's Will in it self considered is his Essence, and not any Accident
in God.

. 5. II. Yet esse and Velle are not Conceptions of the same sense or
importance; but are distinct inadequate Conceptions of the same God: And so is
also Intelligere.

. 6. III. As Posse and Agere are not really two things in God, so his Will as a
Power, Faculty or Virtue, and his Will as an Act or Volition in himself, are
not two things; but two inadequate Conceptions of that which is simple Unity in
God; for Man's narrow mind can no otherwise know him.

. 7. IV. God does operate or effect immediately by his Essence; and not by any
Action of his, which is between his Essence and the Effect: Whether you call it
his Agere, Intelligere or Velle, or all conjunct by which he effects, it is
nothing besides his Essence which is so called: For there is nothing in rerum
natura, but God and the Creature, and the Creature's Actions: And A^r^ol^s,
that stiffly argues that God's Creating Action is neither God nor the
Creature, but a middle thing, does satisfy no man's Understanding, and is
commonly rejected: and he can mean with sense nothing but God as Agent, vel in
hoc modo; as a Creature in motion differs modally from the same qui^sant: But
God has no Modus which is not Himself, though not an adequate Conception of
himself. You must not conceive of God as of a Creature, which first by
self-motion alters it self (or is moved by another) and then moves another
thing: But God diversifieth things without diversity, and changes things being
himself unchanged.

. 8. V. As to the Controversy, Whether God make and move things only Volendo
(as Brad^ardine and many others say) or also Executive agend^, by excited
Power? Quoad re^^ both are true; because Power and Will in God are really the
same: But as to our Conception and Expression, it is a fuller expression to say
that he does it by Will and Power, because our Conception of m^er Volition is
as of quid immanens which does not efficiently go forth of it self, but command
in Man the executive Faculties; and so conceiving of God after the manner of
men, Volition is not an adequate conception of his causing Efflux, without
Active Power: But they that conceive of Volition as transient and potently
efficient, do mean the same thing, and really differ not from others.

. 9. VI. God's Will as it is his Essence has really no parts, no division, no
change, no priority or posteriority, but perfect Simplicity and Eternity.

. 10. VII. God's will as it is himself has no Cause but is the Cause of every
Creature: And to ask a Cause of the first Cause is absurd.

. 11. VIII. All the effects of God's Will ad extra, have their diverse natures,
orders and seasons, priority, posteriority or simultaneity, which we may
sobe^ly enquire after.

. 12. IX. God's will, though but one, as related to the objects and effects,
may by us be diversely denominated: And so we distinguish of his Creating will,
and his Redeeming will, his will to Save, and his will to Damn, his will to
save Peter, and his will to save John, and so of all the rest of the Objects.
In all which we mean not a Diversity of Essences or Faculties in God, or Acts
ex part agentis, really differing; but only one and the same Will diversely
conceived of and denominated by reason of the diversity of objects or effects
to which it is related, and so by Connotation the Will it self is thus
distinguished.

. 13. X. This distinction and denomination of God's will has extrinsick
Reasons, which some call Causes, from the various termini; as the same Light
shining into several Rooms; the diversity being real only ex part recipientis.
And so God's Will may be said in this Sense to begin and to end, to have
diversity, priority and posteriority of Acts; which are all to be judged of by
the Order of the Objects.

. 14. XI. The great question which the Schoolwits trouble themselves with, and
Vasquez, with abundance more, pronounce unsearchable and past our reach, is,
What is the Cause that God's Will is terminated thus or thus, on this Object
rather than on that? To which I take the boldness to answer for the ending of
that Dispute.

By [ the Reason of Termination] you must mean either, 1. The Reason of the
Being of that Object or Terminus rather than another: or 2. The reason of the
Relation of God's Will to that terminus rather than another, and so of the
denomination: or 3. The reason of the being of that Act of God so terminated.

1. For the first, the cause of all the effects of God's Will, is his Will it
self: And so of all the diversities effected. 2. The reason of the Relation of
God's Will to those effects, and so of the connotation and denomination, is the
Will and the Effect as from which the relation does result. 3. And the Being or
Act of the Will thus terminated, is God's essence, which has no Cause. And
what would you have more?
. 15. But this satisfies not Men that still think of God as of themselves, but
they go on still and ask, What is the Cause that God's Will (...) to make this
World or Creature rather than another? or to give the first grace rather to one
than to another? that his Will is terminated rather on Peter than Judas in
election? etc. But I must but call you back to consider again distinctly of
what was answered before. 1. The Cause of all the effects of Creation, etc. is
God's Will: 2. The cause why his Will is related to that effect a posteriore is
the position of the effect with God's Will. 3. The cause why God has such a
Will is not to be asked, for God's Will has no Cause. And if you add, But what
is the cause that, a priore, his Will is thus related and denominated as
decreeing this or that? I say, A priore, there is nothing in God's Will but it
self, which has no Cause: we dream of priorities and posteriorities and
varieties in him, when we think of the following effects; But when there was
nothing but God really to terminate his will, there was no ground for any real
relation and relative difference; And to talk of Relationes rationis in God
himself as to non-existent Creatures, and ask the cause of them, is ^ash
presumption; while we know that there was nothing in God but God, who has no
Cause. And the question respecting nothing but what was eternally in God
himself, whatever you will call his Essential Will fore-related to the future
Creature, you must needs say, that it had no Cause.

. 16. But if the question go further, Why God wills not other Creatures, or
other effects, and so his will is not effectively terminated on such; it is
after to be fullier answered; and now it is enough to say, that Nothing has no
Cause.

. 17. And when we say, that God's will may be denominated as diverse, prior and
posterior, and changeable as related to Objects that are such, this is to be
understood only of those acts which are to be denominated by Connotation of
what is diverse and mutable, ex part termini, still remembering that ex part
Dei there is really no diversity or mutation. And therefore such denominations
are given of God's will chiefly as related to existent Objects, which are his
Acts called Love and Hatred, or Complacency and Displacency: e. g. we may say
that [ God is displeased with Paul or Manasseth unconverted] and [ he is
pleased with them when converted] the change being only in them. Yet the same
denomination may be used also of God's purposing Will. As, e. g. we may say,
that [ before Christ's Incarnation, God had this Decree; I will send my Son to
be incarnate, and die for Man's redemption.] But now it is not fit to say that
God has yet such a Decree, when the thing decreed is past: nor a Decree that
He will create Adam and the rest of the World, which is created.

. 18. But whoever likes or disliketh any of these modes of Speech, must still
remember that Controversies about them are not about any real change in God,
(which all deny) but only about the connotative and respective denomination of
his Will from the changeable Creature. And while that is confessed, sober men
will not be forward to fall out about it.

. 19. Suffer not the Quaerist to confound the three forementioned Senses of [
the Will of God,] and you may resolve almost all the ordinary questions about
it, as is before intimated, without any more ado. As, e. g.

Qu. Is God's Will resistible?

Ans. 1. God's Will, as it is his Essence, cannot come into the Question, as
not being passive, and so not properly resistible. 2. As God's Will is taken
for the objects and effects of his will, many of them are resistible: As his
Commands when they are violated are resisted morally; so one effect of God's
will, or one Creature moved by him naturally, may resist another. 3. If the
question be only whether the respective Termination of God's will, and the
Denomination of it as thus or thus terminated, can be resisted? I answer, 1.
Not by any resistance upon the Essential will of God so terminated. 2. Not by
making God to be willing and not willing of the same thing in the same respect
at the same time; for that is a contradiction; and were to make the same Object
to be and not to be at the same time, Contra necessitatem existentiae. 3. Not
by preventing or destroying any Object or Effect which God's will so produces,
as that no Creature has power to hinder. 4. But when he will cause one sort of
motion, and himself cause a greater contrary motion, or enable a free Agent so
to do, this contrary motion resisting the other motion, which was the effect of
God's will, his will is denominated as resisted respectively. The same may be
said of Passive Resistance.

. 20. So if the Question be [ Whether God gave any Conditional Will?]

Ans. 1. There is no place for the Question about God's Essential Will in it
self. 2. Many Objects of God's will and effects are antecedently conditional.
1. Quoad ^ormam, as his conditional Promises. 2. Quoad ^ventum, as when he
suspendeth any Right, or Benefit on a condition to be done by a free Agent; as,
e. g. [Adam shall live if he sin not, and die, if he sin.] But here
Conditionality implies no uncertainty as to God's Knowledge. 3. Therefore if
the Question be only, whether ^b objecto any Will of God may be relatively or
connotatively called Conditional, 1. Remember that the Question is but de
nomine. 2. The same will of God may be called Conditional, as quid conditionale
is the Object of it; and also Certain and Absolute, as the same thing is to him
certainly future, which yet was in the Order of Causing, conditionally future.
But this supposes the certo futurum, to be quid volitum; and not Sin, which is
certo futurum and non volitum.

CHAP. IV. Of GOD's Knowledge.
. 1. AS we must not think of God's Will as having various and mutable internal
acts as Man's has; but as One Essential Act, only variously denominated from
the relation of extrinsick Objects; even so must we think also of his Knowledge.

. 2. God knows not by Reception of any Light or Species or Idea from the
Object without him, but as beseems the perfection of the Infinite Intellect
and first cause; even partly by a productive act of Intellection, and partly by
termination on the Objects known. ( N. B.) I am fai^ all along to use the name
of [ Extrinsick Objects] to signify that the Creature is not God: though it is
improper to say that any thing is extra Denm: but we want better words.

. 3. Many of the Church-troubling Disputes about God's Knowledge, are raised
from that profane supposition, That God knows cogitand^, by many distinct
Cogitations, as Man does, and by Idea's or received Species of the Creatures.
And on the false Supposition that Man can comprehend God's way of Knowing, or
at least has formal conceptions of it, and must speak accordingly. From whence
there are such rash Disputes which Act is first, and which comes after.

. 4. Most of these Controversies are ended by the right applying the foresaid
distinctions to God's Understanding, which I before applied to his Will. As, e.
g.

Qu. Has Gods Knowledge any Cause?

Ans. 1. Not as it is his Essence. 2. The Objects of it have their Causes. 3.
The denomination of his Knowledge as such, from the Objects respectively, has
its cause, such as a Terminus may be called. And as in Man the Object is really
the quasi materiale and constitutive cause of the Act, not as an Act, but as
this Act in specie vel individuo thus terminated; so as to the mere connotation
and relation and denomination, though not as to any real reception, we may
speak of God.

. 5. So if the question be, Whether God's Knowledge ^ave many Acts? and whether
one be before or after others?

Ans. 1. God's Essential Knowledge is simply one. 2. The Objects of it are
many. 3. Therefore as denominated ab extra, from respect to the Objects, we may
distinguish his simple Knowledge, and mention priority and posteriority, but
such only ^s resulteth from the Order of Objects: And these being but
Conceptions and Denominations necessitated by our weakness, without any real
diversity ^n God, we must fear and abhor presumptuous boldness, and
contentiousness hereabout.

. 6. So if the question be, Whether God's Knowledge be mutable?

Ans. 1. His Knowledge essential it self is not. 2. The Objects are. 3. And
therefore the Denominations of his Knowledge ab extrae often are: As we may say,
That God knew from Eternity that the World would be created, and Christ
incarnate, as future. But now he knows that they were so, ut praeterita. God
does not now know, that Christ will be born, that Christ just now is crucified,
that Paul is preaching on Earth: but once he knew all these. Yet here all the
Change is in the object, and none in God's Knowledge, as there is on man's.

. 7. If the question be, How God knows future contingents?

Ans. 1. God's Essence is Knowledge, and is Infinite, and therefore extends
to all that is intelligible: And if they be not objects intelligible, it
belongs not to a perfect Intellect to know them. But if they are, it is
rashness to ask any other reason of God's knowing them, besides his Perfection
and their Intelligibility: But all Contingents that are future, are Certainties
to God as well as Contingencies, in several respects, and accordingly known:
But the shallow Brain of Worms does little know what Futurity signifies in
Eternity to God. 2. But we know what future Contingents are to us. 3. And
thence we know that God's Intellect may be denominated by imperfect Man, as in
its perfection comprehending our Futurities and Contingencies, and human
Measures, though not as Measures to God.

. 8. If the question be, Whether God know things as future, because he wills
them to be future; or because they are future from the free Agent's Will*

Ans. 1. God's Knowledge, ex part sui, is his Essence, and has no Cause, for
it is no Effect. God's Understanding, Will and Power are essentially One, but
as various, inadequate conceptions, they only make up* perfect Unity, and are
not Causes and Effects to one another; much less caused by any Creature. 2. But
Futurity is caused by that which causes the thing future: And therefore the
futurity of Sin is caused by Man that causes Sin, so far as it is capable of a
Cause; of which more in due place: But as Futurity is not Existence, so it
needs not an existent, but sometimes only a future cause. 3. And God's
Intellect is terminated on things as Intelligible, and that is as they are: And
so on things that are future by his own will, as such; and on things future by
Man's Will, as such; as far as Futurity is an object of an eternal mind.

. 9. The many Disputes de scientia simplicis intelligentiae, purae visionis and
mediae, I think best abbreviated according to the forementioned Principles.
God's essential Understanding is but One: Things intelligible are many; God's
simple Intellect may be variously denominated as related to and terminated on
various intelligible Objects, and so according to their Order: But this
signifies no real diversity at all in God, but in the things known: Nor must
we dream, that Scientia simplicis intelligentiae, is like man's, a knowledge of
certain Logical Notions or Propositions by way of Thinking, as to know that [
This is possible, and the other is possible, and that is convenient,] as if God
needed such second notions to know by; but it is infinitely above Man's mode of
knowing: His Knowledge is first effective and then intuitive, and this without
diversity or change in God.

. 10. It is a great aggravation of the Presumption and Profaneness of many
voluminous School-Disputes, about the unsearchable nature of divine
Intellection, that the certain Knowledge of our own great ignorance (even about
every silly Creature) and of God's incomprehensibleness and infinite distance,
do not prevail to repress such audaciousness, and bring men to more Modesty and
Reverence of God: And how much more learned^y and wisely does he answer
abundance of their Questions, who says [ I know not] than they that by
presumptuous conclusions take on them to know what they do not, nor ever will
do, in this World?

CHAP. V. Of ELECTION.
. 1. ELECTION in Scripture sometimes signifies God's actual choosing or taking
one Man or People from among others to himself, either for his special
Complacency and Service by Sanctification or Conversion; or to some special
Office, as David was chosen from among his Brethren. And sometimes it
signifies God's eternal Will or Decree so to choose, call or sanctify and
save men at a determinate time: as in Ephesians. 1. and elsewhere.

. 2. God will convert, justify, adopt and save some men, by his Grace.

. 3. Therefore it is certain that God from Eternity did will or decree so to
do: For the event in time, makes it fit so to denominate God's etern^ will:
Though there was nothing before the Creation really but God; and so real
existent Man was not the Object of his Will; and Man in esse cognito, was
nothing but God himself, there being nothing else from Eternity (except as
Eternity comprehends Time.)

. 4. In the same manner as God brings men to Grace and Glory, he wills or
decrees to do it: For his Decree to do it, is no real Act of God distinct from
his Essence; but it is his simple essential will denominated from the effect
related to it. Therefore the Controversies about Election ^re resolved into
those about the giving of Grace and Salvation; and there will be clearlier
ope^ed.

. 5. Glorification, Perseverance, Adoption, ^ustification, Sanctification,
Faith and Repentance ^ or Vocation) preparatory common Grace, and ^he Gospel,
and other means of Conversion, are ^everal Gifts of God's Grace through Christ:
Therefore God's Decrees to give them may be ^liversly denominated from relation
to the effect. The Decree to glorify may be distinguished from the Decree to
convert, to justify, ^c. And yet where all these are really conjoined, and are
but (as the parts of one Engine) the several gifts which make up One Salvation,
as the object ^or effect is in that sense One, so may God's Decree be called
One, as related to it. So that they that say God's Decrees about our Salvation
are many, and they that say They are one, do both speak Truth, and disagree not.

. 6. They that will denominate God's Volitions or Decrees according to the
Order of Intention, must not mean that Ex part Volentis, God has really many
thoughts, Volitions or Decrees, and that the first is de fine, and the next de
mediis. But only that in the order of real Causation, one of God's Gifts or
Effects is made to be a Cause or Means to the production or attainment of
another; and so the latter is to be Man's End intended in the use of the
former; and so Man is first to intend the End before he uses the Means: But no
Gift, Work or Creature is to be called God's End, except when we speak Vulgarly
after the manner of Men, that which we will not defend as proper Speech.

. 7. Yet God may be said to will and n^^ One thing to produce or Cause another;
which imports only that it is a second Efficient Caus^ of that Other, and the
other an intended Effect; and also that the other is to man to have ration^^
finis, and so may be called finis operis, and operan^^^ secundarii.

. 8. God is not an Efficient Cause of Himself, or any thing in Himself, and
therefore not properly an End to Himself, because there is nothing in Him
Caused. But if any will speak otherwise, as if there were in God himself
Eternal Causatio^ Efficient and final, and Eternal Effects, and thereby explain
the Doctrine of the Trinity, let them remember that they venture on singular
Expressions, and such as favor of Imperfection; but we hope that they differ
from the Commoner way, but in a Logical Notion, rather than in a real
Conception.

. 9. If we may not say that God is his ow^ End (for every End has a Means, and
there is no Means to God's Beings or Perfections) then he is not properly said
to have any End. For nothing but Himself can properly be his End.

. 10. Yet when by an End we mean but improperly the ultimate Effect, and not
any thing which to God is Causa agendi; and so declare that we take the words
End and Intention equivocally as to God and Man, the phrase may be used: And in
that sense we must say that God's will as Efficient being the Beginning of all
things, God's will as fulfilled and pleased is the End of all; which yet
signifies not any diversity or change in God; for his Will is always
fulfilled, though not always by the same means: And the fulfilling of his will
must ^e our ultimate proper End.

. 11. And because that the excellency of God's works is his own Image or Glory
shining in them, and the Perfection of the whole Universe most ful^y contains
that Glory, therefore we may say that God's Glory is his End, and that as it is
found in the perfection of the Universe, of which the Glorified Church is an
eminent part.

. 12. Therefore they that call the Glorifying of God's Mercy in Saving, and of
his Justice in Damning men, his End, and all that tends hereto the Means, do
name a means, (and that not the highest) as the End: For the Glory of Mercy and
justice is but part of God's created or caused Glory, and especially as it is
on this or that Individual: But the perfection of Christ, Angels, Saints,
Heaven, Earth, and all things, is that Glory which may be called materially
God's End, as being his perfectest Effect; as the Complacency or fulfilling of
his will, herein is the most formal notion of it. But God's Glory appears in
every Creature and every providential change, in its proportion; and if any
will call that God's End, we must not make a strife of words if we mean the
same thing.

. 13. According to this explained sense of Intention, the distributing of God's
Decrees juxta ordinem intentionis, will make no considerable Controversy; but
in the distribution of them juxta ordinem Executionis, we more commonly and
easily agree: And it being but the diverse denominations of God's simple will
from the effects* it is from the Effects ^ure that they are fitlyest
distinguished.

* 14. As to the controversies about the O^jects of God's Decrees, meaning the
Personal o^ subjective Object as distinct from the effects of the Volition (or
the presupposed State of him that God Decrees the gift to.) If we will
distribute God's Decrees or Volitions as the parts or gifts decreed are
distributed, then the question is all one, as, What State a man is supposed to
be in when God gives him such or such a Gift; which is a thing that we are not
much disagreed about.

. 15. e. g. The Recipient of the Gift of Glory is a persevering faithful Saint.
The Receiver of the Gift of Perseverance is a true Believing Saint: The Gift of
Justification, Adoption, and the Spirit of further Sanctification, is given to
a penitent Believer: Faith and Repentance are given usually to persons prepared
by a more common Grace, having the means of Grace, and for ought we know
sometimes suddenly without such Preparation. And so on to the beginning.

CHAP. VI. Of Reprobation, or the Decree of Damnation.
. 1. THough (...) in Scripture signifies one whose existent Pravity rendereth
him disapproved, loathed and rejected of God, yet we here continue the word
Reprobation as ordinarily used, for the Decree of rejecting men for ever, that
we may be understood; not refusing any ^itter name.

. 2. God's essential Will as such is not called Reprobation nor a Decree of
Damnation, as distinct from other Volitions: Therefore the distinguishing
denomination must be fetched from the effects or objects which it has relation
to.

. 3. Therefore where there is no effect or object of God's Will, there is no
such will to be named and asserted: But so much as God effects in or toward
Man's damnation, so much he must be said to will.

. 4. God effects no man's Sin, and therefore he willed not or decreed not to
effect it.

. 5. He effects it not either for it self, or as a means to something better:
Therefore he decreed not to do either.

. 6. God effects much without which Sin could not be, (as the Life and Power
of the Sinners, his abused Mercies, Objects, etc.) Therefore all this he
decreed to do, even as his own Works, which Sinners make the occasions of their
Sin.

. 7. If it be said that God permits Sin; therefore he decreed to permit it:
These things must be answered. 1. Permission is an ambiguous word: Strictly it
signifies in Physics nothing at all but a m^er Negation, which is non
impedire, not to hinder: But in Politics it often signifies a positive License
or voluntary Concession of Leave for a man to do or possess something: And many
Divines by Permission mean not bare non-impedition, but also some action that
tends to the procuring of the event. In the first and proper sense* it*
follows not that God decreed to permit Sin, because he ^^rmitteth it: For
permitting here is but a bare verb, and signifies nothing: Not-to-hinder is
merely nothing: And nothing is no terminus to denominate Gods Decree or Will.
But as permitting signifies any positive act, which men make an occasion of
Sin, it is improperly called Permission, and it was spoken of before: And
though God's general Influx be presupposed, that is not Permission, nor part of
Permission.

And as Permission signifies Leave to Sin, God permits none; for it is not
Sin if so permitted.

2. And if it would hold that God Decrees his Permission of Sin, it follows
not that he decrees the Sin permitted; for that is not a capable object of his
Volition.

. 8. God effects punishment, even in Hell (at least, part of it, of which in
due place) therefore he decrees or wills so to effect it.

. 9. God damneth none but Sinners: Therefore he decreed to damn none but
Sinners: Therefore a Man only as a Sinner is the object of the Decree of
Damnation or Punishment, seeing the Decree is denominated from the effect.

. 10. It is not a Sinner merely as a Sinner that God will damn: else all
Sinners should be damned. But it is only a certain sort of Sinners, who
prevalently and finally reject remedying means and mercy. Therefore it is only
such that are the Objects of the particular Decree of Damnation.

. 11. In the first instant we are Men, in the second innocent, in the third
guilty of Sin against the mere Law of Innocence; in the fourth we are brought
under the Law of Grace upon the Promise of a Redeemer, and in the fifth we have
the Common Mercies of that Law and Redemption given us, as means to our
performance of the Duty which that Law requires and obtaining further Mercy.
In none of these instants is a man the object of the Decree of Damnation: God
damneth not any man merely as a Man, or as Innocent, or as a Sinner against the
mere Law of Innocence, nor as redeemed and under the Law of Grace, nor as
receiving the common means and mercies of that Covenant; Nay, nor as in the
sixth Instant he is guilty of sinning against such Mercies; (for else all that
do so should perish.) But only as in the seventh instant he is found a
prevalent, final rejecter of the special Grace, and abuser of the common
Mercies of that Covenant. And therefore the Decree is to be accordingly
denominated; though God's essential will have no Cause, nor Dependence upon any
Creature.

. 12. But there are other Acts of God's justice which are comprised in
Reprobation or Rejection as the word is commonly understood: As, 1* Cutting off
a sinner untimely in his Impenitency. 2. Denying him some inward helps of Grace
which once he had, or was fair for (so far as that is quid positivum) and
depriving him positively of some Means of Grace; for his sinful refusal or
abuse, or for abuse of other Means and Mercies. And all these punishments God
so far decrees as he Executes; which is upon none but such as by sin against
the Law of Grace deserve them.

. 13. But where Negations are no Punishments nor Privations, they fall not
under the notion of Positive Effects or Objects, and so are not fit to
denominate a Positive Decree or Will. Therefore when it is not a Punishment, (
Not to give Faith, Repentance, Preaching, etc.) is no act of Reprobation: As
not to give that Faith, Repentance and Pardon which he needed not to Adam in
Innocence; not to give them in act to Infants, etc.

. 14. Yea, when a Penal Privation is only the consequent of God's not Acting,
and not of any Positive Act, there the Ratio Poenae is of God, and is quid
positivum, and God causes it by that Law which did make the debitum poenae:
But yet the Negation or Privation in which it consists is Nothing, or nothing
of God's causing, and therefore not fit to denominate a distinct Decree: e. g.
Not to give special Grace, Pardon, Justification, Glory, to Judas, is nothing,
and so as nothing not the object of a positive Decree: But both the positive
acts by which any Mercy is withdrawn, and also the relation of Punishment which
is in these Nothings or Privations is caused by God, and therefore Decreed by
him. As if God say, This shall be his punishment that will not Eat, that he
shall die of Famine: Here not eating is nothing, but the penal reason which is
in Famine, which is but the privation of Meats, resulteth from the Law of
Nature and will of God.

. 15. By all this it appears that Election and Reprobation go not pari passu,
or are not equally ascribed to God. For in Election God is the Cause of the
means of Salvation by his Grace, and of all that truly tends to procure it:
But on the other side, God is no cause of any sin which is the means and merit
of Damnation; nor the Cause of Damnation, but on the supposition of Man's sin:
So that sin is foreseen in the Person Decr^e'd to Damnation, (but not Caused)
seeing the Decree must be denominated from the Effect and Object: But in
Election God decrees to give us his Grace, and be the chief Cause of all our
Holiness, and does not elect us to Salvation on foresight, that we will do his
Will or be Sancti^ied by our selves without him. Therefore Augustine, Prosper
and Fulgentius, still make this difference, That the decree of Damnation goes
on foresight of sin, but the Decree of Salvation contains a Decree to give
that Grace that shall certainly Save us.

An ANSWER TO Mr. Polehill's Exceptions about Futurition.
SIR,
IAm much chidden already for writing many Books, and Answering so many that
object, and am told, That if the Case well Stated will not satisfy men, no
Answer will do it, b^eause it is for want of their Receptive Capacity, which
long and right Studies must help them to, and not a mere Answer to their
Objections. I very highly value the worthy Gentleman whose Papers you sent me,
hearing of few, if any, among us more commended for Knowledge and Piety. The
question is but whether it be he or I that by half confused conceptions of the
matters in question speaks in the Dark, or which of us has the more ripe
digested and ordered thoughts hereof. And must others be troubled with such
Cases? It is those that he pleads for that have made the edge of the Razor so
thin that they or I do Cut our Fingers with it, and have spun such subtle
Notions, which if their wits when they have done be not subtle enough to
manage, they will often slip through or be as Spiders Webs. As to the first
Controversy of Futurity or Possibility, this Gentleman's method will do me no
good, being no whit fitted to that which I expect. I should expect from him
that he had taken notice of my Distinctions and Explications ^f Futurity, and
that he had directly pleaded only for that sort or sense which I deny, and had
Answered the Reasons which both in the First and Second Part I bring against
it. But it is not so: And to Dispute at such rates is but to try who shall live
longest to have the last word, (it being easy at this rate to talk against one
another as long as we live) which I cannot expect, and therefore shall give any
man herein the best. All that he has said against me is materially Answered in
the Book already, and if he perceive it not, how can I help that? More Books
are not like to do it, nor have I leisure for such tasks: Yet briefly I return,

I. As to my sense of the words (Future) and (Possible); 1. As they are
predicated of the thing future or possible, they are termini diminuentes quod
realitatem existentem, and futurity as it is rei ipsius futuritio is nothing.
2. Whether Time be any thing distinct a re durante or Nothing, is a
Controversy, which I conjecture Mr. P -- 's Pen and mine are never like to
decide. It is enough for me now to say, that I take it for nothing Distinct. 3.
Yet shallow man that sees not uno intuitu the Universe, as God does, nor has
his essential Eternity, is in motion, where there is mensura motus, and must
think of things by partial Conceptions, and must make past, present, and future
his differing Notions in Duration. 4. The internal Concept^^ in man of a thing
as future (that it will be) is quid reale; for it is an act of the mind and a
Ver^um mentis; and an act d^ ni^il^: A mental Negation is a real act: To think
and say in the mind (the World was not from Eternity: Darkness, Death, etc. are
nothing) are real thoughts. 5. The ver^^^ prolatum ore vel scripto (sin will
be, etc. the Su^ will rise, etc.) is quid reale: It is a Word, a Proposition.
6. The fundamentum or premises, from which such a Conclusion may be fetched, i^
quid reale: e. g. God's Will or Knowledge, or any necessitating Cause. 7. God
that knows man, knows all his mental Conceptions and his Propositions de
futuro, without Imperfection knowing our Imperfection; and so knows whether
they are true or false. 8. God's willing and knowing that things were, are or
will be, are all one ex part Dei, being nothing but his simple, perfect
Essence thus knowing and willing: But ex part rei cognitae aut volitae, there
is difference; And thence by Relation, Connotation, or extrinsick denomination,
God's internal Acts are variously named, as de praeterito, de praesenti, de
futuro. 9. God's Will and Knowledge from Eternity, that there shall be Time,
Successions, Man, Propositions, and that things shall be in such an Order, are
a foundation of the verity of such a verbum mentis vel oris (these will be) if
there had been any such eternal Words or Propositions. 10. Though formaliter
there was no such thing in God ( and forma denominat); yet eminenter that
perfect intuition of God, which is the knowledge of all Intelligibles,
comprehends all of man's Knowledge, which is any part of Perfection: And we
must bear with the naming of God's perfect Acts by the same names that signify
our imperfect Acts; so be it we have due care not to ascribe to him the
Imperfection; nor from names which connote Imperfection in ^ersu primo, to
infer false Doctrinal Conclusions of God. 11. An ipsum nihilum may receive in
^an's partial Conception, a name, and accordingly many and diverse names fetched
from some ^easons of his Conceptions. 12. Accordingly we ^all a thing that is
really nothing, but as in the Cogitation to be possible, or future, or past, as
if these were rerum reales affectiones, or somewhat ^ow Real: Whereas the
Epithets are but the modes of our own Notions or Thoughts, and raised from our
knowledge of other things. And the proper Language is but this, (God can do
this: God will do this) which suppose it not done. As (God can make the world)
would have been a true word from Eternity, had there been any such word to be
true. And thence we say (The World was possible.) And God's perfect Knowledge
being eminenter somewhat infinitely more perfect than such Thoughts, Words, and
Propositions, after the manner of weak man, we speak of God and of Nothings as
related to his Will that they shall be, or to his Knowledge, and so call them
possible and future.

II. Now I expect the Confutation of the Reasons, which I gave (As that there
was nothing Eternal but God, therefore Eternal possibility and futurition can
be nothing but Conception of God himself; and so of the rest.)

III. His Exceptions have all their strength from the mere ambiguity of the
word ( futurity), continuing the Confusion after all my Explication. I have not
time to Transcribe all his words, and therefore must suppose you to have his
Writing by you, which I shall briefly Answer in Order.

Ad 1. As nothing they differ not, but (...) various Conceptions of them
differ, as do (...) Reasons of those Conceptions and Denominations: Sun and
Moon, Angels and Men, were equally nothing from Eternity: And yet God's simpl^*
Will to make all these, might have had various relative or extrinsick
Denominations, had there been then a Created Intellect so to name it, and these
nothings called Future, Angels, Men, etc. accordingly.

Ad 2. Nothing as nothing has no Parts or Distinctions, but nothing may be
variously named; or to speak more aptly, Before Things are Any-things a
purposing and foreseeing Agent may make Names and Notions for them before* the
things. Greg. Ariminea copiously disputes that (that which is not, may be
related to that which is, and that which is, to that which is not, or nothing):
his Reasons are subtle. Relation is rerum referebilitas or Comparibilitas. If
an Angel Existed before the Light or Sun, and knew that God would make the
Light or Sun, why might not the Angels Intellect refer God's Will to the Light
or Sun, which he would make, while it was nothing? Which is no more than to
know (that God will make such a thing which is yet nothing.) But I say these
nothing's relate not to God, but God's Power, Knowledge and Will, may by an
Intelligent Creature be considered (while they are not) as that which will make
them, does foresee them, etc. which is to be referred to them. It Is true that
nothing is no effect, and will be nothing without God (which is that I said).
It Is true that the Divine Power does not make mere Possibility to be any thing,
for it is nothing: But it being true that God can make that which he yet has
not made, for this proper Speech (God can make it) man's broken thoughts ^ut a
Name or Epithete on that which is not, and call it possible for Discourse sake,
and for the ordering of our thoughts about nothings, or things that yet are not
(yea never will be): For we say that Millions of Millions of non futura are
possible. And is Possibility then any thing extra m^ntem Di^inam and humanam?
Why he spoke of things being possible without the Divine Power I know not. ^
take Possibility as real to be but part of that Ens rationis or mental
Conception which by Reasoning we take up of Non-existents, because God can make
them that yet are not made. The same ^ say of his words (if futures be futures
without the Divine will, what horrible Fate must be upon God?) Futures are
nothing, and no good will ever be but by God's Will. And because he wills it,
we have the just ground of a Conclusion that it will be (if we know it). And
this thought or word is therefore true, and had we been from Eternity, and had
such a thought, it would have been true. And while there was no Sun or Earth,
we should have said, They are futures, that is, they will be; that is, God will
make them: And must futurity therefore be a Thing or Being? Whence then came
the supposition of Fate, imposing on the summum Ens, or what means it?

Ad 3. Nothing indeed has no Verity: Futures are not true; but Conceptus or
Propositions, that such things will be, are true. How God's perfect Knowledge
is extrinsecally denominated the Knowledge that such things will be (which we
call Futurition) I opened in the Book at larg(...) You know, I suppose, how
commonly it is ^a(...) That Nothings and Impossibles and Non-futurities a(...)
all known to God: Must therefore Nothing, I(...) possibility, and Non-futurity
be Beings, lest God cannot know them? God cannot know things to be future you
say, unless they are such: The word(...) ( are such) sound to the ignorant, as
if they signified Entity. God cannot know Nothings to be Nothing,
Impossibilities, Non-futurities, unless they are such; that is, unless it be
true that they are such: And it is true. But what is it that is true* The verbum
mentis vel oris, that they are nothing, etc. Must they therefore needs be
something* and so God be mistaken? But he says ( If there be no eternal
Futures, what becomes of Divine Prescience?) Good men's Thoughts may wrong God,
while they think they honor him. Augustine tell(...) you, That Prescience
differs not in God from Science of present things. You may say also, If there
be no eternal Nothings, Non-futures, how can God know them? But must Futurity,
or Nonfuturity, or Nothing, be therefore any thing? God's knowing that it will
be and yet is not, proves that the thing future is nothing; and therefore
Futurity, no modus rei, but a Name put by us on Nothing from God's Will to make
it. (Supposing it be not Sin, which God will not make, but has another Cause.)
I had thought you had known, how commonly the Schoolmen prove, That things
that are not may be certainly known by God; yea, how the Nominals prove his
Knowledge of future Contingents from his mere Perfection; so that Socinus is
not unanswered in those things, and ye^ Futures and Futurity are no beings. At
least, you may see Answer enough in Strangius and Le Blank (...) two Authors
well worth your reading.) Those (...)hings are certo futura, which God will
certainly make, or certainly knows will be done; and (...)et Futurity be
nihil reale. I would you had told me, whether you take the Reality of Futurity
to be (...)n esse rei extrinsecae, or in esse objectivo intrinseco? The former
you are not able (considerately) to believe; (that nothing can have any real
mode, accident, or affection;) if none of these, what is (...)t then? You must
needs hold to the latter; and then in man, the futurity of things is nothing
real, ^ut the mode of his Cogitation or Conception; as I have before said, we
may have real thoughts, that here is not such or such a thing, but will be; in
which we frame a real Idea of that which will be (and is not) in our minds
(from the helps of similitudes or words) and so say, Such a thing (thought on
and named, but not in being) will be. But in God there is nothing but God; the
Creature is of him, and is in him dependently as their Cause and Comprehender,
but not as constituent of his immanent acts.

Why you add ( Suppose nothing to have some Verity) is above my reach: I think
Nothing has no Verity: But, 1. God's Knowledge that it will be, has Verity.
2. The Proposition ( This will be) may have Verity. 3. But the thing future
has not Veritas rei. Futurity as in re has no more Entity than Possibility:
But to will or know that quid nominatum can be, and that it will be, are two
real acts in Man, and two extrinseck Denominations of the Divine Will and
Intellect. When you have answered what I said of Dr. Twisse, I may review it.

Ad 4. You say ( Future is nothing; ergo, ^^thing is future.) I am glad that
the Creed a(...) Bible are not thus worded: Future in your fir(...) Proposition
signifies the Affection or somewh(...) real of the thing future, and so it is
nothing; (...) you take future so in the second, it is fu^ile (...) true, being
but a gross expression of ( Nothing has real Futurity, which is aliquid rei.)
But according to common use, your second Propositio(...) will be taken for a
denial of the Saying ( Somewhat will be) and this is a real truth. You say
th(...) Proposition is identical, as ( Nothing is Nothing.) We speak not of the
Being or truth of Propositions or Conceptions, but of futurity it self as
incomplexum. You after confess I told you so May you not equally say (
Negations, Non-existents, Non-futurity are nothing; ergo Nothing is a Negation,
Non-existent, Non-future?) Answer one and you answer the other. Negations in
mente are Thoughts, and in the Mouth they are Words, but in re negata they are
nothing: So I say of Nonfuturity and Nonexistence. Frail Man dreameth that the
mundus naturalis is the same with the mundus fantasticus and notionalis in his
Brain; and Oh! how commonly do Words and Thoughts go in Disputes for Extrinseck
Realities?

Ad 5. Because God decrees to do any thing, you and I, when we know it, may
truly say ( This will be;) and ( will be) is no being, but Gods will and our
knowledge and our words are. Alas, that so much skill is necessary not to be
deceived by ambiguity of words. God's Knowledge and your Knowledge and your
Words, may be all true; and yet Futurity ex part rei futurae, has no proper
Verity, metaphysical, physical or moral, being no subject capable of any such.
You say [ Did not the Futurity of the World result from a Decree?] It Is
(...)earisome at every Sentence to repeat Distinction and open Confusion. The
futurity of the World is nothing, Extra mentem Divinam and humanam, and extra
propositionem de futuritione. Why talk you of our designing another Origin,
when we are proving, that it is nothing, and needs no Cause? And why answer you
not what I wrote against Dr. Twisse, before you call for an Answer to him? Or
at least, why answer you not Strangius, but impertinently talk of the Serpent
Socinus? If Socinus had no more wit than to take the Futurity of Sin for a
Being, (Substance, Accident or Mode) no wonder if he knew not how to deny that
God is the Cause of it. And why do you not attempt to answer me, who tell you,
That if you take it to be a real Being and eternal, you must take it to be God
himself; for nothing else is eternal. But I pray you say not (like your former
arguing about nothing) [ The eternal Futurity of Sin is God himself; ergo, God
is the eternal Futurity of Sin.] The Subject and Predicate are not so
convertible as you seem to make them. You say, if we say, Futurity is nothing,
then it is a wonder, an independent on God and his Will, self-originated and
unpreventable, etc. You write no wonders to me, this rate of Discourse being
common in the World, and has been in most Ages. Is Nothing a wonder? Is it a
wonder for nothing to be independent? but yet that which has no dependent
Being, may so far as a Nothing be at God's will, that he continue nothing or
make something (the first non agendo, the second agendo) as he pleases, that
is, by willing or not willing. And it were a wonder indeed for Nothing to be
self-originated, or that Nothing should spring from any thing as an efficient
Cause: But reductively some Nothings may be ascribed to God's Non-agency, as
Beings good are to his action. As God is improperly called the Cause of
Darkness, because he there makes not Light, so improperly he may be said to be
the Cause of Nothings, because he made not the contrary Somethings. You say
(then there is fatum Stoicissimum on God) and all his Works, and this Futurity
binds the Almighty, that he cannot do as he pleases in Heaven and Earth. This
is a wonder indeed that Nothing should be stronger than God, and rule him and
the World. If Dr. Twisse hold Sin to be nothing, does it follow, that it binds
God, because it is nothing? Does Death bind God, because it is but the privation
of Life; or vacuity ( si detur vacuum) because it is nothing? Or when there was
nothing but God, did Nothingness bind God? Is that God bound or conquered that
can turn Nothing into Something at his pleasure? Non-futurity is nothing:
therefore it has no Cause. Is this Nothing the Ruler of God and All things,
because he causes not that which is not causable? Alas, that good men should
keep up dividing Controversies at this rate of reasoning: You say, If it have
no Cause, it can have no Impediment, and so there is Fatum Stoicissimum. We all
talk at the rate that we understand. The World was nothing before it was made,
and so had then no Cause in the esse causae, as being no effect (Relations in
esse being simultaneous): Does it follow that God was subject to Fate? There
was no Impediment indeed to Nothingness; it is not necessary that Nothing be
hindered, lest it become Something. God can make somewhat where there is
nothing, at his pleasure, and can make a future Nothing to become an existent
Something. And what should be the medium I wonder that tempted you to think
otherwise: Did the nothingness of Angels before their Creation hinder God from
making them? Or can nothing have a ruling Power?

Ad 6. Again you stick not at the repeating of the contradiction of a
self-originated Future (or Nothing) and think God's Decrees endangered by
nothing, because it has no Cause. What a dreadful thing is this Nothing! To be
self-originated is to be Something of it self. And if Futurity be nothing, then
it is something of it self. And you offer not a Syllable to prove these
Contradictions. You add ( To what purpose shall Decrees be?) Ans. To produce
the thing decreed in its proper time and place, and not to make them something
before they are any thing, nor to make an ens Rationis to be a real extrinseck
Entity. You strangely say ( To decree such a Futurity is a nullity, for it can
never come to pass.) What can never come to pass? Futurity? Say also ( To
decree Nonfuturity, or that there shall be to us but one Sun, but one Savior,
is a nullity, because Nothing can never come to pass.) What is it for Nothing
to come to pass? It is come to pass without a Cause that there is but one Sun
to us, but one Savior, and other Nothings. The Decree or Will of what shall
come to pass is no nullity: for it shall all come to pass; and yet the Decree
made not the word ( shall be) to signify a real Entity, distinct form or model
of the thing that shall be. The Decree that there shall be a World, was
fulfilled, and yet ( shall be) was not a being before t(...) World, unless it
was God's Essence. You Phrase imports as if Futurity must come to pass as a
thing Decreed, and question whether there was a futurity of that futurity, and
so in infinitum. For the word ( Coming to pass) imports futurity of futurity,
and not eternity. You say [ To decree in compliance with it, is below God over
All -- for it will come to pass whether God decree it or no.] Alas, that
Speaking should be so hard an Art! What i^ it to decree in compliance with
nothing? Has it any sense? How is it that Nothing will come to pass? It Is
true, that Nothing will be Nothing without a Cause, and therefore without a
Decree. And therefore let the reverence of God make you consider, whether it be
meet for us in the dark to ascribe to God such Decrees of nothing* and to
number Nothings, and make as many Decrees. Such a dance and game of notions we
may more boldly use about our selves than about God, till we know him better.
You add ( God in decreeing does not decree the thing into being in the instant
of decreeing, but He decrees the Futurity of it, and if that be nothing, he
decrees nothing.) Ans. Wrong thoughts will have wrong words. All that you
should have inferred, is, [That His Decree effects nothing till the time
come] which is true: For He decreed only to effect it at such a time: But does
it follow, that God decrees nothing but Futurity, because the thing decreed is
not presently done? Thus you must say, That God decreed not the World, nor
CHRIST, nor Salvation, but Futurity only. The Decree or Will of God was, That
the World, CHRIST, Resurrection, etc. shall be at such a time: ( shall be) is
no being; and yet it is a being when existent, which God decreed, but his
Decree makes it not a being till it exist. Dr. Twisse will over and over tell
you, that God's immanent acts do nihil ponere in objecto. And I have often told
you truly, that you or I little know what we say when we divide God's Eternity
into parts, and assign him his praeteritum and futurum. And it would put you
hard to it to tell me clearly and surely what God's Eternal Decree is before
the effect exist! our present common-received School Divinity will call us
Blasphemers, if we say, that before the Creation there was any thing but God,
and any thing in God but God, and that God had any real accidents: And
therefore it says, that he does operari per essentiam, and not per accidentia.
And therefore that God's Decree before the effect was nothing but his Essence.
But it is his Essence denominated (not as such, but) as related to the things
decreed, though yet they be not. If you will forsake this common Theology, and
place acts in God, which ex part agentis, are but Accidents and not his
Essence, and say, This is consistent with his Simplicity and Perfection, you
will let in a Body of new Divinity, and we shall not know when we have all
God's Accidents, no^ how to order them. His freest Acts are his Essential Will
freely acting; but those free acts themselves before the effect are nothing but
God himself. We must not place in God a number of Thoughts, Images, Notions,
Accidents, as we do in Man. But your Phrase savoureth of other Thoughts.

Ad 7. Here you are for yea and nay: you will suppose no Propositions in God,
and yet you argue that then, what will remain of a Decree. I said, But that God
knows not by Propositions, b^^ yet that he knows Propositions. If you hold,
That God knows by Propositions and Argumentations, say so, that I may know
what to speak to. If you hold, That He has no Decrees, what is it that you
plead for? But to answer your Question, God's Decree is not a forming of
Propositions in his mind, or any change in himself, or addition to his Being:
But it is His simple will that such and such things shall be, emanative,
communicative, productive of them in their season. There are some that think,
that as Time-Divisions are the measures of imperfect Creatures, and God's
Eternity has none such; so that it is an ascribing Imperfection to God, to
say, That he has Decrees de futuris distinct from a productive Volition, which
in the most proper sense should be denominated from the produced Existent as
such. But in this I interess not my self, as knowing that we must speak
improperly of God or not at all. You say that (It shall be, is a Futurity.)
Ans. What Is that? A ( shall be) is (a Futurity), and (a futurity) is a ( shall
be.) Ergo a shall be and a futurity is a being. Would I knew what. But to hope
for that from you is too great Presumption. You add ( A futurity, a nothing,
and to decree nothing is not to decree.) Ans. Say you so? I am glad you say no
worse: Then if those be in the right (as most) that think Sin is nothing (no
more than Death or Darkness) you will grant that God decreed it not. And if I
prove that Futurity ex part rei, is nothing, you will grant that it needs no
Decree as such. But seeing you are so much on my side, I crave your help to
confute those, that otherwise you defend, who make innumerable Nothings the
Objects of God's Decrees. But yet I would not follow you too far: (Not to give
Grace to an Infidel) is nothing. (Not to give the Gospel, not to end the World
till the time, not to take away Grace, Gospel, Life, etc.) You say here (in
your general) that none of these can be decreed. But then prepare an Answer to
your Friends that will take this ill of you. I have fully opened my sense of it
elsewhere. You say ( Abstract futurity from the Decree and it will be nothing.)
Ans. If you abstract not Futurity as a real Entity from the Decree, you will
abuse God by presumptuous false Conceits: But if you abstract the word shall
be) from the humane Conceptus of it, it will not differ from a Conceptus de
praesente. And though I more reverence you, I may say of some other Objecters
that quibble with arbitrary notions, that if you except Fatuity and Futility,
from what they say for the entity of Futurity, it is all nothing. You add (
That if in time only the thing actually exist by virtue of the Decree, the
Decree is something in time, but eternally it was nothing. That is ( God's will
to effect any thing is nothing till it do effect it.) Yes, it is God's Will so
to do, and is that nothing? It is nothing but God's essential will denominated
from the res efficienda; but that is not nothing: if God be nothing, there is
Nothing: There is nothing indeed but God from Eternity. If you think otherwise,
tell us what it is. Aureolus indeed pleads, That Actus Dei creantis is
neither Creator nor Creatura, but quid medium, but few second him, and many
confute him. It seems you think of Futurity as our Epicureans, and our new
Infidels do of matter, That it is an eternal effect of God as an eternal Cause.
I will give you many thanks if you will peruse and answer Raymundus Lullius's
Arguments against t^^ Eternity of any Creature, where he argues, That
whatsoever has the perfection of Eternity, must needs have other suitable
Perfections, and so be God. Is Futurity a more excellent Being tha^ Spirit,
Matter and Motion, to be capable of this Divine Attribute? I pray what is the
Verity that you say resulteth eternally? Can you forgive me for not loving
Confusion? Is it, 1. The verit^ rei futurae? 2. Or the veritas conceptus Divini
de rerum futuritione? 3. Or the Verity of a Proposition? Are these all one with
you? The first being a Metaphysical Verity, is Affectio entis, a^ unum and
bonum are: And quod non est, non est unum, verum aut bonum. 2. As to the third,
is it a divine Proposition, or a humane? If a divine, prove that God had either
concept as vel prolatas, eternal Propositions; if he had and you prove it, I
never denied the truth of such propositions. If humane, when there was no man,
there was no humane propositions. All that you can say is but what I often said,
That God's Volitions were a ground that would have made such propositions (
These things will be) certainly true, if there had been any such eternal
propositions. And as to the second, it is not denied as before explained. God's
Will and Knowledge were certain, but they were but himself, who gave no Being
to eternal Futurition out of himself. You ask ( How are the Promises, being
Propositions, true signs of the Divine Will, where there are none?) Ans. How is
the World and signa naturalia the signs of God's Will, and how are Writings and
Voices signs of it, if there be no World, Writings o^ Voices in God? God
wills that which is not (...) himself eternally: God wills Creatures and
God wills Propositions. And these are the ^roducts of his Veracity, when he
sends them ^y Revelation: and true, because they come from ^im. When his Will
is to give the world an (...)carnate Savior, may not the promise of this ^ruly
signify his will, though he have no Proposition in his mind, but only a will
to give him, and an intuitive Knowledge? But I say again, ^f you can prove,
that God thinks, reasons, ^r talks eternally, and knows by terminos
sim^lices, Propositions and Syllogisms, I will easily confess that all these
are true, and yet not grant that ex part rei, Futurition or Non-futurition,
Possibility or Impossibility are any Beings.

Ad 8. You meet with a distinction of [ Futurity as nothing, and a Proposition
de futuro as something] with an [how so? It signifies only futurity, and that
is just nothing.] Ans. You should pardon a man in my condition, if he be ^oth
to write new Books to answer all Objecters that know not that a Proposition de
nihilo is something. If Atheists say, There is no God, They shall know that
they say something: If I say that there are no other true Gods, I say
something. They that say Datur vacuum say something. You say (But was it not
true before:) what is your ( it)? The Proposition was not true before it was a
Proposition, Concepta vel prolat^: Futurity had not the Metaphysical or
Physical verity of an Entity; for it was nothing. The res futura had no such
truth; for it was not res dum futura tantum. What mean you then by ( it?) I say
still if you can prove that there was an Eternal Proposition de future in God,
it was true and was God's Essence; which is nothing to our question. You add
[Not true before, nor knowable as true.] Ans. You seem by thi^ to intimate that
God cannot know what will be by his production, without making Mental or Oral
Propositions, and knowing them to be true Must God's Prescience be deplorate,
if he know not by your Me^ns and Measures? You may ne^^ say, It must be by
Sense, Fantasy and Species* as our Souls work in these muddy Brains. God*s
Knowledge receives not a constitutive Object from without, as ours does. It
first concurreth with his Will and Power in making all things what they are
(All flowing from it, and it receiving from none:) And in s^cundo instanti; it
discerns all things to be what they are. And when he has made Propositions,
he discerns the^ to be true. You keep your way and say [ When God declares
things to come, he declares something* because there is a Proposition: But
when he foreknoweth them, he fore knows nothing; which is (...) to
foreknow.] Ans. 1. When God declares by Propo^^tions things to come, the
Propositio^^ are the Declaration it self and are something; but the things
declared are nothing, till they are Why would you confound these? and When he
foreknoweth what will be, he knows that it is not: Ergo it is not. 3. How
prove you, That to foreknow from Eternity that there would be no World till
the Creation, or no Deluge, Resurrection, etc. till the time, is no
foreknowledge? I do not Dispute it with you, but crave your proof, having said
somewhat my self elsewhere upon that Question. You talk of [ a thing's
beginning to be Future before it is put into a Proposition, etc.] As if you
still begged the Question, and took Futurity extra mentem and signa, to be
something ex part rei. That which is not, is not true. A negatione est secundi
Adjecti ad negationem Est ^ertii valet consequentia, says Dr. Twisse often.
You ask [ Is it true because formed into a Proposition? Then all Propositions
are true.] Ans. Is what true? That there is a Futurum? Is not that a
Proposition? What is it antecedent to the Proposition that you call true? Is it
the res futura? That Is false. Is it the Realitas futuritionis ex part ^ei?
That is it I deny. Futurum, says Dr. Twisse, and possibile, are termini
diminuentes, signifying that the thing is not. Is it the Conceptus Divinus? If
that be by a mental Proposition, it is not antecedent to it self; if not,
doubtless God's Knowledge is true (efficiently, it will make the thing true)
and true perfectively and denominatively, knowing things but as they are, and
therefore not knowing Futurity Rei to be a Being. If it ^e human Conceptions,
they are mental Propositions, not eternal nor antecedent to themselves. All
Propositions that God makes are true: Because true Propositions are true, must
all be true? Because it is a word or Proposition or Syllogism, which is the
Subject of Logical truth, does it follow that all Words, Propositions or
Syllogisms are true?

Ad 9. Possible is a notion relative from God's Power; Futurity from his Will,
or any certain Cause. Neither is a real Entity in re.

In the Conclusion I was about to wish that you would have done somewhat that
tended to my Edification, and when you had all this while talked for the Entity
of futurity that you would have deigned to tell me what it is; if it be
anything, why would you not say, what? Is it a Substance or an Accident? What
Accident (or mode) or of what Substance? Could you forget that this would be
expected from you? And whether Futurity be annihilated or turned into somewhat
else when the thing existeth. But I find that you have made a kind of attempt,
saying [ Things have an esse intentionale in God's will, though not an esse
Reale in themselves.] And is this all that we shall have instead of the
Definition, that should have gone before, and instead of regarding and
Answering what I had said of the Point? 1. Here then you intimate that Futurity
has no esse reale in it self; and it is the esse reale that I denied* Why lost
you so much Labor. 2. Can you English to any man that takes words for means of
understanding things, what it is for [ Things to have an esse intentionale in
God?] 1. Sure the commmon Doctrine of esse intentionale in man, needs an
Oedipus. 2. But alas how shall I know what esse intentionale is in God? 3. Much
less how millions of millions of Nothings have their esse intentionale in God.
Qu. 1. Is that esse intentionale any thing real besides God himself? 2. Are
such esse's as many in God as the things will be in themselves? Has God
Accidents, and so many millions of millions of Accidents, and yet most simple
and immutable? 3. What are all these things in God from eternity in proper
language? are they his Volitions or Intellections? And are these so numerous?
Or are they Creatures in esse intentionali? Do not you confess that that esse
is non-esse as to any Creature? If you mean Pl^^^onick Idea's, are not Idea's
and Species, as they are called, in man, the notes of his Imperfection, while
his Soul knows, ut forma, in a Body, as distinct from perfect intuition? I
refer you to what I have said of Divine Idea's, and pray you to seign nothing
in God without proof. But if you do prove such, forget not the next time, that
I denied not the truth of any Divine Idea or Knowledge.

Your concluding line I pardon, and it needs no more. All that is said in this
Paper on this point is materially fully answered in my Book; and I even now
asked a Friend what I should say to all that object against a Book which
contains sufficient matter of answer to their Objections: And he answered,
Not write for every man a new one, but wish them to read the former better.

Pardon my often repeating to you my sense of Futurity, with which I conclude. To
man, Time in various instants, and the narrowness of our understandings, that
must have various Conceptions and Organical Notions, make it needful to us to
use names, even for things that are not (or nothings). When God (or any certain
Cause) tells what will be hereafter, we frame an image of that thing that is
not by the help of Words and the similitude of Things that are or have been.
Then we put a name on that imagined thing, as if it were: Then we make use in
our discourses of that name, and turning a Verb into a Noun, as [ it will be]
into [ Future], and then an Adjective or Participle into a Substantive, [
Future] into [ Futurity] our poor Fancies run on with it, as if we had by the
name made or mentioned some Substance or real Being. When all is nothing but a
Relative notion or Ens rationis. The knowledge that a thing will be may be a
real knowledge: And instead of denominating the Act we denominate the Object,
(which is internally an Image; externally Nothing real) and call it Future, and
thence name Futurition: As Futurition signifies improperly the relation of the
mental act to the thing fore-known, it is a real mental act's relation: As the
Subject is the thing future, so it is nothing real but a feigned organical
Notion, by which we discourse instead of Verbs. The Relatio Conceptus vel
nominis, is the relation of a real act. But the relation of the thing future as
future is secundum dici, but feigned instead of a Verb. And of God's knowledge,
I shall here say no more.

In a word, If you take futuritio rei to be the Name of any immanent eternal
Act of God, whatever we think of the aptitude of your Phrase, I suppose we
differ not about the thing intended, as long as you hold no eternal Accidents
or Composition in God, and that nothing is eternal but himself; which I must
think you do in Charity. If you take futuritio rei for the modus or relation of
a humane Conception or Assertion de futuris, I suppose we shall not differ de
re, nor will you say that it is eternal. 3. If you speak but suppositively,
that if there had been such a conceptus or Assertion from Eternity, it would
have been true, we differ not. 4. If you take Futurition extra mentem, to be
any thing (Substance, Mode, Accident or any Reality or aliquid rei) and that
from Eternity, I deny it, and say, That they that make an universal Spirit, and
they that make Matter and Motion to be eternal with God, are more excusable,
than they that make a thing called Futurity distinct* from God; yea, the
Futurity of Sin to be eternal, and God the eternal Cause of that eternal Effect.

I purposed at the first glance to have answered the second Paper also about
God's decreeing Sin; but when I had read it I was unwilling, 1. Because it is
but too largely answered materially in my Book already, and more fully in old
Papers that lie by me, which I cannot transcribe. 2. Because I hear so much
Good of the worthy Author, that I am not willing to be drawn to dispute a Case,
which cannot be handled justly, without opening so much Evil in that which I
must oppose, as will sound harsh toward one that I so much honor. Men are so
apt to feel that as touching themselves which is spoken to their Cause. If
Hobbes (who wrote the Treatise of Necessity against Bishop Bramhall) had sent
me that Paper, I should readily have answered it: But here I fear it.

Only I tell the Author, that I have been as strongly tempted that way as most
others; and do acknowledge that it is the greatest difficulty in all these
Controversies, to conceive, how free will can act otherwise than God does
predetermine it: But I am satisfied in the Solution; and fully satisfied, that
the Predeterminant Opinion which I oppose does certainly infer the Religion of
Hobbes, the denial of Christianity, and leaves us no Religion; but that Good
and Evil, Happiness and Misery are Differences all made by God himself, as
Light and Darkness, Angels and Serpents are made to differ by him: And I am not
willing to let go Christianity (...) such Objections as these: And it had been
m(...) that he had answered what I have said to Alvar^ Mr. Sterry, etc. on this
Subject, and taken notice of my Answers to the most of his.

His talk of Casualty is his sum; by which if he mean that which had not a
predetermined Cause, Sin is casual, till the Sinner determine his own will. But
if he mean, that which is unknown to God, it is not casual: And the Assertion,
That such things are not knowable to God, I have confuted at large, which he
here takes no notice of.

If I shall find that Necessity make it my duty to give any such Paper a
particular Answer, if I have time, I may do it. But I think enough is said of
that already, and my leisure from better work is small.

RI. BAXTER.

CHAP. VII. Of God's Providence, and predetermining Premotion and Miracles.
. 1. THE word ( Providence) is variously used by Writers: Sometimes as
comprehending God's foreknowledge and decrees themselves: Sometimes as
comprehending all his Works: Sometimes as comprehending all his works which
follow the Creation: And sometimes as signifying only his effective disposal of
Persons and Things in Motions, and Alterations, as dictinct from Legislation,
which only makes Duty and Right.

. 2. In CREATION God Glorified his Three Essential Principles or Attributes: 1
His Omnipotency eminently in giving BEING to all things. 2. His Wisdom
eminently in the ORDER and Composure of all* 3. His Love or Goodness eminently,
in the GOODNESS and Welfare of all: For he made them Good, and then Rested:
Yet so as that all these Attributes were glorified in each part of the Effect.

. 3. From hence a posteriore he is in the one Relation of CREATOR Related
triply to the World, and specially to the Rational part: That is, 1. As the
MAKER of things, (which is Creator in the narrow sense). 2. As ORDINATOR. 3. As
BENEFACTOR. And thus he is the Author of NATURE.

. 4. From this fundamental Relation of CREATOR, and the nature of the Creature
made (and continued by Conservation, which is a continued Creation or
Efficiency) there resulteth a threefold Right and further Relation to God. 1. A
Ius Dominii, or Right of PROPRIETY, and so he is our OWNER, and may do with all
things what he will, and must be the disposer of Events. 2. His Ius Imperii
(including Doctrine) or Right of Government; which to things merely Natural is
Natural Government, and to Moral Agents it is Moral Government, by Doctrine,
Laws and Executions: And so he is our KING or RULER. 3. His Ius Amoris ut
finis; or Right to be the end of all, and by the Rati^nal Creature to be
chiefly Loved, and absolutely for Himself, as the Best and most Amiable, and so
he is our ultimate END: Where LOVE is considered not only as an act of
Obedience to a Rector as all other duties are; but eminently as it is the final
perfective Act of man, closing with the final Object, and so above the common
nature of mere Obedience.

. 5. All God's after- works and all our Duties to him must be observed as
respecting all these Relations of God to us, and our answerable Relations to
him: For therein is the Nature, Order, and Harmony of them discerned to be
Glorious: And unskillful confounding them is a spoiling and profaning or
dishonouring of them. And thus the various acts of Providence must be set each
in its proper place.

. 6. God being the fons naturae, and having settled the frame of Nature (or
created Beings and second Causes) in a fixed state and order, in which one
thing is united to another, and adapted to its proper work in concurrence with
the whole, we must not expect that God do ordinarily violate this his
established Course: For his Works shall show somewhat of his Constancy, and
Experience tells us, that really thus He does.

. 7. But we must not dream that God is involuntarily tied to his own Work, or
hindered by second Causes, or the course of Nature, from doing what He would;
but His free will delights it self in this Constancy and ordered Course of
Nature, and use of second Causes, which have still all their being, force and
order continued by Him.

. 8. And the number and operations of second Causes are so unknown to us, that
when things seem Miracles to us, it is hard for us to say, that God uses no
second Cause in effecting them. But it is enough to the use of Miracles to know
that their extraordinary production has an answerable extraordinary use and
signification of God's Will.

. 9. And no doubt but Nature and all its parts are absolutely in the Power and
Government of God's Will: And He can and does turn things up and down as He
pleases, without making any breach in his established Order: If the Husbandman
can turn the course of Rivers to water his Grounds, by mere Impediments and
Receptivities, without any alteration of the natural motion of the Water; how
much more must we ascribe to God, in using Nature without overthrowing it?

. 10. It is Atheistical or absurd to set God and Nature in opposition,
competition or separation; and to say as some Philosophers, [ This or That
natural Causes can do without calling in God as the Determiner.] Whereas
natural Causes are nothing, and do nothing but by God: And there is no less of
God in the effects of Nature, than if He did the same himself alone: In Him we
Live and Move, and Are.

. 11. And it is no better in them that say, that God does not operate
proximately and immediately where Nature or second Causes work, but only
remotely. As [ immediately] signifies [ without any medium or second Cause] so
God does not then work immediately: But as it signifies proximately, He does:
For an infinite being cannot be essentially distant from any Creature or
Effect: Nor is it possible that the second Cause can be nearer to the Effect
than God; who is as near as if he used no such Cause.

. 12. And the Dispute, Whether God do proximately effect immediatione
suppositi, or only virtutis, seems to have a false supposition, vi^. That
God's Virtue is not his suppositum, and that the virtus divina may be where the
suppositum is no^ If by suppositum they mean God's Essence as Essence existing,
and by virtus they mean his Essence under the formal notion of Power, Wisdom
and Love, then they are but two inadequate Conceptions of the same simple
Being, and therefore God thus ever operateth immediatione essentiae and
virtutis essentialis. But if they mean, that God has ^ virtus which is neither
his Essence nor a Creature, we believe them not.

. 13. The Controversy between Durandus and his Followers, and the Jesuits and
Dominicans, about the necessity of a moving Concourse, besides the support of
Nature, seems to me thus reconcilable.

1. God as he is fons naturae, is the Living God, the prime Active Principle,
who by constant vital Activity is the Spring of all the Action in the World;
and is not to be dreamt of as one that had made the World, and then left it to
it self, and withdrew his hand and is fallen asleep. 2. But the Living God
moves not all things alike, but every thing according to its nature and place;
for his Influx is received ad modum racipientium. 3. The Nature of some
Creatures is essentially Active, and so inclined to act that they will act if
their Nature be not by others, or want of concurrent Necessaries, hindered.
Such is every Soul or living Principle, and Fire. And other Creatures are
naturally Passive only ex se (or at least principally). So that for God to
continue Fire or Souls or any naturally-active Principle, is to continue a
nature essentially inclined to move or act. 4. It is supposed that these
Natures are not solitary, but parts of the universe, and are continued with all
necessary circumstant Beings and Objects; and that the whole frame of Nature
and cooperating Causes are continued: e. g. That the Sun does not stand still,
while the Life of a Plant or Brute is continued. 5. All this being supposed by
Durandus, Aureolus, a Dola, and all sober men, the Question debated is, Whether
there be further necessary another immediate Divine Motion or Concourse to
every motion of a Creature natural or free, besides all this aforesaid?
And, 1. Let it be considered, that God's Essence being but one, his Act, which
ex part agentis, is his Essence, is not distinguishable, saving ex
connotatione effectus: And if this be all that is meant, That as ipse motus
distinguitur a causis, so God's Will, Power and Agency may be distinctly
denominated, 1. As from the second Causes; and 2. also from the Motion it self,
as more than the Causes; this none can deny, nor is it a Controversy. But if
the question be of the necessity of another distinct way of Divine Causation of
the motus, besides that by second Causes before mentioned, they can prove no
such necessity.

For is it mediate or immediate Causation or Efficiency which they mean? (we
speak not of immediate as it signifies proximate, which is granted, but as
signifying sine causis secundis.) If it be mediate by second Causes that God
must further concur, those are natural Causes or some other: if natural, it is
a contradiction to say, that Besides God's moving by natural Causes (which is
granted) he must also move by natural Causes; as if Ide^ were not Idem: Unless
they will say it must be by some other natural Causes, which they do not, nor
can assign; nor yet any other that are not natural.

But if they mean, that to every motion there must be an immediate operation of
God to it without that which he does by second Causes, even by God alone
without any second Cause, I then ask, Does God move any thing in the World by
any second Cause or not? If not, then not by the Sun; not the Coach by the
Horses, the Arrow by the Bow, the Stone by the Hand, the Pen by the Writer,
etc. If yea, then is it the whole or part only of that motion which is made by
second Causes and God by them? If the whole, habetur quaesitum: If part, how
prove you that God cannot make the whole motion himself by second Causes, as
well as part, but must needs leave the other part of the same motion to be done
without second Causes.

And it would follow that no second Cause, no not the noblest in the World (as
the Sun) and God as acting by it, has and exercises a vis adequata to the
smallest motion even of a Leaf: Whereas God in Nature makes natural Power,
with his own, as he is fons naturae, adequate to its Actions.

And let unbyassed Reason judge, Whether if a Rock should be held up in the
Air, if God con^inue the natural Gravity of it, with all the rest of the frame
of Nature, could not that Rock fall, without another motion of God which is
without any second Cause, to thrust it down? If He continue the nature of Fire,
was it not a greater Miracle, that it burnt not the three Witnesses, Dan. 3.
than to have burnt them, or than its ordinary Action? Why else should there
need ten thousand fold more natural Power to hold up the said Rock, or to
quench a City on fire, or to stop a River, or the Winds; than to move them
supposing natural Causes, if there need an Infinite Power moreover to the act,
and none to the cessation? And by this Rule it would follow, that all Motion in
the World is supernatural: For if God cause it ut sons naturae, he causes it
in the natural course: if he do not, it is all supernatural and miraculous.

Moreover, if all this satisfy not Disputes, if it be worth the Cost, they may
try the Case thus: Supposing that God has told no man his Secrets, when he
will immediately move any thing without second Causes, and that no second
Causes, nor his own Operation by them can move any thing without another
immediate Motion, Let them cut down the Pillars, or undermine their Houses, and
say that by mere natural Causes the House cannot fall: Let them set fire on
their Houses, and say that by mere natural Causes they cannot be burnt: Let
them drink Poison, and say, By mere natural Causes it cannot hurt us: Or let
them cut their Flesh, etc. For God never told them, that he will immediately
concur, and then there is no danger.

Perhaps they will say, That Experience tells us that God does usually
concur with them: I answer, And is not that because he works by them? What
Experience or Reason have you, that God should still work immediately with*
them, and yet not by them? We can prove that He works as the first Cause. But
if you will prove that He does it not as the first Cause moving the second
Causes, but by immediate concomitancy, let us hear your proofs.

Lastly, let it be noted, that when they that affirm all Motion to be by
immediate concomitant Concourse or Predetermination, do pretend that they do it
lest God's Causality should be denied or extenuated, it is a mere deceit: For
all are agreed, that there is no less of God in the Operations done by second
Causes or Nature, than in immediate Operations without second Causes (such as
God exercises on the first created Motor, and how else he please) God is as
much in one as in the other.

. 14. For the understanding of the nature and use of miraculous acts of
Providence, it must be considered, 1. That God that made the World of Natural
Agents, and things Passive, moved by the Active, is not to be feigned without
good proofs, to alter any of the Works which he has made, which we see he
continues in the course that he made them without any mutation of their
Natures.

. 15. God can change, and cross, and use as he pleases the Actions of Natural
Agents without changing their natures and inclinations. One Natural Agent or
moved Passive, may be resi^ed and turned back or overcome by another; and yet
there may be nothing but natural moti^n in them all: A stronger Stream may
drive ^ack a weaker. A Canon may cross the ordi^ary motion of the Air: As a
great Dog may ^aster a little one, or a Woolf devour a Lamb, and a Bird a Worm
or Fly; and yet there be ^one but natural and sensitive motion. So God ^an dry
up or stop the Red Sea or Jordan; and ^y Winds carry Caterpillars to and from
Egypt, and such like, and by one natural ^otion overcoming another. It Is hard
for us ^n most Miracles to say that God does more than this.

. 16. But it is certain that God has a rank of free Agents that act
arbitrarily, and that these have a great measure of power over natural and
necessary Motions: As man is a free Agent and drives his Sheep to what Pasture
he pleases, and guides his Horses and Oxen in their way and furrow to do his
will by their natural and sensitive necessitated motion, and as a Miller can
make the natural course of the Wood and Water and Millstones, and Horse, all
to serve his intention, without changing the nature of any one of them, so much
more can God and free Agents under God, attain their freely chosen ends, by
Ordering and not Changing Natural and Sensitive Movers.

. 17. We so little know what Arbitrary Free Agents that are invisible Spirits
God has set over this Passive World, and what power he has given them to use
Natural Agents as they themselves freely will, that it greatly disableth us to
resolve all the Difficulties of the Cause of Sin and Misery, and about the
nature of Miracles. But it is a clear truth that it is by such Free Arbitrary
Agents primarily that natural Agency is crossed and overcome in Miracles, the one
Natural Agent be employed to resist another, (as to quench the heat of Fire, to
stop the course of Winds and Water, etc.) Yet it is some voluntary free Agent
that thus uses natural Agents against each other. Scripture tells us, that God
uses Angels as Rulers and Protectors of lower Agents: And that there is a kind
of a war between these and Devils: And how far the prevalent Wills of good and
bad Angels or voluntary Agents may be the Cause of Evil, or be the Actors of
Miracles, by setting one moved Agent against another, and yet all but Natural
motion that is caused by these free Agents, Mortals do not know; and therefore
should not be peremptory in judging.

. 18. But though we know not that in Miracles God uses not second Causes, some
natural and some free in ways unsearchable to us, yet may we be assured by
Miracles of his will and attestation: when we find that things are done quite
out of the way of his ordinary Providence in the uncontrouled confirmation of
some prophetical Revelation: For God is the Governor of the rational World;
and his moral Government must be by the intelligible signification of his will
de debito, what shall be due from us, and to us: And if Miracles be used to
deceive us, they cannot be done without him, whatever second Cause there be:
And if he should use them (though by second Causes) to deceive us, we are utterly
remediless, and therefore guiltless. And God that (...)ath neither impotency,
ignorance nor badness, cannot need a Lie to govern Man, when he has (...)de it
part of his Image, on Man, and needful to Men's Justice to each other to hate
Lying.

. 19. A Miracle controuled by contrary Evidence, is no notification of God's
Attestation: It may be permitted for several good ends: For God by controuling
it gives us sufficient remedy against Deceit. And there are two ways by which
a Miracle may be controuled: First, by greater conquering Miracles used for
some contrary Doctrine or Cause; so the Egyptian Magician's Miracles were
controuled by Moses. Secondly, when it is some unquestionable Truth or Duty or
Word, that is already better proved, which that Miracle pretends to
contradict. As if a Miracle were done by a Deceiver, to prove that there is no
God, no Life-to-come, or against Mercy or Justice, or to disprove Christianity;
the greater Miracles which have confirmed the Gospel, and the evident Light of
Nature, which proves the Deity and Life-to-come, and the Duty of Love and
Justice, do control such deceiving Miracles. (Therefore a Servant of Christ
may most comfortably suffer Martyrdom for his testimony to the Deity,
Christianity, the Life-to-come, or Charity and Justice against Malice and
Persecution and Cruelty, which even a Miracle would not justify; more than for
a disputable Opinion.)

. 20. It Is a great Question, How a true Prophet might be known antecedently,
before his Prophecy was fulfilled. And it is of great moment to consider, the
difference between a Legislative Prophet, and a mere particular Message. Moses
and CHRIST, the Legislators, confirmed their Laws and Word by multitudes of
uncontrouled Miracles: For Life and Death lay upon men's Obedience or
Disobedience to them: And if a Prophet did reprove any Sin against that Law,
the Miracles that confirmed the Law did justify them. But if it were but a
Prophecy about some other temporal Event (as Ieremy's of the Captivity) it
needed no Miracle; for it was but a temporal Suffering that followed the not
believing them.

The Law of God, which should here be handled, I shall speak of Pardon the
disorder of not handling the Law before Sin: It is for young Readers sake, who
would have all God's Laws opened together, ^^ give Light to each other.
afterward.

CHAP. VIII. Of God's causing or not causing Sin.
. 1. HOw certainly the Doctrine of the necessity of immediate, efficient,
physical, predetermining Premotion, does make God the principal Cause of all
Sin, I have so often showed, and so fully proved, that I shall here be very short
upon that Subject.

. 2. To say, that God is the principal determining Cause of every sinful act
with all its Objects and Circumstances (called the materiale peccati) and also
the Cause of the Law that forbids it, and the Person that commits it, is
to make him the chief Cause of Sin, as far as it is capable of a Cause, even of
the formal Cause.

. 3. To say, That such a Cause is the Cause only of the Act, but not of the
Obliquity, is absurd; because the obliquity is a Relation necessarily resulting
from the Law and Act with all its modes and circumstances: And the obliquity
can have no other Cause.

. 4. To say, That God wills and loves and causes Sin, not as Sin, but for
good ends and uses, is, to say no more for God than may be said for wicked men,
if not for Devils; save only that God's Ends are better than theirs.

. 5. To say, That God wills not Sin, but the Existence and Futurity of Sin,
is but as aforesaid, to say, that He wills not Sin as Sin, or sub ratione ^ali,
but that it exist for better ends; or else it is a contradiction: For to will
or cause Sin is nothing else but to will and cause the existence of Sin.

. 6. They that say, That God wills the Existence of Sin, as it is sum
conducibile, to the Glory of his Justice and Mercy, (yea, and that per se, and
not only per accidens) do wrong the Glory of God's Holiness and Wisdom. A
Physician can love his own skill, and compassion, and the honor that comes to
him by curing a Disease, without loving or willing the Disease it self, but
only supposing it as an Evil which he can turn to Good.

. 7. They that say, That God is the Cause indeed of our Sin, but is no Sinner
himself, because he is under no Law, say nothing in the latter but what all
grant, and nothing in the former but what God's Church does commonly abhor,
excepting some few singular presumers.

. 8. They that hold, That God does by immediate physical efficient
predetermining Premotion principally and unresistibly cause every sinful act,
with all its modes and circumstances, do certainly deny all certainty of Faith,
and so subvert all Christianity: For the formal Object of all Divine Faith, is
God's Veracity, (that God cannot lie) if God could lie, our Belief could have
no certainty: Now God speaks to us, but by inspired men, and not by an
essential voice of his own: And if God cause, as aforesaid, all the Lies that
ever were spoken by Men or Devils in the World, then no man can be sure that he
does not so by Prophets and Apostles, or that ever they say true: And God's
Veracity then is gone.

. 9. They that think ^o evade this Evidence by the difference of
Predetermination and Inspiration, and say God inspireth no Lies though he
predetermine all by physical Premotion, do labor in vain: For, 1. No man can
ever prove that any Inspiration does interest God more in the Act or Lie, than
physical Predetermination does: For how can God be more the Author of any Act
than by effectual premoving the Creature to act it, and that by immediate
physical Predetermination? What does Inspiration do, but so move the Mind, Will
and Tongue of a Prophet? No man can name more that Man is capable of. 2. But if
there were a difference, we are not capable of understanding that difference so
well, as to prove that God can cause all the Lies in the World by
predetermining Premotion, and yet can cause none by Inspiration; shall none
believe him that know not this difference? 3. And were it intelligible, it
would be only to inspired men themselves. So that I am past doubt that we must
part with all Certainty of Christianity, and of all Divine Belief, if we
receive this Doctrine of Predetermination, because the objectum formals fidei
is then gone.

. 10. They that say, that if we make not God the Predeterminer to every act in
specie morali, and in every comparative respect and mode, we shall make Man a
God, by making him a Causa prima, do thereby as much conclude God to be the
first and principal predetermining efficient Cause of every wicked Habit (as of
Malignity, or Hatred of God, etc.) because a Habit has as much Entity as an
Act: Therefore if it deifie Man, to make him the first Cause, e. g. of a Lie or
Murder, in specie, then so it will do to make him the first Cause of the Habit.

. 11. If it be as impossible for Man to do any thing but what he does, or not
to do all that he does without God's foresaid predetermining Premotion, as it
is to be Gods, or to overcome God, or make a World, then if Men are counted
Sinners, and condemned, it is for not doing such impossibilities, for not doing
what God alone can do, or for not overcoming Almighty premoving Power.

. 12. ^t cannot rationally be expected, that they that believe that God is the
chief Cause and Willer of all Sin, should think it very bad, or themselves bad
for it; or that when God has unresistibly made all men to sin, he yet hates
it, and sent his Son into the World to testify his Hatred by dying for it; and
that he is serious in all that he says against it in his word: nor that such
men should hate it, and rather die than sin.

. 13. Therefore as the Church of God has ever abhorred to make God the Cause
of Sin, and kept up the sense of the Evil of Sin, (for our hatred of it, and
departing from it, and our Humiliation) as a necessary part of our Religion, so
must we resolutely do still; or else we shall be worse than the Light of Nature
teaches Heathens themselves to be.

. 14. God has many ways to cause the Effects of Sin, without causing the Sin
it self; as by impediments to other ways, by altering Recipients, Objects,
Concauses, and many others, which I have elsewhere enumerated: He can will and
procure, that Christ shall die by the sinful malice and action of the Jews,
without willing or causing their malice, will or action as bad: As he can
procure a man to be in the way where a Murderer comes with a disposition to
murder, and can direct the Bullet, etc.

. 15. When one and the same word does signify both the Sin and the Effect of
the Sin, it occasioneth the error of men that cannot distinguish: And so if the
Scripture should say, That God is the Cause of it, they think it includes the
Sin with the Effect. So Murder signifies both the will and action of the
Murderer, and the death of the man murdered as the effect: Absolom's
Constuprations signifies both his sinful will and action, and the effect of
both: The revolt of the Israelites from Jeroboam; the giving up of Kingdoms to
the Beast, and many suchlike, in Scripture are ascribed to God as the Cause,
not as the words signify the sinful will and action of the Malefactor, but
only the produced effect of both (saving when God's permission only is
understood.)

. 16. They that deride it as absurd, that God should decree, will and cause the
Effect, and not the Wills forbidden Act, are too bold with God, in measuring
his Counsels and Actions by the rule of their vain Imaginations: Yet many give
us, instead of Scripture and Reason, but such a confident derision, and say, [
How absurd is it to say that God willed, decreed and caused that Christ should
be murdered, and yet willed, decreed or caused not that any should murder him?
That God should will and cause David's Concubines to be defiled, and not will
or cause that Absalom should defile them? That He should will and cause the
Kingdom to be rent from Rehoboam, and yet not cause any one to will or do it?
etc.] But is all false that is not agreeable to their imagination? Or is this a
convincing way of reasoning? It is not from imperfection but perfection that
God does not will or cause men's Sin: But it is from his perfection that he
causes the effect, as being the Lord and Ruler of the World. Sin is not a
capable Object of God's Volition, or an effect which he can cause: But the
effect is, God cannot love or cause Iuda^'s will or act ( in specie) of
betraying Christ, nor the Jews will or act in murdering him: But God can will
and cause, that Christ shall be betrayed and killed, by such individual persons
as he foreknew were by their wickedness disposed thereunto.

. 17. All good men have so deep a hatred of Sin, and zeal for God's Holiness,
and confess, that Sin is of the Devil, and it is his special character to be
the Author of it, that when zeal against an Adversary in Disputation can yet
make many put that character on God (yea, as the prime Efficient, which is more
than a Tempter) and this as a part of the Honor of his Providence, and think
they serve God and his Truth, by bitter reviling the contrary-minded, it is a
dreadful instance how far Faction and Contentious Zeal may carry men. And yet
when we see how carefully many avoid Sin when they have thus honored it as
God's work, it is a notable instance how far good men may err in notions, and
yet practically hold the contrary truth, and what great notional Errors must be
pardoned to each other, as they are pardoned of God.

. 18. God punishes Sin with Sin, without causing that Sin at all; that is, 1.
He justly demeth his Grace to the rejecters of it, and their Sin is the
consequent of that Privation, as a drunken man's wandering is to ones denying
to lead him: 2. God makes it a punishment when man has first made it a Sin. [
q. d. If thou will commit such a Sin, it shall have this penal nature and
effect.] As if in the Law of Nature God decreed, that excess of Drink or Meat
should breed Sickness, that taking a sweet Poison should torment you, that
Venery should bring the Pox, that Prodigality shall impoverish men, etc. Here
Man first makes it a Sin, and then God makes it a Punishment: And Sin it self
being the deformity and misery of the Soul, has two relations at once (in
time); the first in order of Nature is the sinfulness, caused by Man; and the
second the penal relation caused by God; whose Act indeed was antecedent in his
Law (of Nature), making Nature such, that it should so suffer if it will so
do); and yet the Effect is consequent to man's Act.

CHAP. IX. Of Natural Power and Free Will.
. 1. THE Glory of God on his Works is their expression of his Perfections, by
the Impression of them which he has made. And He has communicated Being and
Substantiality as the substratum, and therein the Virtues of Vital Power,
Wisdom and Goodness (or Love): and these are his Image upon Man.

. 2. The more Power therefore a Creature has, the more he glorifieth the Power
of God: And the most powerful Creatures (as the Sun) do more show forth his
greatness than the most impotant. Therefore to deny or extenuate any Power
given of God, is to dishonor him in his works: So absurd is it to think that
the Power ascribed to Man, is dishonorable to God; as if you took from the
Workman all the Praise that you give to his Works.

. 3. All Man's Power is passive from GOD and superior Causes, but it is
naturally active as to things inferior, and in it self.

. 4. God endued man at first with a threefold Power, 1. Natural, 2. Moral, 3.
Political, which is a Ruling Power over Inferiors.

. 5. Man's Power was partly essential or inseparable, and partly accidental or
separable. 1. To have the three Powers or Faculties of Vital Activity,
Intellection and Will, is essential, and Man cannot be a Man without them: But
to have these in promptitude and strength, is but as health or strength to the
Body; a separable thing. 2. To have some moral Power to know and desire and
practice some moral Good, it seems is inseparable from Man in via; for all
men naturally have some notitiae communes, and differencing sense of moral Good
and Evil: Else men should be as bad as Devils: But to be truly Holy was
separable (as Health) and so was lost. 3. To have some superiority over Brutes,
and Parents over their Children, it seems is inseparable, or is not separated;
for it continues in Nature: But the true Majesty of this superiority was lost
by Sin.

. 6. No Creature has any Power but what is totally derived from God and
dependent on him, and still upheld by him and used under him.

. 7. Though some would have more Power ascribed to Nature, and others
appropriate more to Grace, yet in this it is no Controversy, How much is to be
ascribed to God: For both Nature and Grace, and the Powers of both are totally
from God: But all the question is, Which way God gives it to man.

. 8. In general we should be most cautious, 1. That we disparage not any Power
or Endowment which is God's own Work, whether natural or gracious. 2. That we
give not too much to any Work that is proper to Man.

. 9. Natural Power, of Vital Action, Intellection and Volition, is supposed by
God as Lawgiver in his Subjects; that is, that we are Men.

. 10. Every act of Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Love and Obedience is done by
our natural Powers or Faculties, and none without them.

. 11. The word [ Moral Power] signifies, 1. Sometimes a Power to moral
actions, (and so natural Power in Man is also moral in some degree.) 2.
Sometimes a Holy Disposition, especially in the Will, to such holy moral
actions; which is the Rectitude of our natural Powers, or the Health of them in
a saving degree or sort, and is the Gift of Grace, since Sin departed. 3. Most
frequently I use the words for such a degree of God's helping or healing Influx
or Grace, as is short of a Habit for promptitude and facility, but yet puts the
soul in such a disposition, by which Man can do the Act, (and it may come to
pass without more Grace whether it do or not) which the Dominicans call
Sufficient Grace, and I rather call Necessary Grace. 4. Sometimes it is meant
(as causa moralis) for that which is Power Reputatively.

. 12. Power has several degrees: some can act easily, yea, is hardly
restrained: some can act with difficulty, yet constantly: some difficultly and
very rarely: some can act, but the Impediments are so great, and its weakness
such, as that it never will do what it can: And these we call a moral
Impotency; as being reputative impotency, in these three last degrees.

. 13. Sin has debilituted Man's very natural Vivacity and Activity to things
spiritual, and also darkened and undisposed his Understanding to them; but
especially dis^ffected him, and perverted his will, with an indisposition,
averseness and enmity to God. And none of these are cured, but by the Grace of
Christ; quickening (or strengthening and awakening) illuminating and converting
the Soul. (Of which more after in due place.)

. 14. Adam had Power to have stood when he fell: God took no power from him,
nor let out such a Temptation as he could not resist: But Sin entered at his
Will, and corrupted it before he lost his Power.

. 15. There is therefore in (...), such a thing as a true Power, to do more
good and less evil than we do.

. 16. And there was such a Power in Adam's Will, by which he could have willed
what he did not ^ill, and by which he could have rejected the Temptation: And
this without any other Grace, than that which he then had, and used not.

. 17. Otherwise all the sin of Adam and the World would be resolved into the
necessitating Will and Work of God, and so all Faith would be subverted.

. 18. Therefore Man's Will was such a Faculty as could be a causa prima, of the
moral modification or specification of its own Acts: (Not a causa prima
simpliciter, but thus, secundum quid.) For else God must be the causa prima of
Sin, which is the ill modification of that Act.

. 19. I know that to Nature the Reasonings of our late Infidels, to prove, That
every Act of the Will is as truly necessitated as the motions of a Clock, do
seem plansible and hard ^o answer; because it seems strange, that in any mode
of Action Man should be a first Cause of it, and that a Creatures Act should
have no superior Cause in any mode: But on the other side the Evidence is
cogent, 1. That God is able to make a self-determining Power, that can thus do:
For it is no contradiction. 2. That it is congruous, that below the happy Race
of confirmed Spirits, there should be a Race of such undetermined free Agents,
left much to their own self-determining Power. 3. And Experience persuades us
de facto, that so it is. 4. And they that deny it, must unavoidably make God
the prime Cause of all Sin, in a higher degree than it is or can be ascribed to
Satan: And is all this with the rejection of Christianity more eligible, than
the Concession that God can and does make a Creature with such self-determining
Free Will, as can, as a first Cause of Of the diverse sorts of Freedom of Will,
and the fuller opening them, see my Methodus Theologiae, and Cath. Theol.
its modified act, sin without God's Predetermination? And by his help could
forbear Sin when he does not. The Contest is, Whether GOD or Man shall be
counted the causa prima of Sin; we say, Man is the first Cause, and GOD is none
at all: Some say, God must be the causa prima of all that can have a Cause in
it: and rather than deny him the Honor which is given to Satan, they will deny
Christianity, and deny him to be holy and to be GOD.

. 20. GOD made this natural Free Will that Man might be a governable Creature,
fit to be morally ruled by Laws and rational Motives, and as part of God's
Image on Man.

CHAP. X. Of Original Sin.
. 1. BY one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death
passed upon all in that all have sinned.

. 2. We were not in Adam distinct Persons really; for our Persons then existed
not; and therefore did not inexist.

. 3. God does not repute us to have been what we were not; for he judges
truly, and is not mistaken: Therefore he judged not Peter and John to have been
those Persons in Adam then, nor Adam's person the same with theirs.

. 4. Therefore we were not then when he sinned persons guilty in Adam; for Non
existentis non sunt accidentia.

. 5. We were Seminally or Virtually in Adam when he sinned: Which is but that
he had that Virtus generativa from which we naturally sprang in time; But to be
Virtually in him, is Not to be personally in him, but Potentially, it being as
to Existence terminus diminuens.

. 6. As soon as we were Persons, we were Persons derived by Generation from
Adam: Therefore with our Persons we derived Guilt and Pravity: For he could
beget no better than himself.

. 7. When Adam sinned his whole Person was guilty and no part innocent:
Therefore his very Semen prolificum had its part in the guilt according to its
Capacity; And though it was not a guilty Person, it was a part of a guilty
Person; and a part that was the Semen personae; so that when that Semen became
a person ( Cain) it became a guilty person, the guilt following the subject
according to its Capacity: And so downward by Propagation to this day.

. 8. God does not impute Adam's Dr. Twisse frequently well opens this.
Sin to us because he will do it, without any real participation of ours; no
nor beyond our true natural participation, but according to it: Otherwise God
should have made us sinners, merely because he ^ould do so, and not Adam.

. 9. We receive our Original Guilt and Pravity immediately from our next
Parents, and but remotely from Adam: It could never have come to us but through
them from whom we receive our Nature, from them we receive the guilt and
pravity of our Nature.

. 10. Therefore thus far at least our next Parents communicate Guilt and
Pravity to us, and not Adam only: In which we see that God's Imputation goes
along with real Natural Participation.

. 11. It seems to me a strange oversight in too many Divines who deny (or
observe not) our Guilt of all the rest of our Parents

Of this I have published a Disputation which proves it.
Sins, while we were in their Loins, as well as of Adam's; seeing 1. there is
that same reason of both, save what the change of the Covenant makes (of which
after.) And, 2. Scripture is so full and express about it.

. 12. 1st, If I have a guilty and deprayed Soul from my Parents, it is because
I was once in them, Virtually or Seminally as truly and naturally as I was in
Adam: And had not the Guilt been theirs it had never been mi^e: And if it be
mine because it was theirs, why not one part of theirs as well as another?

. 13. It will be said, Because God so Covenanted with Adam that he should stand
or fall for himself and his Posterity: I Answer, That there was any such
Covenant that if he stood his Posterity should all stand, or be Confirmed and
Saved, is more than ever I found in Scripture or can prove, or do believe: But
that it would have been to the benefit of his Posterity I doubt not. And that
his fall was to the Guilt and Corruption of his Posterity I doubt not; but (as
I said) not without and beyond their natural Interest in him, and Derivation
from him as the reason of it: And we were as much naturally in our next
Parents: And the Covenant of Innocence and the Covenant of Grace do not so far
differ as to exempt us from the Guilt of our next Parents sins: For the
difference lies not in this, That the first only made Death the due reward of
all Sin, nor that the first did interest Children in the Guilt of their Parents
sin: But in this, that the first made us Guilty without a Remedy; But the
second gives us a Remedy presently for Pardon and Recovery, and so our Guilt
is not so full, because it is but a half Obligation having the Pardon annexed.
The first Law said, [ If thou sin thou shall be filius mortis, and so shall
those that are Propagated of thee.] The second Covenant says, [ For thy
Original and Actual Sin death is thy due, but I give thee a Pardon and
Remedying Grace procured by the Righteousness of Christ.] But note, That this
Covenant pardons our Original Sin as from Adam; And yet it follows not that
we had none because it is pardoned: Even so it pardons our guilt of our next
Parents sins, and therefore we had it to be pardoned: Both are pardonable to
us; therefore we had both.

. 14. 2. And the Scripture is more copious, and as plain in making punishment
due to Children for their next Parents sins, as for Adam's, though Adam's only
was the Original of all Sin and Misery. I have elsewhere proved it at large:
The Case of Cain's Posterity, and Cham's, and Ishmael's, and Esau's, and
Achan's Family, and Ahab's, and many more do fully prove it: And more fully the
Second Commandment, and God's declaration of his Name to Moses, Exodus 34. and
many a Threatening to the Seed of the Wicked, and Christ's express Words in
Matthew. 23. 36. so that Scripture puts us out of doubt.

. 15. The common Objection is, that their [ Guilt would be greater on us
toward the End of the World, than on them at the Beginning, because all our
Ancestors Guilt would be ours: But I answer, 1. If it were so, it would be but
many Obligations to the same Punishment, when it amounts to that which God
sees our Nature capable of: For a Finite Worm is not capable of more Suffering
than is proportioned to his Nature. 2. And this Objection vainly supposes,
that none of our Ancestors Sins were pardoned: Whereas all are pardoned to the
Faithful and their Seed, and much Temporal Punishment is pardoned to many of
the Unsanctified: And God himself by limiting it to the third and fourth
Generation, seems to set bounds to his own Justice. 3. And the Guilt of our
Parents Sins being of a more Diminute Nature than that of our own Actual Sin
(Coeteris paribus) it falls not so fully on us, as it did on the Committers
themselves, nor as our own do. 4. And God offers us the full pardon of our
own and all together: And as long as the Law which tells us of our desert of
punishment, does also give us a free pardon, we have no Cause to complain.

. 16. That we have all Original Sin is proved, in that else Infants should be
saved without a pardoning Savior, or a cleansing Sanctifier; which cannot be.

. 17. He that sees the universal inclination of Mankind to Evil even in their
Childhood, and their backwardness to Good, even that Evil and that Good which
Nature it self assures us are such, must needs believe Original Pravity, or
else think hardly of God's Work.

. 18. He that sees still that Drunkenness, Gluttony, Lust, etc. do vitiate
both the Soul and Bodily Temperament of the Sinner, and how frequently a
diseased, distempered Body, inclining Men to particular Vices, and an
extraordinarily vitiated Soul, is in their Children the plain fruit of the
Parents Sin, may the easilier believe that we drew down Pravity from Adam also,
when we derive so much from nearest Parents.

. 19. And they that consider, that Man's Soul being made Holy, for God, this
unholiness is not only a Negation but a Privation, not of Sensitive and Natural
only, but of Moral Rectitude, will not deny but that the name of Sin or Moral
Pravity belongs to it.

. 20. And they that consider, that Parents Cause not Children as an Artificer
makes an Engine, but by Generation, which is a Communication of their own
Essence, and what Natural Interest Parents and Children have in each other, and
that it is real Sin that is in both, and that the Moral Privation in its
Nature, contains much of Man's misery, will easily grant that it is both a Sin
and Punishment, and a Moral Cause of further punishment, properly enough so
called.

. 21. They that lay that Reason of their denying Original Sin, Mr. W. Fenner
put his Opinion for the Traduction of Souls, into his Catechismes: But the
Publisher left that out.
upon the difficulty of understanding whether Souls are new Created or Derived
from Parents, do too little suspect their frail understandings* and their own
^deductions, and too*easily suspect the Word of God. And I think that I have
elsewhere proved that Generative Traduction of Souls, and yet God's present,
yea, immediate Causation of their Essence (which may be called Creation) are
here Consistent* Which here I must not now repeat: Vid. Meth. Theol. and
Reasons of Christian Religion.

CHAP. XI. Of our Redemption by Christ.
. 1. SIN having made Man guilty and depraved, unfit for duty and felicity,
odious to the most Holy Righteous God, and liable to his Justice, the eternal
Wisdom and Word of God did interpose, and by Mercy did save Man from the
deserved rigor of Justice, promising Actual Redemption in the fullness of time,
and on that supposition giving fallen Man a pardoning and saving Law (or
Covenant of Grace) with answerable help of his Spirit and Means, and outward
Mercies fitted to his Recovery and Salvation.

. 2. But God would not have this Recovery and Salvation to be perfect at the
first; but gave Man a certain proportion of Common Deliverance and Mercy,
binding him to a Course of Duty, in the performance of which he should receive
more by degrees till he were perfected. (As Phisicians cure their Patients.)

. 3. Therefore God did enter into Judgment with fallen Man, and did sentence
him absolutely to some degree of Punishment, even to Labor, Pain, the penalty
of the Cursed Earth, and finally to Death; which Temporal Punishment God would
not remit, nor give him a Savior to procure the pardon of it; but only to the
Faithful, to turn all this unto their Benefit, and to deliver them from the
greater everlasting Sufferings.

. 4. And their own sinful pravity and privation of Holiness, and communion with
God, which also was their greatest punishment by Consequence, God would not at
once, nor in this Life perfectly save them from; and therefore accordingly
pardoned them their punishment, but by the forementioned degrees. For he is not
perfectly pardoned or saved, who is yet left under so much penalty.

. 5. Some thinking it hard, that for 4000 Years the World should have no
Existent Mediator, and that an Existent Faith in the future Mediator, should be
more necessary than an Existent Mediator and his Work, and thinking withal that
it would solve many Textual Difficulties objected by the Arians, and explain
the Appearances of Christ to the Patriarchs, have conceived that Christ has a
threefold Nature, viz. The Divine Nature, a created Super-Angelical Nature to
which the Divine Nature was united before the Incarnation, and the Humane
Nature assumed at the Incarnation; and that so we had an Existent Mediator from
the time of the Fall. But whatever conveniences this Opinion may seem to have,
I find no satisfactory proof of it in Scripture, nor that the Christian Church
did ever hold it. And it is overmuch boldness to take up so great a Doctrine as
a third Nature in Christ, which the Church of Christ was never acquainted with.
And the Texts that seem to be for it, are capable of the common Exposition.

. 6. If any think that this was the Judgment of abundance, yea, the most of the
Ancient Writers, before the days of Arius, because they have such unhappy
expressions of Christ, which the Reader may find truly Collected to his hand by
Petavius de Trinitate, and that it is fitter to Expound them as speaking only
of Christ's second Nature, than to account them all Arians, or to honor the
Arians by making them on their side, I answer, I leave every Man to his own
judgment upon perusal of the Fathers words, allowing all Charity that has
sufficient ground: But I cannot perceive, that these Writers talk of any more
Natures in Christ than two, and pious ends must be served by no Fictions and
Untruths: I think that we must rather gather with Petavius there that the Votes
in the Nicene Council tell us, that then the greater part of the Church were
against Arius, and therefore they were so before, because they held (in so
great a point) the Faith which they had received from their Fathers: And that
the greater part of Writers, might differ from the greater part of the Church.
And withal, these Writers having more than other men to do with the Heathen
Philosophers and Orators, who were prejudiced against the Doctrine of the
Trinity, did shun their Offense by too much stretching their speeches to that
which they thought they could easilier digest, which gave Arius his advantages.
The Conclusions either way are harsh and sad; but I leave others better to
avoid them.

. 7. The Deity it self may not unfitly be called our REDEEMER before the
Incarnation, though not so fitly a MEDIATOR, and though Redemption by Christ's
Death and Merits in the Flesh was not then wrought: Because the word Redeeming
is often taken for a merciful Delivering, though without a price; and also
because the Price was promised from the beginning. But thus the word REDEEMER
is equivocal, signifying either the Deity as a promising, undertaking Savior,
or the Mediator who was promised, and who performed the undertaken means.

. 8. The MEDIATOR himself being purely the Gift of the Divine Love and Mercy,
it was no inconvenience, that God then had all the Glory, and that Faith then
acknowledged no other existent Savior, but God himself the infinite Good.

. 9. It troubles men much to open, how Christ was any true Cause of our Pardon
and Salvation as a Mediator, before his Incarnation? And what his merits,
sacrifice and intercession could do, before they did exist? And the common
Answer is, That Moral (though not Physical) Causes may cause before they exist,
and so operate as foreseen, foredecreed or willed. But these Logical notions
must not be used to put off the Question, instead of satisfactorily answering
it. This tells us not whether by a Moral Cause they mean a True Cause of some
moral Being, or something morally called a Cause which indeed is not so, but
quasi causa: Nor yet whether they mean a Cause efficient, final or
constitutive: Nor yet whether they mean a Cause of any thing in God, or only of
some following effect.

. 10. It must be concluded that Christ's merits, sacrifice and Intercession
make no real Change in God, his Understanding or Will, and therefore have no
such Causality.

. 11. But God's Promise first, and Christ's Merits and Sacrifice next make a
Change in the state of things, laying that Groundwork or necessary Antecedent
and Condition, upon which it becomes meet, right and just for God to give the
rest of his mercy which this is the Condition of, and the true meritorious
Cause: And so the Change was neither on GOD, nor immediately on Man, but for
Man on the state of things which God and man were both concerned in: It is a
causa ordinis, while that is done first, which is prerequisite to what is to
follow: And it is a causa rei ( benefici^) while it not only removes moral
Impediments of our Pardon and Salvation, but also sets matters in such a
state, in which it becomes congruous, meet, right and just for God to pardon
and save us; which is a remote disposing the fallen sinner to be a due
Recipient of God's following promised Grace. And thus it is in both senses a
moral Cause, as it is a Cause of our Right, and of Congruity, and as it is,
though not indeed, yet morally, reputatively, or Quasi causa physica realis, of
our Pardon, Grace and Salvation, by making them become just, right and due. And
being thus far a Cause of the effects ad extra, per extrinsecam denominationem
ex connotatione and relatione ad objectum, it may be called (with cautelous
sobriety) a Cause of God's own Intellections and Volitions: For though in
themselves they are God's Essence, yet for God [ to know us to be redeemed and
to will our present Pardon and Salvation as Redeemed ones,] are words that
speak more than God's Essence as in it self, and include the termination of his
Acts on these Objects as such; and so denominate God's Essence distinctly from
the Objects, which else would never be distinguished, nor have but one name;
being really but one.

. 12. Yet all these diversifying, distinguishing, denominating Causes of God's
Intellections, Volitions and Operations, must not (even denominatively or
relatively) be counted or called Efficient Causes of God's Acts, nor strictly
final but objective. And therefore here it must be considered what Cause an
Object is, which Philosophers are not well agreed in. But I think I may safely
say, That as to moral acts, the Object is to be reduced to such a cause
materialis or constitutiva as they are capable of, not of the Act as an Act,
but as this act, in specie, denominated from the receptive terminating matter
or object. And though to Man, to know this or that, and to will this or that ad
extra, seem somewhat really different (or modally at least) from knowing and
willing our selves or some other Object, yet in God it is not to be called ex
part sui, a real or modal difference at all.

. 13. Yet I assert not that the Ratio prima of all these Diversities of the
Divine Acts is ex terminis seu recipientibus: For the first Reason is in and of
God himself: For it is God that makes all diversities of Effects and Changes;
and so it is from those diverse Effects of his own Will, that his Will is
relatively ex connotatione termini diversely denominated. But that in God which
is the Ratio prima diversitatis, is not diverse, but his one simple essential
Will; so that it is the diversity of Objects which is the immediate Reason of
distinguishing God's acts, (of which before).

. 14. These things premised, I come nearer to the Question, if that which
existeth not do truly cause, it must be either efficiently, constitutively, or
finally. The two first are denied by the common Reason of Mankind. That which
is not, cannot effect: Nothing can do nothing. And to say it is not, is to say,
it constituteth not. And as it is certain, that causa finalis non efficit, yea,
is but causa metaphorice operans, so it is certain, that no Creature causes
any thing in God, no not finally.

. 15. Those that say, That Christ and his death and merits did not cause before
Existence, in esse existenti, but in esse cognito, as constituting the Divine
Idea's, 1. Must remember that the esse cognitum, as they call it, is no esse
rei cognita at all; Therefore if only the esse cognitum do cause, then it was
not Christ and his Merits that caused. 2. In Man for an esse cognitum, to cause
his further acts, is but for one Thought to cause another Thought, or a
Volition or Nolition. And these Thoughts and Volitions are really diverse, and
constituted by reception of intromitted Objects: But God is no Recipient, nor
knows any Object as we do by intromission; Nor has he any such Thoughts or
Idea's of Creatures as are really diverse ex part Dei, but only by extrinsick
denomination.

. 16. If it be said, That then God should know nothing till it is, because a
denomination must be from something, and nothing can be no Object or terminus;
and so of his Will. I Ans. 1. God does not know any thing as existent now,
which does not exist now. But our Now is in his Eternity, and his Eternity
without partition comprehends all our Times; prae and post, ab and ad are
Prepositions of no signification in and of Eternity; but only [ In]. And
therefore as Augustine says, his Prescience is but his Science so denominated
from the Order of Objects, but notes not any difference in him, who has
neither prae nor post. How this is to be understood without making the Creature
eternally exist, I have elsewhere fully opened.

. 17. That plain truth therefore which must here satisfy us is, That God, who
is the first efficient and ultimate final Cause of all things, and caused by
none, did of his free abundant Mercy undertake the saving of sinful Man, and
notwithstanding his Threatening and Man's Defect, resolving to make advantage of
our Sin and Misery, for the Glory of his Wisdom, Love, Mercy and Justice, he
promised that the Eternal Word should in due time assume Man's nature, and
therein do and suffer that which should glorify him more than Man's Perdition
would have done, and which should make it just and meet for him to save the
Guilty, both inceptively at the present under the Promise (for 4000 years) and
afterward more fully at Christ's Incarnation, and finally to perfect all in
Glory.

So that the Work of our Salvation is one entire frame, composed by Divine
Wisdom and Love; where one part is the Reason of another, though none be the
Cause of any thing in God: And Christ's Mediation, though coming after 4000
years, yet was then to do that which should make it meet and right and just for
God to pardon Sin before: Even as in a Building the several parts may be the
reason of each other, because they must be all compaginated and fitted to their
relative places and uses: And though the Foundation make not the
Superstructure, it upholdeth ^it^ And as Aquinas briefly faith, Deus non
propter hoc vult hoc, sed vult hoc esse propter hoc; nothing is the Cause of
God's Will, but it is God's Will that one thing shall be for another: And when
all his Work must be one Frame, the part last made may be a reason of the
former. And so Christ's merits and sacrifice, though after 4000 years, perform
that for which it became just and meet before for God to pardon Sinners. For
though it was not then existent, yet (besides the Decree) the Promise,
Prediction and Publication made it useful to its ends, in respect to GOD and
Man.

. 18. So then, though the Cause be not truly a Cause till it exist, and though
all the Pardon and Salvation given for 4000 years, was before the existence of
the merits and sacrifice of Christ, yet the Promise and Notification of the
Mediator and his merits and sacrifice, as the reason of this Pardon, did then
exist, and was the cause of that Pardon, which Christ was afterward to merit.

. 19. It is therefore no absurdity, that the existence of Man's Faith and
Repentance should be necessary, when the Mediator's Existence and his Merits
was not necessary: For it was not then an existent Mediator (and Sacrifice,
etc.) that was the Object of Faith, but only a Promised Mediator.

. 20. And whereas it is a doubt, seeing the Head is essential to the Church,
and the Divine Nature only was Head of the Church before the Incarnation, and
the Divine and Humane united was afterward the Head, whether it follow not the
Church before the Incarnation and after (and so Faith and Religion) were diverse
in specie, and not the same? I answer, That while we agree all de re, that so
much difference there is, it is not worth our trouble to strive about the Name
or Logical Notion of [ Sameness of Species.]

. 21. When God has chosen to save Man by way of a Mediator, and by his
Sacrifice and Merits, as that way in which his Wisdom, Love, Holiness, Mercy
and Justice are eminently glorified, it seems to me too bold Presumption to
dispute, Whether he could not have saved us otherwise, and pardoned Sin without
a Savior? as it would be to dispute, Whether he could not illuminate the Earth
without the Sun? He wants not Power to do whatsoever is meet for God to do;
but all the question is, Whether it be meet, supposing Man's Nature and Sin to
be what they are?

. 22. God did illuminate the World without the Sun, till the Sun was made: But
it was the imperfect World, and before the perfecting of his Work: And so God
did save Man without an Existent Mediator, (unless God may be called a Mediator
between himself and us, which is a harsh Phrase). But it was before the Work of
our Salvation was brought to maturity; for the Cure of Man is perfectest at
last.

. 23. We must take great heed, that in considering of the parts of our
Redemption by Christ, we look not all at one and overlook the rest, nor set
not those Works of Christ in opposition which must be taken in conjunction: But
his Incarnation, Obedience, Contempt of the World, Victory over Satan,
Suffering, Resurrection, Ascension, Glory, Intercession, Reign, Raising the
Dead, Judgment, glorifying his Church, must be all conjoined, though not
confounded.

. 24 The Benefits of Redemption, or recovering Mercies, are not all given in
the same way: We must carefully distinguish of those that God gives absolutely
and antecedently; that is, before any Condition or Duty on Man's part, and
those that he gives consequently upon Man's Duty performed as the means of
Reception.

. 25. Antecedent Mercies are some common to all men, and some proper to some
Countries, Ages and Persons, as the free Benefactor pleases.

. 26. Of the former sort is the Sustentation of Nature, reprival from deserved
miseries, the Law of Grace, as to the tenor, and some degree of promulgation,
with all the common Mercies, Means, Duties which tend to Recovery. Of the later
sort are the greater degrees of such mercies and means, which God freely gives
to some more than others.

. 27. Therefore we must not say that Infidels or wicked men have no Mercies, or
no Right to what they do possess as from God, as being no Consenters to the
Covenant or Performers of it: Because there are Antecedent Mercies given before
such Consent or Performance; not as to Covenanters but as to miserable men,
invited to enter Covenant with God in Christ. Though these are so forfeited by
their refusal, that they have no assurance of their continuance, but God may
soon take them all away.

. 28. The consequent Mercies are Pardon, Justification, Adoption, the Spirit, a
secured filia^ Right to all outward Mercies that are good and suitable to us,
and final Glory, and whatever God has promised on Conditions by us to be
performed.

. 29. The question of universal Redemption, and special, I shall pretermit till
I speak of universal Grace.

. 30. Seeing Life, Health, Food, Hope, and all that is truly good, were
forfeited by Sin, and none of them can be due to us by the Law of Innocence, it
follows, that wherever they are given, it is upon other terms, which can be
no other than those of the Law of Grace, as fruits of our Redeemer's Mercy (
antecedently or consequently.) And where the Fruits are apparent, we may know
the Cause.

. 31. The Fruits of Redemption are one entire frame consisting of various and
unequal parts, to diverse persons (yet mutually related:) And therefore it will
not follow, that nothing but what certainly infers the person's Salvation is
any such effect of Man's Redemption.

CHAP. XII. Of the several Laws or Covenants of God.
. 1. THough the order of the matter require, that I should have spoken of the
Law of Innocence before I had spoken of Sin and Redemption, yet thinking that
the sort of Readers for whom I now especially write, will best understand
things, if I treat of all God's Laws together, I will at this time fetch my
method from their intended benefit.

. 2. The nature of a Law in general, and of God's Laws in special, I have
elsewhere so often and largely spoken of (pretending somewhat to clear up that
Doctrine from several mistakes) that I must here pretermit it.

. 3. Though the word [ Law] do principally signify the regulating Imposition
of our Duty, and the word Covenant does principally signify a mutual Contract;
yet it is the same Divine Instrument, which is meant often and usually in
Scripture, by both these Names: (Of which see Grotius at large in his Preface
to his Annotations in Nov. Testamentum.) It is called a Law in one respect, and
a Covenant in another, but the thing is the same.

As a Law, the parts of it are, 1. The Precept (and Prohibition) constituting
our Duty. 2. The Retribution, Premiant and Penal constituting the Dueness of
Rewards and Punishments, as the duty is performed or neglected.

As it is a Covenant it contains, 1. The Benefit (which is the Reward) freely
given, yet on condition of a due and suitable Reception and use of prescribed
Means: 2. The Condition described, and Means prescribed, in the said Preceptive
part. 3. And the Threatening in case of Ingratitude, Refusal and Disobedience.
Which are the same things as in the Law of Grace, considering the Covenant but
as Instituted and Offered: For (...) signifies And where (...) is taken for a
Testament, the Parts and Acts are the same with the Relation of it to the Death
of the Testator, who as his last Will, gives such gifts on such Terms. And
Christ did put his Commands unto his Testament, John 14, and 15, and 16.
usually but the Resolved declared terms of Life and Death, or the Divine
Ordination by which he will Rule and Judge us. And so it is often called a
Covenant before Consent by Man, which makes it to be (...) a Mutual Contract.
And even a Law as Received by a voluntary subject is Consented to, and becomes
a Contract. If any think that I give not the true difference of God's Laws and
Covenants, let him tell me more, and I suppose we shall agree de re, though not
de ratione nominis: And let it now suffice to tell you how I would be
understood my self: Though the word Law be some time taken more narrowly, and
the word Covenant often for Mutual Contract (which is but a Law consented to) yet
being to speak of each term as signifying that Regulating Frame by which God
Rules us and will Judge us, and by which he gives us his Gifts and Rewards, I
mean the same thing, in several respects called by the several names; The
absolute Antecedent Gifts of our Great Benefactor being supposed inclusively in
both.

SECT. I. Of the Law or Covenant of Innocence made to Adam.
. 1. I Shall in this order Treat briefly of the Divine Laws. I. Of the Law of
Innocence to Adam. II. Of the Law of Mediation to Christ. III. Of the Law of
Grace to fallen Man. And there, 1. As in the first Edition to Adam and Noah: 2.
As in the same Edition joined with the Jewish Law of Peculiarily to Abraham,
and of Works by Moses to Abraham's Seed. 3. Of the Law of Graces as in the
second Edition by Christ:

. 2. 1. The Law of Innocence contained a Precept and Prohibition, and a
Retributive part to which Adam was bound to be a Voluntary Subject, and
therefore to Consent (which will allow it the name of a Covenant.) But here the
brief Narrative in the Scripture calls to us to distinguish of things
certain, and things uncertain (whoever assert them.)

. 3. 1. The Preceptive part was revealed by Nature, or Supernaturally (by
Voice, or Inspiration, or Vision, etc.) The former being Lex natura integrae,
the Law of Entire Nature, though the Chief is least spoken of in Genesis because
it is supposed legible in Nature it self.

. 4. The Law of Nature, properly so called, is in esse Objectivo, that
signification of God's Will concerning Man's Duty, which was discernible in the
Universa rerum Natura in all God's Works; but principally in Man's own Nature,
as related to God and all Persons, and Things about him.

. 5. But Improperly or Metonymically so called, the Law of Nature is in esse
subjectivo the Communes notitiae, which Man had and was to have from the said
Objective Law of Nature. But properly this is rather the Knowledge of the Law,
than the Law it self, being not perfect in Adam himself at first, but was to be
perfected as he came to know more and more of the Works of God, and varying
much now in several Persons. Yet may it well be called God's Law written in the
Heart, when we have the Knowledge and Love of his primary proper Law.

. 6. This Law of Nature bound Adam to perfect Devotedness to God as his Owner,
and perfect gratitude to God as his Antecedent Benefactor, and to perfect
Obedience to God as his Ruler, and to perfect Love to God as his ultimate most
amiable End. And this perfect Obedience was to be perpetual.

. 7. It was Adam personally that the Law bound to this perfect perpetual
Obedience, and not another for him, or that he should obey by a Representative,
or a Delegate, a Servant, or by any other.

. 8. Nature, even in its depraved state, now tells us, that all Sin against
God deserves Punishment; Therefore the Law of Nature had a Penal part.

. 9. It is a great doubt with many Divines whether the Law of Nature had any
premiant part or promise, and so was a Covenant; because, say they, Duty
obliges not God to reward us. But it seems to me as far past doubt as the
penal part. For the question is not, what our Duty performed obligheth God to,
much less in point of Commutative Justice, where no Creature can Merit of God,
Job 35. 6, 7, 8. If thou be Righteous, what give thou him, etc. But it is
presupposed that God first became Man's Benefactor and his Ruler, and his Law
is the Instrument of his Government; and his Promise is but the signification
of his Will, what he will give, and on what Terms: And God in Nature signified
his Will to bless the Obedient, and love those that love him; For as a Ruler he
is Just; and if he differenced not the Righteous from the Sinner, what were his
Justice? Were there no other Reward, but the Continuance of the
Paradise-Blessing freely given him (which Sin would forfeit) it would have been
a great Reward: And if God equally take away his Gifts from Good and Bad, it is
not Governing Justice, though as the Act of a Proprietor it be neither Just nor
Unjust, so that the very essence of Undertaken Government, contains a
discovery of God's Rewarding Will; which is the promissory or premiant part of
the Law of Nature.

. 10. The Degree and Kind of the Natural Reward, must be gathered, 1. From the
state that Man was in. 2. From the nature of his Duty. 3. From the state of
Perfection which his Nature was made inclined to desire and seek.

. 11. 1. Man being freely placed in the state of Innocence and God's Favor in
the Earthly Pleasures of Eden, as a Sanctified state of Communion with God,
seeing Sin was to be punished with the privation of these, we may gather, that
the Innocent should not have been deprived of them.

. 12. 2. Man's great Duty being to Love God perfectly (according to his present
Ability) and to please him, and delight herein, we may gather, that the
Innocent should have the felicity which is herein contained, even in the
Delights of loving and pleasing God.

. 13. 3. Man's Nature being not made in its utmost perfection, but in via, with
a desire of knowing God, loving him, pleasing him, and delighting in him yet
more, according to his Capacity, we may gather, That obedient Man should have
attained that Perfection: For God makes not the capacities, dispositions and
desires of Nature in vain.

. 14. But whether all this should have been given on Earth or in Heaven, is not
so clear in Nature or Scripture: But, 1. The Translation of Henoch and Elias
makes it probable, that so Man should have been translated. 2. And so does the
Glory purchased by the Redeemer. 3. And the matter is the less, because
wherever the place be, the same state of Enjoyment would make it a Heaven to
such a person.

. 15. Neither does Nature now tell us, How long Man must have obeyed before he
had merited the full Reward of his Perfection. But only that he must conquer
all the Temptations that God would try him with, and must persevere till God
should please to translate him, not appointing him any determinate time. Nature
and Scripture favor this.

. 16. There are some who considently conclude (without either natural or
Scripture Proof) That had Adam performed but one Act of Obedience to God,
before his Sin, he had been confirmed is the Angels, as his Reward: And what a
Sinner do they make Adam before he sinned, if he performed not one Act of Love
and Obedience to his Maker* This Fancy I dismiss.

. 17. Others say, That if he had overcome one Temptation he should have been
confirmed; but I find no Promise or Proof of it in Nature, nor in Scripture;
and I suppose they feign not a secret conditional Will of God.

. 18. Though it be agreed on by most Protestants, That Adam had been an Heir of
Death and Hell if he committed the least Sin, even an idle thought or word,
though he had not eaten the forbidden Fruit, and so that the Law of Nature made
Hell the due punishment of the least Sin, and does so still if it be not
pardoned, yet the Law of Nature in our lapsed state is herein somewhat dark,
and the Scripture not so clear for it as some imagine: But thus much methinks
Nature it self still speaks.

. 19. 1. That the least sin deserves some degree of Punishment. 2. That God
has various degrees of Punishment, suited to the degrees of Sin. 3. That the
least Sin has a tendency to more, and that still to more, till Man be utterly
miserable. And that both in its own Nature, and in the forfeiture of some
measure of God's Grace or Help. 4. That if you suppose that vain thought or
word to consist still with true Love to God, God could not immediately hate and
damn that Soul that so loved him. But if that Person perish, it must be by that
idle thought or word producing worse, till it had turned his love from God to
the Creature. 5. That antecedently to Gods undertaking to be the Ruler of Man,
no doubt but as an absolute Owner, he might have taken away all that he gave
him, even his Life and Being, without any fault in Man: for he may do as he
list with his own: And therefore he might have done the same for the smallest
fault, which he might have done without it. And therefore he might have
inflicted any Pain, which to Man is not worse than Annihilation, for ever. But
whether his three forementioned Acts; 1. Antecedently placing Man as he did. 2.
Making him such Duty as he made him. 3. And such Inclination to better, do not
imply that God would not punish him unless he sinned, and then but according to
the degree of his Sin, I leave to Consideration.

. 20. But whether God must, and whether he might, punish the least Sin with
Hell, are different questions: Whether by the Law of Nature he must do it or be
unjust, and so a vain thought was not pardonable by or under that Law, and so
Adam was an Heir of Hell when his thought first failed, before he did eat or
consent to eat the forbidden Fruit, are questions which I cannot resolve from
Nature, and are to me more difficult in Scripture than to wiser men.

. 21. The supernatural part of the Law is known to us only by Scripture, but
perhaps the Fathers before the Flood might know more of it by Tradition, than
God has thought meet to write for our times.

. 22. The preceptive part was the not eating the forbidden Fruit, and
consequently the overcoming all Temptations thereto: The Law of Matrimony and
the Sabbath also, are partly supernatural (called Positive.)

. 23. The Penalty is called Death, which signifies Undoing and Misery: But
whether it was only temporal Death or also Hell, Divines are not agreed. They
that are for the former, seem chiefly drawn to it, by comparing the Law with
the Judgment and Execution, thinking it indecent to say, that God fulfilled not
his Threatening, but dispensed with it: And therefore seeing Temporal Death only
is in the Sentence and Execution, they think that no more was meant: And
consequently that Christ did not by Redemption, prevent the sentence and
execution of that Death, but only when it was fulfilled, deliver us from
continuance under it by a Resurrection.

. 24. But I would have such remember, 1. That the Soul was made naturally
immortal, that is, not tending to Annihilation, unless God should against
Nature or settled Course annihilate it. And if it were not annihilated, it must
be in some state, good or bad. If it was to be penally annihilated, Christ
prevented that: And such an annihilation is as little desirable as a tolerable
degree of Pain. 2. And that God's Law determining directly but de debito
poenae, what should be Man's due, and not absolutely and peremptorily then de
eventu, God reserved to himself a pardoning Power, so it were done upon
valuable Considerations, more fully glorifying him and his Government and Law,
than Man's Destraction would have done. And thus to dispense with his Law is no
dishonor to God.

. 25. It is the Wrath to come that Christ delivers us from, and Hell and the
Power of Satan that he redeemed us from: Therefore it seems that it was no
less that our Sin deserved. And spiritual death is contained in Sin and
Apostasy it self.

. 26. What the Reward was to be, besides what I said before from Nature, it is
not easy to gather out of Scripture, nor to find there any plainer a Promise
of Life; but in both I think it is certainly implied.

. 27. It is ordinary to say, That the Condition of Adam's Confirmation was,
That he should have eaten first of the Tree of Life: But to find that among the
Commands, much less the Condition with a Promise of Confirmation, requires
more discerning than I have; notwithstanding the words [ Lest he eat and live,
etc.] from which they gather it.

. 28. How far this Law is yet in force, is also difficultly disputed. In brief,
1. The general Command of perfect Love and Obedience for the future, and the
Commands of the unalterable Duties of Nature, are still so far in force as to
oblige us. 2. But whether sub poena mortis is the doubt? Punishment is due
either absolutely and statedly, and so it makes it due only to the Impenitent
and Unbelievers. Or only in primo instanti, inceptively, with an annexed
Remedy: And so every Sin makes Punishment so far due to the Faithful, as that
they have need of the Grace of Christ, and the new Covenant to pardon it. 3.
But the premiant part of the Law of Innocence, from whence it is named a
Covenant, is now truly null. Which makes our Divines say, That the Law of
Nature (which they call moral) binds as a Rule of Duty, but the Covenant
cease.

. 29. This was not done by GOD but Man, who ceased to be a capable Subject of
that Covenant, Promise or Reward: And so the Condition ( Innocence or perfect
Obedience) being become naturally impossible, we must not feign God to say to
Sinners [ On condition you be no Sinners you shall live]. But Cessante
capacitate subditi cessat promissio conditionalis, and transit in sententiam.

But of the Cessation of the Law and Covenant of Innocence, see more after
Sect. 5,. 32, etc.

. 30. They pervert this Covenant by their unproved Fictions, who say, that the
sense of it was [ Thou, or one for thee, shall obey, and if thou Sin, thou or
Christ shall suffer.] And so that we are justified by this same Covenant which
condemns us, as having been innocent and perfectly righteous (habitually and
actually) in and by Christ.

SECT. II. Of the Law of Mediation or Covenant with CHRIST.
. 1. AS the Mediator in Person and Office, differed from all other Creatures,
so he was under a Law and Covenant, proper to himself.

. 2. This Law and Covenant was made to and with Christ incarnate: For so he was
a Subject under Law. It is too bold, improper and offensive a Phrase to call
God's eternal Decree of Redemption by the Name of a Law, yea, or a Covenant of
God with Himself, that is, of the Father with the Son.

. 3. Therefore all the Descriptions of it in the Old Testament, are but
Prophecies and Promises containing the terms of the future Covenant; (as we
call a form of Prayer, a Prayer, though it be but matter fitted to be a Prayer
when it has the formal act.) But Christ had truly a Law and Promises.

. 4. The Preceptive or imposed part was, in general, that he do the Office of a
Mediator: particularly, 1. That habitually and actually he perfectly fulfill
all the Law of Nature, which he was capable of. 2. That he fulfill also the Law
of Moses. 3. That he also do those things proper to the Mediator, in his
Miracles, Sacrifice, Resurrection, Intercession, Tea^hing, Government, etc.
which he undertook.

. 5. Christ took the Nature of Man, but not strictly the Real or Reputative
Person of any man, but himself, much less of every Man or every Believer: I
mean, that his Person was not the natural Person of any other, nor esteemed of
God so to be; nor yet was he the full and proper Representative or Civil Person
of any man, much less of all men; that is, One that the Law allowed us to do
and suffer by, so that in Law-sence his doing and suffering should be reputed
ours; as a man pays a Debt by his Servant or Substitute; which is morally or
reputatively his Act and Deed, or accepted in the same sort and to all the same
effects and purposes, as if he had paid it with his own hands. The person of
the Mediator was not in Law-sence, nor God's account, nor Christ's undertaking
the person of the Sinner himself.

. 6. Else Christ should have been in God's account a Sinner, and the greatest
Sinner in the World, and hated as such by God above any other Sinner; which
whoever shall affirm, shall speak presumptuously and blasphemously.

* 7. Yea, else Christ should have been many millions of persons in Law-sence,
and many millions of Sinners; which is not agreeable to God's Word.

. 8. Christ neither was a Sinner, nor reputed a Sinner by God: And his being
made sin for us, signifies, 1. That he was made a Sacrifice for Sin, and was
taken and used by God as one that undertook to suffer for our sins, in our
stead, though not in our person. 2. And that he was really accounted a Sinner
by those that crucified him, and used as such.

. 9. First, Christ did not fulfill the Law of Innocence in our several persons;
He did not all those things materially that Adam was obliged to do; nor which
most of us are obliged to do. We did not reputatively fulfill that Law by him,
so as that his Perfection is taken as ours, in Habit and in Act.

. 10. Secondly, Christ did not fulfill the Law of Moses in the person of all
them that were never bound themselves to fulfill it; so as that they are
reputed Fulfillers of it in and by Christ: For since his Ascension it is
abrogated even to the Jews themselves, and now binds none in the World (as
Mosaical.)

. 11. Thirdly, Christ did not work Miracles, rise, ascend, intercede, reign,
teach, give Laws, and Ministers, and Grace, in the Person of every or any
other, but only in his own Person as the great Mediator and Savior of Man.

. 12. If any will use the word [PERSON] in a private, narrow and improper
sense, and say, That [ He who undertook in the person of a Mediator to obey and
merit for our Justification, and to suffer in our stead to save us from
deserved suffering, may therefore be called The Person of every one that he
merited and suffered for, though I will not so presume to thrust Phrases on the
Church which Scripture never used, when their obvious sense is pernicious, yet
if that man will by Explication of the word PERSON (or REPRESENTATIVE) notify
to the World, that he takes it in a sound sense, I will not quarrel about an
unfit word, while Religion is safe.

. 13. John 12. 32. John 7. 39. and 6. 60, 61, 62, 63, 54. Joh. 5. 22, 23, 24,
25. Joh. 10. 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 11, 14, 15, 16. and 2. 16, etc. Heb. 13. 20. Joh.
6. 33, 34, 35, 48, 51, 53, 63. and 8. 12, 13. and 10. 10. and 11. 25. and 14.
6, 7. and 20. 31. Romans 5. 17, 18, 19, 20. and 8. 1, 2, 3. Col. 3. 3, 4. 2 Timothy
1. 1. Tit. 1. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 3. Joh. 12. 25. and 17. 2, 3. Tit. 3. 5, 7. 1 John
1. 2. and 2. 25. and 5. 11, 12, 13, 20. 1 Timothy 1. 16. Joh. 4. 14. Gal. 6. 8.
Christ undertook not only to merit and suffer for Man, but also to draw all
men to him, and to send forth his Spirit and Ministry, and to gather together
the Elect of God that are scattered through the World, and to intercede for
them, and to give them eternal life, having raised them up at the last day.

. 14. The premiant part of the Law of Mediation, or the Promise of God in this
Covenant to Christ, was, That All Power should be given him in Mat. 28. 19.
Joh. 17. 1, 2, 3. Romans 14. 9, 10. Ephesians. 1. 20, 23. Phil. 2. 7, 9. Joh. 5. 22.
Col. 1. Joh. 3. 16, 38. Mat. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, etc. Romans 8. 9. 2 Timothy 1. 7.
Romans 8. 1, ^o 28, 34. Heb. 7. 25. Romans 8. 30, 35.
Heaven and Earth, and he should be Lord both of the Dead and of the Living,
and Head over all things to the Church, and that he should be glorified at
God's right hand, and have a Name above every Name, at which every knee should
bow, and that Principalities and Powers should be subject to him. That he be
authorized to give Laws to the World, (all Judgment being committed to him) and
to make with Men a Covenant of Grace and Life, and send forth Ministers to
proclaim it, and the Spirit to effect the gathering of his Church; that his
Intercession for them shall be accepted, and that he shall Judge all the World,
and justify and glorify his Chosen according to the tenor of his Covenant of
Grace: Which is all accordingly performed.

. 15. Though if Christ as a Creature had sinned, he had deserved Punishment,
yet the supposition being of a thing impossible, by reason of the Union of the
Divine Nature, it is improper to talk of any penal part of the Law that was
given him: For penal Laws are for those that have need by fear to be restrained
from Sin, or constrained to Duty; which Christ needed not.

. 16. Christ's entire Righteousness (as before his exaltation) habitual,
active, passive, elevated by union with the Divine Perfection, was his
performance of the Condition of his Covenant with the Father: And his
performance of that Condition was his meritorious Title to God's promised
Effects: And that as it was one entire Righteousness or Condition performed:
And our Justification and Salvation are part of those promised Effects:
Therefore it is abusive subtilty to divide Christ's Performance into little
Parcels, and then say, This Parcel is imputed to me for this use, and that for
that use, and by one he merited this, and by the other that, when (though each
part of his Condition or Duty had its proper reason, yet) it was only the
entire performance that was the Condition of the Benefits, and so of our
Justification and Salvation.

. 17. But I say, [ before his Exaltation] because the Benefits being of several
sorts, some of them were given upon Christ's merit presently, and some upon
Man's believing, and some not till long after by application: But to all these,
what Christ did only as under the Law of Mediation, was properly his merit, by
which they were procured: But his [ undertaking] what he after did, (in
gathering his Church and interceding and ruling) may be numbered with the parts
of his foresaid merit; and still, as a Creature, he is under his Creator's Law,
even the Law of perfect uniting Love, and so does eminently merit.

. 18. It was neither the Covenant nor Will of the Father and Son, that we
should either have full possession, deliverance, or right thereto, immediately
upon Christ's Merit and Sacrifice (as we should if we had done all by him as
our Person): But that we and all things being delivered to Christ's Power and
Will, he should convey the Benefits of his Death and Merits, upon terms, and in
an Order suitable to the interest of his Wisdom, Love, Mercy, and Justice, even
by a Law of Grace, and a Ministry and Means adapted to the end, and in the time
and degrees which his Wisdom should make choice of: Which accordingly is done.
This Covenant which gives Right and Reward to Christ, is not it that gives
any Right or Reward to us.

SECT. III. Of the Law or Covenant of Grace in the first Edition.
. 1. AS God delivered the Law of Innocence partly by natural and real, and
partly by supernatural and verbal significations of his will, so has he done
the Law of Grace; which is the signification of his Will concerning Pardon and
Life granted to guilty Sinners, and the terms thereof.

. 2. The Promise, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents
head, etc. was a Breviate of the supernatural signification; but it is not
unlikely, that God did more fully acquaint them with his Law of Grace and
Redemption, than those words alone could make us understand: Because we find in
their sacrificing, some such intimation; (and in other signs.)

. 3. God's actual Continuance of forfeited Life, Liberty, Health, and other
comforts, and his actual Collation of many great Mercies by the course of
Nature, to such as by Sin have deserved present Damnation, is a degree of
signification of his pardoning will and mercy by these natural signs: (which
they were not before sin and forfeiture.)

. 4. Man being after guilt of death, thus reprieved and enriched with manifold
Mercies, and his life and faculties continued with many instructing
providential helps and means, the very Law of Nature now obliges him to love
and thankfulness to God that shows him so great kindness.

. 5. And the same Law of Nature obliges him to take that God still for a God
of Love and Mercy, and to believe, that what Mercy he has already showed the
World and us, is on terms which he knows to be very well consistent with his
Holiness, Truth and Justice: And it obliges us therefore to seek to him for
Mercy, and to use all possible means for further hope and pardon and recovery,
and not to sit down in despair.

. 6. The common sense of all Mankind from Adam to this day, acquainteth us by
that experience, That these Hopes and Duties are found in the Law of lapsed
Nature: For all the World that never heard the Gospel, do yet take God to be a
merciful, forgiving God, and take themselves to be under some duty for the
obtaining of further mercy, recovery and felicity.

. 7. Though want of the sense of Sin, and its desert, and Man's misery may be
thought by some to be the only cause of this, and so that it is but sinful
presumption, and no part of Nature's obligation; yet this upon trial will prove
false. (Though what they allege be one part of the Cause). For, 1. These men
do acknowledge themselves Sinners, and to deserve punishment from God. 2. They
find some misery and fear more. 3. It is not presumption to judge God to be
merciful, when they and all the World do find him so. 4. It is not presumption
to judge, that he can and will pardon Sin, when full Experience assures us,
that he has already pardoned much. To remit the Sin, is (as we now speak of
it) to remit the deserved punishment. And He that gives Man forfeited life,
health, time, and all the abundant Mercies which the World is full of, does
thereby so far actually forgive Sin: Says Christ, Whether is it easier to say
thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say arise, take up thy Bed and walk, that is,
Executively to forgive them, which is the full forgiveness, by taking away the
punishment. 5. It is no presumption to believe such Duty to be incumbent on us,
as the remaining Law of Nature does oblige us to. 6. Nor yet to take God's own
Encouragements to seek our own recovery and felicity.

. 8. The Light and Law of lapsed Nature does convince men of the duty of
repenting and returning to God, and oblige them to it. So that as Perfect
Obedience was the duty of entire Nature, so Repentance is the duty of laepsed
Nature: And I think few will say that all men are not hereby obliged to repent,
and that in hope of mercy.

. 9. Hence it is that it is found among the Communes notitiae, and all the
World as well as Christians acknowledge it and plead for it.

. 10. They that by God's Patience and Mercy are invited to Repentance, which is
a return from sin to God, and are by Nature obliged to it, ought to believe
that it is not made their Duty in vain, nor shall they lose by it if they
perform it; for that were to accuse God of making Man's Duty in vain, or to his
loss, which is not to be suspected.

. 11. Therefore they are bound not to despair of Pa^don and Salvation; for an
obligation to use means as tending to recovery, is inconsistent with an
obligation to despair. Therefore hope of Mercy and use of some means Mankind is
obliged to by the Law of lapsed Nature.

. 12. This is not the obligation of the Law or Covenant of Innocence; for that
Law bound us only as Innocent to keep our Innocence and perfectly therein obey:
But it gives no pardon, nor appoints Man any Duty in order to pardon and
recovery: Whatever does this, is a Law of Grace.

. 13. The sum of that Duty which the Law of Nature now obliges Man to, is, To
consider of all the Mercies which God vouchsafes Sinners, and thankfully to
improve them; to repent of sin, and turn to this God, who shows himself a
merciful ^ae^doni^g God; To resign themselves to him as their Owner, to obey
him as their Ruler, and to love and seek him as their ultimate End; and to
believe that his Mercy will not let us be losers in so doing, nor to do it in
vain.

. 14. But the Supernatural Revelation tells us much more than all this, Of
the promised Seed, the means of our Salvation, and of our Duty in believing
them, and of the Certainty and Nature of the Pardon, Deliverance, and
Blessedness which we shall attain.

. 15. The ^receptive part at first was not to Believe as much of Christ, as is
necessary since his Ascension; but to Believe what God promised and revealed of
him to the Church at that time.

. 16. Even under the Old Testament, God increased his Revelation of the Messiah
gradually: The Prophets spoke plainlier of him, than any thing written before.
Therefore a more extensive and distinct belief, was needful in one Age than in
a former.

. 17. Yet, even the Apostles were in a state of Salvation, before they
understood and believed, that Christ must D^^ for Sin, rise again, Ascend and
Intercede in Heaven for his Elect.

. 18. Yet all this was partly revealed before by the Prophets, and plainly
foretold them by Christ himself: Therefore it was not of absolute necessity to
Salvation then, to believe all of Christ which had been before Revealed, though
it was a duty to them that knew it.

. 19. Therefore under the Covenant of Grace, the Condition of our right, is
narrower than the Duty which we are commanded to perform.

. ^^. The Promised Benefits (presupposing the Common Antecedent Mercies) were
Summarily, Christ and Life in him: That is, that for the sake of Christ's
future Merits we should have Pardon, Justification, Reconciliation with God,
Adoption, Sanctification and Glory, and all necessary Helps and Means thereunto.

. 20. The Penalty was, 1. The John 3. 18, 19. Matthew. 28. 20. Heb. 10. 29, and
2. 3.
P^ivation of Recovery; 2. and a far sorer punishment for Ingratitude and
contempt of Christ and Mercy.

. 21. This Law or Covenant in this first Edition was made with Adam as the
Father of all Mankind, and so with all Mankind in him, as truly and as much as
the Covenant of Innocence was: For, 1. God's Word makes no difference. 2. Adam
was as much after the Common Father of Mankind, and all we as much in him, as
before the Fall. And he that will say that God arbitrarily Judges otherwise of
us, must prove it if he can. 3. The express Word of God in many places proves
it, joining Children with their Parents in such Blessings, and therefore
including the Children of Adam.

. 22. The same Covenant with some positive Additions, it pleased God to renew
to and with Noah, because he was as a second Head and Father to the generality
of all Mankind, all coming from his Loins as they did from Adam's.

. 23. As all Mankind was made the Subjects of God under this Law of Grace, so
by it they were all to be Governed and Judged, allowing a diversity of Degrees,
in the Promulgation, Mercies and Penalties thereof.

SECT. IV. Of the same Law with Abraham's Covenant of Peculiarity, and the
Mosaical Jewish Law of Works.
. 1. ABraham being a subject to this same Law of Grace, did so faithfully
Believe and Obey it, that it pleased God to reward him extraordinarily, by, 1.
Renewing the Covenant by special Application to him, and by the promises of
Peculiar Privileges to him and his seed.

. 2. Not that his Infant seed was the first that was taken into Covenant. For
the Covenant of Grace had from the beginning been made with the Faithful and
their Seed, as well as the Covenant of Innocence was.

. 3. The Peculiarities of this Covenant were Initially promulgate to Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob; and more fully to the Jews as a Politic Body, by Moses in the
Law; with some particular Sub-additions by David and the Prophets.

. 4. 1st. The Promise to Abraham was, besides the Common Covenant of Grace,
renewed. 1. A promise of peculiar Favor to his Seed increased to a political
Society in Canaan, and differenced by special Mercies from all the People of
the Earth. 2. A promise that the Messiah should be of his Seed.

. 5. This Covenant did not Discovenant the rest that the World, nor put them
into any worse Condition than they were before.

. 6. The peculiar Precept of that Covenant was, That by Circumcision as a Seal
and Symbol, and by peculiar Gratitude and Obedience, and relinquishing the Sins
of the Degenerate World about them, they should difference themselves from
others, as God's peculiar People.

. 7. As the Covenant of Peculiarity was not a separated state, but an
additional Privilege and Reward to Abraham as faithful to the Common Covenant
of Grace; so Circumcision was the Symbol neither of Abraham as under the Law of
Grace alone, nor as under the Covenant of Peculiarity alone (for that was never
alone) but as of One under both, even under the latter as a Reward for his
special Fidelity in the former. And so it was ^ Seal of the Righteousness of
the Faith in the Common Covenant of Grace, which he had being yet
Uncircumcised, though a Symbol also of his after Peculiarities, Romans 4. 1, 2,
etc.

. 8. Infants interest in the very Covenant of Peculiarity, and Jewish
Church State, was not infeparable from Circumcision. As Infants were ever
Members in the Common Church and Covenant of Grace with their Parents before
Circumcision, so they were also without it Members of the Jewish Church, when
as all the Females were Members, and all the Males in the Wilderness, who for
Forty Years were Uncircumcised: Yet is it called, The Church in the Wilderness,
when except very few at last it was an Uncircumcised Church, Acts 7. 38.

. 9. Much less did God lay such a necessity on the outward Sacramental Act, as
to deny Salvation to the Uncircumcised aforesaid, as some would have us think
that even under the Gospel he does by Sacraments. The Covenant was still
necessary as consented to by the Adult for themselves and their Infant seed,
but not always the outward sacrament or symbol.

. 10. The gathering of Israel into a Policy by Moses, as a Theocracy, and their
receiving a Law from God himself as a Political Body, was but the full
Establishment of the Covenant of Peculiarity, in performance of what God had
promised to Abraham, and in Circumcision had begun.

. 11. This Law of Moses therefore must be Considered as an Affix or Appendix to
the Common Law of Grace, and so either as related to it, or as considered
simply and distinctly in it self without that relation. And as it was a Divine
Political Law, for the Government of a Republic as such.

. 12. The Common Covenant of Grace was the Soul as it were of this Political
Jewish Law; and therefore was really expressed in it, in the Decalogue and
other parts: As it was the Soul of their state of Peculiarity, which was the
Reward of Abraham's Faithfulness in the Common Covenant: And their peculiar
Promise to Abraham's Seed as the Nations Blessing, with their Types and
Prophecies all led them to Christ more plainly than he was revealed to others.

. 13. The Law as such an Appendix, contained Preceptively the Decalegue as the
Summary and stamina, and the particular Determinations under it, as belonging
to the First and Second Table; For all those (not accurately distinguished as
Moral, Political and Ceremonial,) are but the particular Determinations of the
things only Generally expressed in the Decalogue, according to which they are
fitlier distributed.

. 14. It pleased God to make the particular Precepts (about Worship and
Political Converse) so many, and the Sacrifices so Costly, and the Penalties so
Severe, as that it became a very operous Employment to do Acts 15. 10. Gal. 5.
1. and Romans 7. and 8. 3, 4. Gal. 3. and 4. and 5. Heb. 7. and 10. Romans 3. and
4. and 5. Mat. 5.
the External Acts of it; which the People made a Snare of to themselves: For,
1. Thereby they were so taken up with the outward Work, that they neglected the
inward spiritual exercises of the Soul, without which all the rest are dead and
carnal things. 2. And they hereby grew into so high a conceit with the Letter
of the Law it self, and these External Duties, as that they thought the very
doing of them was enough to make them just and acceptable to God, and forgot
the true Doctrine of the Promised Messiah, and Righteousness by him. 3. And
hereby they grew Proud as if they had for these Externals, been so much better
than all other People, that all the World was Abominable save they. 4. And they
were so intent on the present Political Punishments to be escaped or suffered,
and Rewards to be won or lost, that they much overlooked the everlasting
Punishments and Rewards: And this Corruption increased till Christ came to Cure
it; who found the S^ducees not believing a Life to come, and the Pharise^s
deceived by their External Legal Works and Righteousness, and most of the
People too, ignorant of the true Spiritual Righteousness required by the Law it
self.

. 15. It may seem to some a difficult Question whether God by such a Law made
them Happier or Worse than the rest of the World? And whether Christ's
Abrogation of it was not a returning them to the common, easier and better
Condition of Mankind? Ans. 1. You must know, that though God made a common
Covenant of Grace with Mankind, the rest of the Nations about them were fallen
into Ignorance and Idolatry; and the Jewish Law much tended to cure both, and
to make them better know God and the meaning of the Covenant of Grace, and to
return to him from Idols, and worship him aright. So that the Jews were happier
than other Nations. 2. The abuse of their Law was through their fault and
folly, and the Law by the faithful among them was better understood and used.
3. Christ, after setting up a better Covenant in its stead, did bring the
Church into a better state than the Jews were: But the Unbelievers and
idolatrous World, that had not Christ's better Covenant, were still left in a
worse state than the Jews were before Christ's Incarnation.

. 16. And God by this operous Law would humble the Jews, that by their
peculiarity were apt to be puffed up with Pride* And as all his works grow to
Perfection by degrees, even the Works of Grace in particular Souls, so did his
Means of Grace, and the welfare of his Church; which was to begin at their
Rudiments, and grow up to better means and knowledge: yet so that all were to
be judged according to the Law that they were under.

. 17. It is this operous Law of Moses which Paul means usually by the [ Law
of Works, and the old or former Covenant] and neither the Law or Covenant of
Innocence made to Adam, nor yet as if this Law of Moses were of the same Tenor
or Conditions, and so called a Covenant of Works, as making Innocence its
Condition: But this Law which was an Appendix to the Law of Grace, and was a
peculiar Law of Grace it self, is called, The Law of Works, because of the
great and burdensome and costly Externals before mentioned, and because as a
political Law it so much insisteth comparatively on those Externals, and the
Doctrine of Grace is comparatively more obscure in it than in the Gospel; and
because the Jews had by their abusive Interpretation overvalued the Externals
and operous Ceremonies and Sacrifices of it.

. 18. The mistake of Paul's meaning in this Phrase [ the Law of Works, or old
Covenant] has led some men to a new frame of Theology in a great part, and
engaged others in Errors, and fruitless Contentions.

. 19. By the words [ He that does these things shall live by them] as
distinguished from believing, Paul meant not that the Condition of the Jewish
Covenant of Peculiarity or Law, was the same perfect Innocence as was required
in the first Law of Adam; for when Man was actually guilty, it was impossible
that he should ever become one that had not sinned: And we must not put such a
scorn on the infinitely wise and righteous Governor of the World, as to
suppose him to have such a Law or Covenant as this [ If you that are sinners
are not sinners you shall be saved], much less to make this a Covenant of
peculiar favor.

. 20. Nor does Paul mean, That the Laws Condition was [ If you will never sin
more, I will pardon all that is past]. For God never made such a Law with man;
not to sin being morally impossible to them, and Pardon never offered on such
terms.

. 21. To put all out of doubt, 1. God before hand proclaimed the Name of that
God from whom they received their Law, Exodus 34. 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgr^ssion and sin, though
he will by no means clear the guilty. (That is, He will not judge a Sinner to
be no Sinner, nor the Wicked to be Godly, nor pardon and save any contrary to
the established terms of his Covenant.) 2. And the Law it self has many
express means of forgiveness of Sin appointed, as sacrificing, confessing, etc.
which shows that it was a Law of Grace.

. 22. By the Law, Paul usually means the written Law of Moses, as contained
in the very words now in our Bibles: As by the Word of God we usually mean the
Scripture. Therefore though it contain much of the Law of Nature, yet as a
written Law, and part of a Law of Peculiarity and Policy of that Nation, even
the Decalogue may be said to be done away, though as the Law of Nature and of
Christ it still remain.

. 23. By the Works of the Law then, which Paul mostly disputes of, and by [ He
that does these things shall live in them] is meant, That this Law, besides the
sweet and easy Precepts of faith and Love, did as part of the Matter of the
Jews Obedience, require abundance of burdensome Externals, and he that would
not do all those must die (for Obedience even to those commanded Tasks was then
made necessary by God): And as to temporal death, it was not by that Law to be
escaped, but on the strict terms thereby required: So that doing these things,
was necessary to life temporal, (and to eternal in sincerity): And the driving
on the People by temporal punishments to these externals, was that Body of the
Law which the mistaking Jews had separated from the Soul of it.

. 24. And he says, None could be justified by the Works of the Law, because
this written political Law and its externals, were in this Dispute put in
opposition to Christ, and the Law taken for the mere Body of Moses's Law,
separated from the Law of Grace, which was its Soul; and no doubt, 1. It is
Faith in the Redeemer and Covenant of Grace, which is the Condition of
constituting Men Just, (which they must have before any Obedience to their
particular Laws could be sincere and acceptable:) and the faithful keeping of
the Law of Grace, which is made the Condition of salvation. 2. And to dream
that legal Strictness, Ceremonies, Sacrifices, or other legal Works, would
justify them without Christ and Faith in him, or any otherwise than as Acts of
Obedience to their Redeemer, by which their fidelity to the Covenant of Grace
was to be expressed while that Law was in force, was contrary to the true
meaning of their Law it self.

. 25. The rest of the World were not in the Covenant, nor under the Law of
Peculiarity or Jewish Policy. And as such (as is said) it is now all abrogated,
even the Decalogue it self, though its Matter be still in force, as aforesaid.

SECT. V. Of the Law or Covenant of Grace in the last Edition, or the Gospel.
. 1. Whether the Covenant of Grace in the first edition to Adam, and this of
the second edition by Christ, shall be called One or Two, the same or dive^s,
and the old Church and the Gospel Church the same or not the same in specie,
are but needless questions about the bare Name of Oneness, as long as we agree
wherein they differ, and wherein they differ not. In some respects they may be
called the same, and in some not the same.

. 2. The Parties in the first Covenant of Grace were really but two: GOD and
Man (unless you could prove that Christ had then such a superangelical Nature
in which he mediated, as some before mentioned hold). But the Parties in the
new Covenant of Grace are really Three, viz. GOD as the absolutely Supreme, who
gave us a Mediator; and Christ the Mediator, as the supreme Subadministrator to
whom all Power is given, and Man the Subject to both.

. 3. The Benefits of the first Edition, respected a future Savior and his
future Righteousness, Sacrifice, and M^rits: But the Benefits of the second
Edition respect an existent Mediator and his merits and sacrifice already
performed, and accepted of God.

. 4. The revelation of life eternal and Man's spiritual felicity and duty, is
far clearer in the second Edition than in the first.

. 5. As there is more done for us, so there are more full and excellent means
provided for Man's information, conversion, sanctification and salvation, in
Apostles, Scriptures, Miracles, spiritual Ordinances, than under the first.

. 6. As the means excel, so the Spirit is given in a greater measure,
answerable to the greater Revelation and means: And is specially Christ's
Witness and Agent in the World, and the mark of his peculiar ones.

. 7. And as more is done for us, so more is now to be believed by us: Many
necessary Articles are added to our Faith: That this Jesus is the Messiah, that
he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under P.
Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, descended to Hades, rose again the
third day, ascended to Heaven, is there glorified in our Nature, Head of all,
etc. are all new Articles of our Faith, which before were not required, because
not revealed, or the matter extant.

. 8. This second Edition is both the Covenant of Grace, and a Covenant of
Peculiarity, far excelling the Jewish Covenant of Peculiarity: Believers are a
holy Nation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar People, etc.

. 9. This Covenant supposes the antecedent gifts of a Savior to be incarnate,
and do his meritorious and sacrificing part, and all such Preparatories, and of
Life, Gospel and Opportunities given to the Sinner.

. 10. The parts of the Covenant are, 1. The Conditional Gifts or Benefits. 2.
The Condition or Terms of Right. 3. The Rule of Duty. 4. The Penalty for
violation or neglect of the Covenant.

. 11. 1. The Gifts are, God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost in their
Cov^n^n^-Relation to us, and the love of the Father, the Grace of the Son, and
the Communion of the Holy spirit. Or as it is briefly expressed in 1 Ioh. 5.
10, 11. Christ and life in him, that is, Pardon, Justification, the Spirit,
Adoption and Glory, at first in right, and after in possession; and all means
and mercies which God sees meet to bring us to it.

. 12. 2. The Condition of our first Right is, 1. That of natural necessity,
viz. Repentance and Return to God; 2. Of natural and instituted necessity,
Belief and Confidence in Christ, and Covenant-Consent.

. 13. The Condition of our continued and consummate Right and full Possession,
is the former Faith and Consent continued, Repentance renewed when we knowingly
sin, and sincere Obedience and Perseverance.

. 14. 3. Seeing sincere Obedience supposes a Law, we must know that more is in
the Precept than in the Condition: Therefore we distinguish of necessitas
praecep^i and medii. The Precept requires perfect Obedience as due: But
Sincerity is the Condition, and will save without Perfection.

14. The Precepts or Law of Christ now contain, 1. The Law of Nature (for all
Things and Judgment are given up to him.) 2. The new peculiar Laws of Grace,
containing our special Faith in Christ, and his special Institutions of
Church Order, Ministry, Worship, etc.

. 15. The Penaelty of the Law of Grace in this Edition, is as in the first. 1.
A Privation of its Benefits to Nonconsenters or Insidels, with a greater d^gree
of punishment for Ingratitude. 2. And withdrawings of the Spirits help for our
quenching and resisting it, and abusing Mercy. 3. And temporal castigatory
Punishments to Believers for their saults.

. 16. The Sum of all essential to this Covenant, is in Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, which are therefore Sacraments and Symbols of it; and Baptism was
appointed by Christ himself to be the solemn Initiation, Badge, and Character
of his Disciples and Church Members.

. 17. The History of Christ's Life and Sufferings, and of his Apostles Life and
Preaching, and all the ^est of holy Scripture, is God's Word, and his Doctrine
belonging to the Gospel Covenant. But it is the Covenant it self, or Law of
Grace, which all that are under it, must be ruled and judged by, and
constituteth the Essentials of Christianity.

. 18. This Covenant did constitute Christianity many years (suppos^d eight)
before any part of the New Testament was written, as now extant, and near
seventy years before it was all written.

. 19. As Man has an Intellect, a Will, and an Executive power, and the Gospel
is to work on all, so the Creed is the Summary of our Belief, the Lords Prayer,
of our Desire; and the Christian Decalogue and Institutions, of our practice,
as expounding what Baptism generally expresses.

. 20. Though to the Jews that were bred up under the use of the Old Testament,
and that expected the Messiah, the Apostles staid not long instructing them,
before they baptized them, when they professed Repentance and Faith in Christ;
yet it cannot be conceived, but that with the ignorant Gentile Christians, all
Teachers took pains to make them understand, first what they were to profess
and promise; for ignorant doing they know not what, pleases not God. And
therefore that the Faith contained in the three Baptismal Articles, was
certainly explained in more words and accordingly professed; which must be in
substance that called the Apostles Creed, which the Churches preservation and
use, with the Custom of long instructing Catecumens, gives us notice of, as
well as the reason of the thing.

. 21. When we find Christ commanding his Apostles to disciple the Nations, and
baptize them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and teach them all
his Commandments; and when we daily see, after people have learned to say, They
believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, how long it is ere they understand
the meaning of those three Articles; and when we know that it is not bare
words, without the sense, that constituteth the Christian Faith; no sober Man
will doubt, whether the persons to be baptized were taught the sense as well as
the words; which must be done by more words. And it is certain that those Words
were not to alter Christ's Baptismal Covenant, nor the Nature and Terms of
Christianity, but to expound them. And it is certain, that multitudes were so
weak, that had those Words been very long and many, they would rather have
burdened them, than become their own profession, as understood and remembered.
And it is certain, that the changing of words does easily turn to a change of
the sense; and that even then Heresies quickly multiplied; which made it
necessary to the Church to be careful to preserve sound Doctrine. From all
which it clearly follows, that a Creed (that is, a Summary Profession of
Belief explaining the Baptismal Articles) was in common use in all the Churches
many years before the writing of the New Testament. And it is not likely that
in the Apostles days the Churches did receive it from any but themselves.

. 22. Yet it is not probable that they composed exactly such a Form of Words as
might not at all be altered, and used still the very same terms; for the Creeds
recited by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Marcellus in Epiphanius, and others, do all
differ in some words from one another, and some Articles have been added since
the rest (of which see Usher and Vossius de Symbolis.) But (except those few
Additions) they all agree in Sense; which may persuade us that the ancient
Churches kept still to Words which signified the same matter of the Articles of
our common Creed, and admitted no variation of the Words, but such as was
small, and endangered not the Doctrine.

. 23. Though Baptism explained by the Symbol of Faith, Lords Prayer, and
Decalogue, contain at least the Constitutive Essentials of Christianity, yet
the Integrals are much larger, and all that Christ commanded was to be taught
the Church. And though this was done by Voice many years by the Apostles before
they wrote any part of the New Testament, yet the Memory of men from Generation
to Generation, would have been a very unsafe and treacherous Preserver of so
many things, had they been committed to Memory alone* Therefore it pleased the
Wisdom and Love of God, to inspire the Apostles prophetically and infallibly to
commit the Sum of the History of Christ's Life, Sufferings, and Death, etc.
with all the Integrals of his Word, to those durable and sacred Records which
we call the Holy Scriptures, for the easier and fuller Propagation and
Preservation of the Christian Faith, and all its Integrals, especially his
Example and sacred Precepts; yea, and the necessary Accidentals, or
Appurtenances.

. 24. Because the Scriptures contain both in Words and Sense, much more than
the Essentials of Christianity, and so more than is of absolute necessity to
Salvation; many a million may be saved, that understand not all that is in the
Scriptures; nay, no man on Earth understands it perfectly: And he that
understands and receives the Essentials, shall be saved, though he were
ignorant of a thousand particular Texts.

. 25. Therefore it is that the Church has ever selected the great and most
necessary Truths, and taught Children and Catechized Persons these before the
rest, by way of Catechism; of which the foresaid Creed, Lords Prayer, and
Decalogue are the Sum, and the Sacramental Covenant is that Sum yet more
contracted. And it has not been the Churches way to teach Children or Converts
the Bible over in order indifferently, without selecting first the Marrow out
of the whole, which the Ignorant cannot do for themselves.

. 26. Besides the Method or Order of the Scripture books, there is specially to
be studied by those that will be more perfect than the rude^ fort, the true
Method of the Body of Doctrine, contained in all the Scriptures: For all the
parts of that Doctrine have that Place, Order, and Respect each to other, as
makes up the Beauty and Harmony which is in the whole. And even in the
Covenants, the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Decalogue, there is a most excellent
Order and Method, above all that is found in Aristotle, or any humane Writers,
though, alas! too few perceive it.

. 27. Therefore they that gather true Systems of Theology, do not add to the
Scripture, nor feign it to have a Method which it has not (no more than
Catechisms do) but only gather out that Doctrine which is there, and deliver it
in the true Scripture-method; not as it lies in the order of Words, but in the
order of Relation that one Truth has to another. And to despise this real
Method, because every dull and slothful Wit does not see it in the Scriptures,
is indeed to despise the Matter and Design of the Scripture, and to despise all
true and clear Knowledge of things Divine: For to see Truths placed in their
proper Order, does differ from a knowing of some confused parcels, as knowing
the parts of a Man, a Picture, a Clock, a House, a Ship, etc. duly
compaginated, and seeing all the parts cast confusedly on a heap. But to draw
up a true Method is the Work of a skilful hand; and mistaken ones so seduce,
that one Error in the Order leads to many.

. 28. Yet even Catechumens and young Christians should learn what they learn in
method: And that is first the said Baptismal Covenant, and our Relation to the
Trinity thereby; and all that is added to their Knowledge daily (be it never so
little) should be methodically added: For a weak head may perceive the true
method of the few Essentials (being great and plain), though the strongest
cannot follow the due Distribution of innumerable Integrals and Consequent
Truths: As the first partitions of the Tree into its greater Boughs, are easily
perceived, though not the innumerable sprigs thence arising.

. 29. Accordingly a wise Teacher will proceed with Infidels in proving the
Christian Religion, (yea, and with himself); and will first prove the Truth of
the Essentials (which are delivered us both in Scripture, and other infallible
Tradition) before he undertake to prove all the Scriptures to be the Word of
God: For he that will begin here, 1. Must show the Book which he will so prove;
and when he cannot vindicate it from variety of Lections, and the Errors of
Scribes and Printers (to say nothing of the greater of Translators) it will
stop him in his Designs. 2. And when he has so many thousand Words to prove to
be Divine, and so many Integrals and Accidentals to make good, he makes his
Work difficult, by allowing his Scholar to doubt as much of the Essentials of
Religion, as he shall doubt of the Truth of any particular Book or Text,
History, Genealogy, etc. in the whole Scripture. A blind Zeal for Scripture
has led some to this dangerous way; but the ancient Churches did otherwise,
and so will all that well understand what they do. And really on supposition it
could be proved (as it cannot) that any Penman of the Scripture erred in a
Ci^ation, a Genealogy, the Circumstance of a bye-History, etc. it would not
follow, that we must be therefore uncertain of all our Religion, even the
Essentials; and they ignorantly betray their Faith, that say, It would so
follow.

. 30. So far is it from being true, that the Scripture is too narrow, as to the
matter of Divine Faith and Duty, without the additional matter of Tradition,
that indeed, as the complete Body of a Man has more than his Essentials, yea,
or Inte^rals, even Hair and Nails, as Accidents, so has the Holy Scripture, as
to the matter of Divine Faith and Duty. There is more than is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, but not less.

. 31. They that in peevish opposition to others, tell us, That Christ made no
Law, and that the Gospel is not a Law, if they strive not about equivocal
Words, but mean that Christ is not a Legislator, nor has a Law and Covenant by
which he will govern and judge the World, do deny all our Christianity at once:
For Christ is not Christ, if he be not the King of the Church; nor is he King,
if he be not a Lawgiver; nor does he Rule and Judge, if he have no Law; which
is so far from Truth, that there is now no Law of God that we are under, but
what is truly the Law of Christ: For he is Lord of all, and Head over all
things to his Church; and all power in Heaven and Earth is given to him; and
John. 17. 2. and 13. 3. Matt. 28. 19. Romans 14. 9. John 5. 22. Ephesians. 1. 23.
the Father (alone, or merely as Creator, by the Law of Innocence) judges no
man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, as Redeemer and Universal
Administrator. The lapsed World, and the Law which they are under, as rational
Creatures, are now delivered up to the Redeemer, whose Law (as is aforesaid)
has two parts; 1. The Law of lapsed Nature, (commonly called the Moral Law.)
2. The Remedying Law of Faith; of which before.

. 32. But it is not to be supposed, that the very preceptive part of the Law of
Innocence is now in force to us, as it was to Adam: For it bound him to be
perfectly innocent in Act and Dispositions. But to a Man that has lost his
Innocence, and is already in Act and Habit sinful, it is not to be supposed,
that the Law says, Thou shall be innocent: For that were to command not only a
Moral, but a Physical absolute impossibility, as saying, Thou shall not have
sinned.

. 33. Obj. God changes not his Law when man changes his capacity: Therefore
the Law may be the same as in Innocence, both as to the Precept, Threatening,
and Promise: God may still say, 1. Sin not, or be innocent: 2. And if thou be
perfect, thou shall live: 3. Else thou shall die. And if man will make himself
incapable, it is his own change.

. 34. Answ. I spoke to this before, and now further add; God's Law is not to be
taken for a mere script of Words considered as standing in a Book not
obliterated, or as written on stone, and not broken, or cast away: The signum
materially may stand, and the Law be changed, and the signification cease: As a
repealed Statute may be still in the Books and Records: God's Law is signum
voluntatis divinae, debitum constituentis: Therefore if it signify not God's
Will as constituting what shall be due from us, and to us, it is no Law. And
that it may so signify his Will, and constitute Dueness ( Debitum or Ius) (or
as they use to say, oblige and give) the Subject must be in a natural capacity:
For where there is no Subject to be obliged, there is no Law. And where natural
capacity cease (as in a dead corpse) there is no Subject to be governed: And
the Law is Instrumentum regiminis. So that if you do not only say, This was
God's Law, but This is God's Law, you must mean, Thus he n^w obliges man, and
This he threatens now, and This he conditionally gives him. So that if it be
an unchanged Law to us, just as it was in Innocence, you must make this the
sense of precept, threat, and promise. 1. [ Preserve thine Innocence, and sin
not in act or habit, but be thou a pe^fect Obeyer of my Laws;] and this to one
that has sinned already, and is habitually inclined to more: q. d. [ Let not
that be which is, or quod factum est infectum fiat. 2. If thou sin, thou shall
be an Heir of Death.] When we are Sinners, and Heirs of Death already: 3. [ If
thou be, and continue sinless and perfect, thou shall not die but live.] When
we are Sinners and dead before. In which Case, all Law and Reason says, That
the Law does transire in sententiam, vel rem judicatam.

. 35. So that, as was before-said, the Covenant of Works is ceased; yea, the
Law or Precept binds not now, as it is a Law of Innocence made to innocent
Nature for its preservation, for Nature is not innocent: But the Law of Nature
is now the Law of lapsed redeemed Nature, and not of innocent Nature. And it
obliges us for the future to as much perfection of Duty, as we are naturally
capable of performing at that time, though viciously indisposed, it being only
natural disability, and not moral vicious unwillingness that hinders
Obligation: But though ( not to do all that we can) be peccare, yet it is not
to sin unto Death or Damnation, if he perform so much as is made by Christ the
Condition of life. In short; 1. Before man's sin, he was under the proper Law
and Covenant of Innocence, which made perfect personal Innocence the Condition
of life. 2. Immediately after sinning, before the Promise, man was not under
any Promise of life on condition of Innocence, nor yet under the Command of
being innocent, nor of seeking and hoping for life on that Condition: For upon
the Impossibility these ceased, without a Repeal, cessante capacitate subditi:
But man was then under no Covenant or premiant Law: But under, 1. The Command
of perfect Obedience for the future. 2. The Obligation to Punishment, not
peremptory, but due for every sin, unless it should be pardoned on due
satisfaction: These two Obligations man was under between the Fall and the
Promise.

3. But next, sinful condemned man, with his said Obligation, was delivered
into the hands of the Redeemer, who now continues the said Law of lapsed
Nature (making perfect Obedience de futuro due, or Death for sin in primo
instanti;) but adding the Remedying Law of Grace, giving Christ, Pardon and
Life to penitent Believers.

. 36. The Question, What Punishment is due to Venial sin, must be resolved from
the sense of the Law that obliges us: And the Question is not what Punishment
would have been due to the smallest sin, if the Covenant of Innocence had
continued; but what is due to it by the Law of Redeemed Nature and of Grace,
which is in force.

. 37. There is a threefold Dueness (or Desert) here considerable (without
distinguishing of which, many such Questions cannot be answered.) 1. A Dueness
of natural Congruity, without any Remedy which the Law gave, or took notice of:
So Death was due for every sin by the Law of Innocence (as I think).

2. A Dueness of natural Congruity with an affixed Remedy, which hinders the
guilt from being complete and fixed. And such is the Dueness of punishment to
the least real sin, by the Law of Redeemed Nature, to which the Law of Grace is
annexed, giving a Conditional Pardon to all the World for the Merits of the
Redeemer. As if God said, [ Thy sin in strict Justice is worthy of death, but I
will forgive thee, if thou repent and believe in Christ.] Here is so much
Dueness as needs pardon; but it is virtually, conditionally pardoned as soon
as committed; and so it is not a plenary Obligation to punishment.

3. A Remediless Dueness (or Guilt) by natural Congruity and peremptory
determination of the Lawgiver: And such was the Guilt of temporal death for sin
against the Law of Innocence, (at least the eating of the forbidden Fruit) (for
so far it is not forgiven); and the Guilt of perpetual misery to impenitent
Unbelievers and ungodly Ones, that so die.

. 38. By this it appears, that sins of mere Infirmity, consistent with
sincere Faith, Repentance, and Holiness, in the second sense deserve punishment
(not all alike, but) according to the degree of the Offense: But not in the
first sense, or the last.

. 39. Accordingly a great Question must be determined, Whether the sins of the
Faithful deserve any more than a temporal Chastisement? And whether they may
pray for pardon of perpetual punishment, or need any such pardon? Ans. The sins
of the Godly deserve everlasting punishment in the second Sense, or Degree of
Desert or Dueness; which is so far as to need a Savior and Pardon, and so as
they must pray for, and receive that pardon: But not in the first or third
Sense.

. 40. It is the Law of Christ, or of Grace, which is norma officit and judicii,
and by which we must be judged at the last day.

. 41. It is of great importance in the Controversies of Justification, to know
whether, or how far we shall be judged by the Law of Innocence, or whether only
by the Law of Grace.

He that is judged by the Law of Innocence, must be justified by personal,
perfect, perpetual Obedience (not by another) or be condemned: But he that is
judged by the Law of Grace, must be justified by Christ's Merits and Sacrifice
(or Righteousness) as purchasing his Grant of a Pardon and life, or Right to
Impunity and Glory, given by the Covenant of Grace conditionally, with his own
performance of that Condition.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Universality and Sufficiency of Grace.
. 1. IT was not only the Nature of the Elect, but of all Mankind, that Christ
assumed in his Incarnation.

. 2. It was not to Adam only, as the Father of the Elect, but as the common
Father of Mankind (lapsed) that God made the Promise, or conditional Law, or
Covenant of Grace, Genesis 3. 15. And so renewed it with Noah.

. 3. It was not the sin of the Elect only, but of all Mankind that were the
occasion of Christ's sufferings, (called by some, An assumed meritorious Cause,
because by his consent they were loco Causae meritoriae.)

. 4. It is not to the Elect only, but for all the World (as to the Tenor of it)
that Christ has purchased, and given a conditional Pardon of sin, and a
conditional Donation of Life eternal in the Covenant of Grace, both of the
first and second Edition: That is, the conditional Grant is Universal; Whoever
believes shall be saved: Though the Promulgation of it may have many stops.

. 5. It is not to the Elect only, but to All, that Christ has commanded his
Ministers to proclaim this Law or Covenant, and offer the Benefits, and require
their Consent, as far as the said Ministers are able.

. 6. It is not only to the Elect, but to all Mankind, that many Mercies
procured by pardoning and reconciling Grace are actually given, which were
forfeited (or not due) by reason of sin against the Law of Innocence.

. 7. These Mercies given to all Mankind after sin, and contrary to desert, are
not given by Gods Mercy alone, without respect to the Blood and Merits of
Christ: But his Blood and Merits are the Cause of them, as truly as of the
greater Mercies of the Elect. And they that say, That God does give all these
Mercies without a Savior's Merits, as the Cause, prepare the way for Infidels
to infer, That then he might have done so by the Mercies of the Elect.

. 8. All these actual Mercies given to mankind, contrary to Merit, are a degree
of Promulgation of the Law of Grace, telling all the World, That God does not
now rule and judge them merely by the Law of Innocence, but upon Terms of Mercy
(as is aforesaid)

. 9. Hereby it is signified to all the World, that God is as he proclaimed his
Name to Moses, Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and that will by no
means clear the guilty (by false judging:) and that the World have no cause to
despair of forgiveness, as if they were Though this be said before, a new Case
here causes me to repeat it.
under the remediless (or unremedied) Sentence of Damnation.

. 10. There are no People on Earth that are not obliged to the use of some
means appointed them to be used for their full Pardon and Salvation, else
Despair would be their Duty, and they should not be judged Sinners for
neglecting any such means. And were they not bound to do any thing for their
own Salvation, their Sin and Misery that neglect so to do, would be far less
than it is.

. 11. Therefore all People have some such Means, that have a tendency to
Recovery and Salvation afforded them by God.

. 12. They that say, That all the Mercies of the Non-elect, are no Mercies,
because through men's Sin, they end in their Misery, do perversely extenuate
Gods Mercies and Man's Sin, and teach Sinners falsely to plead in Judgment,
That they never abused, or sinned against Mercy, which God and their own
Consciences will easily confute.

. 13. In the Controversy, Whether Christ died for the Elect only, or for all
Mankind, it seems to me, that we little differ about the matter, but only
strive about ambiguous Words; even about one Syllable [ for.] If to die [ for]
signify [ for their sins,] under the reason of a Cause of Christ's Death, so
(as Paraeus does) we must all grant, that Christ died [ for] all.

2. If ( for) signify [ eorum loco] in their stead, so the Phrase has yet
great Ambiguity, and will require a great deal of distinguishing for its due
Explication: The various kinds and degrees of Benefits to which the Intention
is limited, do leave the word liable to various Senses. Christ died so far in
the stead of all Mankind, as to suffer Death (by his voluntary sponsion) as a
punishment deserved to themselves by sin, to free them all from it, on
condition of their suitable acceptance of his Grace. But if by [ for] be meant
( in the civil person of all men, as representing them) the Word is still among
Lawyers and all Writers, ambiguous. In a large sense he may be said to (
persenate or represent) another who does it but secundum quid, and not
simpliciter, in part aliqua, vel in tantum and ad hoc, and not in omni, vel ad
omne. And if any will so far stretch the Phrase, and because Christ suffered in
the common Nature of man, will say that he suffered in every man's Person; or
because he had a special purpose of saving his Elect, will thence say, He died
in the person of Peter, John, and every elect Sinner; I will not strive against
men's Phrases, if they will explain them soundly: But in strict Sense, as
Representing a man, or doing it in his Person, signifies, that Christ so died
(and merited) in several men's Persons, as that the Law or Lawgiver does take it
to have been in sensu civili, their own suffering, and doing, and meriting, or
to all intents, purposes, and uses, all one to them, as if they had so died and
merited themselves:] thus Christ neither died, nor obeyed for any man (as shall
be hereafter proved.)

But if by [ for] is meant [ for men's benefit or good] so it is yet ambiguous,
and liable to a threefold sense, viz. 1. Intentionally, 2. Aptitudinally, 3.
Eventually, for their good. And, 1. Intentionally, the Controversy either
speaks of Christ's Divine Nature and Will, or of the Humane: Concerning the
former, the Question is the same with that about Election, or Gods Decrees,
which is before spoken to, viz. How far God decreed good to all men by Christ's
Death. As to Christ's Humane Nature and Will, it will prove but an arrogant
unprofitable Question, Whether Christ as Man, kn^w the Names of every
individual person in the World, or of every one of the Elect, and had a
distinct Intent to save every one of those by Name that are saved: It Is better
let such Questions alone. 2. And [ Aptitudinally,] there is no question but
there is that in Christ's Sufferings and Obedience, Sacrifice and Merit, which
is in its moral Nature adapted to the Good and Salvation of all, and has that
sufficiency thereto, which would accomplish it, if it were duly accepted and
improved.

3. And as to the Event, we are agreed, viz. That some, and not all are saved
by Christ's Death and Merits; but that all have great Mercies, which are the
fruits of these, though many wilfully turn them to their Sin and Misery.

. 14. By all this it appears, that it is a most unfavoury thing for men
called Divines to dispute hotly, That Christ did or did not die and merit for
all, and bitterly revile their Adversaries in the Controversy, without ever
explaining that one ambiguous syllable [ FOR], or telling men what they mean.
And when it is well explained, we scarce know how to differ.

. 15. For few will deny but that Christ suffered, not immediately because Man
sinned (as if Suffering were due to him merely because we sinned) but because
he undertook so to do, and was obliged so to do by the Law of Mediation: But
remotely he suffered, not only because the Elect had sinned, but because all
Mankind had sinned. That is, The Conditional Pardon and Mercies given to all
Mankind, are such as Christ's Sacrifice and Merits must be congruously the
Causes of, as well as the actual Pardon of Believers.

. 16. But if the stress of the Controversy be laid on Christ's personating or
representing this man or that, by that time this (humane, invented, ambiguous,
unscriptural) Phrase is explained, either we shall be ^ound to be all of a
mind, or else some will run into an intolerable error about [ Christ's dying
and meriting in our civil person, and our dying and meriting by his natural
person]; or else they will dispute themselves into a Wood of Uncertainties, and
be lost about the sense of a word that cannot be sufficiently explained.

. 17. And they that will lay the stress of the Controversy on the Aptitude or
the Event, must be men of some singular Conceits, and not of the common
judgment of the Reformed Churches, the Lutherans, the Jesuits, or the
Dominicans, if they will disagree; for here we are commonly agreed.

. 18. But as far as I can discern, most Contenders lay the Controversy upon
the point of Divine Intention, Purpose or Decree: viz. Whether Christ as God
did purpose to justify and save all men by his death? or else, Whether he
purposed to do good to all men by his death? Which Purpose is nothing but God's
eternal Will or Decree. And why then do they make two Controversies of Election
and Redemption, when they mean the same in both? And here methinks there cannot
easily be a difference. For (in a few plain words) whatever good Christ gives
to any, that he from Eternity decreed to give them: But we are agreed that he
gives not Salvation to all men, and yet that he does give many and great
Mercies to all men, and especially, that he has given to the World (and not
only to the Elect) an express conditional Pardon of Sin, and conditional
Justification, Reconciliation* Adoption and Right to Glory: And sober Divines
had rather say that this universal conditional Deed of Gift, is the effect of
Christ's Sacrifice and Sufferings, than that God gives it to one part of Men
for Christ's death, and to the other part not for his death, but as without it.
And we are agreed, that Christ does give to some such special Grace, as shall
and does infallibly prevail with them to repent and believe, and also actual
Pardon, Justification, Adoption and Salvation.

. 19. Therefore in this sense Christ died for all, but not for all alike or
equally; that is, He intended good to all, but not an equal good with an equal
intention. Whatever Christ gives men in time as the fruit of his death, that
he decreed from Eternity to give them. And whatever he never gives them, he
never decreed to give them. What he gives them absolutely, he decreed to give
them absolutely. And what he gives them but conditionally, he decreed to give
them but conditionally. Therefore being agreed of the fact and event, we must
be agreed of the Intention or Decree, and what needs there more?

And by this time you may answer their Objection that say, Why not a common and
conditional Election, as well as a common and conditional Redemption?

Ans. Neither of them are conditional as to the Act of God and Christ: There is
no act of ours the Condition of God's decreeing ex part Dei, but only of the
thing decreed; nor of Christ's Death or Intent, but only of the benefit: That a
conditional Act of Grace, or Deed of Gift of Christ and Life to all Mankind in
common (in the tenor of it) should be made, was both decreed by God and
purchased by Christ. But, 1. This is not the whole of God's Decree or Christ's
Purchase and Intent. 2. And this is not to be called Election, as it signifies
a choosing of some from among the rest: Common Redemption and the Decree of
Common Grace, both antecede that which is properly called Election, in order of
Nature in esse objectivo; that is, God decrees to give Faith and Salvation
effectively to some of them that had common Grace.

. 20. The old Solution which Schoolmen and Protestants have acquiesced in, is,
That Christ died for All, as to the sufficiency of his death, but not as to the
efficiency of their salvation: Which is true, but must be thus explained:
Christ's Death and Obedience were not only sufficient but effectual as to their
first effects; that is, They effected that which is commonly called,
Satisfaction and Merit; and hence and from the Covenant of God they were also
effectual to procure the Covenant of Grace as of universal tenor, and therein a
free pardon of Sin and gift of Right to life-eternal to all, on condition of
due acceptance: This conditional Gift of Christ and Life is effected: And this
efficacy of the antecedent Mercies, must either be called part of the
sufficiency of Redemption, as to the consequent Mercies ( viz. Actual Pardon
and Salvation) or else an efficiency beyond the sufficiency, antecedent to the
said special efficiency. That Christ's Death has effectually procured the Act
of Oblivion or conditional Gift of Life to all Mankind; but it does not effect
the actual salvation of all: To the universal Grace it is both sufficient and
efficient; but to the special Grace and actual Salvation it is sufficient to
All (as after shall be opened) but not efficient, (which is by the Refuser's
fault and forfeiture.)

. 21. When we say, that either Christ's Death or Grace is sufficient to more
than it effects, the meaning is, that it has all things on its part which is
absolutely necessary to the effect, but that somewhat else is supposed
necessary to it, which is wanting.

. 22. As there is a common Grace actually extended to Mankind, (that is, common
Mercies contrary to their merit) so there Of Sufficient grace.
is such a thing as sufficient Grace in su^ genere, which is not effectual. So
that though it be disputable in what cases this is found, and what not, yet
that there is such a thing is past dispute.

. 23. By sufficient Grace here I mean such without which Man's Will cannot, and
with which it can perform the commanded Act toward which it is moved, when yet
it does not perform it; and this without any other degree of help than that
which procures not the act. So that it is not all that is useful to the
effect, nor all that is necessary to easy or prompt performance, or to the
infallible ascertaining of the act, nor to the melius esse only that we speak
of; but so much as is necessary ad esse, and efficient of the true posse: When
you can properly say that a Man can do this, you say that he has all that is
of necessity to the doing of it.

. 24. Iansenius himself is so far from denying this Grace called Sufficient,
that he asserteth that by this, improved by free will, (without such special
Grace, as of it self, gives the Act as well as the Power) the good Angels
stood when the bad ones fell, and Adam stood till the time of his Fall: And so
that such a thing there has been.

. 25. And seeing God is still the same, and man's will the same in its natural
faculties, and God seems to us to delight in Constancy, it is very improbably
imagined, that God did for so short a time Rule Angels and Men by such a Grace,
as he would never after make use of in the World; and that Man's free will did
for so short a time do its Duty by that Sufficient Grace, and never after do
any one act by the like Grace, in any one to the World's end.

. 26. It Is true, that such Grace will not serve our turn to do that now in our
lapsed state, which Adam could have done in Innocence (no, nor will all our
effectual Grace yet reach it) that is, to have continued sinless: But it is
incredible, that no common Grace of God now is as sufficient to the performance
of the least good act (which is good but secundum quid) as Adam's was to the
fulfilling of all God's Law; and that the best unregenerate man is not able to
do any better than he does, or forbear some Evil that he does, as well as Adam
to have forborne all.

. 27. At least, to the Regenerate such a Grace must be acknowledged: For though
of the rest Iansenius will say, They do no good, because they love not God and
goodness (and on the like reasons others will say, That the Regenerate do no
good, because all has sinful mixture or imperfection); yet he will not say so
of the godly: And must we believe that no godly man can do any more good than
he does? and so, That he has no meerlysufficient Grace to any one act in all
his life?

. 28. The Controversy about sufficient Grace is the same in the true meaning
of it with that of the Power of Man's Free Will. For when by sufficient Grace we
mean nothing but the enabling a Man to the act, or giving him Power to do it,
the stress of the Question is, Whether Man has truly any Power to do more than
he does? For if he have such a Power, Grace has given it him, if it be for a
Work that Grace is needful to. So that indeed were it not for Custom and
Expectation, this Question should be handled under that of the Power and
Liberty of Man's Will.

. 29. No man has at the present Grace sufficient for his Salvation, if he have
longer time to live: Because the Grace or help of the present hour is not
sufficient for the next, but there must be continual Supplies from God;
supposing that we distinguish of Grace by the distinct numerical acts and hours
for and in which we need it: But if you distinguish of Grace by the species of
Acts for which it is needful, and not by the numerical acts, then it may be
truly said, that the same Grace ( in specie) which a Believer has to day, may
be sufficient to his Salvation, or to his life's end.

. 30. But if you speak de gradu, that Grace may be sufficient to one thing,
which is not sufficient to another: And so, 1. An Infidel may have Grace
sufficient to forbear some Sin, or avoid some Temptation, or use some means
that tends to Faith and Repentance, who has not Grace sufficient to believe
and repent unto Salvation. 2. A man may have Grace sufficient to enable him to
believe and repent unto Justification, and yet not have at that instant Grace
sufficient to enable him to love God above all as God, with a fixed habitual
Love, and to live an holy life (for the Spirit and Sanctification are promised
on condition of Faith and Repentance). 3. A sanctified man that is yet but
weak, may have Grace sufficient to live to God a holy life at present, and yet
not have Grace sufficient for greater trials of Duty and Temptation: And
therefore Augustine and all his Followers still say, That the Grace of
Perseverance is a Gift over and above the Grace of mere Sanctification in the
weakest degree.

. 31. By all this it is evident, that he that disputes of the sufficiency of
Grace, must first distinctly tell us,

1. Whether he mean extrinseck Grace, or intrinseck. 2. If extrinseck, Whether
he mean it comprehensively of all extrinseck Grace together, or only of some
particular part of sort. 3. If the latter, Whether he speak of the sufficiency
of Christ's Death and Righteousness, Sacrifice, Merit, Intercession, etc. or of
the sufficiency of the Gospel Covenant or Promise; or of the sufficiency of
Preaching, Praying, and other means; or of the Scripture-Records, etc. 4. If he
speak of intrinseck Grace, Whether the Question be of Sufficiency ex part Dei
agentis, (which none must question); or ex part effecti. 5. If the latter,
What is the effect whose sufficiency he questioneth? 1. Is it a Grace or Power
to do some more common good, use some means, forbear some evil, as the
Unregenerate may do? 2. Or is it a Power truly to repent and believe? 3. Or to
love God habitually, and live holily? 4. Or to overcome greater Temptations,
and persevere? 6. And he must tell you whether he speak, 1. De specie, whether
the Grace or Power sufficient to this sort of Acts or Duty be sufficient to
another, or to all. 2. Or de gradu, Whether this degree be sufficient against a
greater degree or sort of Temptation. 3. Or as men use to distinguish Grace and
Help by numerical Acts and Hours, Whether the Grace of this Hour and Act be
sufficient for the next, or for all? The sense of all these Questions is
distinct. 7. But his last and greatest difficulty will be, to tell you truly
and plainly what is that Grace which is the subject of his Question, of its
sufficiency in the general nature of it, and as related to the thing which it
is called sufficient to.
. 32. For, by Grace he means, 1. Either somewhat ex part Dei agentis, 2. Or
ex part effecti, or, 3. Quid medium; 1. Grace, as it is in God the Agent; 2.
Or as it is in Man the Recipient; 3. Or as it is somewhat between both.

. 33. I. Grace, as it is in God, is nothing but his Essence, not as Essence,
but as an essential Power, Intellect and Will denominated by Connotation from
the effect: This is commonly agreed on: God does operate per essentiam, and not
by Accidents.

. 34. II. If they mean any mediate thing between God and the Effect, either
they speak of the first effect or a second, and so on: If they speak but of
secondary effects, and the meaning be only whether one effect be a sufficient
Cause for another, they mean either an outward or an inward Grace or Effect. If
an outward, then the sense of the Question is, Whether some other Work of God
be sufficient to move the Will of Man? And then it must be told what other Work
you mean: Whether an Angel, or the Planets, or the Word or Preacher, or an
outward Mercy or Affliction, or what it is? But if you speak of the very first
effect, then the fancy is almost proper to Aureolus among the Schoolmen, to
think that there is something from God antecedent to the Creature and Motion,
which may be called Action or Energy, or Efflux, which is neither the Creator
nor a Creature, neither Cause substantial nor Effect, but Causation: As if some
Beam of Virtue or Force went from God to produce every Creature and Motion,
which is neither God, nor the Creature, or Motion. But this is commonly and
justly rejected, as feigning a third sort of Entity between God and the
Creature, which it passes the wit of Man to conceive of what it should be.

And if God do immediately per essentiam, cause that middle Entity, or Action,
or Force, which he says is no Creature, why may he not as well immediately per
essentiam, cause the Creature and motion it self? This therefore cannot be the
thing meant by Grace in this Question.

To question the sufficiency of God's Essence is intolerable: To question the
sufficiency of a mediate divine Efflux or Action, which is between God and the
Creature and Effect, is to dispute in your Dream of a Chimera, an unproved, and
a disproved, and commonly-denied Entity. To dispute of the sufficiency of
Angels, Scripture, Sermons, etc. to work Grace, is not the thing commonly
intended in this Controversy of Grace: Each several sort of means may be
sufficient in its own kind and to its own use; but no one of them is sufficient
to the effect. But if you will put the Question as of All together, it must be
so explained.

. 35. III. The Grace therefore meant in this Question can be no other than
either some effect on the Soul, as tending to a further effect, or the
aforesaid comprehension of necessary extrinseck means. If the former be meant
(as it is by almost all Schoolmen and Disputers of this Case) then, 1. It must
be enquired, Whether such a thing be? and, 2. What it is if it be?

. 36. 1. Bradwardine, and some that go his way, do deny the being of any such
thing as we now dispute of; and say, That God's essential will, as a will, is
the immediate Efficient, and the Act of Man is the Effect, ( e. g. Faith,) and
because God wills that Act, it does immediately exist, as the World did, by
his creating will: And so here is no place for the Dispute of Sufficient Grace:
For God's Will is certainly sufficient to cause what he will cause: And Man's
Act either is existent or not: And there is no Grace antecedent to it, to be
called insufficient, unless you will vainly say, that Gods essential Will is
sufficient to nothing but what he preduceth, which is a Dispute unfit for sober
men.

. 37. 2. But because the contrary Opinion is far more common, that there is an
inward Grace ( e. g. to believe or consent) antecedent to our Act, whose
sufficiency is questioned, it poseth the Wits of all the Schoolmen (much more
is it above many Contenders that never so much as studied it) to say, what it
is. The Notions of Alvarez (who calls it motus) and of Vasquez, and others I
have elsewhere considered, and here pass by: And I have showed, that I take it
to be so far past man's reach, as to be unfit for hot Contention. But so far as
we may conceive of it, it must be in this twofold notion: 1. As it is some
Divine Impress on the Soul, which is Analogus to the Vis impressa received from
the Mover in the Patient in corporal Motion. 2. That this Impression received,
does in primo instant^, put the Faculty into such an immediate Ability to the
Act, or such a state of Disposedness to the Act, as may be called a Moral Power
(the natural Faculty being supposed) and puts the Will in such a state as to
the act of Consent, as that it can do it, but is not necessitated to it, nor
actually determined, but can forbear. And this is called sufficient Grace. 3.
And in the next instant when the Will does consent, God and Man are both Causes
or Agents, and the Grace is effectual by both Causes, God the first, and Man
the second.

. 38. 2. The Pelagians and some others seem to think that God does not operate
immediately on man's Soul, as to proximity of Causation, but immediately on
superior Causes and Means (as Angels, Word, Objects, etc.) and that when all
means are duly ordered, man may be said to be able in his mere natural powers
for the Act, because those means are now Grace sufficient to excute it. And
that when one Means of an hundred is wanting, it is insufficient Grace.

. 39. We all confess, that God works by means, and we cannot name an Act on
us, which he always or ordinarily does without any means, or second Cause. And
we acknowledge that there are gracious means, and that ordinarily these must
have a sufficiency in their kind: But withal we must say, that God works
immediately as to proximity of Causation, when he works not so immediately as
without second Causes: And that whether by means, or without means (as he
pleases) there must be such a Disposition communicated to a depraved,
undisposed Soul, as shall be a moral power, and put it into an immediate
capacity to consent (or act): And to dispute the sufficiency of the means, is
one thing, and to dispute the sufficiency of this inward Disposition or Power,
is another. And this must be the question.

. 40. The common disputed question is, Whether all men have Grace sufficient to
believe? which must be negatively answered; They have not. Those that never
heard the Gospel, have not.

. 41. But, 2. have all that hear the Gospel sufficient Grace to believe?

Ans. No: many of them are hardened by former sinning, so as to be set at a
greater distance and enmity, than many Heathens.

. 42. But, 3ly. All the World has Grace (or merciful Help) sufficient to
enable them to do less evil, and more good than they do, and to use some means
better than they do, which tend to further Grace. And they that do not this,
are justly denied further Help.

. 43. 4. But the sticking difficulty is, Whether any men in the World have
Grace sufficient to repent and believe savingly, who do not?

To which I answer, 1. The Question is of less moment than it is commonly made
to be; seeing those are unexcusable who use not that Grace which was sufficient
to their foresaid use of means, and less resistance to God's Grace: 2. But
certainly to answer the question negatively or affirmatively, I cannot; as not
knowing any more of Gods working on men's Souls, than he himself has told us
of. 3. But if we may conjecture upon Probabilities, it seems to me most
likely, that there is such a sufficient Grace or Power to repent and believe
savingly in some that use it not, but perish. For, 1. if Angels had, and used
such a sort of Grace: 2. And if Alam had such a sort of Grace, and used it a
while: 3. And if unregenerate men have such a grace for lower Acts, which tend
to Faith: 4. And if the Faithful have such a grace to do more good, and less
evil than they do: 5. It seems very improbable, that only to the fifth
Instance (to repent and believe) none in the World should have such a
sufficient grace.

. 44. And though Iansenius seem very singular in denying that there is now any
such sufficient grace of Christ in the World, which is not effectual either to
believe, or to do any other good; that is, That Christ's grace enableth no man
to do any more good than he does; yet indeed it is most in two ambiguous Words,
that Iansenius differs from others, (though many unskilful Disputants suppose
it to be much more material a difference) viz. 1. In one Syllable [GOOD.] For
he will call nothing good in man's Actions, but Holy Love and its Effects; and
so says, That no unsanctified Man does good, and therefore has not Grace
sufficient to do it. But moral [ Good] is taken in three Senses (or Degrees) 1.
Good, secundum quid, in a degree not predominant: See of this my Discourse of
Saving Faith.
And so Infidels and ungodly Christians have some good. 2. Good, secundum quid,
vel imperfectum, but in a degree predominant. And so the Godly do good, though
mixed with evil. 3. Good in perfection and unmixt with evil: and so none do good
till they are perfected in Glory. (To say nothing of [ essential simple Good
per se, and independent;] for so none is good but God only.) And all this is
the Effect of Grace.

. 45. 2. But, says Ian senius, there is some grace which is not grati^
Christi, the grace of Christ; and such is all that comes from mere fear
without Love, which is a kind of providential preparatory grace, but not the
grace of Christ. Ans. It is not that eminent and special grace of Christ: But
to think that it befalls men without Christ's procurement, and is not a
commoner sort of Christ's grace, when all Power in Heaven and Earth is put into
his Hand, and he is made Head over all things to the Church, is below a
Christian Divine to imagine* and too injurious to Christ. But by all this it
appears, that even Iansenius differs from others more about the Names of [
Good] and [ Christ's Graces] than about the Matter.

CHAP. XIV. Of Man's Power and Free Will since the Fall.
. 1. SO much is said, Chap. 9. of Man's natural Power and Free Will, and so much
now, Chap. 13. of grace, and the Power given by it, as may allow me to be short
in what is here to be added.

. 2. All that natural Power and Liberty which was essential to the Will,
remains in it since the Fall: For Man is of* the same Species.

. 3. The Will is still a self-determining Principle, supposing, 1. God's
necessary Influx, as he is the first Cause of Nature, 2. And the Being and
convenient Position of Objects, 3. And the Perception of the Intellect, 4. And
the concourse of necessary concomitant second Causes.

. 4. The three Faculties of man's Soul are all vitiated by sin. 1. The vital
active Power is so far dead to God and Holiness, as to need the cure of
quickening, and strengthening, and exciting Grace. 2. The Intellect is so far
blinded, as to need the cure of illuminating grace. 3. And the Will is so far
turned by Enmity from God, to the inordinate Love of carnal self-interest and
Creatures, as to need the cure of converting, sanctifying Grace.

. 5. Grace heals the Will of this Enmity and vicious perverseness, so far as
it prevails; which is, 1. common Grace enableth it to common good, and
prepares it for better. 2. Special Grace causes it actually and habitually to
will and love special Good; that is, God as God, and the Creature for God, and
Holiness as his Image. 3. Perfecter Grace brings up the Will to perfecter
holy Acts and Habits.

. 6. Nature it self is not in lapsed man, divested of all moral or Divine
Principles, Abilities, and Inclinations: In the Intellect there are commen
Notices of a Deity; that is, That there is one God who is infinitely powerful,
wise, and good: And in the Will there are some Inclinations still to good as
good, and therefore to God as far as he is truly conceived of as good; and so
far as that conception is not conquered by a cross Conception of some Enmity:
And so of other Good.

. 7. Nature and common Grace may cause a man to go as far in Love and Religion,
as those whom we call the highest Hypocrites, or almost-Christians may do
(which our practical Preachers do frequently tell the People at large in Books
and Sermons.

. 8. Such may have a common sort of Faith in Christ (even formerly to the
working of Miracles), and of Repentance, and Reformation, and of good Desires,
and love to goodness and good Men; yea, to God himself.

. 9. For men are not so corrupt by Nature (much less under the Effects of
common grace) as to hate all goodness, or to hate all that is in God: They may
love God as he is the Almighty Creator, Preserver, and Natural-Orderer of the
World, and the Cause of its Being, Motion, Beauty, Harmony, and all natural
Good: And they may love him as he is the Giver of life* and all natural
Blessings to themselves, and as he is the Preserver of them, and their only
Security and Help in Danger, and not only as his Blessings gratify their
Senses, but as all their Hope of everlasting Happiness is in his Power and
Love: They may love him as he does this good to others also, and is the common
Benefactor to the World, without whom it could not subsist a moment. And they
may love him as he makes such Laws as preserve their lives, and Properties,
and Rights, from Fraud and Violence, and by making other Men conscionable just,
and charitable to all, do both gratify themselves, and tend to the common
Order, Peace, and Welfare of Societies, and of Mankind.

. 10. I am not able to confute or deny what Adrian (afterward Pope) has
written (in his Quodlibets) That an unsanctified Man (not in a state of
Salvation) may so far love God, even above himself, as to consent rather to
die, and be annihilated, than (were it possible) God should be annihilated, or
not be God. For a Heathen might consent to die for his Country: And he is a
B^ast and no Man, that would not rather be annihilated, than all the World,
yea, or all the Kingdom, or all the City should be annihilated, or than the Sun
should cease to be, or to shine. And he that knows that if there were no God,
there could be no World, no Being, Motion, Knowledge, Goodness, or Felicity in
the World; besides, that which is worse, the Cessation of the Infinite Good
himself; must be yet more unmanly, if he would not rather be annihilated alone
(if per impossible, you suppose he could live alone) than all this greater Evil
should come to pass. He that tells men, that they shall be saved, if they would
rather be annihilated, than that there should be no God, does make them a
promise which God has not made.

. 11. But (as the same Author observes) that which the unholy cannot do, is,
to love God as God, as the ultimate Object, and most amiable Good to be known,
and by Love and Holiness enjoyed, and pleased by a holy Soul; and this above
all sensual terrene Delights, and to love him as the holy Ruler of the World,
who forbids all sinful sensuality, and all men's inordinate Conceits,
Desires, Delights, and Practices, and requires holiness and purity of Mind,
and Life, and Sobriety, and Temperance, and Self-denial in all that will be
saved. And as he is a just Judge who will execute all these Laws, and condemn
the ungodly to endlers Misery. They love not God, as he is the holy Go^^^^our,
and righteous Judge of men, that would restrain them from their sinful Wills
and Pleasures, and damn them if they will not be holy. And consequently they
love not his Laws, and other means by which this is to be done: Because loving
the pleasure of their Lusts, and being averse to things spiritual, high and
holy, they love not that holiness and rectitude in themselves, which God
commands, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.

. 12. Though God, as the Fountain of Nature, continue the natural power and
liberty of the Will, yet its moral Impotency, Pravity, or ill Disposition, by
which it is averse to Holiness, and prone to Sensuality, must be cured by
Grace; where common Grace and special, cause common and special Effects in the
Cure.

. 13. The moral Power given by Grace, consisting in the right Disposition of
the Will, is not of the same kind with the Natural Power or Faculty: And the
Words [ CAN] and [ CANNOT] used of both sorts, have not the same signification,
but are equivocal; otherwise Sin and Grace should change man's Species. Those
Disputants therefore that confound them for the sounds sake, deceive the
Auditors.

. 14. We must say then, That quoad vires, vel potentiam naturalem, every man
can believe, who has the use of Reason, Objects revealed, and extrinseck
necessary Causes; that is, He wants not the natural Faculty or Power, nor
needs another natural Faculty, but only the Excitation, Illumination, and
right Disposition of that which he has: But as to the said right Disposition,
or moral Power, no one can truly repent and believe without that Grace which
must so dispose him: Common Grace must dispose him to a common Faith, and
special Grace to a saving Faith.

. 15. It is more proper to say, That an Unbeliever, and unholy Sinner will not
repent and believe, than that he cannot; though that also may be truly said, if
well explained. But the meaning is not, that he cannot, though he sincerely
would: Nor yet that he cannot be willing, for want of the natural Power of
willing: But, 1. That he has a Logical, and, 2. A moral Impotency; that is, an
Indisposition; he wants both Disposition, Habit, and Act, but not the Faculty.

. 16. It is an abusive miscarriage of those Disputants, who in the Words [ CAN]
and [ CANNOT] use to confound not only, as aforesaid, natural and moral Power,
but even Logical also, which is neither, and signifies no more but that in
ordine probandi; such Premises being put, the Conclusion Can or Cannot follow:
For so it may be truly said, That no man can do, speak, or think any other than
he does; and nothing can ever come to pass, but what does come to pass; even
from Gods foreknowledge this will follow: For seeing nothing ever will be
otherwise than God foreknoweth it will be, a Disputant will say, It can be no
otherwise; but he must only mean that posita praescientia divina, the
Conclusion cannot be true, that the Event will be otherwise: when yet as to the
nature of Causation, we must say, sensu physico and morali, that it Can be
otherwise oft-times, though it will not be otherwise.

. 17. These things considered, it appears that we are commonly agreed as
follows: 1. That all Men have natural Powers and Free Will to good, even
spiritual good; that is, Whenever such good is chosen or willed, it is done by
the natural Power or Faculty; and when it is not willed, it is not for want of
a natural Faculty, but its due Disposition.

. 18. 2ly. That as to Civil or Law-power and Liberty, all men have much more
than Liberty granted them by God to repent and believe. For Helps and a Command
are more than Leave or Liberty: But Liberty from the Penalty for sin, belongs
only to the pardoned.

. 19. 3ly. That as to Ethical Power and Liberty, which lies in a right
Disposition of man's Faculties, every man has it so far as Grace has
prevailed, and wrought it in him, and none any further.

. 20. Or as Liberty is denominated from the Evil which we are free from, 1. All
men's wills are free from being constrained to sin, 1 By natural inclination of
the faculties themselves; 2. Or by the senses; 3. Or by Objects; 4. Or by Men;
5. Or by Devils; 6. Or by God: Because the rest cannot and God will not; no,
not physically premove and predetermine it thereto.

. 21. 2. The wills of all men are free from any Commands to Sin: that is, God
cannot command it (for else it were no Sin) and if men command it, their
Commands are null, and lay no obligation on the will to obey them.

. 22. 3. We are free from sinful Dispositions so far as Grace freeth us, and no
further: Therefore by common Grace men have common Liberty, and by special
Grace saving Liberty; but none perfect Liberty here; and no unsanctified man
has saving Liberty of Will: that is, such by which he is duly disposed to such
acts as have a flat Promise of Salvation: And where now does our difference
remain?

. 23. Obj. The difference is, Whether a bad man can change his own will?

Ans. Your [ can] means the natural Power, or the due disposition: As to the
first, he can, that is, he has those faculties which want not natural Power to
act better: But as to the latter, he cannot without Grace, that is, through
indisposition he will not.

. 24. Q. But is not Grace the only cause of the Change?

Ans. Grace only causes the first Impress on the Soul, which moves it to act;
but the Soul (or will) it self is a Cause of the Act, else it were not Man but
GOD that does repent, believe, obey, etc.

. 25. Q. But is it Grace or Free Will that is the chief Cause?

Ans. Grace no doubt: Which is commonly acknowledged by the several Parties.

. 26. The very marrow then of all the question about the Power and Liberty of
the Will, is that so often before mentioned, Whether Man's Will be made of GOD
such a self-determining Power, as can truly do any more good than it does, or
forbear more evil, without any more Grace from God, than that which it has
while it does no more: And whether ever the Will can and do make a various use
of the same degree of Divine Assistance: And this as is said, is confessed of
the Angel's Case and Adam's: For if Adam had not Power to have stood when he
fell, by the same Grace that was given him, but fell because God withdrew or
withheld such necessary Grace without which he could do no other than he did,
we may then lay by these Controversies, and think how to answer Infidels.

. 27. Those persons that make others odious by their revilings, for holding
Free Will, or denying Free Will, without telling men what Freedom it is that
they mean ( natural, ethical, legal or logical, Freedom from Coaction,
necessitating Premotion, natural Inclination, or vi^ious Disposition, etc.)
should be rebuked by the Lovers of Truth and Peace, as the Peace-breakers of
the Church and World, that presume in their proud ignorance to reproach others
for that which they understand not.

. 28. They that say, That the Liberty of the Will as natural is not violated,
but by Coaction, and that Coaction, is nothing but making a man will against
his Will in the same respect and act, and so that to will and to will freely is
all one, and that to will by Coaction is a contradiction, viz. to will and nil
the same, and that God predetermineth all men's wills to all sinful habits and
acts in specie as circumstantiated, by immediate, necessitating or unresistible
premotion, and yet takes not away their Liberty, because he makes them will
and not nil the sin. These do but play with the name of Free Will, and are
confuted as aforesaid from the instance of Adam, and from the scope of
Scripture, and do subvert the Foundations of Christianity. To will is the
proper act of my will; and if he that moves me by prime physical efficiency to
will the circumstantiated act of Sin, deprive me not of my Liberty, because it
is willing that he makes me do, then if Men or Devils had Power to make me
will Sin, as I cause my Pen to write, or the Fire to burn this or that, it
would be no loss of Liberty. But of this more largely elsewhere.

CHAP. XV. Of Effectual Grace, and how God gives it.
. 1. AS I said before about Sufficient Grace, so here about Effectual; the
first thing to be done by Disputers, is, to agree what that is which they here
call [ Grace] as the Subject of the Question. And as I there showed, 1. It
cannot or must not be God's essential Will or Power, for that is simple and
immutable, and not in it self (save relatively) distinguishable into sufficient
and effectual. 2. An Efflux or vis, which is neither God nor the Effect, there
is none, or none proveable. 3. It is not Faith it self that is meant here by
Grace, for it is the Grace that effects Faith; and it were absurd to ask what
Faith is effectual to make or cause it self: This is true both of the Act and
Habit. The meaning is not, what Habit of Faith is effectual to the Act, nor
what Act to the Habit or it self, but what Grace of God is effectual to cause
both Act and Habit. 4. Therefore there is nothing left to be meant by Grace,
but the two things before mentioned, viz. 1. The gracious Means or second
Causes appointed by God to cause our Faith. 2. The first moving Impress on the
Soul, as it is antecedent to Act and Habit, (supposing that such there is, Some
say, that God's mere will causes man's act, as willing it, without any other
Influx or Impress on Man's Will, save our Act it self effected: But though it
be only God's essential will, which is the first Cause, yet the thing received
by us from God seems to be a certain Impress, Impulse, or vis, or Disposition
to act in order of Nature, before the act it self, which Impress sometime is
made uneffectual by a prevalent Indisposition or Resistance of the Will.
though some deny that there is any such thing.)

. 2. And for the first, all means will be uneffectual without God's inward
Operation by his Spirit: He must work on the Speaker and on the Hearer, to make
means effectual, as is agreed on. But whether as God works in Naturals
according to the aptitude of natural second Causes, so he work Faith and other
Graces by a settled proportion of Concourse, agreeable to the Aptitude of
gracious second Causes (or Means of Grace) is a Question too hard to be boldly
and peremptorily determined by us that are in so much darkness.

. 3. But it seems to us, that God would not have made it so great a part of
his Government to establish a Course of Means, if he did not intend to work
ordinarily by them, and according to their fitness. Christ is the chief Means,
and instituteth the rest; Scripture, Ministers, Example, good Company, merciful
Providence, Afflictions, Meditation, Books, Prayer, Sacraments, etc. are all
appointed for such effects: And if God would ordinarily work immediately
without means, what need all these? This teaches Infidels to say, that he may
do it without Christ. The Spirit first indicted the Word (as we cut a Seal to be
the instrument of Impression) and then by that word does work on Souls.

. 4. But if God did tie himself not only ordinarily, but always to apt means,
no mortal could say what means is sufficient, and what is insufficient, and
what is more than sufficient, even necessarily efficacious: For the means, 1.
are very many and more than we can take notice of; and if one be wanting, it
may render the rest insufficient or uneffectual, how excellent soever in
themselves. 2. And that means is fitted to one Hearer that is not fitted to
another: All have not the same temptations, hindrances, prejudices, objections,
weaknesses, nor obstinacy: And God only knows when means are adequately
fitted to the desired effect upon men's Souls.

. 5. And though many of the means operate ex part sui, necessarily, yet so do
not all: For Preachers and Instructers are free Agents, and so it must be other
effectual means that must first move them to do their Duty for a Sinner's good:
Which who can judge of?

. 6. But God is the Arbitrary Absolute Lord of all means, and therefore he can
change and dispose of them as he pleases, and yet work by them. So that the
Effect is nevertheless from God's free or arbitrary Volition, though he never
went beyond the aptitude of means: When even a silly man can turn the natural
course of Water and Wind to move his Mill or Sails at his pleasure, without any
alteration of their natures: A Fisher can use his Bait as may serve his end;
and a Physician can vary his Medicines to cure the Disease without changing
their nature, or curing without them.

. 7. But there is no question but God can work without means, and Intellectual
Souls being so near to the first Cause, it is utterly uncertain to us, whether
in Works of Grace God have not a double operation on the Soul, one by his
appointed means, and another by immediate Influx Though before I showed that
this seemed not necessary to all acts of Man, and will not overthrow Durand.
; and if it be so, how these concur to one and the same effect, and also how
God does immediately move Souls, are all past Man's reach, and should be
acknowledged above our Disputes.

. 8. II. God has more inward operations on Man's Soul than one or two (whether
with means or without) to bring us to Faith and Repentance: The mind must be
enlightened, the dull faculties must be excited, especially Conscience and
Will, and the Will must be touched with the gust of Divine Love to breed a holy
Complacency in good, and many Impediments must be removed, some by outward acts
of Providence, and some by inward Grace. And where Impediments are not removed,
no doubt but there needs more of the other Acts of Grace, to bring such a
Soul to Faith and Repentance, than in one where there is less resistance.

. 9. And seeing that Recipitur ad modum recipientis, and the disposition of the
Recipient has so great a hand as common Experience tells us in almost all
the Changes in the World, (what wonderful variety of Effects does the same
Action of the Sun produce throughout the World, by the diversity of receptive
dispositions)? Therefore no mortal man can say when the efficacy or success of
Divine Grace is more to be ascribed to the Preparatory Disposition of the
Recipient by a former act of Grace, and when more to the present moving Influx?
nor what proportion these always bear as comparable. And what man dare say
that he can search out the ways of God?

. 10. When we know so little of the secret Energies of natural Principles, nor
how God produces Animals in the Womb, nor how he causes our Food to nourish
us, nor how any of our Senses do their Office, nor how our Souls do use the
Corporeal Spirits, etc. And when Christ has told us, That the Wind blows
where it lists, and we hear the sound of it, but know not whence it comes,
and whither it goes; and so is he that is born of the Spirit, Ioh. 3. 8.
Should not this, with the experience and consciousness of our Ignorance,
suffice to keep us from bitter Contendings about that which is certainly beyond
our reach, and from presumptuous boldness with the unsearchable things of God?

. 11. Whether you will with Bradwardine and many others say, That it is God's
mere Volition that effects all things ad extra; or whether you will say with
the most, That it is not his Will alone, but his Will as operating by his
executive Power, the meaning seems to be the same, and the difference to be
but notional, as is aforesaid: For they that speak in the first manner, mean,
That it is not God's Will as in it self immanently considered, but his will as
going forth to produce an effect; which emanation or exertion is, from the
effect, called by those that speak in the second manner, God's Executive Power.

. 12. The prime Reason of the Effect, is God's Wisdom, Will, and Power as the
Cause: And so the prime reason why Means and Grace become effectual whenever
they are effectual, must be from God the prime Cause.

. 13. The first Impress on the Soul moving it toward the Act ( e. g. Faith) is
the first Grace internal ( sub ratione effecti): And this God himself works
on man as on a mere Patient; though not antecedently to all former acts of Man,
or all preparative dispositions, (usually) yet antecedent to that Act of Man to
which it moves: So that as to this, 1. Man is passive, 2. and the Divine
Operation (or the powerful Will of God) is not only sufficient but effectual;
for that Impress or Motus is effected.

. 14. Though God being a Spirit moves not by such Contact as Bodies do on each
other, yet must we conceive of his motion, and the motion of all Spirits on
Bodies, as analogous to corporeal Contact, and as a motion by Efflux and
eminent Contact of Virtue and Essence, according to the more excellent nature
and operation of Spirits; or else we cannot conceive positively of them.

. 15. It is already proved, that God uses various degrees of Impress or Motion
on Souls; of which some do by their proper power or degree so ascertain the
effect, that the Argument is always good as a causa, [where-ever God does so
move, there the Effect (that is the Act, e. g. Faith or Consent) follows: And
this Grace is effectual ex propria vi vel virtute: But that God sometime
operateth by a less Impress or Motion, which does not from its own force infer
the effect, but so far disposes the Mind or Will to the Act, that the man can
do it without any more grace; which is it that is called Sufficient Grace, as
aforesaid.

. 16. It is a thing not to be believed, that this latter degree of Divine
motion is never eventually effectual to the Act: Seeing, 1. it is granted, that
there is such a Power in Man's Will as c^n act in some cases by that degree of
Grace called Sufficient: And frustra fit potentia quae nunquam reducitur in
actum. 2. And it is granted, that the Angels and Adam did act by such help.
Therefore as to acts preparatory before special Faith, few do affirm that they
are all done by such Grace as is necessarily effectual ex propria vi alone, but
that sufficient Grace leaves them often to Man's Will.

. 17. Therefore all that remains, is to resolve what is the reason of the
certain effect when we believe? To which I say, 1. It is ever an effect of two
Causes (at least) God's motion and man's faculty, and so both must be said to
be the Cause of the effect. 2. But man's will is no Cause (save a recipient
Cause) of God's Part or Impress. 3. God sometimes, at least, makes so powerful
an Impress, as does necessarily determine man's will, by a Necessity consistent
with his Liberty. 4. It cannot be proved by any man, that no man believes by
that sufficient Motion, which does not necessarily determine his will; seeing
many preparatory acts are done by such a motion. And it is probable that it is
often so. 5. But the certainty of this, or when and how often it is so, no man can
know.

. 18. But by which degree of Grace soever the effect be produced, still God's
Will is the chief cause of it; which can procure the effect infallibly, when it
does not necessitate: Yea, and his premotion or impress called Sufficient, is
incomparably more the cause than Man's Concourse is; though God leave some part
of the Causation to man's Free Will.

. 19. But when the Effect does not follow, that is, when men believe not, it is
man's will by omission and resistance, that is the chief cause, and culpable,
and not God's omission or non-determination.

. 20. The same degree of divine Impress or Motion, which prevails with a Soul
predisposed by common Grace, is not enough to prevail with some others that are
ill or indisposed: Though God's Absolute Will and Answerable Operation would
prevail with any, how bad soever.

CHAP. XVI. Of the State of Heathens and others, that have not the Gospel.
. 1. THE opening of the several Laws or Covenants of God before, has taken up
most that is necessary to be said about this point: The question, Whether any
but Christians are saved, is agitated on both sides by so much the sharper
Censures, by how much the nearer it seems to concern the Fundamentals of
Religion.

. 2. On one side some say, That nothing is more fundamental than God's Nature,
and Government, and Beneficence, and the Attributes which belong to him in
respect to each: And they say, That for God to be the Ruler and Benefactor of
the World, and to be also Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. Heb. 11. 6.
gracious and merciful and Love it self, and a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him, are our Fundamentals; which are not consistent with this, That all
the World since Adam, except a few Believers or Jews and Christians, that were
born from Adam, under as absolute a necessity of being remedilesly damned, as
of dying.

. 3. Here they use first to consider of the number, viz. 1. That it is not past
the sixth part of the World that are called Christians. 2. That the far
greatest part of these (perhaps twenty to one) have not competent means to
understand what that Christianity is which gives them their name, and which,
as to the name, they profess. The Circassians, Mengrelians, and other
Georgians, the Armenians, the Muscovites, the Cossacks, the most of the Greeks
and Abassines, yea, and Papists, besides the Copties, Syrians, Nestorians,
Iacob^tes, Maronites, Christians of St. Thomus, etc. and too many Protestants
are bred up in so great ignorance, that multitudes of them never are
sufficiently taught to understand the Essentials of the Christian Religion
which they (nominally) profess; and therefore are really much in the case of
common Heathens.

. 4. 2. They consider their impossibility of being saved: For it is not only
morally (by Vice) but naturally impossible to believe that which was never
heard, read or understood: So that their Damnation seems unavoidable,
especially to such as live in the vast Countries of America, and much of Africa
and Asia, that are quite out of the reach of any Instructions for the Christian
Faith.

. 5. 3. And lastly, they consider the goodness and mercifulness of God,
declared in his Word, and in his great and manifold mercies to all the World,
and that he would have a righteous man to be merciful even to his Beast, much
more to the Bodies of Men, and most of all to their Souls, and that our Rule
and Motive is, Be merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful.

. 6. And they think that the contrary-minded, by over-doing, are the greatest
Hinderers of the Christian Faith, and Promoters of Infidelity, while they make
it seem so contrary to God's own Attributes, and to humane Interest, and to be
a Doctrine not of glad but of saddest tidings to Mankind, viz. That none shall
be saved that hear not the Gospel, when it is few comparatively that ever heard
it or can hear it.

. 7. On the other side it is thought a dangerous undermining of Christianity,
to say that it is not absolutely necessary to Salvation, Act. 13. 48. Mark. 16.
16. Joh. 3. 36. Joh. 14. 6. To. 10. 10. etc. Mat. 11. 27. Luke 10. 22. Mat. 16.
17. Romans 1. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 2. 10, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 3. Romans 8. 1, 9, 13. Luke 19.
10.
and that any besides Christians may be saved: And it seems to them to be
contrary to Christ's words, that He that believes not, shall be damned; and
that He is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man comes to the Father,
but by him. And how shall they call on him on whom they have not believed,
etc.? No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will
reveal him, etc. And it seems to confound the Church and the World, to say,
That any are saved out of the Church.

. 8. In this great Controversy, that which must satisfy us, is to agree in so
much as is certain, and to leave that which is uncertain and unknown,
undetermined: For we shall know it never the more for a confident pretending
that we know it, when we do not.

. 9. And here the first thing to be enquired after, is, What Law of God the
World that hears not of Christ, is now under, as the Rule of Duty and of
Judgment. And then, 2. to enquire, Whether they so keep that Law, as to be
saved by it? We can say nothing to the second, without the first.

. 10. And we have here nothing to doubt of, but, 1. Whether they are under any
Law or none? 2. If any, Whether it be the Law of Innocence as made to Adam, or
the Law of Grace? 3. And if the Law of Grace, whether of the first or second
Edition? It must be one of these.

. 11. And, 1st. It is certain, That they are under a Law (and not only under a
Physical Government, as a Ship at Sea, or Brutes are): For else God were not
their Ruler, and they his Subjects, so much as by Right and Obligation; and
then they were bound to no Duty, nor in hope of any Reward, nor in Danger of
any Punishment for Disobedience: For where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression.

. 12. It is certain, That they are not under the Rule of the Covenant of
Innocence made to Adam, or the Law of Innocence, as containing the Precept,
premiant and penal parts, which is the same with the Covenant as offered. This
I proved before: (Though I was long ignorant how far that Covenant was
repealed, till Mr. Lawson's Papers (which I labored to confute) did begin to
enlighten me.) God now says to no man [ I give thee life on condition thou be
personally innocent, and perfectly obedient:] Nor does he say [ I command thee
to be perfectly innocent, sinless, and obedient, that thou ma^st live:] For no
man is a Subject capable of such a Command or Promise, being already a Sinner.

. 13. If any should think that they are under the bare preceptive part of the
Law of Innocence, with the penal part, without any Promise, or premiant part,
or hope of life, this is certainly a mistake.

Because, 1. God has no such Law, nor never had, which has no Promise, or
premiant part; and is not in a Covenant-form, what he does by the Devils,
belongs not to our Question; but as to Men, they must be under a Covenant of
Works, or of Grace. And it were a hard Conceit to think, that the far greatest
part of Mankind had never any means to use for their Salvation, nor any thing
to do for it, but were under a mere Sentence of Despair and Damnation, as the
Devils are, without any offer of Help or Hope; and consequently that none of
them all are guilty of refusing any such Mercy, or neglecting any such Means
and Duty.

2. The very nature of Law and Government tell us, That if God command any
Duty, it is that the Subject may be the better for it; and he never says to
any [ obey me perfectly, and thou shall be never the better for it.]

. 14. Besides, the very Precept is not in force in that sense as it stood in
the Law of Innocence; for so it bound only innocent Man to keep his Innocence:
But God says not, Keep that which thou have lost.

. 15. Obj. God is not bound to change his Law, if man sin.

Ans. I answered this before, That God is not the Changer: But the Law will not
continue to be a Law, but by continuing to signify God's governing Will: And
it cannot so signify his governing Will, when there is no Subject to be a
capable terminus: So that it ceased, cessante capacitate subditi, vel cessante
termino. To say, That the Law still signifies what God would have had man do
while he was capable, is true; but that says no more but that [ It was once a
Law, and now is none:] For so it may do by the dead, yea, were they
annihilated, even tell others what God would have had them do, but this is not
a ruling Act; but Lex transit in sententiam. And to say, That at least the Law
binds a Sinner to perfect Obedience for the time to come, is to say, That it
binds not as the Law of Innocence, but as some other Law, of which we are
enquiring.

. 16. And it is a clear Truth (before proved) That God brought all Mankind in
Adam under a Law and Covenant of Grace, founded in the Promise of the Victory
of the Woman's Seed: And his dealing with all men ever since, does fully
confirm it. And this Law made to Mankind in Adam and Noah, was never repealed
to the World, but perfected by a perfecter Edition to those that have the
Gospel. Therefore we have two Questions here to consider. 1. What Law the World
was under before Christ's Incarnation: And, 2. whether Christ repealed it to
them?

. 17. 1st. And it is proved, That on God's part the said Law of Grace
continued: And man's Disobedience could not here nullify the Law, as it did
that of Innocence: Because it was a Law that allowed Repentance till the time
of Death: So that when they sinned never so much, they were still obliged by it
to repent, that they might be saved. Their Rebellion deprived them of the
Benefit, but did not end the Law, nor rendered them incapable of its
Obligation. God made Adam, and after him the Heads of Families his Priests: He
had then public Worship natural, and instituted sacrificing, and the
distinction of clean and unclean Beasts, Sabbath and Marriage, as well as
calling on the Name of the Lord, are expressed: As the Covenant to Noah was the
same with that to Adam, with some small Addition, so no doubt were the Precepts
of Noah. As the Canaani^es sacrificed, so their marrying in the prohibited
Degrees, is called one of their Abominations: It Is very probable, that not only
the Decalogue in sense; but also all, or most of the particular Mosaical
Precepts, which are but the Instances, Explications, and Applications of those
Generals, were given before the Flood; and some more, which even the Nations
Traditions kept some remembrance of, though not named particularly in the Text.

. 18. And it was not God's Covenant of Peculiarity with Abraham and the Jews,
that ended it to the rest of the World (as I before proved.)

. 19. So that though there be difficulty in opening the Terms of the Law of
Grace, as it stood to all Mankind besides the Jews, there is no difficulty to
prove, that it did indeed so continue.

. 20. And that Christ has not repealed or nullified that Law of Grace to the
World that never have the Gospel, which they were under before his coming, is
evident. 1. Because he came for the Benefit, and not the Destruction of the
World, to make their Condition better, and not worse: But had he nullified that
Law of Grace to all the World, and given them no better in its stead, save to a
few, he had come directly by himself to take away their Mercies, and make them
miserable. For it is certain, that though the Apostles Commission was to preach
the Gospel to all Nations, and every Creature, yet it is comparatively but a
small part of the World that ever heard it, or had the means to know and
believe in Christ. And all the rest were under a Law of Grace before, and
therefore are so still. 2. And ^^ Christ repealed that Law, by which Act did he
do it? Not by making a better Edition, for that could not have any such Effect
to them that never did, or could know of that Edition: And there is no other
Repeal to be found in Scripture. 3. And if the Law of Grace be nullified to all
the World that hear not the Gospel, are they since under any Law of God, or
none; if none, they are either no Men or damned Men; for they are no governed
Subjects: If they are under any, what is it? The Law of Innocence I have proved
it is not: And the GOSPEL (or second Edition of the Law of Grace) it is not:
For that cannot oblige where it never is promulgate: It being a supernatural
Revelation, can extend to none to whom it is not (directly or indirectly) sent:
Therefore it is evident, that Christ leaves such under that Law which he found
them under.

. 21. What this Law to the World contains, having before opened, Chap. 12..
3. I shall not repeat it, but only here add, 1. It is certain, that though this
Law make perfect Obedience for the future to be a Duty (to them and us) yet not
to be the Condition of Salvation; but that it does hereto accept sincerity. 2.
That it makes not the particular Articles of our present Creed about Christ's
person, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, heavenly Intercession in our Nature,
necessary to their Salvation: For before Christ's Coming, no Jewish Believers
could believe, That this Jesus, in his demonstrable Person, is the Christ, but
that Christ should come: And after he had long taught them, and pronounced them
blessed, the Disciples knew not that he must die, rise, ascend, interced^ in
Heaven, come again, etc. 3. It is certain, that all that the Prophets had any
way foretold of Christ to the Jews, was not of absolute necessity to Salvation
Luke 24.
to the Jews themselves to be understood, much less to the World that never
heard it: For Christ proved out of the Prophets, That he was to die, and rise,
and so to be glorified; when yet the Apostles had not understood it till that
time. And the Jewish Believers had very dark (if not erroneous) Notions of the
person of the Messiah to come. And to believe that he should be of Abraham's
S^ed, as it was part of Abraham's Covenant of Peculiarity, so it seems to be
necessary only to such as were under, or knew that Covenant, and not to all.

. 22. And it is certain, that when the Messiah was come, they were not bound to
believe that he was yet to come (though they knew not of his coming) because it
was then an Untruth.

. 23. The proclaimed Name of God, Exodus 24. with Psalm. 19. Prove. 1. Act. 10.
and 14. and 17. Romans 1. and 2. Heb. 6. 11. do seem to be the Expositions of the
true Sense and Tenor of that Law of Grace, Genesis 3. 15. which the World before
Christ's coming, was under, and yet is, where the Gospel cannot be had.

. 24. The Texts that say, He that believes not shall be damned, plainly refer
to such as hear the Word to be believed, and speak of the Unbelief of what is
revealed, and not of what is unrevealed.

. 25. Romans 10. says no more, but that no man can believe in Christ without the
Revelation of him by preaching or declaring; and that no man that hears, can
be saved without believing in him, nor no man saved at all without that Faith,
which the Law that he is under, makes necessary to Salvation. But if all were
damned that believed not that this Jesus is personally the Christ, all before
his Incarnation must be damned: But if not all before, then the same thing was
never made necessary after to all that could not possibly hear of it.

. 26. The same I say of Ioh. 14. 6. No man comes to the Father, but by me. 1.
No man is reconciled to God, and pardoned, and has right to life (in all Ages
of the World) but for the sake of the meritorious Sacrifice and Righteousness
of Christ, as promised, Genesis 3. 1. before, and performed after: But this was
the part of God and our Redeemer, which he promised in his part of the
Covenant, and performed: For God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing to them their sins, (so far forgiving them, as to make an
Act of Grace and Pardon, which he committed to his Ministers to proclaim,) 2
Cor. 5. 19. But, 2. on man's part it is not the knowledge and belief of this
Jesus incarnate personally, that was made necessary to all before his coming,
and therefore not to all after. No man ever came to the Father, but by the
Son's Merit and Spirit; nor without a consenting Belief and Affiance in God's
redeeming or recovering, pardoning, saving Mercy, and true Repentance, and a
sanctified Soul, which is in love with God and goodness: And whatever was
absolutely necessary in the terms of the first Edition of the Covenant of
Grace, even to all the World before Christ's Incarnation. But Christ never
meant, that no man before his Incarnation (or since, that heard not of him) did
come to the Father without believing that which the Apostles themselves long
believed not, after they followed Christ.

. 27. The rest of the World were not bound to know so much of the Messiah as
the Jews, as having not the same Revelation.

. 28. 1. Having proved that it is a Law of Grace that all the World is to be
ruled and judged by, it remains to be enquired, Whether any of them that have
not the Gospel, do keep the Conditions of this Law, and so are justified by it,
and saved?

To which I answer, 1. That being a matter of fact, it is not of so great
Importance for us to be certain of it, as some imagine: And who can be certain
of the Affirmative, unless the Scripture affirm it; when if we knew all the
World, one man cannot be certain of another Sincerity? And much less can any
be certain of the Negative, without Scripture Negation, seeing no man can know
every man in the World, and every Heart.

. 29. 2. But it is exceeding probable, at least, That God would never govern
many hundred parts of the World (compared to the Jews) before Christ's
Incarnation, and five sixth parts since his Incarnation, by a Law of Grace,
which yet no person should ever have effectual Grace to keep as far as was
necessary to his Salvation. Every Law of God is a Means, and appoints the
Subjects the use of much Means for their own Salvation: These means they are
bound to use, and shall be condemned, if they use them not; and that none
should ever use them savingly, is an Assertion so unlikely, that he that has
the boldness to affirm it, should bring certain Proof of it, which the
Scripture; I think, does not afford him.

. 30. But what numbers do perform the Condition and are saved, no mortal man
can tell: But in general we know, that God usually works in Congruity to his
appointed means, and consequently that far fewer are saved where less means is
vouchsafed, than among Christians who have herein the unvaluable pre-eminence
above others.

. 31. For as the Jews had both the common Covenant of Grace, and also the
Covenant of Peculiarity, setting them above all others; so the Christian Church
has both the common Covenant of Grace, and by the second edition of it a
Covenant of Peculiarity; both sealed by Baptism and the Lord's Supper, as the
Jews Covenant was by Circumcision and the Passover: Yea, our Covenant.
Privileges set us above the World, incomparably higher than the J^ws were.

. 32. Yet should we take warning by the example of the Jews Pride, who were so
confident that none were saved or beloved but themselves, that they despised
the rest of the World, and provoked God to cut them off, and call the Gentiles
into higher privileges: So some Christians so trust to their
Gospel-Peculiarities, (as the Jews did to their Law) that they despise all the
World besides themselves, and can easilier believe that God will damn a
thousand millions that never heard the Gospel than one of them, who have no
more real Holiness, than many of those whom they despise. But it is our Duty to
be thankful both for our excellent Peculiarities, and also for the commoner
Mercies unto others.

And I wish the impartial Reader to study, Mal. 1. 10, 11. whether even this be
not the sense, [ Nor will I accept an Offering at your hand, for from the
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, my name is great among the
Gentiles, and in every place Incense offered to my name, and a pure Offering:
For my name is great among the Heathen, says the Lord of hosts; but ye have
polluted it.] Our Translators have, as Expositors, thrice (at the least) added
the future Tense [ shall be]. But all the old Translations, Syriack, Calde^
Paraph. Greek, Latin, etc. put it in the present Tense [ is great, is offered.]
I do but desire the Reader to study it. It Is strange, that all the ancient
Churches should misunderstand it. It seems more probable by the Context that
the Hebrew Text understood the present Tense (none being expressed.)

. 33. If we might imitate our Father Abraham (who yet saw Christ's day and
rejoiced) we should suppose the number of the saved through the world, to be
very considerable: For as I said elsewhere, though God had told him, that Sodom
was so much worse than the rest of the World, that God would destroy it, yet
Abraham thought there might be fifty righteous persons there. It Is like he
thought not worse of the rest of the World.

. 34. Obj. You seem to make the rest of the World happier than the Jews; for
they had a Law that would justify them, and so had not the Jews.

Ans. The second assertion is false: The Jews were under the Law of Grace,
which Paul calls the Promise, and might be justified by it, and had greater
helps to know and keep it than the rest of the World had. But when they
foolishly separated their Mosaical Law from the Promise or common Law of Grace,
Paul tells them, by the Deeds of that Law no flesh could be justified.

. 35. Obj. Do you not thus confound the World and the Church?

Ans. No: I ask you, Did he confound them before Christ's Incarnation, who
thought that more than the Jews were saved? Certainly no: No more do I now.

. 36. The word [ Church] is sometime taken so properly and strictly, as to
signify only those that are under the Covenant of Peculiarity: And so the Jews
before Christ's Birth, and Christians since, make up the Church, (and some few
perhaps before the Jews Covenant.) But sometimes it is taken more largely, for
the Kingdom of God: For all that are in a state of Salvation, under the several
editions of the Law of Grace. And so Job and his Friends, and Melchizedeck and
many others, before, and all now that love God and Holiness sincerely, are of
the Church. Accordingly by the [ World] is meant, either, 1. All Men as under
the Redeemer's Law of Grace, antecedently to their Consent; and so all the
World belong to God's Kingdom, as subditi obligati. 2. Rebels that refuse
Consent: And so they are of the Kingdom by obligation, but condemnable for
Rebellion: And these are the [ World] in the worst sense. 3. Consenting
Subjects under the Common Law of Grace, who yet were not Jews, nor are not in
the Covenant of Peculiarity: And such are in a state of Salvation, though not
in the Church of the peculiar (as the Subjects of Melchizedeck, Sem, etc.) and
so are both in the Church and in the World, in several senses.

. 37. Having delivered that in this great Question which seems to me
agreeable to God's Word, I advise those that use to assault such things with
reproach, which they find reproached by their Party, to remember, that God is
Love, and Christ is the Savior of the World, and the Pharisaical Appropriators
of Mercy and Salvation, do seldom know what spirit they are of.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Necessity of Holiness, and of Moral Uirtue.
. 1. HOLINESS is our Dedication, Separation, or Devotedness to God, and
alienation from all that stands in competition Zech. 14. 20, 21. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
Heb. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. and 2. 5, 9. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Exodus 19. 6. Deuteronomy. 7.
6. and 26. 19. and 28. 9. Isa. 62. 12. Romans 11. 16.
or contrariety to God.

. 2. It is our Separation to God as the Creator of our Nature, and our
Redeemer, and the Author of Grace, and our Felicity, and the Cause of Glory: As
the first Efficient, supreme Dirigent, and ultimately final Cause.

. 3. It is our separation to God as our Owner by Resignation, as our Ruler by
Obedience, and as our Benefactor and ultimate End by Thankfulness and Love, in
the acknowledgment of his infinite power, wisdom and goodness, as essential to
himself, and related to his works.

. 4. Holiness is our dispositive, actual, and relative separation to God; 1.
When our Souls are habitually inclined to God and to his Will. 2. When we
actually give up our selves to God and to his will; by Consent first, and
Obedience and Love after. 3. It signifies the relation of the Person as thus
habitually and actually separated. (A holy Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9, 11.)

. 5. Holiness is the Habit and Act of all the three Faculties of the rational
Soul; viz. 1. Of the vitael Active Power by 1 These. 5. 23. Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. Act.
26. 18. 1 Cor. 3. 17. and 7. 14, 34.
Quickening and Strength. 2. Of the Intellect by Illumination. 3. Of the Will
by Conversion, Love or Complacency.

. 6. The Soul as sensitive, and the body it self, are said to be sanctified, so
far as they are dispositively and actually subject and subservient to a holy
Soul in Holiness, and related accordingly as separate to God.

. 7. Our Holiness is no alienation from the Creature as a Creature, in its due
place and subordination to the Creator, but contrarily contains our Honor
of, and Love to, all God's Creatures for his sake and impress, and a devoting
of all that is ours to his use: But it contains a renunciation of that which
is against Luke 14, 26, 27, 31, 33.
his Honor and Government and Love, as such.

. 8. As God communicates Holiness really and relatively to Man, so holy
persons communicate such Holiness to Creatures below them, as consists in the
use and relation of things separated to God, by a due separation of them by
their dedication and holy use: and that in various degrees.

. 9. True Holiness is the Health, the Rectitude, the Honesty, the Justice of
man's Heb. 12. 14. Col. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 4. and 5. 27. 1 Pe^. 1. 16.
Soul; and therefore necessary, as his Duty by God's Law, even of Nature, and
to his Happiness both in the very nature of the thing, and by the determination
of God's Law. It is a contradiction to be happy and unholy, Rev. 20. 6.

. 10. Holiness is the end or perfection of our Nature, and God's chief Interest
in man, and is begun by Grace and perfected in Glory. Ephesians. 5. 27. and 4. 16,
etc.


. 11. The Fear of God and his Judgments, and a Care of our own Souls, and a
Sorrow for Sin, and a desire of Happiness, may be not only Preparatives, but
lower parts of Holiness; but the true formal specifying nature of it consists
in a love of God's infinite goodness, and a Will addicted to obey his Will, or
a Pleasedness in pleasing Him Col. 1. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4. 1 John 3. 22. Heb. 13.
21. Col. 3. 20. Heb. 11. 5.
: This is Holiness.

. 12. Because a man is denominated according to the predominant bent of his
Will (or Soul) he is not to be called Holy who has some slight inclination to
please God, and more to please his own carnal Appetite and Will; or greater
love to the Creature than to God.

. 13. Christ himself came into the World to recover sinful Man by Holiness Luke
1. 75. Ephesians. 4. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. Heb. 12. 10. Romans 8. 1, 9.
to God, and disdained not to be a means of Man's Sanctification, and to make
this the notable operation of his Holy Spirit on us.

. 14. Whatsoever Law Men are under, before Christ or since, Jew or Gentile,
Works or Grace, no man can be saved and happy without Holiness; that is, unless
they be devoted in Obedience and Love to GOD and Goodness.

. 15. No man can be damned that is holy, while such; nor can God hate and make
miserable those that truly love him and his governing Will.

. 16. Yet a person that is holy may deserve Damnation, by deserving to be
denied that help of the Holy Spirit by which his Holiness must be continued:
And as to be saved is to be perfectly sanctified, so to deserve Hell, is to
deserve to be forsaken, to the ^o^al loss of Holiness. And so though it be hard
for us to know whether Adam's first loss of Innocence was a total loss of
Holiness, yet if it were not, it was a forfeiture of divine help, and so a
mediate loss of it. And so a man that loves God sincerely, may by great Sin
deserve to be deprived of the Spirit, and therefore we must pray for the pardon
of such desert for the sake of Christ, though we cannot be damned or miserable
while holy.

. 17. Obj. But how does God love a holy Soul if he forsake him, and withold
his Spirit? And if he be not loved of God, he is miserable? If he be loved, he
will not be forsaken.

Ans. Answer this your self as to the Case of the Angels and Adam. God loved
them, and yet not so as to secure them from the loss of Grace: But he so far
loved them efficiently, as to give them that grace by which they could
persevere; but not that by which they necessarily should persevere; and he
loved them complacentially, according to the goodness which was in them, and
yet they lost it.

. 18. Obj. That is because they were left to their Free will, and had but
sufficient Grace, and not efficacious determining Grace: But it is now
otherwise with all true Believers.

Ans. True Believers have not determining efficacious Grace, to prevent all
sin, nor all such sin as Noah, Lot, David, Peter did commit: And that sin
deserves an answerable desertion of God, it being a deserting him first so
far: And though God pardon it, yet the desert is presupposed to the pardon; for
it is desert of punishment that is pardoned.

. 19. Quest. If a man were holy, (that is, an obedient Lover of God and
Goodness) without Faith in Christ, would that save him?

Answ. 1. The Covenants of Grace requires various degrees of Faith, according
to its several editions and promulgations: It is not the same degree of Faith,
as to the Objects extensively, which was required of Jewish Believers before
Christ's Incarnation, as is now of us, nor the same degree that was required of
all the rest of the World as of the Jews. 2. But such a Faith in God our
Redeemer as that Law which men are under makes necessary to Salvation, is
necessary to Holiness: And to ask what God will do with a man that is holy
without Faith, is to talk of a nonexistent Subject: There is no such man; for
without Faith it is impossible to please God: for he that comes to God must
believe that God is, and that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, notwithstanding original and actual Sin, and the Law of Innocence
condemning us; and therefore that he is under a pardoning and rewarding Law of
Grace, Heb. 11. 6. No man can be sanctified without the Merit, Doctrine and
Spirit of Christ, nor without that degree of Faith which the Covenant which he
is under requires.

. 20. Quest. What if a man that was sanctified by believing, should retain his
Holiness, or Love and Obedience, and lose his Faith in Christ?

Answ. It is a thing that never was nor will be; and not to be disputed of.

. 21. Moral Virtue in the proper sense of the word, is the same thing as
Holiness taken comprehensively, as containing our Love and Duty to God, and to
man for God's sake: But as Holiness is taken narrowly for our Love and Duty to
God, as distinct from our Love and Duty to Man, so Moral Virtue is the genus,
and Holiness the chief species of it. And thus we take Moral Virtue and Moral
Action, and so all Morality, as contradistinct from Physics or things merely
natural, not falling under the genus moris: And so Virtue and Vice (or Sin) are
all that is Moral, that is, Moral Good and Moral Evil: And this is the first
and most notable sense of the word.

But some of late have used Moral as contradistinct from Holiness or Grace, or
from infused Habits, or from Faith and Christianity; and some tell us
confidently but falsely, That this is the most fit and famous sense, and the
word so to be taken when not otherwise explained. It Is the sad case of Mankind,
that we have no words but what are liable to ambiguity: And it is the
unhappiness of the Church that has so many Teachers that will dispute, write,
and wrangle about words unexplained, and in the end show, that under diverse
terms they mean the same matter in which they are agreed and know not their
Agreement.

. 22. As Holiness is sometimes taken so largely, as to comprehend all that God
commands, and sometimes for the natural part of our Duty (Love and Obedience)
as distinct from Faith in Christ, which is the mediate Grace, and of
supernatural revelation; so is Morality or moral Virtue distinguished.

. 23. They that take moral Virtue Phil. 4. 8. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 5. Pro. 12. 4. 31.
and 31. 29.
so narrowly and improperly, as to mean no other moral Virtue than Heathens
had, or than is taught in Aristotle's Ethics, should first tell us, That this
is their sense; and then they may boldly declaim against those Preachers that
take this for sufficient; or that preach no other: For Scripture and
Christianity were to little purpose if they taught us no more than the Writings
of Philosophers do.

. 24. And no doubt but it is a pitiful sign and an odious Crime in a Minister
of Christ, to say little to the People of the Mysteries of Man's Redemption,
the Person, and Offices, and Works of Christ, the Covenant of Grace, and the
special Blessings given by it, our Union with Christ, Justification, Adoption,
and the special Works of the Spirit on Men's Souls, and all the Duties and
Pleasures of a Heavenly Conversation, in the love of the Father, the Grace of
the Son, and the Communion of the Holy Spirit, and all this under pretense of
magnitying and preaching up the Love of our Brethren, and Charity to the Poor,
and Justice, and Temperance; as if Man were our God, and to wrong man were the
only Sin, and to wrong God were none, or God could be no otherways wronged.

. 25. But Covetousness and Pride contradicts their own Doctrine: For among
their good works those of Piety are first extolled; and those are the enriching
of the Church, and that is themselves; and why them more than the poorer People
about us? Because they are sacred persons, and belong to God, and serve at his
Altars? Very good. And is Piety to a sacred person (and such as they) so great
a Duty, and yet our Piety as immediately to God himself, an indifferent thing,
in comparison of our Duty to Man? Yea, some usually make that part of their
Piety which consists in the observance of their own Traditions and
unnecessary Injunctions, to seem of great weight, while the holy observance of
God's own Laws is perhaps accused as too much preciseness or hypocris^s; when
indeed the Hypocrite is he, that instead of the life and serious practice of
true Christian-Holiness, sets up and rests in the Image of Holiness, and
certain formalities, that are lifeless, to deceive himself and others.

. 26. Where there is no Faith and Love to God, nor Duty done in obedience to
God, there is no true moral Virtue, but somewhat equivocally so called,
whatever good such may do to the Commonwealth or to their Neighbors; for it
wants the principle, end and object that should inform it.

. 27. An Hypocrite may be said to have moral Virtue, as he may be said to have
Holiness, that is, only secundum quid, yea, but analogically; yea, but
equivocally, in that he has no other sort of Faith and Love and Obedience.

. 28. An Infidel's moral Virtue, and all unsanctified Heathens or other
persons, is of the same sort only with this described of the Hypocrite: And
they err not that say, They have no true moral Virtue, but analogical.

. 29. Yet Nature and common Grace do give men that which is truly good (and not
only minus malum) and may do much good to others, and some to themselves, and
is truly laudable and amiable, considered without the mixture simply in it
self: But because the contrary evil is still the predominant part in all the
unsanctified, it will not properly denominate them good men, nor the whole
action a good action, save equivocally, analogically or secundum quid; because
the form denominateth, which is here wanting.

. 30. But if any one think otherwise, that the name of moral Virtue, yea, or
Holiness, is due to the best actions or habits of Heathens, Hypocrites, or any
unsanctified men, it is but a Controversy de nomine, and no otherwise to be
regarded, while we agree of the things signified by that name.

. 31. It is certain, that now there is no moral good, in any man on Earth, that
is not the effect of some Grace of God, common or special; for even Nature now
as reprieved, and maintained is an effect of common Grace; much more further
gifts: But it is perverseness in some Schoolmen, who make common Grace and
special (at least as to Faith) to be differenced only in the Causation, one
being not infused and the other infused, but the same in act, and so that no
man can know whether he have infused or acquired Faith (which some call but a
Moral Virtue.)

CHAP. XVIII. Of the necessity of Faith in Christ, where the Gospel is made
known.
. 1. INfidels take scandal from Christ's making Faith in himself to be so
necessary to our Salvation, as if it tended only to his Honor, and were in its
own Nature of no necessity to our happiness, but arbitrarily made so.

. 2. And their reason also against this necessity, is, because believing is an
act of the Intellect; and Intellection is not free, and in its self is no moral
Act. A man cannot know or believe what he would, no, though he most earnestly
desired it: And will God condemn men for that which they fain would do, and
cannot? Especially when men's intellectual Capacities do so greatly differ, that
some seem to differ but little from the Brutes.

. 3. This Scandal arises from their not well understanding the Nature and
Reasons of our Faith in Christ. 1. They falsely suppose it to be only an Act of
the Intellect (where many Divines have given them the Scandal.) 2. They falsely
suppose, That the Intellect herein is necessitated to unbelief. 3. And they
consider not the Ends and Uses of our Faith.

. 4. 1. The true nature of our Faith, is our Trusting in Christ, as our
Savior, who has reconciled us to God, by his Sacrifice and Merit, that he may
bring us to God, by Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and Glory. It
contains Assent, Consent, and Affiance, though through penury of Words, we
are fain to call it by some one of these names oft-times, as the occasion
requires: But indeed the very sense of (...), fides, and Trust, includes all.
And when the Act of the Intellect only is named, it is as including, or
informing both the other.

. 5. 2. Though the Intellect be not free of it self, it is free by
participation, being quoad exercitum, under the Empire of the Will that is
free. And the Will by commanding it to act, search, think, of the Evidences of
Verity, may do so much toward the specifying of the Act, as that the mere
weakness of Understanding without the fault of a vicious Will, shall keep no
man in damnable Unbelief.

. 6. For Christ has many ways provided against mere Weakness of our
Understanding: 1. By the fewness and plainness of necessary Articles of Faith:
2. By the fullness of Evidence of Credibility: 3. By great Means and Helps for
our Faith, which he appoints: 4. And by the powerful Helps of his Spirit,
which is ready to illuminate us by these means.

. 7. No man was ever yet known, that could say [ I have done my best to have
obtained Faith, and did not obtain it.] Though many can say, I earnestly
desired to believe, and could not: Because those may desire it, that yet use
not the means aright and faithfully, and that indulge their own Prejudices, or
carnal Lusts, which hinder it.

. 8. 3: In the saving of Sinners, there is considerable: 1. The great Benefits
already given in the Purchase, Merits and Covenant: 2. The greater Benefits
offered, and to be received hereafter:

3. The Means to be used on our part for obtaining them. 4. The danger and
loss, if we miss of them. 5. The ultimate End of him that gives them.

. 9. And, 1. will not any reasonable Infidel confess, That Thankfulness is
naturally due for great and inestimable Benefits? And how can a man be thankful
for that which he believes not was ever done for him, or given him? Or can he
be thankful to he knows not whom?

. 10. 2. Do not great Benefits freely offered, require Acceptance? And how can
a man accept of that which he believes not was ever purchased, procured, or
offered him? Will you accept a shadow?

. 11. 3. Christ never meant to carry Sluggards asleep to Heaven, but to save
them in the use of his appointed means. 1. They must learn and obey his
Doctrine; and can they obey it that believe it not? 2. They must take Heaven
procured by a Redeemer for their Hope and Portion, and love, desire, and seek
it above all: And who will do this, that believes it not, and the Word that
promises it? 3. They must take Christ for their Guide, and Mediator, and
Intercessor, to bring them thither; and they must forsake all here that stands
in competition, that they may obtain it: And can you do this, and not believe
and trust him that must save you? Will you venture your life in the Hands of a
Physician, and take his Medicines, if you believe not that he has Skill and
Will to cure you? Will you leave your Country, and follow one over Seas, that
promises you a Kingdom, if you trust him not?

. 12. 4. And who will avoid Sin, Temptations, and Hell, that believes not him
that tells them of the evil, and of the danger that is before him?

. 13. 5. And God can have no lower End ultimately than Himself, and the Glory
of our Redeemer is more excellent than mine or yours. And therefore if We have
the Salvation, it is meet and necessary that God and our Redeemer have the Love
and Thanks, the Praise and Glory of it.

. 14. Yet has not God arbitrarily made Faith more necessary than it is in the
true Reason and Aptitude of it to its Ends. He has not made to all a Faith so
necessary of Christ, and his Intercession; and therefore though Infants and
Idiots cannot actually believe, they may be saved by Christ: And though those
before Christ believed not all that we must now believe, nor the Gentiles
before, so much as the Jews, yet neither of them were thereby excluded from
Salvation.

. 15. Quest. Has not Christ made the Case of Christians harder than it was
before his Incarnation, to Believers, by making so many more Articles of our
Faith, and those of necessity to our Salvation?

Ans. No, no more than it is our Misery to accept of more Mercies and Benefits
than were offered to others. Our Belief is not of numerous unnecessary
difficulties, but it is of such things as we must receive, and be Partakers of;
it is the means of our use and fruition: Who would take it for a Misery to
believe that the King will give him a Lordship, or that a rich Man will give
him so much Money, if he will come and thankfully accept it? Every act of
belief is but a means to some Benefit to be received.

. 16. As Christ is the way to the Father, and the Mediator is to bring us unto
God, so Faith in Christ is the Mediate, or healing Grace to help us to
Holiness, or the Love of God, which being its End, is as much more noble than
Faith in Christ: And Faith kindling Love to God, and Goodness, and Men; and
Love kindled by Faith, is the Sum of the Christian Religion. And it is no
Disparagement to Christ and Faith in him, to be taken for a Means; or to trust
him, as one that will save to the uttermost all that come to God by him.

CHAP. XIX. Of the State of Infants as to Salvation.
. 1. I Have said so much of this in two Books against the Anabaptists, and in
my Christian Directory, that I shall therefore here be brief. What measure of
Glory, and holy intellectual operations Infants shall have after Death, we know
not; but we have reason to judge, that they shall not be like Brutes, nor so
unintelligent as in the Body, nor sleep in an unactive Potentiality; but be,
intellectual Agents.

. 2. The Conceits of a middle state of those unbaptized, as having poenam
damni, and not p^nam sensus, we know not what to make of, unless they suppose
them to be not actually, but only potentially intelligent: For one that is
deprived of true felicity, must by knowing it, have the sense of his Privation.
Nor do we find in Scripture any Proof of their middle State, however Reason may
think it congruous.

. 3. They that think all Infants saved, go on these different grounds: 1. Some
think that they have no sin: But if Pelagians could prove that, it would be no
Proof that they shall have Heaven or Happiness. 2. Others think that Christ
has pardoned them all that sin which was derived from Adam: But either they
mean, that his Sacrifice and Merit immediately pardoned it; or that he has
pardoned them all by the Covenant, or Law of Grace. But, 1. Christ's Sacrifice
and Merits are given to God for Man, and pardon no man immediately, but only
Merit a pardoning Covenant. 2. And that Covenant does indeed in tantum, pardon
all men as far as common Mercy amounts to (for the remitting any part of the
punishment, is so far to remit the sin.) But the saving-pardon in question, it
gives to no man actually before the Condition be performed; for it is but a
conditional Pardon: Therefore as no one at age, so no Infant has any Pardon
given him by that Covenant, that I can find, but only conditionally.

. 4. All grant, That the Covenant pardons the Adult only conditionally; and
if it should pardon all Infants absolutely, their Condition would be so much
more happy than that of the Adult, as is not consistent with what Scripture,
Reason, and Experience speaks. And there is no such thing said of them in the
Word of God, and therefore not to be believed.

. 5. Those that think not all Infants (so dying) to be saved and glorified, are
also of several minds. 1. Some think that none are glorified, as being
incapable Subjects (whom I will not bestow the labor to confute, nor to open
the ill Consequents of it.) 2. Some think, that some are glorified, but none
are positively punished with the poena sensus. These seem to me less rational
than the former: For either Infants will have actual Intellection, and
answerable Joys and Sorrows, or not: If not, the former, who reduce them all to
mere Potentiality, or the state of Brutes, are in the right (of whom some will
have them to be Viat^res after Death in vehiculo a^reo, and some are for their
Transmigration, and return to Earth.) If yea, then as one part will have
rational Joys, the other must have rational Sorrows, unless some return to
Earth, or some middle state, be better proved than I have yet seen.

. 6. 3. Some think, that all that are baptized, are saved, and no other,
(though the rest have no Pain.) But, 1. this is not suitable to the Nature of
God, as a Spirit, and as most wise and merciful; nor yet to the Tenor of his
Word, to lay men's Salvation and Rejection upon a mere outward ^eremony, or Act
of Baptizing. The Seed of Believers may want it in many Cases of Impedition;
and the Children of Cannibals and Infidels, might by Soldiers be taken away by
thousands and baptized against the Parents Wills, and then turned to them again
to be educated: And who can believe that barbarous Soldiers that must
themselves ^e damned, can thus save thousands at (...) pleasures? There are
many Infants that have no right to Baptism; and why then should it save them*

. 7. 4. Some think, that all that are baptized by the Parents Con^int, are
saved* But what if a Hea^hen, or Infidel, or Athent say, I believe not in God
or Christ my self, but for worldly Ends, I desire my Child may be baptized
(whether he say, I will, or I will not educate him unto Christianity.) There is
no show of Reason, much less of Scripture, that this should save the Children
that are no better offered to God.

. 8. 5. Some say, That all that any Christian (Sinner or Hypocrite) offers to
God, and is so baptized, shall be saved; that is, That has Christian Godfather
or Godmother. But if so, then what if Christians take Heathens Children against
their Wills, and baptize them, and then turn them home again? Are they saved by
the Ceremony, or by Consent to the Covenant? Not by the mere Geremony, as is,
and shall be showed: Not by Consent of any such Christian that has no right to
them, nor power to represent them; else all the Children on Earth should be
saved: For Christians would sit at home and consent for them, and dedicate them
to God unseen: And sure God would not refuse to save them, because of distance,
nor because unseen (for the Godfather may be blind); nor because unbaptized;
when it cannot be had, and the Child hinders it not.

. 9. 6. Some say, That it is the Churches Faith, and dedicating them to God in
Baptism that is the Condition of their Salvation: But this is not intelligible.
If by the Church they mean all the Christian World, or all a National Church,
or all a Diocesan Church, yea, or all a Parish Church, they use not to be all
Godfathers, nor to offer other folks Children to be baptized; nor did I ever
know one that had so common a ^ote, or was so offered: If they mean that the
Churches Faith ^erveth whoever be the Covenanter or Offerer, then all the Pagan
World may have their Children saved by the Churches Faith, or all that can be
caught up and baptized (and so the Ceremony does it.) But if they mean by that
Church the Bishops or Presbyters, whether it must be all the Bishops of the
World, or of the Nation, or one Bishop, or the Presbyter that baptizeth, every
one may speak according to his own Invention and Fancy, but with no Proof from
the Word of God or Reason (as the aforesaid Disproofs do manifest.)

. 10. 7. Some say, That any one baptized by a Godfather's offer, who
undertaketh for his Christian Education, shall be saved, and no other. But, 1.
The Godfather may have no Propriety in the Child, but steal him, shall that
save him? 2. The Godfather may be an Hypocrite, and mean nothing that he
promises; and shall the Child be saved by his Lie that damneth the Liar
himself? 3. Why should a Promise of future Education save a Child that must die
to morrow, or ere long? 4. But if it be the mere opus operatum of Baptizing
that must save, that may be a Profanation when unduly applied; and the Priest's
sin that damneth himself, cannot save others.

. 11. 8. Some lay the hope upon Ancest^rs Faith, and say, That if the Great
Grandfathers, or others before them were faithful, the Infants shall be saved:
But then are all Men saved for Noah's Faith? Or how far must our Confidence
ascend?

. 12. 9. Most of the Anabaptists with us, hold, That there is no Promise, nor
Assurance of the saving of any particular Infants in the World, either
Christians or Heathens; but only that God electeth some, whom he will sanctify
and save, and reprobateth others, whom he will damn; without any notice given
to the World who they be, or how many, or how few. So that we cannot say, that
he will save Ten, or that he will damn Ten of all the World; nor have the
Faithful any more promise than Heathens of the Salvation of their Infants, and
so are not to baptize them.

. 13. 10. The commonest Opinion among the English Calvinists, is, That God has
made no certain Promise of the Salvation of any particular Infant, but by his
general Promise of mercy to the Seed of the Faithful, has given us cause to
hope that more of them than of others, shall be saved; and therefore that they
are by Baptism to be entered into the visible Church, as we baptize the Adult,
while we are not certain but they may be Hypocrites.

. 14. But I think this would not warrant their Baptism, nor give us any certain
hope of any ones Salvation. God has but one Covenant of Grace, which gives us
Christ and Life; and God has ordained no Baptism, but what is for the
Remission of Sin, and making us Members of Christ, if we have the Conditions of
Right to Baptism. The Adult profess Faith and Repentance; if they have them in
sincerity, and consent with the Heart as well as the Tongue, they are certainly
pardoned: If they are Hypocrites, and consent only with the Lips, they have
notoriously the Qualification which the Church must require, and so are
received to outward Communion, but not that which God requires to Remission
and Salvation. But if an Infant be the Child of a true Believer, he has all
that God and the Church require: And therefore if he be to be baptized, he is
certainly put into a state of Life, because no Condition is wanting on his part.

. 15. 11. Others say, That the Children of all Christians ( Sinners, or
Hypocri^es) if baptized, are in a state of Pardon and Salvation; and that God
will not punish the Child for the Hypocrite or profane Parents Sin. But by
that rule Heathens Children should be in as safe a case, because God will not
punish them for their Parents sin. Either something on the Parents part is a
Condition of the Child's Right, or nothing. If nothing, Heathens and Christians
Children are equal: If something, it must be true Faith (as to God's
acceptance): For whatever the Church must do, (that knows not the Heart) it
is incredible that God should have such a Covenant [Thy Child shall be saved if
thou will, (though lyingly) offer him to me, tho* thou shall be damned for that
Lie.]

. 16. 12. That which I acquiesce in is this: That God who visited Adam's Sin on
all his Posterity, has in the Covenant of Grace also so joined Infants to the
Parents, See the full proof in my two Disput. of Original Sin.
that till they have a Will to choose for themselves, their Parents may choose
for them, and dispose of them for their good, and God takes them as Members of
the Parents so far: And so he has made many express Promises of mercy to the
Faithful and their Seed, (and Threatenings to the Wicked and their Seed): And
that this Mercy cannot be consistent with their Damnation; for it is to be
their God, and to love and bless them, which cannot stand with damning them.
And God having but one Covenant, seeing they are in the same Covenant with
their Parents, and not another, if it give Pardon to the Parents, it does so
also to the Child, of whom no Condition is required, but that he be offered by
a believing Parent to God; whose Acceptance is Salvation.

. 17. Therefore I think that the Synod of Dort truly conclude, Act. 1. 17. That
faithful Parents need not doubt of the Election and Salvation of their Children
dying in infancy: The Covenant certainly pardons and saves them.

. 18. But this is not only because they are born of their Bodies, nor yet is
their Faith the efficient Cause of it; but there are two things go to qualify
the Receiver as the dispositive Condition, that is, 1. That he be the Child of
a faithful Parent, who devote^h himself sincerely to God. 2. And that he be by
the Parent devoted to God, by Consent, that he be in the mutual Covenant: Which
virtually all the Faithful do that have Infants, because they devote themselves
and theirs to God to the utmost of their Capacity. And the Recipient Subject
being thus qualified, God*, Covenant pardons him, as the efficient
Instrument, by signifying God's Will.

. 19. Though the Promise here be not so plain, I deny not, that all true
Propriet^rs, whose own the Child is, here be as Parents.

. 20. God having not made the Case of Infants so plain to us as our own, that
are Adult, there are difficult Objections against this way; but as it seems to
me, much more against all the rest.

. 21. The grand Objection is, That then some Infants lose a state of Salvation
when they come to age. Ans* This will follow; but far ha^der things from all
the rest: But, 1. This was thought no Absurdity for a Thousand years after the
Apostles, when I cannot prove, that any one man thought that none of the Adult
themselves fall away from true Sanctification and right to Life: When even
Augustine the famous Defender of Election and Grace against Pelagius, thought
that all the Elect only persevered, and that more were justified and sanctified
than were Elect, and that the rest all fell away. 2. Davenant answers this,
That Infant-grace may be lost, and yet not the Grace of the Adult: Because it
is but a Relative Regeneration, and an Extrinseck Remission of Sin, that gives
them Right to Impunity and Life, or if they are said to have the Spirit, it is
not in a fixed Habit of Grace. If you say, They cannot be saved without real
Holiness, I answer;

. 22. 3. Distinguish of Holiness, and of the Season of it. 1. Infants have not
actual Faith, nor necessarily a proper Habit, which is a disposition to facile
acting that same act: But a semen, a Seed, (as Amesius rather calls it than a
Habit at first even in the Adult:) And Calvin says, That some men, semen fidei
qualecunque perdunt. Adam had such a Holiness as might be lost: And why may we
not say, that Infants first* Grace is of such a sort or degree? 2. And yet that
none are saved without more; but that upon this first degree they have a right
to Salvation, and that their further Holiness shall be given them whom God
will, as part of their Salvation, to which they have right: At furthest, at
death, in the same time and manner as perfect Holiness and Mortification of Sin
is given to Believers that are till death imperfect. A loseable degree of
Holiness like Adam's, may be the way to more in all that so die.

. 23. Divines use to mention three degrees of Grace in order to Faith it self.
1. So much Grace as makes a man able to believe, (which they call Sufficient
Grace.) 2. So much more as efficiently determines him to the Act of Believing:
This they call effectual special Grace, and Protestants call it our Vocation
effectual. 3. So much more as gives him a fixed habit of Faith, Love, and all
Holiness together. This Papists call Justification, and Protestants
Sanctification. Vid. Amesii Medull. de voc. and sanct. Rolloc. de vocat. Bishop
Downame against Pemble Append. to his Treatise of Perseverance, etc.

. 24. Now some hold all these loseable: some hold only the last not loseable;
and almost all hold the first loseable. Now, 1. What if we think that Infant's
first Holiness, besides relative ( Pardon, and jus ad impunitatem and regnum)
is but of the first degree? Though a mere moral Power to believe be not enough
to the Adult, because the Act is necessary to them, yet say Protestants,
The Habit is not necessary to their first Covenant-Right, but is given by the
Spirit in sanctification as a Covenant-Benefit. And why may not Infants be in a
pardoned state, that at first have but that Grace which gives a moral Power to
believe when they come to age? Consider of the matter.

. 25. I have so fully elsewhere In two Treatises for Infants Church Membership;
and in my Review of Infant Baptism.
proved, That Infants Church Membership was instituted both in the Covenant of
Innocence, in the first edition of the Covenant of Grace; in the Covenant of
Peculiarity with Abraham, and in the last edition of the Covenant of Grace by
Christ; and also that God never had a Church on Earth, of which Infants were
not Members, if the adult Members had Infants, that I will now supersede that
Work.

CHAP. XX. Of the Nature of Saving-Faith.
. 1. SO much of this came in before on the by, as will excuse my brevity here.
I have before showed, That the Faith now in question is not merely our general
Belief and Trust in God, as a part of our Holiness, but the mediate Belief and
Trust in God our Redeemer and our Savior, which is made the Condition of the
Covenant, and the means of our sanctification: And also that as the editions of
the Covenant vary, and promulgation of it, so it is not the same degree or acts
of Faith, as to the particular credenda or Articles to be believed, that was
and is necessary to all persons in all times.

. 2. Though the word [ Belief] in English, and Assent in Latin, signify
strictly only the act of the Understanding, and Saving Faith is often named from
one act, yet really that Faith which in Scripture is made the Condition of
Pardon and Salvation, does essentially contain the Acts of every Faculty, even
Assent, Consent, and Affiance; and (...) and fides do properly signify Trust,
even a consenting or voluntary Trust upon believing; as is before said.

. 3. We do very aptly call both the Act and Object by the same name fides in
Latin, (and Faith in English, oft-times): For Faith is a trusting on another's
Faith, Fidelity or Trustiness; and so the fides asserentis seu promittentis,
and fides credentis, are related.

. 4. The Faith that has the promise of our Justification, is not to be called
one only Physical act in specie (much less in numero): (That were but
profanely to jest with holy things); but it is a moral act or work of the
Soul, containing many physical acts. Otherwise we should be all confounded, not
knowing how to distinguish of all our physical acts of Faith secundum speciem,
and then to know which of them is the right: And it would be but some very
little of the true Objects of Faith, that justifying Faith must be constituted
by: In a word, the Absurdities are so numerous that would follow, that I will
not be so tedious as to name them.

. 5. Saving Faith is such a moral work as we use to express by the names,
Believing, Trusting, Consenting, Taking, Accepting, Receiving, in Contracts
personal with men. If we say [ You shall Trust such a Physician, or take such a
man for your Physician] all men understand us, and none is so logically mad, as
to think that by Taking or Trusting we mean only some one physical act of the
smallest distribution. If we say [ I take this man for my King, my Master, my
Commander or Captain, or this woman to be my Wife, etc.] every one knows here
what Taking means: viz. our Consent to that Relation, according to the nature
and ends of it.

. 6. Therefore though we use diverse names for this Faith, and also on several
occasions, give several half-descriptions of it, we mean still the same thing,
and suppose what we omit to make the description entire.

. 7. When we call Faith [ a Believing] or [ Assent] we mean such an Assent as
prevails with the Will, to accept Christ with his Grace as offered in the
Gospel, and consent to the Baptismal Covenant; and this indeed as a fruit of
the assenting act, but as essential to justifying Faith.

. 8. When we call it [ Consent] or Acceptance, or [ Receiving Christ] we mean,
that as Man's Soul has an Intellect and Will, and a true actus humanus vel
moralis, is the act of both, but of the Intellect as directive, and of the Will
as more perfective, or as the Faculty, primarily moral; so the same Faith which
is initially in the intellect's Assent, is perfectlier in the will's Consent:
And it is the Receiving of a Savior believed, or the Consent to a believed
Covenant: We suppose Assent when we name it Consent.

. 9. And when we name it Affiance or Trust, we include both the former, and
mean a resolved practical Trust, and dedition of our selves accordingly to one
that covenanteth to bring us from Sin and Misery to GOD and Glory; where Belief
and Consent to that Covenant are supposed.

. 10. And the Terminus a quo, and the renunciation of Competitors and
Opposites, is connoted, if not essentially included in Saving Faith: And
therefore Christ does so often tell us, of forsaking all, if we will be his
Disciples.

. 11. I use to express it by this similitude: A Prince redeemeth a Slave, and
also promises him great Possessions and Honors in a Kingdom in the East
Indies, or at the Antipodes, if he will leave his Servitude and his Country,
and all that he has there, and go with him in his Ship, and patiently endure
the Sea-trials till he come thither. Here he must, 1. believe that the Prince
has paid his ransom: 2. That he is a wise man, and knows what he promised,
and skilful to conduct him safely through all the perils of the Seas: 3. That
he is an honest man, and intends not to deceive him: 4. That he is sufficient
or able to perform his word: 5. And if upon this belief he trust him, he will
let go all and venture in his Ship, and follow him. And here one tells him that
the Ship is unsound; another tells him that the Prince is a Deceiver, unable to
perform his Word, or unskilful, or dishonest, and some way untrusty; and
another tells him that small matters in his own Country, are better than
greater with so much hazard; and sets out the dangers and terribleness of the
Seas: Now if the man be asked [ Do you believe, or will you trust me, or will
you not?] here every one by believing and trusting knows, that a practical
Trust is meant, which lies in such a confidence as forsakes all, and takes
the promised Kingdom for all his hope. Such is our Saving Faith.

. 12. As many Acts and many Objects go to constitute Saving Faith, so if you
will logically anatomize it, all these following must be taken in.

. 13. 1. The principal Efficient Cause is God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
respectively, according to their several operations.

. 14. 2. The Instrumental Cause is the Word of God, and the Preaching and
Preachers of it, or Parents, Friends, or some that reveal the Word unto us.

. 15. 3. Subordinate auxiliary means are Providential Alterations, by some
awaking Judgments, or inviting Mercies, or convincing Examples, etc.

. 16. 4. The Soul of Man in all its three Faculties, Vital-active,
Intellective, and Volitive, is, 1. the Recipient of the Divine Influx, and
then, 2. the immediate Efficient or Agent of the Acts of Faith.

. 17. 5. Preparatory Grace and Duty is ordinarily Man's Disposition, as he is
the Recipient of God's Grace, and the Agent of believing. But God is free, and
can work on the unprepared; but it is not to be taken for his ordinary way.

. 18. 6. The formal Object of the assenting Act of Faith, is veracit as Dei
revelantis, the Veracity or Truth of God revealing his Will.

. 19. 7. The formal Object of the accepting and receiving Act, is the Goodness
of the Benefits offered us by the Covenant, as offered.

. 20. 8. The formal Object of our Trust or Affiance is God's fides, Fidelity,
because of his aforesaid Veracity in promising, and his Power, Wisdom and
Benevolence as a Performer; and this full Act comprehends all the rest: It is
God's Trustiness.

. 21. 9. The material Objects of the assenting Act in genere, are all God's
Assertions or Revelations: More especially the Gospel, or the Christian Faith
objective; according to the Edition of the Covenant which we are under.

. 22. The Essentials of our objective Christian Faith constitute the Essence of
our active Saving Faith; and the Integrals of it constitute the Integrity.

. 23. And it is of great importance to distinguish here (as to the Word and
Objects) between 1. the signa or words, 2. the signification or sense, 3. the
things, matter or incomplex objects, as distinct from words and sense, viz.
God, Christ, Grace, Heaven, Goodness, Justice, Men, etc. And to hold, 1. That
the words are not necessary
for themselves, but for the sense; and therefore Translations, or any words
which give us the same sense, may serve to the being of Saving Faith. 2. That
the sense it self is not necessary for it self ultimately, as if Holiness lay
in notions, but for the things which that sense reveals, viz. God to be loved
and obeyed, Christ to be received, the Holy Ghost to be received and obeyed,
Holiness and all Grace to be received, loved, used, increased; our Brethren to
be loved, Heaven to be desired, etc. All sense will not bring us to the
reception of the things; for all is not apt; but any that does this (which must
be divine and apt) will constitute us true Believers.

. 24. 1. The material Objects of our acceptance and consent, are the Word of
God commanding, offering, and promising, and the good of Duty and Benefit
commanded, offered and promised; that is, All that is given us in the baptismal
Covenant, God the Father and his Love, the Son and his Grace, and the Holy
Ghost and his Communion: The Father as reconciled and adopting us, the Son as
having redeemed us, to teach, rule, justify and save us; the Holy Spirit to
sanctify, comfort, and perfect us.

. 25. 11. The material Object of our Trust or Affiance is God himself, the
prime Truth, Power and Good, and Christ as his Messenger and our Savior, and
the Holy Ghost as the Author of the Word, and the Word as being the Word of
God: You must pardon us as necessitated to call God a material Object,
analogically, for want of words.

. 26. 12. The ultimate or final Objects of Saving Faith are, 1. God himself,
the ultimate ultimum; that is, the perfect Complacency of his will in his Glory
eternally shining forth in our Glory and the Glory of Christ with all the
Church triumphant. 2. Next to that, This Glory it self (which is a created
thing) and the Perfection of the Universe, and of Christ's Church and our
selves* in which it consists. And therein our own Perfection, and our perfect
sight, love and praise of our glorious God, and our Redeemer. 3. And next under
that, the first fruits of all this in this World, in the foresaid love of the
Father and Grace of the Son, and Communion of the Holy Spirit and the Church.

. 27. If therefore we were put to give a full description of Saving Faith, we
must be as large as this following, or suchlike in sense, viz.

[ The Faith which the Adult must profess in Baptism, as having the Promise of
Justification and Salvation, is a sincere fiducial practical Assent to Divine
Revelations, and especially to the Gospel, revealing and offering us God
himself to be our God and reconciled Father, Christ to be our Savior, viz. by
his Incarnation, meritorious Righteousness and Sacrifice, Resurrection,
Doctrine, Example, Government, Intercession and final Judgment; and the Holy
Ghost to quicken, illuminate and sanctify us, that so we may live in the Love
of the Father, the Grace of the Son, and the Communion of the Holy Spirit, and
of the Christian Church, being saved from our Enemies, Sin and Misery initially
in this Life, and perfectly in eternal perfect Glory: With a fiducial
acceptance of the Gifts of the Covenant according to their nature, and a
sincere federal Consent; and with a sincere devoting and giving up our selves
to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and renouncing of all that is
inconsistent with this Covenant: Which Assent, Consent and Trust are the
effects of the Gospel and Spirit of Christ, and are founded on God's Fidelity,
that is, on the Veracity, Love and Sufficiency of God Almighty, most wise and
good, and on Christ the Father's great Apostle, and on Christ's sub-Apostles;
and on the Gospel and especially the Covenant of Grace, as on God's revealing
and donative Instrument; and on the manifold obsignant operations of the Holy
Ghost (miraculous and sanctifying) as God's infallible Attestation to the
Gospel-Verity.]

. 28. Historical Tradition of the Words, Books, and Matters of Fact, are
subordinate necessary means of transmitting the Objects to our sense of
Hearing, who live at such a distance from the Time, Place and Facts.

. 29. But though all these things aforesaid are in true Faith, yet a distinct
Perception or Description of them all is not necessary in him that has them.
But a more general Conception of it, which will but consist with the true
Reception of the Things signified by the Words (God, Christ, Grace etc.) may be
certainly saving to a plain and simple-hearted Christian; when one that can
describe it accurately, may be graceless: For it is Believing, and not Defining
Faith, which God has made necessary to Salvation.

. 30. Therefore we do ordinarily well use shorter Descriptions to the People,
and sometime we say, That Faith in Christ, is our Christianity; that is, our
Assent and Consent to the Baptismal Covenant, and our Self-dedition to God
therein. For in Scripture it is all one to be a Believer, a Disciple of Christ,
and a Christian.

. 31. Sometimes we say, That saving Faith is a fiducial-practical Assent to the
Truth of the Gospel, and Consent to the Covenant of Grace; or an Accepting of
all the Benefits of the Covenant, as they are, and on the terms offered; or an
Accepting of Christ and Life in, and with him there offered us.

. 32. Sometimes we say, It is a practical Affiance, or trusting on Christ as
our only Savior for Salvation, or to bring us to God and glory: And in all
these and the like we speak truly, and mean the same thing; some terms being
used on occasion, while the rest are employed, and to be understood.

. 33. Those that will needs call no act by the name of Faith, but Assent, and
confine it to the Intellect, do yet seem to differ with us but de nomine, about
a Word, and not the Matter: For they confess, if there concur not a Consent of
the Will, it is not saving, but as some call it ^ides informis; and so that
Assent and Consent make up our necessary Condition, or means of our Union with
Christ, or Interest in the Covenant-Rights or Gifts. And then seeing we are
agreed so far of the matter, it is not worth much striving, whether one only, or
both Acts shall be called Faith.

. 34. When the first Reformers had to do with men that commended uncertainty of
our Sincerity and Salvation, and kept People under a Spirit of Bondage, and
tempted them (contrary to the Nature of Faith) to love this World better than
the next, and to be afraid of dying, by being doubtful whether they should be
saved; in the heat of opposition, some of them called Faith, Assurance, or
certain or full Persuasion of our own personal Election, Pardon, and Salvation.
But those that came after them, and those that conversed practically with Men
of troubled Consciences, and observed the state of the greatest part of good
Christians, followed not this Example, but spoke more cautelously and soundly,
and described Faith as I before have told you. For they found that not one of a
multitude of godly Christians could say they were certain of their Election,
Sincerity, or Salvation: And some that were forwardest to say so, were none of
the best, and had not what they said they had.

. 35. But whatever the transmarine Divines say, I can witness, that except
ignorant Antinomians, or such Sectaries, rejected by the Orthodox, I remember
not that I have met these forty years with one Divine that takes saving-Faith
to be such Assurance of our personal Election, Justification or Salvation,
especially the first act, which is not to believe that we are justified, but
that we may be justified.

. 36. Indeed you would think those few must hold this, who say, That
Justification is an immanent eternal Act of God. But, 1. this is but a
difference about the word [ Iustification]: All confess, that God's essential
Volition of our Justification is eternal, as being himself; but some think that
his Will may be denominated an Eternal Justification; and others better say,
Not: But all confess that the Law of Grace does justify no man till he
believe, much less the Sentence of Christ as Judge. And though some call our
Persuasion that we are justified, by the name of Faith, yet they deny not
another act of Faith antecedent to this, that makes us true Christians.

. 37 And indeed, besides Mr. Pemble and Dr. Twisse (both excellent Men) it is
rare to meet with any English Divine that talks for Eternal Justification: And
Mr. Pemble, who let fall some such things in his Vindiciae Gratiae, did set all
right again in his Treatise of Justification (being very young when he wrote
even the last:) And Dr. Twisse, who in his Vindic. Gratiae, has some such
words, speaks elsewhere soundly, as Mr. Iessop his Scholar has showed in a
Treatise purposely written to prove it, when I had taken exceptions against his
words.

. 38. It is therefore shameless Calumny of those who persuade their Followers,
That the Reformed Churches take Faith for such an Assurance or Belief, that we
are justified or elected, and shall be saved; only because they find some such
word in some former disputing Doctors of ours; when as all, or near all have so
long renounced that Opinion, that he would be a Wonder among us in England,
Scotland, or Ireland (and I think abroad) that should hold it.

. 39. Yet we still say, That saving Faith is not only a believing that God's
Word is true, but a believing it with personal Application to my self.

. 40. But that Application is such as follows. 1. I believe that Christ has
died for my sins as well as for the rest of the World. 2. I believe that the
Gospel offers Pardon and Salvation to me as well as to others. 3. I believe
that God will have mercy on me, and Christ and Life shall ^e mine, if I shall
truly believe and repent; and Glory, if I persevere. 4. Hereupon I accept the
Offer and Consent to the Covenant of Grace, which gives me right to these
Benefits, if I consent. 5. And so far as I can say that I am sincere in my
repenting and believing, so far my Faith helps me to conclude that I am
justified.

. 41. But this last is a mixed act, and a rational Conclusion helped by Grace,
whereof the major only is de fide [He that believes is justified] but not the
Minor [ I believe.] Therefore we usually call it a fruit of Faith.

. 42. Some incautelous Divines in the heat of Dispute do indeed say, That it is
de fide divina, or a Divine Word, that [ I am a true Believer.] And Chamier too
unhappily goes about to prove it by saying, That it is the Word of the Spirit
in us, which is the [ Word of God:] As if the Spirit spoke in us new Articles
of Faith, or a new Word to be believed, whose work in those that are not
inspired Prophets, is but, 1. to cause us to believe that Word already given:
2. To be a witnessing Evidence that we are God's Children, by making us holy as
he is holy, as similitude witnesses a Child to be his Fathers. 3. And to help
us to discern that Holiness or Evidence, and to exercise it, and to gather
Comfort from such discerning it, and exercise.

. 43. We now commonly disown all such Assertions; I meet with no sober Divine
that owneth them, because we grant, that Conclusio semper sequitur partem
debiliorem: But yet we find that those few that call it de fide, do most of
them mean no more, but that it is partly de fide, because the Major Proposition
is so; and so they differ but about a Logical Notion.

. 44. Some have said indeed (Beyond Sea) That a man cannot believe, and not
know it; but we know thousands may believe, and yet doubt whether it be a
sincere and saving sort of Faith.

But I have written so many Books of these matters, that I here add no more.

CHAP. XXI. Of the nature of Righteousness, Justification, and Pardon.
. 1. THE Controversies about Justification have made a great noise; but I think
that those de re are few, in comparison of those de nomine, even among all
sorts of Christians; and the confounding them by unskilful Heads, who have made
the ignorant believe, that those which are but de nomine, are de re, has
kindled foolish Wrath, and quenched Christian Love, and taken up poor Souls
with a deceitful Zeal, who have thought that they were contending for great and
necessary Truths, when it was but for Logical Notions, Names, and Modes of
Expression, over-commended to them by their several Teachers.

. 2. The Words Justice (Righteousness) and Justification, are very ambiguous
used in many senses in the Scriptures, and in the Writings of Divines, and in
the common use of men, which I have opened in so many Books, and so largely, as
shall here excuse my brevi^y: The Senses which we are now most concerned to
take notice of, are these following.

. 3. Righteousness is considered materially, or formally: Materially it is, 1.
immediately; 1. A righteous Action: 2. A righteous Disposition or Habit; 2. And
thence a righteous Person.

. 4. Righteousness materially is, 1. in some or other particular Action,: 2.
Or, in the main bent of Heart and Life: 3. Or, in Perfection. The first
denominateth the Person Righteous in hoc, or secundum quid: The second
denominateth him a sincerely Righteous Man: The third, a perfectly Righteous
Man.

. 5. In the notion of the material Cause, is included also the Comparative or
Relative State and Proportion of Actions: When the Action is duly qualified and
modified in its physical Nature and Circumstances, it is materially just.

. 6. The form enquired of, is Quid morale? And it is the Relation of the
Action, and Habit, and Person, as congruous to the justitia mensurans, or the
Rule of Righteousness. The Rule or Law first makes jus vel debitum, and says,
This shall be your Duty, and your Neighbor's Due (and declares God's Due:)
And the jus being constituted by the Law (natural or positive) that which
agrees to it, is j^stum. So that Righteousness formally is a moral Relation
resulting from the physical mode and relation of Actions and Habits, as
compared with the Law or Rule. A moral Relation founded in a physical Congruity.

. 7. Righteousness is both materially and formally distinguishable as toward
God or Man: Materially, as it is God or Man that we deal ^ustly or injuriously
by: Formally, as it is God himself, or Men ruling under him, who give us Laws,
and make the debitum vel jus, or dispose of Propriety.

. 8. Righteousness toward God being Relative to his Laws, is to be
distinguished according to the several Laws that men are under, and according
to the several parts of the Law, which give the word diverse Senses.

. 9. 1. Righteousness as related to the Precept as such, is nothing but
Obedience, whether partial, sincere, or perfect: He that does righteousness is
righteous.

. 10. 2. Righteousness related to a mere Condition (of Pardon or Salvation,
etc.) is the performance of that Condition, which may be the Causa judicanda.

. 11. 3. Righteousness, as related to the premiant or donative part of the Law
or Promise, is our jus ad praemium, our Right to that Reward or Gift.

. 12. 4. Righteousness, as relative to the penal part, is our jus ad
impunitatem, or when punishment is not due to us according to that Law.

. 13. 1. Righteousness, as related to the Precept of the Law of Innocence, is
materially perfect, personal, continued Obedience to our Creator.

. 14. 2. Righteousness, as related to the Condition of that Law, is the same;
because nothing but the said perfect Obedience is there made the Condition of
Life.

. 15. 3. Righteousness related to the rewarding part of that Law is right to
that Life which is there promised; that is, to God's Love and Felicity.

. 16. 4. Righteousness related to the Penalty of that Law, is a Right to
Impunity, as to the Death which it threatens to Sinners.

. 17. 1. Righteousness, as related to the mere preceptive part of the Law of
Grace, is also perfect Obedience for the future (not Innocence, as to the time
past) for even Christ makes perfect Obedience our Duty, though he pardon sin.

. 18. 2. Righteousness, as related to the Condition of the Law of Grace, is
sincere Faith and Repentance, as the Condition of our first Right to the
present* Gifts of the Covenant, and also sincere Love and Obedience to the end,
as the Condition of our final Justification and Glory.

. 19. 3. Righteousness, as related to the Reward of the Law of Grace, is our
Right to our Relation to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and all the Gifts of
the Covenant, Christ, Grace, and Glory.

. 20. 4. Righteousness, as related to the penal part of the Law of Grace, is
our Right to Impunity, as to the Punishment threatened specially by that Law.

. 21. The meritorious Cause of both these last (our Right to Impunity, and to
Life) is the Righteousness of Christ; for the sake of which the Condonation and
Donations of the Covenant of Grace are given us.

. 22. This Righteousness of Christ is his fulfilling the Conditions of his own
proper Law or Covenant of Mediation: which is materially, 1. His habitual, 2.
and actual Perfection in Resignation, Obedience and Love; 3. and therein his
Humiliation and offering himself a Sacrifice for sin: 4. And all this exalted
to acceptable Dignity by the Conjunction of the Divine Perfection.

. 23. The Donative Covenant of Grace to Man being but a mere Instrument of
Donation and Condonation, that which procured it, is the procuring Cause of
Pardon and Life; that is, Christ's meritorious Righteousness.

. 24. Though this Covenant pardon and justify no man till he perform the
Condition, and be a capable Subject by that moral Disposition, yet when that
Condition is performed, its performance makes us but meet Recipients, and it
is still the meritorious Righteousness of Christ, for which we have the free
gift of Pardon and Life; for the performance of the Condition does but remove
the receptive Incapacity of the Patient, and the suspension of the Donation.

. 25. Justification signifies, 1. making us righteous and judicially
justifiable. 2. Judicial Justification (1. By Plea, 2. By Evidence and Witness,
3. By Sentence.) 3. Using us as Righteous by Execution: Or, 1. Constitutive, 2.
Judicial, and 3. Executive Justification.

. 26. No man of common Understanding will deny the real difference of these
three: And if the Name only be Genesis 6. 9. Hos. 14. 9. Heb. 10.* 38. and 12. 23.
Luke 1. 17. and 2. 25. and 14. 14. and 15. 7, Matthew. 10. 41. 2 Pet. 2. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 9. Romans 5. 7. Mat. 13* 17. 1 Jo. 3. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 12. and 4. 18. Heb.
11. 4. Mat. 13. 43. and 25. 37. 46. Romans 10. 6, 10. and 8. 4. 10. and 6. 13,
16, 19, 20. and 5. 17, 21. Romans 2. 26. Act. 10. 35. Luke 1. 75. Mat. 5. 6, 20.
questioned, no man will reasonably deny, That in humane use the name is
accordingly applicable to each: And that use of it is easily proved also in the
Scripture; 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 7. Rev. 22. 11. etc. And the word Righteous
and Righteousness, is so frequently used in Scripture for that called Inherent,
or Self-performed Righteousness (incomparably oster than in any other Sense) as
will help to inform us what Constitutive Justification is: And if any dislike
the Name; let them call it [ Making us righteous] if that will please them
better than the word justifying.

. 27. Constitutive Justification is ever first: God never judged a man
righteous, that was not righteous.

. 28. No man on earth is righteous by the Condition, or by the rewarding Part
of the Law of Innocence. Not by the Condition as performed, for that Condition
is perfect, perpetual, personal Innocence, which no man has; nor is any
righteous in conformity to the Precept, unless secundum quid, as a damnable
Sinner's less unrighteousness may be called Righteousness: Nor is any one
justified by the Retributive or Promissory part of that Law, because perfect
Innocence is its Condition.

. 29. Though that Law perfectly justify Christ, who perfectly fulfilled it, we
are not therefore righteous in the sense of that Law, or justified by it,
because Christ fulfilled it (of which more anon:) Because the sense of the Law
was not [ Thou shall obey, or another for th^e.] (It never mentioned a
vicarious Obedience:) But [ thou thy self shall perfectly obey.]

. 30. We are justified from, or against the curse of that first Law, by
deliverance or grace; but it is by a Redeemer, and not by that Law.

. 31. The Causes of our whole Justification (whose parts were beforementioned)
are these: 1. The constitutive Causes (called Material and Formal) are before
opened, being diverse in their diverse parts: In brief, our Righteousness now is
[ our Interest in the meritorious Righteousness of Christ, and our own
performing of the Conditions of that Interest, or of the New Covenant by his
Grace, and thereupon our Right to Impunity and Life (or to Salvation from
destructive Punishment, and to Glory.) 2. The efficient Causes are, 1.
Principal, God: 2. Mediatory and meritorious, Christ and his Righteousness: 3.
Instrumental (as to our jus ad impunitatem and gloriam) the Condonative and
Donative Covenant. 4. The material Dispositio receptiva of this Right, is our
Faith and Repentance, or performance of the Covenant's Condition hereof. 5. The
principal Cause of this Faith or Disposition, is the Holy Ghost. 6. The
instrumental, is the Word. 7. The mediate Agent is Man.

. 32. That Justification which consists in our jus impunitatis quoad poenam
damni and sensus, our right to impunity (as to Loss and Sense) is the same
thing with Pardon of sin, whether you take both actively or passively.

. 33. Obj. If the Law of Innocence as a Covenant ceased upon Adam's Fall, no
man but he and Eve was ever under it: And if so, they deserved not Damnation
for any Sin but final Unbelief and Impenitency, according to the Law of Grace:
And if so, no such desert is forgiven them by Christ.

. 34. Ans. The Law of Grace takes in the Law of Nature ( naturae lapsae),
though not on the Terms of the first Covenant, as it was naturae integrae, for
preservation of Innocence: And still all that God commands is our Duty, and
all that he forbids, is Sin; and every sin deserves death in the nature of
it (for it cannot be Sin and not deserve Punishment): but the difference is,
That under the Law of Innocence it was Desert unremedied; but now it is Desert
with present Remedy, or an affixed Pardon to every penitent Believer. So much
of the Law of Nature remains as makes Punishment due in primo instanti
naturae, conjunct with a Pardon which makes Impunity due in secundo instanti:
As if the King should grant a future Pardon by a Law to every man that will
list himself in his Wars under his Son, lest in primo instanti, their faults
deserve punishment, while they are daily pardoned.

. 35. II. Public judicial Justification (for private I pass by) is virtually
in the Law, or constitutive Justification before described: For when a man is
righteous, the Law justifies him virtually: And this is the sense that we are
said to be justified by Faith in, primarily in Scripture: A Believer is made
just indeed, and so is justifiable in Judgment, that is, justified virtually by
the Law: As we use to say, The Law does justify such a man.)

. 36. 2. But actual judicial Justification is principally by our Judge and
subordinately by Christ as our Advocate, by Plea; and by Evidence and Witness;
which is chiefly by the Righteousness of the Cause laid open to all the World.

. 37. It is by the Law of Grace (the edition which men lived under) that Christ
will judge the World: Therefore we must accordingly judge of his Justification.

. 38. Seeing the thing to be judged of is the meritum causae, the Merits of a
man's Cause; therefore the same may be the meritorious Cause and the material
of this judicial Justification; and they err that take this for an Absurdity.

. 39. Though the great end of God's Judgment of Man will be to glorify his own
Justice, Mercy and Wisdom, and to glorify Christ's Righteousness, yet the
Cause of the day, which is to be decided, is not whether Christ be righteous,
but We: Nor whether he fulfilled his mediatorial Law; which is presupposed.

. 40. Justification being related to ( real or possible) Accusation, so many
things as the Accusation may extend to, the Justification must extend to if
perfect.

. 41. But no man is perfectly and absolutely just or justifiable: For instance,
1. If we be accused to have sinned, we cannot be justified directly against
this Accusation, but must plead guilty by Confession. For factum non potest
fieri infectum, and that Fact will for ever be culpable: [ Adam did sin] will
for ever be a true assertion. The Guilt of fact or fault is never done away in
it self; [that it was really a fault] and [that we really did it,]. will be an
everlasting Truth: Of which more afterward.

. 41. 2. If the Accusation be, That [ in Adam we deserved Death,] it must be
confessed: Yea, temporal Death and correcting Punishments are not only deserved
but inflicted, and not pardoned, nor we justifiable herein.

. 42. 3. If the Accusation be, that we deserved to have Abatements of Grace,
With-holdings of the Spirit, and abatement of what Glory we might else have
had, all this must be confessed.

. 43. 4. Yea, if it be said, That our Sin primo instanti deserved Hell, it must
be confessed, and against all this there is no direct Justification.

. 44. But against these Accusations we must be justified: 1. If it be said,
that we are of Right to be damned, or have no Right to Heaven but to Hell, this
must be denied: And we must be justified by these several Causes: 1. Because
God's Justice and the Ends of the violated Law are satisfied by Christ, and by
his Righteousness, a free Gift of Pardon and Life are merited for us: 2. And
this free donation is the Law that we are to be judged by, which gives us
Christ to be our Head, and Pardon and Life with him.

. 45. 2. If it be said, That we are Unbelievers, impenitent or unholy, and did
not fulfill the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, we must deny it, and be
justified against this by our Faith, Repentance and Holiness it self; or else
we must be condemned and perish; for nothing else will do it.

. 46. And seeing it will be the work of the day, to judge men as performers or
non-performers of the said Conditions of the Law of Grace, therefore it is that
the Scripture speaks so much of inherent or performed Righteousness, and of
Christ's judging men according to their works, that is, their works which are
the performance of that Condition.

. 47. To be judged according to our Works, is to be justified or condemned
according to our Works: For to be judged is the genus, and to be justified or
condemned are the species. Judging is justifying or condemning.

. 48. While all are agreed, that all men shall be justified or condemned
according to their Works, it is unreasonable to quarrel at that height that
many do, about the syllable [ BY] ( whether men be justified and condemned by
their works) as if [ according to them] and [ by them] had a different sense;
when as to judicial justification the sense is the very same, though as to the
making of men just, the sense may differ.

. 49. We are commonly agreed, that no man is justified by Works in any of these
following senses.

1. No man is justified either constitutively or judiciarily by his Works done
according to the Law of Innocence, that is, by perfect personal Obedience and
Love, (because we have it not.) 2. No man is justified constitutively or
judiciarily, by his Works done according to the Mosaical Jewish Law as such. 3.
Much less by any Works of his own or other men's invention, which he accounts
good and are not so. 4. No man is justified by any Works set in opposition to
or competition or co-ordination with Christ, but only in subordination to him
and his Righteousness by which we are redeemed, and for which we are all first
conditionally pardoned and justified by the Law of Grace. 5. No man could be
justified by his Gospel-Obedience, or his Faith, if he were to be judged by the
Law of Innocence, as not redeemed. 6. No man's Faith or Obedience will justify
him in Judgment against this accusation, [ Thou art a Sinner] or this [ Thy sin
deserved Death.] Nor as one that has fulfilled all the preceptive part of the
law of Christ. 7. No Works do justify us, as meriting Life of God in proper
commutative Justice. 8. No man is justified by Tasks of working, as
contradistinct from believing and trusting on Free Grace: or by external works,
without Christ's Spirit and spiritual Evangelical Duties. 9. No good Work or
Act of Man was a Condition of God's giving us a Redeemer, or giving us a
conditional justifying Law of Grace. 10. Man's true Faith and Repentance is not
before the Grace which works it, and therefore is no Condition of that Grace.
11. Man's antecedent common Works, while he is impenitent, merit not properly
the special Grace which causes Faith and Repentance. 12. We have no Works that
are acceptable to God, but what are the fruits of his Spirit and Grace.
. 50. And on the other side we are agreed, 1. That we are justified by the
Works of Christ, as the Meritorious Cause of our Justification.

2. That the Justification purchased and given us by Christ, is given us by a
Law or Covenant of Grace, which gives (as God's Instrument) Right to Impunity
and to Life to all true penitent Believers: And therefore he that is justified
according to this Law of Grace, from the charge of Impenitence and Unbelief,
must be justified by his Repentance and Faith materially, as being the
Righteousness in question, as is aforesaid.

3. That without Holiness none shall see God: And if any be accused as unholy
(and on that account no Member of Christ or Child of God, or Heir of Heaven)
his Holiness must be the matter of his Justification.

4. That though our Faith, Repentance and Holiness be no universal absolute
Righteousness, yet they are that on which the judiciary Scrutiny must pass, and
which will be the question of the great day, on which our Life or Death will
depend as on the Condition or moral Qualification of the Receiver.

5. That in this sense all men shall be judged, by Justification or
Condemnation according to their Works, or what they have done; that is, as they
have performed or not performed the Conditions of that Law of Grace which they
were under (as aforesaid.)

6. That therefore they that will be justified at last, must trust in Christ
that redeemed them, and be careful to perform the Conditions of his Law of
Grace, and both must concur.

7. That that which is the Righteousness which must justify us in Judgment, is
the same that must now constitute us just.

8. That when our Right to Salvation is the thing in question to be judged,
that which justifies our Right to Salvation, justifies the Person as to that
Right; and so far the same thing is the Condition of our Right to Salvation and
to our Justification.

9. And if any with Augustine will mean by [ Iustification] God's making us
such as the Judge will justify by Sentence and Execution, then our Conversion
is part of that Justification.

10. That Scripture sometimes takes Justification in that sense, and most
frequently by [ Righteousness] means that which consists in our Acts and
Habits: In all this there is no place for Controversy or Disagreement.

. 51. They that say, That we must have inherent and performed Righteousness,
but that no man is at all justified by it, must take justifying in some
particular limited sense, (which therefore they should explain by distinction)
or else they speak gross contradiction: For it is no Righteousness if it
constitute not the owner righteous, so far, or in that point; nor yet if the
owner may not be justified by it in Judgment, against the accusation of being
in that point or so far unrighteous. If he that does Righteousness is
righteous, that Righteousness will materially justify him against the false
accusation of the contrary.

. 52. Yea, while they make Faith, Repentance and Holiness but Signs and
Evidences of our right to Life-eternal, they thereby allow it some place in
Justification: For Evidence has its place in Judgment: And they are moral
Evidences, and not physical only.

. 53. If men understood how atheological and perilous it is to conceit, that
either Faith or any thing of ours, (no though we were innocent,) is any proper
efficient Cause of God's own internal acts in our Justification, and would
understand that all can be no more than dispositio receptiva, which Dr. Twisse
calls causa dispositiva, a mere receptive Aptitude, which is but the
Qualification causae materialis, that is, of the Subject to be justified, it
would presently lead them out of their vain Contention about Faith and
Gospel-Obedience herein, and show them how each in several respects and
instances qualify Man for the beginning or continuance of Justification, or
for Right to Glory.

. 54. It seems strange to some, to find the whole Old Testament, and all
Christ's Sermons, and all the other Apostles, inculcating inherent and
performed Righteousness, as that which Men must be judged about, to Life or
Death, and yet to find Paul so often pleading against Justification by Works. But
if we will take the Scripture together, and not by incoherent scraps, the
reconciliation is evident.

Man is now sinful, and condemned by the first Law, and is now under a Law of
Grace, that freely gives Pardon and Life through a Redeemer, to those that
believingly accept the Gift according to its nature, and consent by Repentance
to turn to God, and live a holy life in sincerity: Now God does through all the
Scripture tell us, That no one shall pass with God for a just man, or be saved,
that will not do this, but shall be condemned further for refusing it: And thus
he that does Righteousness is righteous, and all shall be judged according to
their works, thus required by the Law of Grace. To deny this, is to deny the
scope of the whole Scripture, and the Government of God.

But Paul disputed against those that taught that the Gentiles must be
proselyted, and keep the Law of Moses, or else they could not be accounted just
men, nor be saved: And he proves, that the Gentiles being under the Law of
Grace, may pass with God for just men and be saved, if they [ Believingly
accept the Gift of Grace according to its nature, and consent by Repentance to
turn to God, and live a holy life in sincerity] though they keep not the Jewish
Law: Yea, further, that though the Jewish Fathers were obliged to keep that
Law, it was as it belonged to the Covenant of Grace and of Faith, and that
before that Law was given Abraham and others, were just and saved by Faith,
according to the universal Law of Grace; and that the Task of Works, according
to the Mosaical Law, will of it self make no man just or savable, and
consequently no other Task of Works, which would make the Reward to be not of
Grace but of Debt, and is opposed to, or separated from Redemption and the free
condonation and donation of the Covenant of Grace.] This is the plain drift of
Paul.

. 55. Works of Evangelical gratitude, love, and obedience, according to the Law
of Grace, subordinate to, and supposing Redemption and the free gift of Pardon
and Life to penitent believing Accepters, are those that Christ and James and
all the Scripture make necessary to Salvation; and our Consent and Covenant so
to obey is necessary to our first or initial Justification; and our actual
Obedience to the Continuance and Confirmation of it. But a Task of Works either
of Moses's Law or any other set against Redemption and free Grace, or not as
aforesaid, duly subordinate to them, is disclaimed by Paul and all Christians,
as that which can constitute no man just in God's account, nor such a one as
has right to Salvation.

. 56. I verily think, that were their verbal and notional differences
discussed, and men understood themselves and one another, it will prove, that
this aforesaid is the true meaning of almost all Christians, and that they
agree in this sense, while they mischievously contend about ill or unexplained
words.

. 57. What I have said of Justification, is mostly true of Pardon of Sin:
Pardon is threefold, 1. Constitutive, which is God's giving us a Right to
Impunity: This is God's act by the pardoning Covenant or Law of Grace. 2. By
Sentence, judging us so pardoned. 3. Executive, taking off, or not inflicting
Punishment deserved.

. 58. God's non punire, and nolle punire, notpunishing and his will not to
punish, are true pardon when the Sinner, and Sin and Guilt are preexistent: But
they are no pardon before; because not capable of such a relation and
denomination for want of a real terminus. Therefore God's eternal will to
pardon, or his not punishing man from Eternity before Man was Man, or sinful,
must have no such name; which afterward it may have without any change in God,
but in man only.

. 59. Some worthy men say, that Pardon is not Justification, nor to be pardoned
is to be righteous; and that Righteousness is never taken in Scripture for
Pardon, but many score or hundred times for our performance of our Duty
according to the Law of Grace: Therefore they would have Righteousness and
Pardon still distinguished.

. 60. But I have plainly before proved, that Righteousness has many parts, and
the word many senses, and though Pardon be not that Righteousness which
consists in a Conformity to the Precept, (and so is not our universal
Righteousness) yet Pardon is (passive) that Righteousness which consists in
our right to Impunity both as to the punishment of Loss and Sense: And Pardon
with Adoption or the Gift of Life, is that Righteousness which consists in
our right to Life eternal.

. 61. 1. All men's sins are pardoned potentially and conditionally in the Law of
Grace. 2. No men's sins are pardoned actually (as to a right of Impunity) till
they are penitent Believers, or consent to the Covenant of Grace (if at age.)
3. These penitent Believers sins are pardoned virtually before they are
committed, supposing them but Sins of Insirmity, but this is properly no
Pardon, nor so to be called, because it is but the position of those things
which will cause Pardon hereafter. To be only virtual, is not to exist, but to
be in causis.

But it is too grossly inferred hence by some, That it is not God then that
actually justifies, but Man that performs the Condition; as if the Condition
which is but a suspension of the Donation, (and the performance a removal of
the suspending Cause) were the donative Efficient; and so the Receiver were the
Giver. As if he that opened the window were the Sun or efficient Cause of the
Light; or he that lets off a Crossbow by removing the Stop, were the spring
that effects the motion of the Arrow.

. 62. Neither Pardon nor Justification are perfect before death: For there are
some correcting Punishments to be yet born, some Sins not fully destroyed, some
Grace yet wanting, more Sins to be forgiven, more Conditions thereof to be
performed. The final and executive Pardon and Justification are only perfect.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Imputation of Righteousness.
. 1. THE great Contentions that have been about this Point, tell us how
needful it is to distinguish between real and verbal Controversies: The
opening of the Doctrine of Redemption before, Chap. XI. has done most that is
needful to the solution of this Case, we are commonly agreed in these following
Points.

. 2. 1. That no man has a Righteousness of his own performance, by which he
could be justified, were he to be judged by the Law of Innocence; that is, all
are Sinners, and deserve everlasting Death.

. 3. 2. That Jesus the Mediator undertook to fulfill all the Law which God the
Father gave him, even the Law of Nature, the Law of Moses, and that which was
proper to himself, that thereby God's Wisdom, Goodness, Truth, Justice, and
Mercy, might be glorified, and the ends of God's Government be better attained,
than by the Destruction of the sinful World; and all this he performed in our
Nature, and suffered for us in our stead; and was the second Adam, or Root to
Believers.

. 4. 3. That for this, as the meritorious Cause, God has given him power over
all Flesh, that he might give eternal Life to as many as are drawn to him by
the Father, and given him, Joh. 17. 2. He is Lord of all, and all power in
Heaven and Earth is given him, Matthew. 28. 19. and he is made Head over all
things to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Romans 14. 9: And for these his Merits, a
Covenant, or Law of Grace is made to sinful Man, by which all his sins are
freely pardoned, and Right to Impunity and Life is freely given him, if he will
accept it, and penitently turn to God.

. 5. 4. Whenever a man is pardoned and justified (or has Right to Life) this
Law of Grace does it, as God's donative Instrument: And whoever is so pardoned
and justified, it is for and by these Merits of Christ's Righteousness.

. 6. 5. But Christ does initially pardon and justify none by this Covenant but
penitent Believers, and therefore has made it our Duty to repent and believe,
that we may be forgiven, and have right to life; as the Condition, without
which his donative and condonative Act shall be suspended.

. 7. 6. God never judges falsely, but knows all things to be what they are:
And therefore he reputeth Christ's meritorious Righteousness and Sacrifice, to
be the meritorious Cause of all men's Justification, who are justified (and of
the conditional Pardon of all the World, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20.) and as
sufficient and effectual to the assigned ends, as our own personal
righteousness or suffering would have been, and more (though it be not so ours,
as that of our own performance would have been, nor so immediately give us our
Right to Impunity and Life, but mediately by the Covenant.)

. 8. 7. And as God reputeth Christ's Righteousness to be the prime meritorious
Cause for which we are justified by the Law of Grace, as aforesaid, so he
truly reputeth our own Faith and Repentance (or Covenant-consent) to be our
moral Qualification for the gift, and our Holiness and Perseverance to be our
moral Qualification for final Justification and Glory; which Qualification
being the matter of the Command of the Law of Grace, and the Condition of its
Promise, is so far our righteousness indeed, and often so called in the
Scripture, as is aforesaid.

. 9. 8. Therefore God may in this Sense be truly said, both to impute
righteousness to us, and to impute Christ's righteousness to us, and to impute
our Faith for righteousness to us in several respects.

. 10. Thus much being commonly agreed on, should quiet the Minds of Divines
that are not wise and righteous overmuch; and it beseems us not to make our
arbitrary Words and Notions about the Doctrine of our Peace with God, to be
Engines to break the Church's Peace, seeing Angels preached to us this great
Truth; That Christ came into the World for GLORY to God in the highest, and for
PEACE on Earth, and for GOOD WILL or LOVE from God to Man (or mutual
compla^ency;) and his Servants should not turn his Gospel into matter of strife.

. 11. That which we are yet disagreed about, is the Names and Notions
following: As, 1. What is meant by the Phrase of [ Imputing] in several Texts
of Scripture; as Romans 4. 11. [ That righteousness might be imputed (or
reckoned) to them also.] Ans. The words seem to me to have no difficulty, but
what men by wrangling put into them. To have righteousness impu^ed to them, is
to be reputed, judged, or accounted as righteous Men, and so used (the cause
being not in the Phras^ it self, but fore-described.)

. 12. So what is meant, Romans 4. 6. by imputing righteousness without works?
Ans. Plainly, reputing, or judging a man righteous without the works which Paul
there means.

. 13. So what is meant by Not imputing sin, Psalm. 32. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Romans 5.
13. Lev. 7. 18. 1 Samuel 22. 15. 2 Samuel 19. 19. Romans 4. 8? Ans. Not-judging a man
as a Sinner guilty of punishment, not charging his sin upon him in Judgment;
which is as 2 Samuel 19. 19. etc. because he is not truly guilty; or as Romans 4.
8. etc. because he is forgiven.

. 14. 2. What is meant by [ imputing our Faith to us for righteousness?] But of
that more purposely anon.

. 15. 3. Whether imputing Christ's righteousness to us, be a Scripture Phrase?
Ans. Not that I can find.

. 16. 4. Whether it be a fit or lawful Phrase, and whether in so great matters,
departing from Scripture Phrase, and pretending it necessary so to do, be not
adding to God's Word, or the cause of Corruptions and Divisions in the Church,
and an intimation that we can speak better than the Holy Ghost? Ans. God has
not tied us to use only Scripture-words or Phrases; and use may make them
convenient and needful for some times and places, which else are less
significant or congruous. And in this case I see not, but that the Phrase is
lawful well explained. But if any will pretend their own Phrases to be more
necessary than they are, and will calumniate those as not Orthodox, who will
not use them, or subscribe to them, I cannot justify such from the guilt of
Presumption, and Injury to the Church, the Truth and Christ, and the Love of
Brethren.

. 17. 5. Whether they that affirm, That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to
us, or those that deny it are to be accounted Orthodox?

Ans. Perhaps both, if they both hold the same sound Doctrine under various
Phrases: And perhaps neither, if by their various Phrases, each mean something
that is unsound.

. 18. They heinously err, who deny Christ's Righteousness to be so far imputed
to us, as to be reputed the meritorious Cause of our Pardon and Right to Life
(or our Justification) performed by our Mediator, as the Sponsor of the New
Covenant, (for our sakes, and his Sufferings in our stead) as is
afore-expressed.

. 19. And they heinously err, and subvert the Gospel, who say, that Christ's
Righteousness is so imputed to us, as that God reputeth, or judges Christ to
have been perfectly holy and righteous (or obedient) and to have suffered,
though not in the Natural, yet in the Legal or Civil Person of the Sinner or
Believer, as their strict and proper Representer; and reputeth us to have been
perfectly holy, righteous, or obedient in Christ, as our Representer, and so to
have our selves fulfilled all righteousness in and by him, and in him to have
satisfied Justice, and meri^ed Eternal Life, and Christ's Righteousness to be
ours in the same sense of Propriety, as it was his own: For his Divine
Righteousness is the Essence of God, and his Humane his Habits, Acts, and
Relations, which are the Accidents of his own Person only as the Subject, and
cannot be in another (as is after showed.)

. 20. Though most of us now leave this Doctrine to the Antinomians or
Libertines, yet so many Protestants formerly have seemed to own it by their
unmeet Phrases, in extreme opposition to the Papists, or at least to come too
near it, as has greatly scandalized and hardened their Adversaries, and
injured the Reformed Churches.

. 21. The Person of our Mediator was neither in the Sense of the Law, or in
God's account, properly the person of the Sinner; Christ and we are distinct
persons.

. 22. Had we been perfectly holy, innocent, and obedient in Christ, it would
follow, 1. That we are justified by the Law of Innocence, as having perfectly
done all that it commanded us, which is not true: It is by the pardoning Law of
Grace that we are justified.

. 23. 2. That we have no need of Pardon, nor of Christ's Sufferings for our
Pardon, nor of Prayer for Pardon, nor any means for it; for he needs no
pardon that is perfectly innocent.

. 24. 3. Therefore they assert Contradictions when they say, that we both
perfectly obeyed by, and in Christ, and yet suffered or satisfied in, or by him
for our Disobedience.

. 25. 4. It would follow, that all penalties (even corrective) laid on us by
God, are injuries, or no penalties, because we are innocent.

. 26. 5. And that God's denying us any helps of his Spirit, and permitting the
remnant of our Sin yet unhealed, and the weakness of our Graces, are an
injurious denying us our Right.

. 27. 6. It would follow, that we have present Right to the present possession
of the whole Reward, both Grace and Glory, and that our delay is our wrong;
because he that is supposed to have done all that the Law makes his Duty from
his Birth till his Death, has right to the Reward by the Law or Covenant.

. 28. 7. And it would follow, That no Duty could be required of us as a
Condition of any Benefit purchased by Christ, nor any sin charged on us so far
as to be indeed our sin, because we are reputed perfectly holy and innocent.

. 29. Many other such Consequents I pass by, and other Arguments against this
Opinion, and the Confutation of the contrary, because I have done it all
elsewhere, especially in a peculiar Discourse on this Against Dr. Tully's
Accusations.
Subject, and in my Disputations of Justification.

. 30. Christ's own Righteousness habitual or actual, is not ours, as it is his,
in strict sense in it self, as if we were the Proprietors, the Subjects of his
Habits, or the Agents of his Acts: For it is impossible that the Accidents of
several Subjects should be the same.

. 31. And the form of Christ's Righteousness is therefore no more ours, than
the Matter: For Righteousness in Christ, and Righteousness in each Believer,
are distinct Righteousnesses.

. 32. Many Divines have pleaded, That Christ's Righteousness is the form of
ours; and others, that it is the Matter; and others, that it is the meritorious
Cause; and have too much troubled the Church with Logical Notions. The
meritorious Cause it is undoubtedly; and they that say, That it cannot then be
the material Cause, must consider, that we mean, that it is the Matter of the
meritorious Cause: And had we been innocent our selves, would not our Innocence
have been both the Matter of our righteousness (or Merit) and the meritorious
Cause of our right to Life.

. 33. But this supposes that the Matter of the Gospel subordinate
righteousness which consists in that Repentance, Faith, and Holiness, which
is required in us to our right to life, is to be found in our selves, and not
in Christ for us.

. 34. But the form of Christ's righteousness cannot be the form of ours, as is
aforesaid; but it is the form of that which is the meritorious Cause of ours:
But what need have we of th^se Disputes?

. 35. The Not imputing of sin, is called also by some, the Form of
Justification; and by others, that, and the Imputation of righteousness
conjunct; and by others, that, and God's accepting us as righteous; others call
these the Matter of Justification; and thus men's Logic, ill-managed, troubles
the Hearers, which I would not mention, had it not been necessary to
disintangle them.

. 36. They that will dispute what is the form of Justification, must first
confess the Ambiguity of the Word, and tell us in which Sense they take it:
There are so many things that are truly the form of Justification taken in many
Senses, that without such distinguishing to dispute of the form of
Justification, is worse than to say nothing: Justification taken actively, as
the Act of the Iustifyer* has one form: Justification passively taken for the
state of the justified, has another form: And ^^ch of these are subdivided
into many Acts, and many Effects, which have each their form. The Act of
pardoning sin, is one thing, and therefore has one form: The Act of making us
inherently righteous, or performers of the Condition of the Covenant of Grace
has another form: The Act of esteeming us righteous, has another: The Act of
our Advocate defending our righteousness, another. The Act of
Justifying-evidence and Witness, another: The Act of sentencing us righteous,
another: And the Act of executive Justification, or rewarding and saving us, as
righteous, another. And accordingly Justification passively taken, has as many
forms as it signifies various Effects. To be in a state of conditional
Justification, to be Performers of the Condition of the Law of Grace, to have
jus impunitatis, right to Impunity (that is, to be pardoned) and to have jus
Doni and Praemii regni coelestis, a right to Glory, as a gift, and as a reward
(in several respects) are all Effects of God's foresaid Acts, and every one
has its proper Being and Form: And all this as given us; for the Merits of
Christ's righteousness, concur to make up our whole Justification as
constitutive and virtual in Law; and each part has its proper form: And then
Apologetick, Judiciary (or Sentential) and Executive Justification, are also
various Species, which have their Forms.

. 36. Obj. Unius rei unica est forma: Justification is one thing, and therefore
has but one form.

Ans. 1. One Justification is but one thing; but there are diverse things so
called, even in Scripture. When Christ says, By thy words thou shall be
justified, Mat. 12. and Paul says, that we are justified by the spirit of God,
1 Cor. 6. 10. and John says, He that is just, let him* be justified still,
Rev. 22. they have not all the same Sense. 2. One thing may have one form, and
yet its many parts have many forms: Our righteousness taken for the whole of
it, is one whole, whose form is signified by that general Name of our total
righteousness; and yet its parts are all those beforementioned, which yet each
severally are commonly called righteousness. But of these things before.

. 37. Either then let us meddle as little as may be, with arbitrary Logical
Notions in Theology, or let us handle them exactly, or else unskilful using
them in weighty matters, becomes a vain entangling of poor Souls, and a
childish way of troubling the Church of God. The truth is, the forms of such
Acts are best known by their bare Names, if they be rightly named; and by the
Name many understand what they are, where neither they nor their Teachers can
find other words by which to give you a fair Definition of them, which makes
me think of some of our over-wise, and over-righteous Catechizers of the
ignorant, who use to turn plain, honest persons from the Sacrament of
Communion, if they cannot tell them what God is, what Holiness is, what Faith,
Repentance, Sanctification, Justification, Adoption is, by some congruous
Description, when yet a wise Examination might show, that by the Name they
understand the Matter it self, though not by distinct Notions; and when the
Catechizer too often would be found shamefully to seek, if he were put to
answer his own Questions by a true Definition (as I have tried.)

. 38. To conclude, there are many sharp Volumes written of late, which reproach
Imputed Righteousness, to which they seem induced by some men's misexplication
of it; and by such unwarrantable words as some Independents use of it, in their
Savoy-Confession: And they dream that we deny all necessity of Personal
fulfilling the Conditions of the Law of Grace, as a means of our Justification
and Salvation: But they utterly wrong the generality of Divines of my
acquaintance and notice: And I must tell them, for the Independents, that they
did not subscribe or vote that Confession, as some present assure me, but only
a very few men brought it in and read it, and none spoke against it: And some
worthy persons of that Assembly, upon conference, assure me, That how ill
soever it be worded, they themselves did mean it as I and other Protestants do,
and did disclaim the obvious ill sense.

And I add, Had these Contenders but taken up with the distinction of
Imputation which Mr. Bradshaw gives in the Preface to his reconciling Tractate
of Justification, it might have quieted them; by informing them, in what sense
Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, and in what not: And they would have
seen that which is not ours, as Proprietaries of the thing it self in se, may
be called ours, because the Effects are ours, and it was given to God, for the
meriting of those Effects for us.

CHAP. XXIII. How Faith justifies; and how it is imputed to us for
Righteousness.
. 1. ABout this also there are many needless notional Controversies among men
that are agreed in the matter it self: As whether Faith justify as it
receives Christ in all his mediatorial Office, as Prophet, Priest and King? Or
only as in his Priestly Office? And whether, as it receives him in all the
parts of that Office, or which? Or as it receives his Righteousness only?
Whether Faith justify us as an Instrument only? Or as a Condition? Or as
meritorious? Whether it justify us by being it self imputed to us for
Righteousness, or it be Christ's righteousness only that is so imputed? Whether
Faith alone justify us, or also Repentance, Desire, Hope, or any other acts of
the Soul toward Christ? Whether only Faith in Christ justify, and not Faith
in God the Father, or belief of the Promise, or of Heaven? etc. Of all which
briefly.

. 2. I. The word [ Receiving] (Christ, Grace, etc.) has two different senses
necessarily to be distinguished: 1. Physical Receiving is the strict sense, as
pati and recipere are all one: Which is, 1. To receive the mere Act of the
Agent terminatively; or, 2. To receive a further effect of that Act.

2. Moral receiving is nothing but accepting of an offered thing by consent of
Will: And so to receive supposes an offer, and is nothing but Consent to it.

. 3. To receive Grace in the strict physical sense, is to be made gracious, or
to be the Patients of the Operation of Grace if it be real: But to receive
relative Grace physically, is nothing but to be made so related: So to receive
Sanctification is to be sanctified, and to receive Justification or Pardon, is
nothing but to be justified or pardoned.

. 4. But how is Christ himself physically received? That were easily known, if
you knew how he is physically given. But for a Gift of Christ's person by
physical attingency, we can say nothing of it by Scripture-warrant, that I know
of: It is no matter for our Disputes. But in two senses Christ is said to be
given to us: 1. In Relation, as a King to his Subjects, or a Husband to his
Wife: And so we physically receive those Relations, as aforesaid: That is, we
are made related to him. 2. In the real Communication of the Spirit of Christ
to us: And so we physically receive the Spirit in its operations; that is, He
works them on us: This is the first sense of Receiving.

. 4. But morally to receive Grace, or Christ, is but to consent that Grace and
Christ be ours: As a Subject, a Servant, a Wife, consent to their Relation; and
this is our Faith, and not the former.

. 5. Where note, That moral Receiving (or Consent) is but a Means of physical
Receiving (or Having) and a means which makes not the thing ours* any
otherwise, than as the Will of the Giver does appoint, and give it its Power
thereunto. This moral receiving or accepting is but dispositio recipientis, as
to having or physical reception; as there must be in all things dispositio
materiae ad formam recipiendam: He that will not accept the Gift, is accounted
by the Giver morally unfit for it.

. 6. But this is not spoken of every Gift; but of such as are offered by the
Giver on the Condition of thankful acceptance. For God gives many things
absolutely; as Christ was given to be Man's Redeemer, and Christ gave his
Covenant, Gospel, and Apostles, and sends the word to many that before have
it not, and gives the first Grace, which causes men's acceptance of the other,
and all this not on the Condition of their acceptance: But the Gifts bestowed
by the Baptismal Covenant of Grace, are all given on Condition of our moral
receiving or acceptance.

. 7. This necessary distinction of receiving being premised, I answer the
question as follows: 1. To be justified, is to be the physical Receiver of
Goa's justifying act, and nothing else in proper sense.

. 8. 2. No man physically receives Christ's Person (as far as we can prove or
understand) nor Christ's own Righteousness in it self; but we physically
receive our relation to Christ, and the Spirits operations, and our Right to
Impunity and Life.

. 9. 3. We at once sensu physico, receive our relation to Christ as our Head,
that is, our redeeming Owner, Ruler and Savior, or Prophet, as Priest and
King; and not to one first, and to another after.

. 10. 4. In the same instant of time that we receive our relation to Christ, as
aforesaid, we receive with him, as his Grace, by the same donative act of the
Covenant, our Right to Impunity and Life, even to the complacential special
Love of the Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, and so are justified.

. 11. 5. Our moral receiving of Christ himself as our Savior, is the
antecedent Condition of our foresaid physical reception or participation, being
appointed by God to that use or office.

. 12. 6. This moral receiving is that Faith which I before at large described,
and is sometime called Believing, and sometime Trusting, because it is in whole
a believing fiducial Consent.

. 13. 7. This Belief and Consent or Acceptance, has essentially for its object
all that is essential to Christ, as our Savior; his Natures, Person, his
Humiliation, Obedience, his Sacrifice and Resurrection, his Intercession,
Dominion, Judgment, together with his Doctrine, Promises, and Grace; besides
God himself and the Heavenly Glory: And it is not true Faith that has not all
this, at least confusedly and in some degree.

. 14. 8. They that say, Faith justifyeth as it receives Christ's
Righteousness, and not as it receives Christ himself in relation, or at least
not as Teacher, Lord, Intercessor, etc. do draw men into deceit by a Phrase
which intimates a false supposition, or two, viz. 1. It is false that Faith
justifies us, if they mean efficiently; as shall be showed anon. But it is
true, (though some deny it) that Faith justifyeth constitutively, so far as it
is it self our personal inherent Righteousness, (of which after): But this they
mean not: Nor is Faith in Christ's righteousness any more our inherent
Righteousness than Faith in his Promises, his Intercession or his Government,
or in God the Father. 2. It is false, that Faith as Faith does justify; either
as it is Faith in this or that or the other part of the Office of Christ; for
then we should be justified, as they call it, by that ^o credere; and then if
God had not made Faith the Condition of Justification, yet qua talis it would
have justified.

. 15. 9. But the Case is very plain: There is considerable in Faith, 1. Its
Nature, and that is only its material Aptitude to its Office: 2. The Office it
self, and that is to be the Condition appointed by God the Donor, of our
Interest in his Gifts (and so of Justification). Now it justifies not
efficiently at all (unless you take Justification for making us Holy). But it
is the Condition of Justification, and so we are said to be justified by it as
by a Condition; but it is not a Condition, qua fides, or as it receives
Christ's Righteousness, but as it is made by God a Condition in his Covenant.
But Faith, as Faith in Christ, is the Matter of this Condition: Or its Aptitude
to its Office is in Faith qua talis: And no other had been so fit: But then it
is not only our belief or acceptance of Christ's Righteousness that is this
Aptitude: Nothing but entire Faith in its essentials is this matter and
aptitude, and the formal reason of its place or office about our Justification,
is its being the Condition appointed thereto in the Instrument of Donation.

. 16. 10. Were the Question about physical Receiving, it were true, that a man
is justified quatenus, as he receives Justification, and adopted as he
receives Adoption, and sanctified as he receives Sanctification, and
glorified as he receives Glorification, and not something else; as he is rich
as he receives Riches, and honorable as he receives Honor, etc. But moral
acceptance of one thing is often made the Condition of our having another thing;
and here our acceptance of whole Christ is our undivided Condition-title to him
and his Gifts. We are no more justified for or by consenting to be justified,
than for or by consenting to be sanctified, and to learn of Christ, and obey
him.

. 17. Yea more; men use to put that into the Condition of something which the
Person fain would have, which he is more backward to, and would not else do or
have. A Physician uses not to say, Thou shall be cured if thou consent to be
cured; but if thou consent to take my Medicines and follow my Prescript. A
Father will not say to the Child, I will give thee this Apple if thou will have
it; but if thou will thank me for it, and do thy Duty: So if we might make a
difference in the reason of the thing, we should say, That God says not only,
Thou shall have Christ's righteousness, or justification by it, if thou will
have it; no more than [Thou shall be saved from Hell if thou wilt] (and who
would not be forgiven?) But [ thou shall have Christ and Life, Pardon, Grace
and Glory, if thou will thankfully take them together as they are, or wilt be
taught and ruled by Christ, and renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
and take God and Glory for thy all.]

. 18. Christ's own righteousness being not essentially given to us in it self,
but given for us; and to us in the Effects, to say, That the receiving of that
which is not given, is the only justifying act of Faith, is to say, That we are
not justified by Faith at all. But if they mean the Effects of Christ's
Righteousness, then it is but to say, We are justified by no act of Faith, but
by consenting to be justified by Christ's Merits: Which is not true.

. 19. They contradict themselves that make Christ's Priestly Office the only
Object of Justifying Faith, and yet make his whole Righteousness and Merit that
Object: For who knows not, that all Christ's Righteousness was not performed
by him only as Priest.

. 20. And Christ's Priesthood has many other actions belonging to it, besides
his Merits offered for us: Even his present Intercession: Which must be
excluded, if Christ's Righteousness here, as under the Law, were the only
Object of this Faith.

. 21. II. The second Question I had never troubled the World about so much as I
have done, had I not found too many Protestants scandalize the Papists, by
laying too much on the Nation of Instrumentality, ill explained. But the
judicious are here all in sense of the same mind.

. 22. For by an Instrument they mean not, 1. an instrumental efficient Cause of
Justification: 2. Nor of making Christ's Righteousness ours: For we give it not
to our selves. 3. But they take the word Instrument mechanically or less
accurately, and tell us, that they mean a receiving Instrument, as a Boy Dr.
Kendal.
catches a Ball in his Hat: But so as that it is a moral Instrument, that is,
both materially a moral act, and the Instrument of a moral not physical
reception.

. 23. But when they have all done, they do but entangle and trouble themselves
and others with an unapt Logical notion: For (as it is so easy to confute the
gross Conceit, That Faith is an instrumental efficient Cause (either God's or
Man's) of our Justification; (which I have done so often, that I will here
pretermit it, so) this Notion of a Passive Instrument is unapt, because, 1. The
Act of Assent is essential to this justifying Faith, as well as Acceptance; and
so is Trust, which yet are no more Instrumental in reception, than many other
Acts, even Love, Desire, Hope. 2. Because our Consent to other things, as well
as to be justified, and our Faith in God the Father, are as truly the Condition
of our Justification, as our Consent to be justified. 3. And because this
Metaphorical use of the Word Instrument, leads people to dream of proper
Instrumentality, and misleadeth them from the apter Notions: The
Covenant-Donation is the justifying Instrument.

. 24. I conclude therefore summarily, 1. Faith, as Faith in the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, in the Sense of the Baptismal Covenant, is the apt Matter to be
the Condition of our Justification by the Gift of that Covenant.

2. If Justification be taken for making us just Performers of the Conditions
of the Covenant of Grace; so Faith justifies us, 1. Constitutively initially,
as it is the beginning of that Righteousness it self. 2. And by a moral
efficiency, as it is a cause of Love and Obedience.

3. If Justification be taken for the Gift, or right to Impunity and Life in
and with Christ, so Faith is the Condition of it, and no otherwise justifies.

4. But if any will call this by the name of a Submerit, with the Ancients,
meaning but that it meriteth Justification, as a Child meriteth a piece of Gold
from his Father, by putting off his Hat, and saying, I thank you, and humbly
taking it, instead of scornful or neglectful refusing it, I will not quarrel
with any such.

. 25. But remember, that as wise men seldom make any thing a Condition of a
gift, which has no worth in it to please them; so God saw, and put such a
worth or aptitude in Faith, or else he had not so much as commanded it.

. 26. But yet a Condition simply as such, signifies neither Merit nor
Causality at all; but only the terms on which the gift shall be suspended, till
they be performed: And so the performance of a Condition as such, is no
efficien(...) of the gift, but a removing of the suspending impediment.

. 27. Therefore Dr. Twisse often calls Faith Causam dispositivam
justificationis, which belongs not to the efficient, but material or
recipient Cause; and the true Legal Notion of its next Interest in our
Justification, is its being [ Conditio praestita] and the true Logical Notion
is to be [ Dispositio moralis materiae, sive subjecti recipientis] call it
Causam vel Conditionem dispositivam, as you please: And I think this Question
needs no more.

. 28. III. As to the third Question, the truth is obvious, That Christ's
righteousness is imputed, and yet Faith is imputed to us for righteousness in
several Senses; that is, each is reputed to be to us what indeed it is. Two
things make up the Sense of Faith's being imputed to us for righteousness: 1.
Faith is really the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, which whosoever performs,
he is righteous against the Charge of Nonperformance of that Condition; and it
is reputed our subordinate, Evangelical personal, righteousness: 2. And
supposing Christ's Merits and our Redemption by him, this Gospel-righteousness
is all that is required of us on our parts, instead of all that perfect
Obedience which the Law of Innocence required. So that our Faith (taken in the
Scripture-sence) is our real righteousness related to the Condition of the New
Covenant, and instead of a more perfect righteousness of Innocence; forasmuch
as after Christ's Redemption, is required to be performed by our selves.

. 29. This, no Christians that are sober, can deny, as to the thing: And as to
the Name, it is plain to the impartial that will see that Paul, Romans 4. 22, 23,
24. and Iam. 2. 23. by Faith means Faith it self indeed, and not only Christ
the Object of Faith, as some affirm, with too great Scandal: read over the
Texts, and try what Sense it will be, if you put [ Christ] instead of [ Faith.]*

. 30. Obj. But it is not Faith in, and of it self that is meant, but as
connoting the Object.

Ans. The latter clause is true: it is Faith, as connoting the Object, Christ:
But the former is a contradiction. For Faith it self essentially connoteth the
Object: If you speak not of Faith in genere (for it is not any kind of Faith
that is our righteousness) but of the Christian, or New Covenant Faith in
specie, who knows not that the Object specifieth it? And therefore if it be
Christian faith, as connoting the Object, it is Christian faith as Christian
faith.

. 31. But will any sober Christian deny, that (...)ur righteousness in one
sense, and Faith (...)inate (...) in another, and that both are accord(...)ed
to us? How fain would some men differ, if they could, or seem to do it, when
they do not?

. 32. IV. As to the fourth Question, I answer, 1. We are all agreed, That God
will not pardon, justify, or save any, without both Faith and Repentance, and
Desire, as necessary moral Qualifications of the Receiver: And this shall serve
turn, if any like not the term [ Condition] and be willing to be quiet.

. 33. 2. Faith in a narrow Sense, as signifying mere Assent, is distinct from
Repentance; but Faith in that sense as is meant in Baptism, and has the
Promise of Justification and Life, is more the same with Repentance than many
perceive. For Repentance is the change of the mind from evil to good? And the
Good necessary to our Salvation, is a fiducial practical Consent to the
Covenant of Grace, or a practical Faith in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
And to turn to this, is to repent and be converted; even to turn from the
contrary Acts and Objects to this fiducial consenting Belief in God the Father,
Son, and Spirit; and what else is repenting, but this Change?

. 34. 3. It was never Paul's meaning, under the name of Works, to exclude
Repentance, and all Acts of Faith, save one, and Thankfulness, and Desire, and
Hope, and Prayer, etc. while they keep their place in subordination to Christ:
They do but confound sacred Doctrines and men's minds, that so imagine.

. 35. And the same Spirit that says, He that believes, shall be saved, says
also, He that calls on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved, Romans 10. 13. And
we are saved by Hope, Romans 8. 24. and we are saved by the washing Act. 12. 21.
of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5, 6. and by
believing the Articles of the Creed, 1 Cor. 15. 2. and blessed are they that
kee^ his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life (that right
is our righteousness) and may enter in, etc. Rev. 22. 14. By taking heed to
himself and to Doctrine, Timothy was to save himself and his Hearers, 1 Timothy 4.
16. Many such Texts I have elsewhere cited, which are all true.

. 36. V. As to the fifth Question, it is answered before in the Description of
Faith: As the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are one God, so Faith in them is,
one Faith; and no man can truly believe in Christ, that believes not in the
Father; our belief in God, as God, and Love to him, is that Salvation to which
Christ is to bring us: And the Consent to use the remedy, includes the consent
to have Health or to be saved: And our Belief in God, as our Redeemer, even
Christ, is the chief part of our mediate Faith: In a word; all that Belief
which is necessary to the Baptized, is necessary to our Justification: But that
is our Belief in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (in the measure that they are
revealed.)

CHAP. XXIV. Of Assurance of our Justification, and of Hope.
. 1. ASsurance of Perseverance and Salvation, is not here to be spoken of, but
only of our present Justification: And they are distinct Questions. 1. What
Assurance is desirable. 2. What Assurance is attainable. 3. What Assurance we
actually have, and who have it. 4. What is the nature and grounds of this
Assurance.

. 2. I. Some pleaded so much for the usefulness of Uncertainty and Doubting, as
if it were the safest condition to keep us humble and watchful, as excited
Luther and other Reformers to take them for utter Enemies to Christian Comfort.
And certainly Assurance is a most desirable thing; it kindles in us the love
of God; it makes Duty sweet; it makes Sufferings easy, and Death less
terrible, and Heaven more desired, and consequently cures an earthly Mind, and
leads man to a heavenly Conversation, and puts Life into all his
Endeavors: Whereas a man that is still utterly in doubt of his state of
Salvation, and right to Life, will be loath to die, and therefore love this
present World, and have less thankful and loving Thoughts of God and his
Redeemer, and so all sin will have advantage, and Holiness a great impediment.
An Infidel will confess, that such Assurance is exceeding desirable.

. 3. II. And no doubt but a comfortable degree of Assurance is attainable, or
else God would never have so fully differenced the Righteous and the Wicked,
and commanded all to examine and try themselves, and to make sure: But this I
have often elsewhere proved.

. 4. III. But all true Believers have not Assurance of their Justification,
because they are not certain that their Faith is such as has the promise of
Justification: He that believes perceives that he believes, but yet may be
uncertain that his Faith is so sincere, as no unjustified man can have.

. 5. Their Justification is real, or true, or certain in it self; but the
Evidence of it may be dark, and their perception of the Evidence defective;
from whence it is to them uncertain; that is, not known with that full
satisfaction of mind, which we call Assurance.

. 6. Yea, Experience tells us, That it is but a small part of the most
religious Christians, who will say themselves* That they are certain of their
Justification; and of those few that are forwardest to say so, all have it not.

. 7. Therefore justifying Faith is not Assurance that we are justified;
otherwise all should have assurance that have Faith; and justifying Faith in
order of Nature, goes before Justification, but Assurance that we are
justified, follows it; we cannot be assured that we are justified, but by
being assured that we believe: But it is absurd to say, [I am assured I am
justified, because I am assured that I am justified.] But this is only against
the Antinomians.

. 8. No man has perfect Assurance, that is the highest degree in this Life:
For if all our Graces be imperfect, our Assurance must needs be imperfect.

. 9. IV. This Assurance then is not properly Divine Faith, or a Belief of God's
Word; but it is a clear and satisfying perception of our own Justification,
because we are clearly satisfied, that God's Promises are true, and that we are
true Believers.

. 10. This Certainty is not by an immediate Word or Revelation of the Spirit in
us; but yet the Spirit is all these ways the cause of it in the Faithful. 1.
The Spirit working us to God's Image and Will, is our assuring-Evidence, or the
Minor in that Argument, whose Conclusion we are assured of (as the Spirit in
the Word is the Major.) 2. The Spirit in Believers helps them to perceive his
own Works in them, and know their Evidence: 3. And also to rejoice in that
perception. This is the Witness of the Spirit which we mean, and not immediate
Revelation.

. 11. Though Hope be sometimes about things certain, yet it is often also about
that which we are not certain of: And more have true Hopes of Salvation, than
have Assurance of it, or of their Title to it: For Hope may be exercised upon
probabilities, and most usually it is so.

. 12. Strong Probability, with little reason of doubting, may cause such strong
Hopes as may cause us to live and die with comfort: If doubting be small, and
Hope be great, the Peace and Joy will be greater than the fear and trouble.

. 13. Bellarmin's Moral Certainty is more than most Christians attain to, and
his, and other men's Concession thereof tell us, That in this Point our
difference is less than those have thought, who have said it was sufficient
Cause of our Separation from Rome.

. 14. While we are certain that this World is fading Vanity, and that there is
no hope of Felicity on Earth, and that therefore Godliness can cost us the loss
of nothing but Vanity, a Faith short of Certainty, and mixed with doubting,
about the very Truth of the Promise it self, and Life Eternal, may engage a man
savingly in a holy Life, and the forsaking of all for the hopes of Glory: And
such doubting, even of the Life to come, or of the Gospel, as keeps not men
from trusting to it for their Felicity, and seeking it above all, and forsaking
all for it, will keep no man from Salvation, though it be his sin, and the
cause of other sins.

Much more may this be done when men doubt not of God's Word, or the State of
Glory, but only of their own Sincerity, Justification and Salvation.

CHAP. XXV. Of good Works and Merit, and trusting to any thing of our own.
. 1. HEre are several Controversies that trouble our Peace, but few of them
that are so great as they are commonly imagined: As, 1. What are good Works
(which indeed is of great weight, and the chief in which we really differ about
Works.) 2. Whether they are necessary to Justification or Salvation. 3. Whether
they are meritorious or rewardable. 4. What place they have, and what is their
use and necessity. 5. Whether we may trust to them.

. 2. I. It is one of the Devil's chief Policies in the World, to cast out
Christ's Interest by its Counterfeits: To expugn true Wisdom by counterfeit
Wisdom, and true Faith by counterfeit Faith, and true Zeal and Piety by
counterfeit Zeal and Piety, and true Unity, and Concord, and Peace, by their
Counterfeits, and true Worship, Ministry, Discipline, by their Counterfeits;
and true Comfort by counterfeit Comfort; and so also it is by counterfeit good
Works, that good Works are often cast off.

. 3. The measure of all created Goodness, is the Will of the Creator, who is
the prime, essential Good; and no Work of Man is morally good, but what is made
so by the Will of God; that is, 1. Efficiently, by his operative Will: 2.
Directively, by his commanding Will: And, 3. Finally and Objectively, by his
pleased, or fulfilled Will. Man's Wit, Will, or Interest cannot serve to make
any action morally good.

. 4. He that intends God's Honor, and the pleasing of his Will, and the good
of his own or others Souls, or the safety of Religion, or the Church, or State,
and uses means hereto, not commanded, or any way appointed him of God (much
more if directly forbidden) does not a Work that is truly good, but only
secundum quid.

. 5. Could we be sure that such a Work would save Souls, or save Church, or
State, or our Neighbors lives, it would not make it morally a good Work; but
only make the Effect to be physically good to others that are benefited by it.

. 6. Therefore to build Churches, or Hospitals, to feed and cloth the Poor, to
save Men's Lives, to preach the Gospel, are all such as finally do a physical
good, and they are the matter of moral good; but forma denominat: Those Actions
are not morally good, unless, 1. done in obedience to God's commanding, or
ruling Will: 2. And finally to please his Will.

. 7. Those Priests therefore that set carnal, ungodly Sinners (Fornicators,
Murderers, Gluttons, Drunkards, Liars, Perjured, etc.) on expiating their Sins
by good Works, without teaching and persuading them to that internal
repentance, and Conversion of their Wills, and holy devotedness to God, by
which their Works must have a right Principle, End, and Form, do but delude
men, and cheat them by flattery into perdition.

. 8. Much more pernicious is it, to take Sin, Folly, and Superstition, for good
Works, and look to be saved by that which deserves Damnation, and to expiate
sin by sin; such are the Works of Persecuters that think they serve God by
unjust killing, or imprisoning his Servants, or causeless silencing his
faithful Ministers; such were the Wars of the Cro^sad^'s against the Waldenses
and Albigenses; and such are the Works of the Inquisition, and their
persecuting Executioners; such are Rebellions that have fair Pretenses, as were
those against the German Emperors, Fredericks, Henry, etc. and of many of such
Agents often against the Kings of England; such has been the zealous killing of
Kings, and burning of honest desirable Dissenters; and such is the alienating
Men's Estates from better Uses, to maintain a supernumerous sinful, vicious,
idle Monastery, or their prelatical needless Pomp and Pride; or to buy Pardons
or Masses for departed Souls; or to build useless Structures to the Honor of
some Saint or Angel; or to set up useless Formalities and Shadows, as Candles
by daylight, and abundance such: And such are long Pilgrimages to the Shrines
of such as the Pope has Canonized, and to visit Relics, and the carrying
about of Relics, with an ungrounded carnal considence in them; with many such
like.

. 9. So wosully has the Papal Party, and not they only, but in too great a
measure, the Greeks, Moscovites, Armenians, Syrians, Coptics, Abassines, and
most of the Churches corrupted the Christian Religion by their useless or
seducing Fopperies called good Works, that they have among them defiled its
Purity, rejected its Primitive Simplicity, obscured and dishonored its Glory,
and made it seem contemptible to Mahometans and Heathens; and made it less fit
to destroy sin, and frustrate Satan, and to please God, and to sanctify and
save men's Souls.

. 10. II. Were all Sects and Parties of Christians, well agreed what Works are
truly good, it would be a shame to us, should we not agree in the main how far
they are necessary, when the Case is so plain throughout the Scripture: I think
we are commonly agreed as follows.

. 11. 1. Perfect Obedience is not of absolute necessity to Salvation, because
we are under a Covenant that has easier terms.

. 12. 2. The Works of the Mosaical Jewish Law, are neither necessary
necessitate praecepti vel medii, that Law not binding us as such.

. 13. 3. Obedience to Man's Laws is not necessary, when the matter is forbidden
us by God's Laws, or when they are Laws without power; that is, such as men
have no Authority to make.

. 14. 4. No Works of special Grace are antecedently necessary to our reception
of that Grace, o^ of its necessary means.

. 15. 5. No external acts of sincere Obedience, distinct from internal Faith,
and Repentance, and Consent, are necessary before to our first Justification;
that is, to our right to Impunity and life in Christ.

. 16. 6. Even internal Obedience to Christ as Christ, distinct from our
Obedience to God as God, and our Subjection to Christ (or Consent to be his
Subjects, and obey him) is not before necessary to our part in Christ, or our
Union, or Justification, as in its first state or beginning.

. 17. 7. Therefore if we should suppose that a Man should die immediately upon
his first internal Faith and Consent to the Covenant, before he had time to do
one Act internal or external of formal Obedience to Christ, as Christ, that Man
would be saved. But the Supposition is so utterly improbable, that it is not to
be put as a matter of Dispute: The Thief on the Cross performed some Obedience.

. 18. 8. No Works of Man's are necessary to profit God, or can add to his
Perfection or Felicity: He needs not us nor any of our doings.

. 19. 9. No Works of ours are necessary to make up any defects in the Merits of
Christ, or to any use which is proper to Christ or his Merits or efficacious
Grace.

. 20. 10. No preparatory Works of Man's (I think) are absolutely before
necessary to God's effectual converting of him, (unless you will call the Acts
of Nature, by which he is fit to hear and think, preparatory Works unfitly):
For God can give his Grace to unprepared Souls.

. 21. On the affirmative also we are agreed, 1. That all Mankind are under
God's Government by some Law, and owe Him Obedience to that Law.

. 22. 2. That it is only Disobedience that God punishes according to the Penal
part of that Law which men live under.

. 23. 3. That it is only Obedience which God rewards, according to the
rewarding or promissory part of the Law that men are under.

. 24. 4. That the Law of Grace (and not only that of Innocence) has its
Commands of Obedience, and Promises of Reward.

. 25. 5. That men must believe that there is a God before they can believe that
Christ is the Anointed of God and the Mediator between God and man; and
therefore must first believe God's Sovereign Government.

. 26. 6. God commands men to believe in Christ, (and so makes it their Duty)
and to take him for their Lord and Savior by Faith.

. 27. 7. Men ought thus to believe in Christ and accept him, in obedience to
this Command of God, believing that it is his Will.

. 28. 8. Therefore there is some sort of Relief in God, and Obedience to God,
which is in order before our Faith in Christ: And Faith in Christ as it is
voluntary and free, is an Act of such Obedience to God.

. 29. 9. Yet is it the antecedent Teaching of Christ (by Nature, by the Word,
or Spirit, or all) by which we now come to know God to be God, and that he is
to be believed and obeyed. Therefore Christ is men's Teacher, and thereby
brings them to believe first in God, before he is known to be their Teacher,
and believed on himself. As the Sunbeams before its rising give some Light to
the Earth.

. 30. 10. God has commanded men that hear not of Christ, the use of some
means, which Mercy has (through Christ) afforded them, which have a tendency
to their Salvation, and should be used to that end. And his bare Command to use
such means (much more as seconded with abundance of Mercies) tell us, that he
bids not men use them in vain, or without any hope of good success (of which
before).

. 31. 11. He that hears of Christ and believes not, or believes
uneffectually, and is not a converted sound Believer, is under God's Command to
use certain means allowed him, to procure Faith and true Conversion, and that
not without all hope of good success.

. 32. 12. It is God's ordinary way to give his first special converting Grace,
to predisposed Subjects, prepared by his commoner Grace; in which Preparation
some Acts of Man have their part: And the unprepared and undisposed cannot
equally expect it.

. 33. 13. Faith and Repentance are Acts of Man, and pre-requisite to
Justification: Therefore as Acts and Works are words of the same sense, so
Works, even Works of Special Grace are pre-requisite to Justification.

Obj. But not as Acts, but for the Object?

Answ. That Is a contradiction. Christ is Christ whether we believe in him or
not; and it is one thing to say Christ is necessary, and another thing to say,
Believing in him is necessary: It is not necessary merely as an Act in genere,
but as this Act in specie; and it is specified (as is aforesaid) by its Object.
Not only Christ believed in, but Believing in Christ is pre-requisite as a
moral disposition to Justification: And in that sense a Work or Act of Man.

. 34. 14. It is before showed, that this Faith is a moral Work, containing (not
one only, but) many physical acts: He that believes in Christ, believes in
him as sent of God, to reconcile us to God, to bring us to Glory, to save us
from Justice, Sin, and Enemies, to sanctify us by his Word and Spirit, with
many such acts that make up the Essence of Saving-Faith: This is the Work of
God, that ye believe on him whom the Father has sent, Joh. 6. 28, 29.

. 35. 15. The Faith that has the Promise of Justification, is essentially a
subjecting our selves to Christ; that is, a taking him for our Lord and Savior
by Consent: Which is a Consent to obey him for the future.

. 36. 16. Though this actual Obedience to Christ (besides Subjection) be not
pre-requisite to our first being justified, it is requisite to the Continuance
of our Justification: For we consented to obey, that we might indeed obey, and
are per^idious if we do not.

. 37. 17. The World and Conscience will judge us much according to our Works.

. 38. 18. The same Law of Grace being the Rule of Duty and of Judgment, God
will judge all men according to their Works, required by that Law, by
justifying or condemning them.

. 39. 19. Final justification and glorification are the Rewards of Evangelical
Obedience; and the reason rendered of Christ's justifying Sentence, Matthew. 25.
( and passim) is from such acts of Man, as qualifying them for the free Gift of
God.

. 40. 20. There is a moral goodness in these Works of Man, by which through
Christ, they are pleasing to God, which is their aptitude to this acceptance
and reward.

In all this I think all sober Christians must needs confess that they agree.

. 41. III. And as to the Case of Merit, a few words with understanding men may
dispatch it. We are agreed on the negative; 1. That no Man or Angel can merit
of God in proper Commutative Justice, giving him somewhat for his Benefits that
shall profit him, or to which he had not absolute right.

2. No man can merit any thing of God, upon the terms of the Law of Innocence,
(but Punishment)

3. No man can merit any thing of God, unless it be supposed first to be a free
Gift and merited by Christ.

. 42. And affirmatively we are (I think) agreed; 1. That God governs us by a
Law of Grace, which has a Promise or Premiant part, which gives (not the
antecedent, but many consequent benefits) by way of Reward: To deny the
rewarding act, is to deny God's Law, and the manner of his Government.

. 43. 2. That God calls it his Justice to reward men according to his Law,
and give them what it gave them right to. Insomuch, that it is made the second
Article of our Faith, Heb. 11. 6. to believe that God is the rewarder of them
that diligently seek him. And he gives it as a righteous Judge, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

. 44. 3. That this supposes that such Works of Man have a moral Aptitude for
that Reward; which consists in these things: 1. That they are efficiently
from God's Spirit. 2. They are in their measure agreeable to God's governing
Will. 3. They are done in Love, to his glory, and to please him. 4. They are
done by a Member of Christ. 5. They are profitable to Men, our selves and
others. 6. The Habits and Acts are God's own Image. 7. They have the Promise of
his Reward. 8. They are washed in the Blood of Christ, that is, Their
faultiness is pardoned through his Merits. 9. They are presented to God by
Christ's Intercession. 10. And lastly, they are Man's Aptitude for the Reward
in their very nature; yea, part of it themselves as they are of God; Holiness
being the beginning of Happiness, or of that love of God which in its
Perfection is Heaven it self: Such an Aptitude, as that a holy person cannot be
miserable, nor can God hate and damn a holy Soul that truly loves and obeys
him.

. 45. 4. This moral Aptitude for the Reward is amiable and pleasing to God; and
therefore he calls the Reward in the Gospel usually (...), which properly
signifies Wages, which men give by Commutative Justice: But that is only
metaphorically, because God that cannot be profited by man, is yet pleased in
that which profits our selves and one another, and glorifieth him by
declaring his Perfections: And as if this were profiting him, he calls it
Wages, for some similitude, but not in proper sense.

. 46. 5. This moral Aptitude, for the Reward is called often in Scripture
Worthiness, (...), which is of the same signification with Merit: To be worthy
and to deserve, are here all one: So that so far Merit (Worthiness) is a
Scripture Phrase.

. 47. 6. This Worthiness or Merit is only in point of Paternal
Governing-Iustice, according to the Law of Grace, ordering that which in it
self is a free Gift merited by Christ.

. 48. For no Man or Angel can have any thing of God, but by free Gift: What
have we which we receive not, when our being is of God? Therefore it must be of
governing ordering Justice only: The thing is a Gift; but God will give this
Gift to his Children so wisely as to the Order of it, as shall be fittest to
attain his ends. Therefore it is not by Governing Justice after the Law of
Innocence or Works, but according to the Law of Grace. So that the sum of the
Solution is, That 1. the Good received in its value, as Good is of God as a
Benefactor and a free Gift. 2. But in Order of Collation, it is of God as a
wise and righteous Governor, even a governing Father, and so only it is a
Reward, and so it is merited.

. 49. This is easily understood by Parens, who intend to give their Children
freely, out of mere love, their Inheritance, and what else they want: And yet
they will give them Gold or Clothes or Food, in so wise a manner, as shall
engage them to their Duty, and will say, Put off your Hat and thank me, or Do
this or that (which is for their own good) and I will give you this. Here it is
a Gift as to the Goodness, and a Reward as to the order of giving it.

. 50. 7. The ancient Christians (as the Writings of all the Ancients commonly
show) did use the word Merit without any scruple; and I remember not that any
Christians did ever gainsay it or take the use of it for a fault: Yet did they
contradict men's carnal erroneous Conceits of Man's Merit, as well as we: Yet
now our opposition to Popery has brought the word into so great distate with
many good Protestants, as that they take it to signify some dangerous
self-arrogating Doctrine: So great is the power of Prejudice and Contest.

. 51. It is true, That when Heretics have put an ill sense upon a good word,
we must use it more cantelously than at other times and places: But if thence
we absolutely reject and ^ccuse it, we shall harden our Adversaries, and
strengthen the Error which we oppose, by running into the contrary extreme,
which will soon disgrace it self.

. 52. It is a great advantage to the Papists, that many Protestants wholly
disclaim the word, and simply deny the Merit of Gospel-obedience: For hereupon
the Teachers show their Scholars, that all the Fathers speak for Merit, and so
tell them, that the Protestants Doctrine is new and heretical, as being
contrary to all the ancient Doctors: And when their Scholars see it with their
Eyes, no wonder if they believe it, to our dishonor.

. 53. All Orthodox Christians hold the foredescribed Doctrine of Merit in
sense, though not in words: For they that deny Merit, confess the [
Rewardableness] of our Obedience, and confess that the Scripture uses the term
[ Worthy] and that (...) and (...) may be translated Meriting and Merit, as
well as Worthy and Worthiness; and we think it fitter to expound such
Scripture-words than to accuse and reject them: And they all confess, that
man's Duty has God's Promise of Reward, and that Holiness in its nature is
suitable to the End or Reward, as disposing us to enjoy it, and is pleasing
unto God and glorifieth him: And this is all the same thing in other words,
which the ancient Christians meant by Merit. And to hear many godly persons at
the same time, most earnestly extol Holiness, and desire that Preachers should
convince the People that the Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor,
and yet denying all Merit, and reviling all that assert it; this does but show,
that they understand not the word; and think others also misunderstand it: And
so we are reproaching one another, where we are agreed and know it not: Like
the Woman that turned away her Servant upon the Controversy, Whether the House
should be swept with a Bro^m or with a Besom; or the Physicians that let the
Patient die, because they could not agree whether he should take a Potion or a
Draught, a bit or a morsel, or take Ambar, or Electrum or Succinum or Car^be.

. 54. And the partial Teachers are the Cause of all this, while instead of
opening the Doctrine truly to the People, in what sense we have or have not any
Worthiness or Merit, they without distinction cry down Merit, and reproach
those that do otherwise: And if they do but say, [ Such a Man or such a Book
speaks for Merit and Free-will] they have sufficiently rendered him odious or
much suspected with their followers; when yet all sober Christians in all Ages
have been for Merit and Free Will in a sound sense: And is not this to be
Incendiaries and Adversaries to Truth, and Love, and Peace?

. 55. I have formerly thought, that though we agree in the thing, it is best
omit the name, because the Papists have abused it: And I think so still, as in
such Companies and Cases where the use of it not understood will scandalize
men, and do more harm than good: (For why should I use words against men's
edification?) But in other cases I now think it better to keep the word, 1.
lest we seem to the ignorant to be of another Religion than all the ancient
Churches were. 2. Lest we harden Papists, Greeks and others, by denying sound
Doctrine in terms, which they will think we deny in sense. 3. Because our
^enury of Words is such as for my part I remember no other word so fit to
substitute instead of [ Merit] or [ Desert] or [ Worthiness.] The word [
Rewardable] is long and often harsh: And what other have we? And it is nothing
else that we mean.

. 56. Some Papists are against the very word [ Merit] also. Some own the word,
but differ not from the Protestants about the Doctrine* some of them ignorantly
drive the poor People by ill preaching into carnal Conceits of their own Works,
and to trust an hundred Fopperies for Salvation: But he that reads most of
their School-Doctors, must either confess, that they differ from us about the
meritoriousness of true Gospel-obedience, rather in words than in deed; and
that we really mean the same thing, or else he must see with better or worser
Eyes than I do (I speak not this of them all.)

. 57. And Romaeus, who prateth of Merit in point of commutative Justice,
disclaimed by the rest (and some such other ignorant Scriblers) are not to be
taken for the Index of their Doctrine, nor yet their superstitious, abusive
Application; no more than our Deniers of all Merit are the Index of ours; nor
the profane ones abuse of it, who are ready, when we persuade them to a holy
Life, to tell us, That God saves not Men for their Holiness or Works, and that
ours deserve no more than theirs, but he will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy; and it is not of him that wills or runs.

. 58. Not only Waldensis, Contarenus, Ariminensis, and many others expressly say
as much against Merits as we: But Medina, and many of the Th^mists say the same
in Sense, and the Scotists and many others say, That Merit ^riseth but ex
pacto, from God's Promise; and to be meritorious, is no more than to be a Work
which God has promised a Reward to: And do any of us deny this?

. 59. Object. But others say, That Merit is ex dignitate operum, from the
worthiness of our Works.

Ans. Is it the Name [ Worthiness] or the meaning that displeases you? If the
Name, read Luke 20. 35. and 21. 36. Acts 5. 41. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 11. R^v. 3. 4.
Matthew. 8. 10, 11, 13, 37, 38. and 22. 8. 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29. Ephesians. 4. 1. Col. 1.
10. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. and see whether God use not the same Phrase. And as to the
Sense, one Writer understands what he says better, and another worse, and
several men may have several Senses; but they mostly seem to mean, That holy
Obedience is in the very nature of it so pleasing to the most holy God, as
rendereth it apt to be the matter of that Condition on which his Covenant
promises to reward us, the Imperfection being pardoned, and we and our Works
accepted, upon the Redemption wrought by the Merits of Christ, and upon his
Intercession, and presenting them to God. And is this to be denied by any
Christian? Doubtless there is something in the very Nature of Divine Faith,
Love, and Obedience, which makes it fitter to be accepted and rewarded, than
Infidelity, Hatred of God, and Sin, or Rebellion. Speak Christians, is it not
so? And yet it is from God's Promise and mere Bounty only, that our Right to
the Reward resulteth, though the material Aptitude be in the qualification to
which that promise is made: All this is plain and sure.

. 60. Obj. But some talk of a Proportion between the Work and the Reward.

Ans. We commonly hold degrees of Glory according to the degrees of Holiness;
and if any abusive Doctor mean any more, that is nothing to the rest. And it is
pity that Men that are agreed, should hate or revile each other as differing.

. 61. Vasquez the Jesuit is one that is supposed to say most for Merit, who
says so much against it, as I dare not say: For he tells us, That God does not
reward us at all as an Act of Justice, either Commutative, or Distributive:
Commutative Justice he easily disapproveth, and in that we all agree: But the
generality of Christians, Papists, Protestants, Greeks, etc. hold, That God
rewards us in governing-paternal-distributive Justice, as a Father gives
Benefits to a thankful Child that humbly takes them, and not to the
contemptuous or rebellious that spit in his Face. But Vasquez says, That God
has not so much as Distributive Justice in our Rewards. And yet, I think, he
differs but in words, and really means as we all do. And he that dare for
Words, revile Consenters, is bolder than I would have any good Man be: And yet
I doubt not but I and this Writing shall be so reviled by many that differ not
from me, when they think they do, (through Faction and Prejudice) when I am
dead, even for these words.

. 62. IV. The fourth Point is so far dispatched in the second, that I need here
but to say; 1. That our Obedience to God is a Duty resulting from our very
natural Being, and cannot but be so while we are Men: 1. As it is God's due. 2.
As it is part of the right Order of the Universe, and co^ducible to common
Good. 3. As it is our own Order, Rectitude and Health.

2. That Christ is the Savior and Physician to give us this Health, which is
the end of his medicinal Grace.

3. That the Soul cannot be complacentially amiable to God, nor fit for
Communion with him here or in Heaven without it. Resignation to God our Owner,
Obedience to God our Ruler, and Love and Praise to God our Father, and the
infinite Good, make up that Holiness which is our Salvation it self, and the
Image and Glory of God upon us.

. 63. V. About the next Question I may yet be shorter, How far any Works of
ours may be trusted in?

I think all agree, 1. That nothing of ours (or any Creature) should be trusted
to for any thing proper to God, or proper to Christ, or any thing that
belongs not truly to it self. He that ascribes any thing to our Faith, Love,
or Obedience, which is proper to Christ's Merits, or God's Mercy, and so
trusts them, does greatly sin, and he that trusts them for more than God
has assigned to them to do.

. 64. 2. That we must take heed of scandaous Language, and therefore must not
talk of trusting on any act of our own, when it is like to be understood, as
put in Competition with God or with Christ's Merits; as if the Question were,
Whether we must trust God, or our selves, Christ's Righteousness or our own?
For our own is not in the least measure to be trusted for that which belongs
only to Christ's Righteousness to be, or do.

. 65. 3. That yet it is a great Duty to trust every means of Salvation
appointed by God, in its own place, and for its own part alone, even to
preaching, Sacraments, Afflictions, etc. And accordingly to trust our own
Faith, Love, Prayer, Obedience, so far as they are Means, and have God's
Promise, and no further; which is no more than to trust in God, that he will
bless such means. He that trusts his Sword, does not trust it to fight of it
self, without his Hand. When God has promised Mercy upon Prayer, and to the
Obedient or Penitent, for a man to think that God will yet do no more for us,
if we repent, pray, and obey, than if we do not, is to be Unbelievers, and say
rebelliously, It is in vain to serve the Lord. He is so far to trust to Faith,
Repentance, praying, hearing, meditating, diligence, as to trust that God will
bless them, and reward them, and look for more from him when we use means, than
when we do not.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Confirmation, Perseverance, and Danger of falling away.
. 1. I Shall reduce all that needs to be said on this point to these following
controverted Questions: 1. Whether all Grace procured and given by Christ, be
such as is never lost? 2. Whether that degree of Grace be ever lost, which
gives the posse credere without the act of Faith (commonly called sufficient
Grace) in Adult or Infants? 3. Whether any lose actual true justifying Faith?
4. Whether any lose true Holiness, or love of God in the Habit? 5. Whether any
degree of this be ever lost? or all special Grace have such Confirmation as the
Angels have? 6. Whether, if Holiness be never lost, it be possible to lose it,
and be in danger? 7. Whether there be a state of confirmed Persons besides the
merely sanctified, that from the degree or kind of their grace, never fall
away? 8. Or whether Perseverance depend on mere Election and God's Will, which
secureth only some of the justified? 9. Whether all, or most, or many
Christians are themselves sure to persevere? 10. Whether Certainty of
perseverance be fit for all the justified? 11. Whether it be unfit for all, and
a more unsafe Condition than doubting? 12. Whether the Comfort of most
Christians lie upon the Doctrine of such Certainty? 13. Whether the Doctrine of
Eventual Apostasy infer any mutability in God? 14. Why God has left this point
so dark? 15. What was the Judgment of the ancient Churches after the Apostles?
16. Whether it be an Article of such evidence and weight, as to be put into our
Church-Confessions, and we should force men to subscribe to it, or make it
necessary to Ministration, Communion, or Christian Love and Concord?

. 2. Q. I. Whether all Christ's Grace given us, be such as is never lost?

Ans. No: except Iansenius and his Followers, I know of no Christians that ever
affirm it; and he does it on this false supposition, That the common Grace
which works only preparatorily by fear, is not the Grace of Christ, but a
grace of other Providence, and only Love is the grace of Christ. But it is
injurious to Christ, who is the Lord, and Light, and Savior of the World, and
God's Administrator-general, into whose Hands all Things and Power is given, to
say, That since the Fall there is any Grace in the World that is not his Grace;
and that our preparatory grace, and all that is common, is aliunde, some other
way. He that reads Ioh. 15. Matthew. 13. Heb. 6, and 10. may see the contrary.

. 3. Q II. Whether sufficient grace to believe, which gives the mere power of
believing to Infants or Adult, be ever lost?

Ans. These Questions suppose that there are these several sorts of Graces
disputed of by Divines: 1. Common grace: 2. Power to believe and repent: 3.
Actual Faith and Repentance given by that called special Vocation: 4. The Habit
of love and all grace, called Sanctification: (to pass by Relative grace, as
Justification, etc.) 5. Confirmation of these Habits. And we now speak only of
the second: And the very Being of that Grace is controverted, Whether God ever
give (besides the natural Power) a moral Power to believe, to any that never do
believe? And, 1. it is certain by Adam's instance, that he gave him a power to
have perfectly obeyed, when he did not: 2. And therefore no man can prove, that
now Of this more before.
he gives no man a moral Power to believe, that does not. 3. But it seems
most probable that he does, because his Government and Man's Nature are not,
tota specie, changed. 4. And it is certain that still all men have power to do
more good than they do. 5. And even the Dominicans grant this Sufficiency of
grace. 6. But yet for my part, I am not certain of it.

. 4. But if there be such a power given, which never acts Faith (which I
think most probable) it is either in the Adult or Infants: if in the Adult, no
doubt it is lost; for they that will not believe (to the last) retain not still
the moral power in their Rebellion.

. 5. But in the Case of Infants, I think those of them that die before the use
of reason, lose it not, nor any of the Elect that live to full Age: But as to
others, after How far Infants Grace is loseable.
long doubt, How far Infant-Grace is loseable, this seems now the most
probable solution to me.

. 6. Viz. There is a Grace that reaches but to a moral Power to repent and
believe, before men have the Act or proper Habit: Such Grace to persevere, did
put Adam in a present state of Life, or acceptance with God, this Grace Adam
lost: Accordingly such grace that contains but this m^^al power in an
Infant's Disposition
(with relative grace of Pardon) is sufficient to prov^ his right to Salvation,
if he so die; because he is not bound to the Act, nor capable of it; and even
the Adult upon the Act, have right to Acceptance and to the Spirit to cause the
Habit, in order of Nature, before they have the Habit: Therefore Infants may be
in a state of such Right and Life before the Habit, though they shall not
possess Glory without it: And yet the Adult are not in a state of such right by
the mere Power, before the Act, because the Act it self is made necessary to
their Justification, but so is it not to Infants: So that Infants and Adult may
receive a mere power to repent and believe, and lose it after (at age) by
actual sin, though this be a loss of a state of Justification to the one sort
(their fins of Nature being pardoned), but not to the other (who are not
pardoned without the Act:) And yet it follows not hence, that the grace of
habitual Sanctification is lost in any.

. 7. If this solution please not, let them that can, give us one that is less
inconvenient, and we shall thankfully accept it; but it must be none that yet I
have heard of; not the Anabaptists, nor those of their Adversaries, who leave
us no certainty of the Salvation of any particular Infants, but only say, God
will save them that are Elect, but no one knows who they are, nor how few or
many, nor can tell us of any promise made to any upon any antecedent Character
or Condition, nor give Believers any more assurance of their own Childrens
Salvation, than of any Heathens.

Nor theirs that say, Baptized Infants are saved by relative Grace alone,
without any internal real Grace.

Nor theirs that say, They have the Spirit, but tell us not in what operation;
or say, it is only right to the Spirit hereafter.

Nor theirs that say, That all Baptized Infants (at least of godly Parents)
have habitual Holiness (Faith, Love, etc.) such as the Adult in Sanctification
have, and that some at Age do lose it: I think this less inconvenient than any
one of these.

. 8. Q. III. Whether any lose true actual Faith and Justification?

Ans. That a common uneffectual Faith may be lost, is no doubt: But concerning
the other, there are three Opinions. 1. Some say, No; it cannot be lost,
because that Faith has the Promise of the Sanctification of the Spirit, as
well as of Pardon and right to Life. Therefore seeing habitual Holiness is not
lost, that which has the Promise of it, is not lost.

2. Others say, That actual Faith at first is like Adam's loseable Grace; and
that it gives us actual Pardon and right to Life, if we so die, and right to
the Spirit (in relation) to sanctify us in time, and by degrees: But that
every one that has the Spirit, has not the Habits of Love and Holiness, but
he sometimes is causing many Acts before he produce a Habit ( ad modum
acquisitorum.)

3. Others say, That both Faith and habitual Holiness are often lost. I delay the
solution till the rest be considered.

. 9. Q. IV. Whether habitual Love, or Holiness (or the Spirit) be ever lost?

Ans. That there is a confirmed state or degree of Holiness that is never lost,
I do hold; and that this is attainable, and in that state men may be certain of
Salvation: But whether the least degrees of habitual grace be utterly loseable,
which prove a present right to life, till they are lost, I must plainly profess
I do not know; much may be said on both sides: And if my Ignorance offend any,
it offends me more: but how shall I help it, I think it is not for want of
study, nor of impartial willingness to know the Truth: And Ignorance of the two
is safer than Error, by which we trouble and seduce those about us. And in this
case so many great and excellent Men have erred (either Augustine, with the
generality of the ancient Churches, or Calvin, Zanchy, and most of the
Reformed) that my Ignorance is pardonable where their Error it self is
pardoned. But let those that are wiser rejoice in the greater measure of their
Wisdom: But yet think not, that taking up either Opinion upon the trust of
their Party, is such.

. 10. Q. V. To the next, some have said, That had Adam done but one act of Love
or Obedience, he had been confirmed as the Angels in a state of Impeccability:
And that so are all that once truly believe in Christ. But Experience utterly
confuteth that: For all men sin after believing.

. 11. Others say only, That men may sin, and may lose acquired Grace, but no
degree of that which is infused: But we have small reason to think that our
increased degrees are not as much infused as the first degree was: And yet
Experience proves, that such added degrees may be lost.

. 12. Others say, All added degrees may be lost, but none of that which was
first infused: Indeed could we prove, that God always at first infuseth only
the least degree consistent with Salvation, then this must be held by all that
deny that any fall from Justification: But for ought we know God may the first
minute give one man more Grace than to another in long time, and that first
degree may be lessened by his sin.

. 13. Q. VI. Whether it be possible to lose that Holiness which never will be
lost?

Ans. The word [ Possible] respects either a Consequence in Arguing, and is a
Logical Possibility; or it respects the natural power of Causes, and is
called, Physical Possibility. In the first sense it is impossible that any
thing should come to pass that does not; because God knows it will not: And
it is a good consequence, God knows that this will not come to pass;
therefore it will not: And it is impossible that this Consequence should be
false.

But as to the natural Possibility, no doubt but of our* selves we can sin;
nay, it is not an act o^ Power, but of Impotency, or from a defect of Power:
And the Habit given us is not a sufficient Power to ascertain our Perseverance
of it self. But if you speak with respect to the Power of God, by which we are
preserved, we must thus answer: That it is impossible for us or any Creature to
overcome God's Power or Will: And if it be first proved, that God will cause us
to persevere by the way of Physical irresistible determination by Power, then
it must be called Impossible to fall away, or commit any Sin which he so saves
us from. But if he keep any as a free Agent by the sapiential disposal of his
Free Will, and so procure the event of a contingent action, then it must be
said, that this and many things are possible which never come to pass, That God
only decrees, that we shall not fall away, and not, that it shall be
impossible: Thus Dr. Twisse and the Dominicans themselves use to speak: But for
my part I ^ake God's manner of working on and for us, to be so unsearchable,
and this notion of Possibility or Impossibility, of so little moment when we
are agreed what will be the event, that I think the Controversy not worth the
handling, but made among other snares of Satan, to trouble the Church, and draw
us to vain Janglings about words that edify not, from the Simplicity that is
in Christ.

. 14. Q. VII. Wheth^r there be a state of Confirmation here?

Ans. 1. Undoubtedly there are some Christians that are strong, rooted,
settled, established; and some that are weak, and like Children tossed up and
down, Romans 4. 20. and 15. 1. Heb. 5. 12, 14. 1 Ioh. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Ephesians.
6. 10. 2 Timothy 2. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 58. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Col. 2. 5. Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. Col.
2. 7. There is a need of strengthening Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Luke 22. 32. Rev.
3. 2. Act. 9. 22. Col. 1. 11. 2 Timothy 4. 17. Psalm. 138. 3. Phil. 4. 13.

. 15. 2. It is agreeable to Scripture, Reason and Experience to judge, that
strengthened Christians stand faster than the weak, and that it is in it self
more unlikely that they should be seduced and forsake Christ.

. 16. Seeing it is so doubtful, whether any that are sincere fall away; we have
great reason to think that it will hardlier be proved of the Confirmed: I know
that Strength has several degrees, and it is hard to determine just what this
Confirmation is, but I am persuaded, that abundance of confirmed Christians
there are, who have taken hold of Christ by Faith and Love, and have clear
light and great experience, and so much Grace, as that from that Confirmation
it may be inferred, that they never fall away and perish: and consequently that
Certainty of Salvation, and not only of present Justification, is attainable in
this Life. And some of the Papists themselves are of this mind, though others
of them say, That even a state of Confirmation may be lost.

. 17. Q. VIII. Whether Perseverance depend on mere Election?

Ans. It was Augustine's Judgment (and his Followers) That Election is the
ascertaining Cause of Perseverance, giving the special Grace of Perseverance;
but what that Grace was besides Divine Volition and Preservation (whether any
special confirming degree or kind) it is not easy to gather out of him: And I
think it past doubt, That God does elect some to Perseverance, and all
persevere whom he so electeth, and because he electeth them and no other: But
whether many also are truly sanctified and justified that are not elect, and so
do not persevere, as Austin held, I said before, I do not know.

. 18. Q. IX. Are all or most Christians certain that they shall persevere?

Ans. No: For, 1. most Christians in the World hold, that Perseverance is
uncertain to the godly; and how can they be certain of it to themselves?

2. Most that hold otherwise, hold it but as uncertain, and are not themselves
certain that it is true, though they call it certain: I am uncertain: And I
find not by other signs that the most have more knowledge than my self: And he
that is not certain of the Premises, is not by them certain of the Conclusion.

3. Most Christians are uncertain that they are sincere and justified: And such
cannot be certain to persevere in that which they are not certain that they
have.

. 19. Q. X. Certainty of their present state of Justification is not fit for
those that sin as much, and are as bad as ever will stand with sincerity (till
they repent:) Therefore certainty of Perseverance must needs be unfit for them.
And therefore God never gives it to such.

. 20. Q. XI. Certainty of Grace, Justification and Perseverance and Salvation,
is a most excellent desirable thing, above all the Treasures of the World, and
to be earnestly sought by all: and tends not of it self to carnal security,
but to fill the Soul with holy Love and Thankfulness and Joy, and make our
Lives likest to Heaven on Earth: O blessed are they that do attain it: And woe
to them that dispraise it and persuade men to causeless doubting. It is the
height of our attainment here in it self, and the improvement, and makes us
live a Heavenly Life, and long to be with Christ: But we cannot therefore say
that those have it that have it not: But all should promote and seek it.

. 21. Q. XII. They that are certain that all true Believers persevere* have one
great help toward their own Consolation: But if they be uncertain, that they
themselves are true Believers, this will not comfort them. As they that are
persuaded only that all Confirmed Christians persevere, must know that they are
confirmed before this can give them the comfort of Assurance.

. 22. But I have elsewhere fully proved, 1. That most Christians have not the
comfort of their own certain Perseverance, for want of the Certainty of their
Sincerity, if not of the Doctrine it self. 2. And that thousands and millions
of Christians live and die in Peace and Comfort, that have not a proper
Certainty of Salvation. 3. Much more may such live in Joy that are sure of
their present state of Grace, though not of their Perseverance.

. 23. For Experience tells us, that though most of the Christian World are
against the Doctrine of Certain Perseverance of all true Believers, yet many of
them live and die in Comfort.

. 24. And Church History and the Ancients Writings tell us, That though for
many hundred years the Christian Doctors commonly held, That some lose true
justifying Faith, and perish, ye^ multitudes lived and died in Joy, and went
with boldness through the fla^es.

. 25. And we see in all things that men are affected according to what is
predominant; and he that has far more Hope than fear and doubting, will have
more joy than sorrow, though he be not certain, but some doubting do remain.

. 26. It is certain in it self, that God's Promises in the Gospel are all true:
But every one that truly believes it, is not properly certain of it, past all
doubt: And he that has the least doubt of the truth of the Gospel, must needs
doubt as much of that Salvation which is expected on the Gospel-Promise: And
yet such Believers may have Peace and Joy according to the measure of their
Faith and Hope.

. 27. We see among men no Wife is certain one day or night that her Husband
will not forsake or murder her; no Child is certain that his Father will not
kill him; nor any one of his dearest Friend: And yet we can have Love, Peace
and Comfort in our Relations, without such certainty: For it is melancholy folly
to live in fears of things utterly unlikely, and to cast away the Comforts of
great probability.

. 28. Yea, no godly man is certain that he shall not fall into such heinous Sin
as Noah, Lot, David, Peter did; or that he shall not kill his dearest Friend,
or himself: And yet when a man is conscious that his Nature, his Reason, his
Experience, and his Resolution, do all make him hate such a wicked act, and
that there is no probable cause to move him to it, and when we know God is
ready with his Grace to help us, how few lose the Comfort of their Lives, by
fear of such improbable things? Certainty therefore is very desirable, but a
hope of great probability may give us joyful thankful Hearts, or else few
Christians would have such.

. 29. And the Doctrine of Perseverance has its difficulties too as to men's
comfort: For he that holds, That no man falls from a state of Grace, and
sees many, that to all possible humane judgment, were once excellent persons,
fall quite away, can himself have no assurance that he is so much as justified
at the present, unless he be sure that he is better than the best of all those
persons ever were, which doubt the other side are not cast upon.

. 30. Q. XIII. Whether the Doctrine of Apostasy infer any mutability in God?

Ans. No: there is no show of it, unless you hold, that his absolutely Elect
fall away. It was no change in God when he gave us grace, and justified us; and
it would be no more if he cease, than it was to begin. It was no change in God
when I was born, and it will be no more when I die: The Change is only in Man,
and his receptive Disposition. Even the Law of the Land, without any Diversity
or Change, does virtually condemn a thousand Malefactors, and justify the
Just; and will cease to justify them, and begin to condemn them, if they cease
to be just, and begin to be Offenders. The Changes that God himself makes in
all the World, are made without any Change in him: Therefore what man does, or
undoth, cannot change him.

. 31. Q. XIV. Why did God ledve this Case so dark?

Ans. It is not fit for us to call for any reason of his doing, but what he
has given us: But while he has made it sure to us, that he will cause all his
Elect to persevere, and will deny his Grace to none that faithfully seek it,
and will save all that do not wilfully and finally reject it, and gives us no
cause to distrust his Mercy, his holy Ends are by this attained in his Peoples
Uprightness and Peace: And he seems by leaving the rest so obscure, to tell
us, that it is not a matter of so great use to us, as some imagine, and that it
is not a point fit for to be the measure of our Communion or Peace.

. 32. XV. What was the judgment of the ancient Churches of this Point?

Ans. Vossius in his Pelagian History, has truly told you, and copiously
proved it in the main. Before Augustine's time it was taken commonly as
granted, That men might fall away from a state of Grace, and that many did; but
the Case was not curiously discussed: But some thought that confirmed
Christians never fell: But upon Pelagius his Disputes, Augustine defending the
honor of Grace, laid all upon Election, and maintained, That though the
Non-elect did fall away from the Love of God and Justification, and a state in
which they had been saved, had they died; yet none of the Elect did fall so as
to perish, but that the preservation of Grace in perseverance, was the fruit of
Election. Thus Prosper, and Fulgentius after him; and some Passages in him and
Macarius, and some others, intimate that they thought there was a confirmed
degree of Grace, which was never lost; but they all took it for granted, that
some fell from a state of Justification and perished: And I remember not o^^
Writer that I have read and noted, to be of the contrary mind for a thousand
years after the writing of the Scriptures, nor any mention of any Christian
that was so; unless Hierome be to be believed of Ievinian, who says, that he
held, That the godly could not sin; which Report is much to be suspected on
many accounts.

. 33. What Use is to be made of this, I leave to others; but it beseems no
good Man to deprave or deny the Truth of such History: And some great Divines
are to be blamed for reproaching Vossius for a true Historical Report, when
they neither can confute him, nor attempt it. Two or three Sentences out of
Austin are cited by some, but merely mistaken, as if they spoke that of all the
Justified, which he speaks only of the Elect.

. 34. Q. XVI. By all that is said, it is past denial, that Certainty of
perseverance should be most earnestly sought, and that state of Confirmation
which is likest to obtain it; but that few have it, even of the truly godly,
and that it is not the common ground of Christians Peace and Comfort, but Hopes
upon great Probability, do sustain the most; and that the difficulty of the
point is such, as that it should in all Churches be left free, and neither side
made necessary to our Christian Love, Peace, Con^ord, Communion, or Ministry.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Repentance; late Repentance; the time of Grace, and of the
unpardonable Sin.
. 1. REpentance, as a Pain, and involuntary, is part of the Punishment of sin
by the Law of Works; but Repentance as a returning to God, and a recovery of
the Soul, is a Grace and Duty proper to the Subjects of the Redeemer under the
Law of Grace.

. 2. Yea, it is a great and excellent part of the Law of Grace to give
Repentance unto life, and to admit of Repentance after sin, which the Law of
Innocence did not admit of.

. 3. Therefore John and Christ himself did preach the Gospel or Law of Grace,
when they preached Repentance; which was a great part, even of Christ's own
preaching.

. 4. Therefore the Antinomian Libertines know not what they talk of, when they
call it Legal Preaching, and set Repentance as in opposition to Faith, as if
Faith were all that the Gospel did command, or Repentance did not belong to
Faith.

. 5. Yet it must be confessed, that of late times many have laid more upon the
sorrowing, weeping, and fearing part of Repentance, than was meet, and said too
little of the turning of the Soul from worldly and fleshly sinful Pleasures, to
the delightful Love and Praises of God, and willing Obedience and Conformity to
his Will, which is the principal part of true Repentance. And, I think God
permitted the Antinomians to rise up, and cry up Free Grace, and call the
Ministers Legallists, to rebuke our Error in this point, and to call us to
preach up his Grace more plentifully, and to consider better that
Gospel-obedience does chiefly consist in Thankfulness, Love and Joy, and in the
words of Praise, and Works of Love. I am sure this use we should make of their
Abuses.

. 6. Repentance is either general, or particular; General (or Universal)
Repentance is a turning of the Understanding, Will, and Practice (with
repenting Sorrow) from the inordinate Estimation, Love, and seeking of temporal
Things for the Pleasure and Prosperity of the Flesh (or sensual powers) to God,
his Will, and Service, and the Hopes of everlasting glory, through Faith.

. 7. This Repentance is the same thing with Conversion, and as I said before,
Faith it self includes Repentance in its Essence, as denominated from the
terminus a quo, it being a Turning from Unbelief to God by believing in him as
God, and to Christ by believing in him, as our Savior, and to the Holy Ghost
by believing in him, as the Agent and Witness of Christ and our Sanctifier.

. 8. Particular Repentance is our turning with Sorrow from a particular Sin, to
our contrary obedience to God.

. 9. Without that universal Repentance or Conversion, which turns the Mind,
Will, and Life to God, from created Vanity and this World, no Man can be saved;
because he continues an Idolater and Rebel, and does not indeed take God for
his God, nor Christ for his Savior, nor the Holy Spirit for his Sanctifier;
but is an ungodly Man, and a Forsaker of God and his own Felicity.

. 10. Repentance, as toward God, is sometime distinguished from Faith in
Christ: And then Repentance is our turning to God, as God, by Faith (Trust)
Love, and Obedience, resigning our selves to him as our Owner, subjecting our
selves to him as our Ruler, and loving him as our Benefactor, and chiefly as
the Infinite Good in himself, our ultimate objective End. And this is the
greater Duty respecting God, as our End, even the same with Love to God, for
the procuring of which Christ came into the World, and Faith is given us: And
then Faith in Christ is the mediate grace and duty by which we are brought to
this Repentance.

. 11. Not that any man can truly take Christ for his Savior, before he takes
God for his God, (for the Love and Intention of the End, is before our Choice
and Use of the Means:) But Christ being our Teacher first brings us to assent
to the Truth of God's Perfections and Relations to us, and then to the Truth of
his own Gospel, and by this Assent brings us (first to a common, and then) to
a special Consent at once, that God be our God, and Christ our Savior; but so
that we desire God as our End, and Christ as Mediator, as the Means.

. 12. Universal Repentance (or Conversion) does virtually contain all
particular future Repentance, but not actually. Therefore where this is, that
Soul may be saved without actual Repentance for some particular sins (or sorts
of sin): As, e. g. if we are ignorant that such or such a thing is sin, for
want of necessary Instruction, or if in a crowd of business some sinful
Thought, Passion, or Word pass unobserved, or if we do our faithful endeavor
to find out a sin, and cannot, remember it (as who can remember at Conversion
one of many that he has committed in Unregeneracy, and after many are
forgotten:) And every Man dies in some sin, which he has no time here to
repent of; viz. in some sinful imperfection of all grace and duty, and omission
of due degrees of Love, and other Acts: For all which virtual repentance will
be accepted.

. 13. But great and heinous sins must needs have actual repentance, because it
will not consist with the Truth of Holiness to be so indifferent or eas^e
toward them, as not to observe them, and remember them: And if they be known
and remembered, they will be repented of, when the Soul has opportunity to
consider what it has done. For habitual repentance is necessary to Salvation;
and Habits will act when they are not extraordinarily hindered, having notable
Objects and Opportunity.

. 14. Yet some sins that are great materially in their nature, may be lessened
much to some persons by unavoidable ignorance, and so may not have an actual
repentance: As, e. g. in times of War, to kill men in a wrong Cause, is one of
the greatest ^ins in the World; and yet when by the darkness of State-cases,
the Question who is in the right, is so difficult, that very few can decide it;
and after their utmost search, each Party thinks that God binds them to fight
for their King or Country, such persons cannot have a particular repentance,
while they are not able to see that they were deceived.

. 15. It is therefore a Case of exceeding difficulty, what sins may stand with
Justification, not particularly repented of, and what not; or as some speak,
which are mortal, and which venial sins, or sins of Infirmity.

. 16. But he that has a care of his Salvation, must hate all sin in the
general as sin, and keep up his watch, and be willing to know all the worst in
himself, and diligently use the means to know it, and resolve to forsake it to
his power, when he knows it, that so he may not be wilfully impenitent. And
he that will sin as far as he thinks will stand with grace, either has no true
grace, or shall not know that he has it.

. 17. The time of repentance or mercy, may be said in two Senses to be past; 1.
When a man shall not be accepted and pardoned, though he should repent: And so
the Day of grace is never past in this Life (and the Damned do not truly repent
in our present Sense;) so that for a penitent person to fear that the Day of
grace is past, or his Repentance too late (if true) is to contradict the Scope
of the Gospel, which gives pardon to every one that truly repents. 2. When a
man that before had some motions and helps to repent, and obstinately resisted
them, shall be given up to his Obstinacy, and never have such motions more.
Thus the Day of grace may be past with many: And such persons turn from God to
Wickedness, and are hardened in the love of sin, and usually blinded to defend
it, and hate a holy Life: But those that do repent, or fain would repent, or
yet feel God moving them to repent, have no cause to think that God has thus
forsaken them. For it is only obstinate and continued forsaking God, that is
the sign of one forsaken by him.

. 18. And this also is no proof to us, that such a Person is finally forsaken.
For many that have rejected grace many years, are afterward converted by that
grace: So that all that we can say, is, That such as God has forsaken, do
continue to the end to reject his Mercy, and prefer their Lusts; but that he
will so continue to the end, no man himself can tell before the end.

. 19. About the unpardonable sin there are two Co^^oversies: 1. What it is. 2.
Whether it be abs^^^^ely unpardonable.

That final impenitency is unpardonable, is undoubted: But the sin in question
is called, The Blasphemy against the Sea Mr. Hales of the sin against the H.
Ghost; and Paraphrase on Matthew. 12. lately published.
Holy Ghost; of which having written a special Tractate, I now only say, That
it is the Sin of such as believing not Christ to be the Son of God, but a
Deceiver, and yet being convinced of his, and his Disciples Miracles, do in
their judgments think, and blasphemously say and maintain, that they were done
by the power of the Devil to deceive men. These men rejecting the last
convincing means of Faith, are left by themselves remediless.

. 20. But, 2. the Papists and many Ancients say, That by [ not forgiven] is
meant only [ very hardly and rarely;] but most Protestants expound the words
absolutely, as they run; which the Reader will think most probable, I leave to
his consideration.

. 21. Some think that the Novatians denied all pardon to such as committed any
great sin after Baptism; but Alb^spinaeus, Petavius, and others have truly
proved that it was not so, but only that they denied Power in the Church to
pardon such Backsliders; which yet, no doubt, was their Error, seeing as God on
his part pardons men as often as they truly repent; so the Church must pardon
as far as belongs to them, such as seem truly to repent: But frequent gross
sinning does so much disprove men's verbal repenting, that such men's credit
being forfeit, their words are not to be taken till they amend their lives.

THE END*

