Much in a Little: OR, An Abstract of Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof for
INFANTS Church Membership OR BAPTISM.

With a few Notes upon the Anti-queries of T. G. By the same hand that wrote
the Fifty Queries.

LONDON. Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns the lower end
of Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel. 1678.

Reader,
WHat Artifices and assaults the Devil has made and used to supplant the
weightiest Principles, to darken the most clear and comfortable Truths, and to
break the Peace and Concord of the Church, is grown too evident to require
proof. And how he has perplexed this present Doctrine of the
Church Membership, and Baptism of Infants, with Controversies, we need not now
insist upon. But surely, were not our little ones as well concerned and
interested in the Covenant of Grace, as their Parents are, your strange and
deep compassions toward them (so rooted in Nature, and cultivated and enlarged
by Grace) would become their dreadful torment and distress. And why Infants
should feel the smart (...) dreadful punishments of the violated Law (...)
Covenant of innocent nature, (as is evident in their early diseases, pains and
death) and not be capable of redress and pardon by a gracious Covenant, I am
yet to learn. And what their capacity should be for, if not to be answerably
treated and regarded, (supposing what God by his Son and in his Gospel has
prepared and tendered to us) I cannot understand. All Laws consider Infants at
in their Parents, until maturity make them capable of choosing and acting for
themselves. And why we should exclude them from Covenant redresses, seeing God
once took them in by an Act or Law of Grace not yet repealed, I am not able to
conjecture* Were they excluded from Gospel Grace, their Parents would want, 1.
That Cogent Argument which now they have to be devoted unto God themselves, and
to be true to such a Dedication, as ever they regard the present and eternal
welfare of their Infant Seed. And 2. A Sovereign Antidote against their griefs
and fears, when their children are removed in their Infancy. For if God has
nowhere promised to save our little ones by his Son, to pardon them, and to
adopt them into his Family, what can persuade us, that they belong not to the
Devil, and that they are not gone to dwell with him when they are dead? And
then with what dejected hearts and looks must mournful Parents follow their
deceased Infants to their Graves! But I shall (and need) not say any more,
seeing this Abstract of Mr. Baxters larger and elaborate Treatise, comes on
this Errand to its Reader, who is desired to take notice, that it was ready
many Months agone, soon after the publication of the Anti-Queries, though its
own publication has been obstructed until now. Peruse, and judge impartially.

A few Notes upon the Querist Examined.
YOur Anti-Queries, very lately sent me by one of your party, as [A full Answer
to the Fifty Queries,] I have considered impartially, I hope; and cannot think
them worthy of a Book in Answer: Yet that you might not take my Silence either
for consent, or for a contempt, I have written these few pages here.

Now in the first place I must tell you, Those Fifty Queries will remain
unanswered, until that Book of Mr. Baxters be answered, to which every Query
refers, which, for ought I know, you never yet looked into. In your Title page
you say, Fifty Queries gathered out of the works of Mr. Rich. Baxter.
And whether your Anti-Queries, so far as they concern the main point in
Question, be not cut off, and answered again and again in that Book, and diverse
other extant, and common, I leave to the judgment of indifferent Readers.

Further I might tell you of your playing upon the word, [Church,] Antiq. 1. p.
1. which is immediately explained in my first Query, by Kingdom of God, which
prevents your exception. And I might take notice of your newcovn'd Term,
[Practical Ordinance,] which you have so often, as if there were some other
Ordinances, speculative, or not practical. I might take notice of your
Illogical distinction, of being a Member of the Church Essentially, and being a
Member Formally, Anti. 18. p. 14. And your not allowing an universal Visible
Church, Antiq. 16. p. 12. I might take notice how you misunderstand, or
misapply those Texts, Except ye eat the Flesh of -- (Joh. 6. 53.) And, Except a
man be born of water -- (Joh. 3. 5.) As if the former spoke of the Lords
Supper, and the latter of Baptism, (vid. Antiq. p. 5.) Again, I might take
notice of your shooting short, in many of your Antiqueries. As because there
was a time when Infants within the Church were not devoted to God by any such
engaging sign, as Circumcision, or Baptism, no such engaging sign being then
instituted; therefore Infants are not to be so solemnly devoted to God, when
such an engaging sin is instituted, and belongs to all within the Church. And
your shooting wide is plain in some others. I might tell you, how you have the
same things over and over again. Though you accuse me of continual
tautologizing, Antiq. 38. p. 30. I am willing, the Impartial Reader should
judge, whether of us be most guilty here. Turpe est Doctori, etc. I take notice
of your citing Mr. Baxters Cure of Church-Divisions, p. 7. no less than thrice,
(soil. in Preface, and p. 10. and p. 32.) yet a man may turn thrice to p. 7. in
that book of Mr. Baxter for that which you refer unto, and lose his labor. So
I take notice of your vain flourishing, and braving it with Mr. T's confident
challenge, both in the end of your Preface, [And know this, etc.] and again,
Antiq. 49 p. 38, 39. (when also you shoot wide, not one word to my Query.) As
concerning Mr. Baxter, I may say, Know this, that others that are sober and
judicious, tell him, he has cleared those points sufficiently, that any
further debate concerning them is needless. Further I might take notice of the
many [Et caetera's] you have put to my Queries, sometimes leaving out what was
most lively to pinch; yea, you cut off the chief part of fiftieth and last
Query, without so much as an etc. unless it was the Printers fault. Again, I
might take notice where you are not very consistent with, but rather contradict
your self One or two places I may have occasion to observe.

But I must take notice of your fair concessions, and I thank you for them. I
will not dispute it with you, whether these of yours be properly called,
Antiqueries? Let the preposition (...) be either pro or con, with you, I should
not spend time in criticizing on the word. But whether in composition, the word
of an Apostle or Messenger of the Churches, (as I have heard, some do call you)
should be both yea and nay, may be a question.

Now, what do these following Queries o^ yours imply, [Antiq. 5. p. 4. Whether
the Baptists do not as clearly assert Infants right to the grace of God in the
first Edition of the Covenant made with Adam as any whatsoever? Antiq. 10. p.
9. As for the gracious Covenant made with Adam, do we not grant that it extends
to Infants? yea, we say with Mr. Baxter, it was never abrogated. Antiq 19. p.
14. Whether the Blessing of Abraham (if you understand it of Eternal Life) was
not the Blessing of the Fathers that were before him? And whether that Blessing
did not belong to their Infants? (which is not at all opposite to my 19 Query.
And in what follows there, you plainly shoot short, as I noted before.) And
Antiq. 23. p. 17. you fairly grant, that Promises made to the Seed of the
Righteous, to the children of them that Love God, etc. are unrevoked, you doubt
not but these Promises yet remain. (Though I confess, I do not well understand
what you mean by those words, Antiq. 21. p. 16. Whether all men that follow the
rules of Morality, are not within the reach of these Blessings also? These you
speak of, are either Righteous, and such as love God, or they are not. If they
be such, then certainly they belong to the Universal Church, and are real
Members of it; if they are not such, then they have not an interest in the
promise made to such as love God, neither can they lay claim to Blessings
promised.) But to go on with your concessions: Antiq. 11. p. 9. And whether the
difference between the Baptists and Paedobaptists, be not chiefly (if not only)
about imposing Ceremonies upon Infants? Antiq. 12. p. 10. Seeing the Baptists
may and do in a good sense acknowledge Infants to be related to the Church,
viz. by Redemption, pious Dedication to God, etc. Antiq. 30. p. 23. And who
denies Infants to be capable of Infant-Relation, Obligation, or Right? Or who
opposes their being devoted to God in their capacity? Antiq. 31. p. 24.
Whether you do not greatly wrong your self, and those you call Anabaptists, in
saying, they vehemently plead against devoting their Children to God? yea, sure
they do it actually, as far as Gods word requires. -- Prove if you can, that
you your selves do consent to the Covenant of grace for your Infants, more than
we, whom you call Anabaptists.] Here we have (as you say in your Preface) your
Concessions in respect of Infants. Relation to God, by virtue of the Covenant
of Grace, and the Devotion of his people, etc. I shall be very glad, if I may
know you are all agreed in these things. And here (methinks) you offer as fair,
as any of your way, I have ever met with to end our difference about
Infant Baptism. If the premises be granted, the conclusion will follow. If you
grant our Infants within the Covenant, then they have right to the investing
sign. To whom the promise belongs, to them Baptism belongs, Acts 2. 38, 39. If
you yield our Infants Church - Members, then you should not deny their right to
solemn admission by Baptism. (See Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof, etc. p.
23. etc.) And Mr. T. your Champion, yielded, this would follow.

You grant, Antiq. 6. p. 4. and Antiq. 22. p. 16. That Infants are of the
Redeemed Church. And in the close of Antiq. 25. p. 19. That Infants still
retain Member-ship in the Invisible Church. And Antiq. 16. p. 13. They are
Members of the Universal Church (invisible, you mean, for you like not of an
Universal Church Visible.) And otherwise (as you say) How shall they be saved,
seeing Christ is only the Savior of his Body. Only I query whether it be not a
contradiction, when you say, Antiq. 28. p. 21. How can Infants be said to be a
spiritual Seed: Are any but a spiritual Seed, Members of the Invisible Church?
Are not they a spiritual Seed that are of Christ's Body, and saved by him?

But if Infants be not Members of the Visible Church, how can you prove they
are Members of the Invisible Church? To be probably Members of the Invisible
Church, is to be Members of the Visible Church, or Visible Church Members.
Further, you say, The Baptists do in a good sense acknowledge Infants to be
related to the Church, viz. by Redemption, pious Dedication to God, etc.
(Antiq. 12. page 10. before-cited) now do but make sense of it, and I have
enough. Either these Infants visibly belong, to the Kingdom of Christ, or to
the Kingdom of Satan: (for these two Kingdoms divide and share the whole world,
that such as are not of the one, are certainly of the other; and such as are
not visibly of the one, are visibly of the other) And will you say, that such
as are of the Redeemed-Church, related to the Church by Redemption, and further
related by Pious Dedication to God, etc. are visibly the seed of the Serpent,
and of the Kingdom of Satan.

But this [Pious Dedication] leads me to another of your self-contradictions.
Antiq. 30. p. 23. Where are Christian Parents required to devote their
children, by consenting to any Covenant for them? (Though you grant there, the
Jews were required to Covenant for their children in matters of Religion.) And
yet under the next Anti-query, p. 24. you say, Prove if you can, that you your
selves do consent to the Covenant of grace for your Infants, more than we. How
properly may these be called Anti-queries? Or to get off, will you say, you
consent to the Covenant of grace for the Infants? but not as a thing required?

I gave you thanks before, for some things granted concerning Infants, and I
here promise more thanks, if you will prove the same of all Infants. This you
insinuate, p. 5. Seeing then all Infants (for ought you know) have the same
right -- But I doubt, your proof of this point will be as lame and weak, as
your sentence there is imperfect, and abrupt. You should not wrong us, To say,
we restrain the love and grace of God to such Infants as (in your new phrase)
partake with Parents in practicals of Religion, (Antiq. 3. p. 2.) as if we
held, that no Infant (dying unbaptized) could be saved, is a charge, you cannot
prove. Antiq. 4. p. 3. Whether the Parents consent to wickedness is the child's
consent?] Peruse Mr. Baxter of Original Sin. You your self do not deny, (Antiq.
7. p. 6.) but the wickedness of Parents may expose their Infant-children to
external calamities. Yea, Antiq. 21. p. 16. whoever doubted, but that Infants
are -- greatly disadvantaged by the wickedness of their Parents, even so as to
bear their Fathers iniquities many times, as is evident in the overthrow of the
old World, etc.) Now God is not injust in what he inflicts on such children. If
they bear the Fathers iniquities, they are some way guilty with their Parents.

You enquire further, Antiq. 4. p. 3. And whether this do not give the Parents
power to save, or damn their Infants? But you will not say, I suppose, that you
are your own Savior, when you perform the condition of the Covenant, to which
Salvation for Christ's sake is graciously promised. Neither will we say, that
any Infants perish purely for another sin, or the Parents sin only imputed;
but for their own contracted. (As Mr. Baxter of Original Sin, p. 135.)

The overthrow of both those Generations in the deluge, (spoken of Genesis 6.) is
a strange Medium to prove the Salvation of all their Infants, which you hint
at, Antiq. 7. p. 6 And Romans 5. 18. which you there cite, will no more prove,
that all Infants (that die Infants) are saved; then that all men are saved. The
free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. This [all] must be
limited to all in Christ.

Antiq. 22. p. 16. Whether God has not said, that His ways are all equal? And
whether this do not secure Infants of Gods mercy -- when God says, that the
Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, and every one shall bear his own
Iniquity, whether this be not a promise of Mercy to Infant-children, and that
in respect of Eternal Life?] Here you imply, that Gods ways are not equal, if
he show not Mercy on all Infants, if he give not Eternal li(...)e unto all that
die Infants. And if you take these words [every one shall bear his own
Iniquity] to be a promise of Eternal life to all Infants, as such; you must
hold, that no Infant has any iniquity to bear, and so wholly deny the doctrine
of Original sin, (which I perceive you do; though you will never be able to
answer the Arguments, and Scripture-evidence brought to prove it.) But you
misapply the Scripture. What is spoken of the Adult, you apply to Infants, (a
very common mistake of those of your way and persuasion.) In the 18. of Ezekiel.
the Lord pleads with men that had too good a conceit of themselves, and would
cast the blame on others, if they suffered, as if they themselves were
guiltless, Verse. 2. The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the childrens Teeth
are set on edge.] q. d. Our Fathers have sinned, and we their children smart,
and suffer for it. Now the Lord, to show that his ways are equal, declares,
that he that is righteous, shall live, verse. 5. etc. But if such a one has a
Son that proves wicked, that Son shall die, verse. 10. etc. Again, if the Son of
a wicked man sees, and abhors his Fathers wicked courses, if he be righteous,
he shall live, and shall not bear his Fathers iniquity, v. 14. etc. yea, if a
man have been never so wicked, yet if he repent, and turn, he shall surely
live, verse. 21. etc. But in all this there is no promise of Eternal life to all
the Infant Seed of the wicked.

Antiq. 37. p. 29. And where are we taught to doubt the Salvation of the
Infants of Pagans?] Sometimes we are troubled at some of your way, that they
seem to allow us no more ground of hope, concerning the Seed of the Faithful,
then concerning the Seed of the Heathen and Pagans. But if it be so clear, that
none are to doubt the Salvation of the Infants of Pagans, we should rest
satisfied, and think it enough that the children of the faithful are put into
so good a condition. But I told you (in my Treatise of the Covenants, p. 359.)
That to assert the Salvation of all that die in Infancy, seems to imply, that
Gods destroying the old world, and Sodom, etc. were eminent Acts of Mercy,
rather then of Justice; wherein such multitude of Souls were sent to Heaven
together, who if they had lived, had probably (at least the greatest part of
them) gone to Hell. I desire you would remove this doubt of mine. So likewise I
cannot yet reconcile your opinion with that Reason the Lord gives for his
sparing Nineveh, Jonas 4. 11. (which I also there took notice of.) Had there
not been more Mercy, suppose the Lord had taken away above sixscore thousand
little ones, that were not come to the use of reason, if then they had all been
undoubtedly saved; then in sparing them with the City, whereupon probably not
one of very many of them was saved. Help me over this doubt. And if the
Salvation of Pagans-Infants is not to be doubted, (as you suggest) then suppose
the French King should have power to overrun all the Pagan countries in the
world, though he spoiled, plundered, fired all the Towns where he came; yet
provided he did but withal slay all their little ones, then will it not follow,
that he might be looked upon as a greater Blessing than Scourge to the world?
Had the world your light and knowledge, they must conclude, that they ought not
to be so sorry for the spoiling of their Countries, (a temporal calamity) as
they should rejoice, (have cause of rejoicing indeed) that all their little
ones were undoubtedly saved, certainly sent to Heaven. And then what shall we
make of Ephesians. 2. 3. And were by nature the children of wrath, even as others?
And v. 12. That all that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. Having no hope.] If there be no ground to
doubt of the Salvation of their Infants? is not here some hope?

But have you not forgotten that you told us, you do not doubt, but the
promises made to the Seed of the Righteous, and the promise of showing mercy to
the children of them that love God, etc. remain unrevoked? How are those
promises made to their Seed, as such, if as great mercy be ensured, and
secured, procured by the death of Christ, to and for all Infants that die
Infants, (as you intimate Antiq. 37. p. 14. and in other places? And when you
would have the blessing of Abraham (understanding it of eternal life) to belong
to the Infants of the Gentiles, (as Antiq. 19. p. 14.) if you understand, and
take in the Infants of the unbelieving, as well as believing Gentiles; then do
not you forget that Expression, Gal. 3. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles. As to their Infants, you here suppose it to have been on
them all along, and not to come on them, by their Parents receiving the Promise
through faith. According to your opinion, all Infants are, and ever were
blessed with faithful Abraham, notwithstanding many of the Parents have been,
and are Pagans, Infidels, and such as the word Pronounces under a Curse. Now,
how may diverse of your own party (such as you call Baptists) justly object that
to you, which without ground they are wont to object against us? you would make
the promise of Salvation run unto a fleshly line indeed, (as Mr. Baxter notes
in his Review, p. 33.) And who can forbid water, (now that Baptism is the
initiatory Sign and Seal of the Covenant) to any dying Infant of a Pagan, since
he may be confident the Blessings of the Covenant belong to it?

You query ubi supra, (Antiq. 37. p. 29.) Will not the second Adams obedience
salve the first Adams disobedience? And Antiq. 38. p. 30. Whether the
meritoriousness of Christ is not as available to save Infants, without any man's
acceptance thereof for them?] I doubt not, but the second Adams obedience and
merits are available, so far as was intended, and agreed betwixt the Father and
him. But it lies on you to prove, that it was so intended and agreed, that all
Infants, so dying, shall absolutely be saved.

Antiq. 37. p. 29. Whether it be his will, that the grace of that Covenant
should depend upon others observation of the condition for them? And whether
this be not to put the Salvation of Infants out of his own hand?] Infants are
not saved by the Covenant of grace, which is [to Believers and their Seed;] if
they neither be Believers, nor the Seed of such. Only that I be not
misunderstood, I add, If any that enjoy not the Gospel, that never heard that
joyful sound, come up to the terms of the Covenant of Grace made with Adam and
Noah, I rank not them and their Seed with Infidels.

To what you say of Gods, [putting the Salvation of Infants out of his own
hand:] I need say but this, you might as well query, whether God put not the
Salvation of the Adult out of his own hand, if their Salvation be suspended on
performance of the condition required.

One thing more I cannot but observe, (wherein I suppose you are a little
singular also) In Antiq. 26. p. 19. You make your Imposition of hands as
generally pertaining to Members of the Church, as Baptism. (Where I might note,
that you seem to grant, Baptism generally pertains to the Members of the
Church. (But that by the way.) Now elsewhere In Sermon. on 1 Cor. 12. 1. p. 95.
you tell us, that [In this holy Ordinance of Prayer and Imposition of hands,
we are in a solemn manner ushered into the promise of the holy Spirit.] You go
on, [Imposition of hands does put us in a better capacity to seek daily for the
gifts and graces of the Spirit; because now solemnly interested in the promise,
by that very way the primitive Saints were interested therein, Act. 8. 15, 17.
Act. 19. 2, 6. 2. Tim. 1. 6. Heb. 6. 1, 2. -- What shall I say? The Scriptures
(or, these Scriptures) are evidence sufficient, that this Crdinance is of
Divine Institution, is from Heaven; the promise which it leads to, is
perpetual, and universal, it belongs to the whole body. There is one Body, and
one Spirit, etc. This is the conclusion of the Sermon, (p. 96, 97.) And what
gifts of the Spirit you speak of is very plain, throughout the Sermon. For
brevity, I will mention but one place, (p. 77.) Thus you see the Church being
under perpetual Exhortations, to seek for spiritual gifts [without any
restriction,] necessarily infers her perpetual right to them, and every of
them; which consideration alone is sufficient (as I conceive) to satisfy any
Christian, that the promise of the Spirit (even the same that was given to the
first Churches) in respect of gifts as well as graces, belongs to the Church of
Christ throughout all Ages.

Now if Imposition of hands generally pertains to all the Members of the
Church, and solemnly interesteth them in the promise of the Spirit, methinks it
should follow, that all such Members, on whom you lay your hands, (supposing
you have right to do it, as you take up the practice, if I be not misinformed)
should have some extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. And I have reason to think,
you encourage your followers to submit to this Imposition, by working in them
such a persuasion and expectation. For (p. 88. of the forecited Sermon) you
have these words, As the promise of gifts (as well as graces) [pertains to us
as we are the called of God] we ought to stir one another up, to seek with all
diligence, and [full assurance] for the Spirit of promise. And p. 95. It Is well
known (and I think granted on all hands) that they (i. e. the Primitive
Churches) used the solemn Ordinance of Prayer and Imposition of hands, for
obtaining the promised Spirit, at least with respect to these gifts. -- Then
seeing these gifts are promised to us as well as unto them, and are attainable,
and in part (at least) attained by many, what should hinder the Churches, but
that now they should tread in this path, with faith, and [full assurance] that
a blessing is in it? But while you call for full assurance here, I am full of
doubt, that you have no such Promise, nor Commission for your practice [of
Imposition of hands, for conferring the gifts of the Holy Ghost.] Take heed of
pretending a Commission from Heaven; take heed of counterfeiting Heavens Seal.
Oh, be afraid of taking Gods Name in vain. Will you herein imitate the
Apostles? May it not be said of you, you know not what Spirit you are of? May
you not as well take upon you, to lay hands on the Sick to heal them? Because
of that, Mark 16. 18. They shall lay hands on the Sick, and they shall recover:
or, anoint them with Oil in the Name of the Lord, because of what you read,
Mark 6. 13. Jam. 5. 14. I dare not limit God or his holy Spirit: and I desire,
that you may not tempt him. When you have pleaded all you can for the
continuance of those extraordinary gifts, and for the promise of them being
perpetual universal to the whole body, and pertaining to us as we are the
called of God, (whereupon it follows, that they should pertain to all that are
called of God) yet experience will confute you, and prove, they are not so
ordinary. When you make Prayer and Imposition of hands, The means ordained of
God to obtain those gifts, (Ser. p. 94. To which see something in my Treatise
of the Covenants p 430, etc. And more in Mr. Whistons Priv. Doct. of Bapt.
95.) I might retort some of your own words, Antiq. 33. p. 25. Show us what
benefit, etc. And Antiq. 39. page 31. Name one -- Name one that has received
those gifts of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of your hands. If the gift of
healing, etc. was seen to follow, these might draw in more to you then your
Writing or Disputing. And I wish you would be advised, ere you encourage all
your hearers to seek for Spiritual gifts, without any restriction; lest Women
seek to Prophesy; or men seek new Revelations, and so turn Enthusiasts, and
think themselves above Man's teaching.

There is enough to be said against your Imposition of hands; though I have
nothing to say against Confirmation, being duly and orderly performed; but have
long wished for the Restoring of it. So I have nothing against Imposition of
hands, in setting apart persons that are proved, and fitted to the work of the
Ministry. But this pertains not to every Member of the Church.

I can pass by what you say of me, that I am worse for my Baptism in Infancy,
as resting upon that, etc. Antiq. 40. p. 32. Does not your Conscience tell you,
that the Baptism of Men and Women upon profession of faith and repentance, is
beyond the reach of contradiction?] The Baptising of such as were without the
Church, or were first of the Jewish Church, and to be afterward admitted into
the Christian Church, upon the profession of Faith and Repentance, is plain in
Scripture, not to be contradicted. But this contradicts not the Baptising of
the Infants of such, being also to be acknowledged Church Members. Neither can
you show in all the New Testament one instance of any Baptized upon their
profession, who deferred their Childrens Baptism (if Infants) till they were
grown up, and able to make the like profession.

But to come a little nearer to you; would you have none but Men and Women
Baptized? Then do you not forget your self again? and what you said, Antiq. 39.
p. 31. Who is against as early an engagement of children to God, as can
lawfully be made?] Now this one concession of yours, that you are for as early
an engaging them to God, as can lawfully be, will prove your way not so
certain, not altogether clear, (as you would persuade your Readers in your
Preface) not beyond the reach of contradiction, but full of doubts, full of
difficulties. If the children of Christians are not to be engaged, and devoted
to God in their Infancy, you can none of you tell, (how then are you like to
agree) at what age they are to be so engaged, and devoted to God? What think
you? Is it not sinful to neglect and put it off, when once it might lawfully be
done? Now what word, what Example can you produce out of Scripture, to satisfy
Conscience how early you may do it? What was the youngest Age that ever any
Christians child was Baptized at? And if you could tell us the minimum quod
sic, and quod non, the youngest age at which any child was Baptized, and under
which age none might be Baptized, it would be some guide to us. Because you put
the matter to my Conscience, I would speak seriously. And so I must say, was I
off from the grounds of Infant Baptism, I cannot see, how Conscience would be
well satisfied about the time of Baptizing my own Children. To defer it after
they are come to make a visible profession, by your own Principles, should be
concluded sinful, against the Rule of the Gospel; but how soon a Child's
profession may be taken for a sufficient visible profession, I should not know
how to resolve, or how to determine.

I have one request to you, that you would take into your more serious thoughts
that part of the last Query which you left out. Think how much of it you have
granted unto. And let us study the things that make for Peace, and whereby we
may edify one another.

What you seem to hide from your Readers, I shall give you the substance of
(more briefly) out of Mr. Baxters Review, p. 27. That if you would be contented
your selves, to satisfy your own Consciences to be Rebaptized, (as one that
doubted whether he were well Married, would secure it, by being Married over
again) and would afterward live peaceably in Communion with your Brethren, and
not appropriate Church Communion to your Sect: And if you would not deny our
Infants part in the Covenant of Grace, the promise of Pardon, and life by
Christ, and our Infants Church Membership, and only deferred the Baptismal
Investiture, as Tertullian desired, for the more solemn Inauguration and
Obligation; Though I should not be of your mind, I should live in as loving
forbearance and communion with you, as with other Christians.

The Lord direct all his professing people into the way of Truth, and Peace, so
prays

Your Friend J. B.

After this brief Reply to your Antiqueries, Some Queries out of Mr. Baxters
Plain Scripture Proof for Infant Baptism.
I would propound to you these following Queries out of Mr. B's first defense,
or plain Scripture Proof, etc. desiring your serious thoughts upon them. If you
say, they are answered already in Mr. Ts writings, then it will be more easy
for you to return an Answer, which if clear and succinct, may more befriend
your cause than greater volumes.

Preparatory Enquiries.

1. Is not the Scripture more sparing v. p. 3.
in such cases as these?

1. In speaking of those to whom it speaks not, as concerning the Heathen, and
concerning Infants? 2. In lesser points? 3. In points not then questioned? 4.
Does not the New Testament speak more sparingly of that which is more fully
discovered in the v. p. 4.
old? And is not this the very case here? The main Question not being [By what
sign Members are to be admitted into the Church,] or [whether by a sign, or
without?] but [At what age they are to be admitted Members?] which is as fully
determined in the old Testament, as most things in the Bible; and therefore
what need any more?

2. Will the difficulty of a point, that it is not so easy or clear as we
would have it, prove, that it is not Truth? The Apostle Peter tells us many
things v. p. 5.
are hard to be understood, even in Paul's Epistles; yet are they not truths for
all that? Are there not many weighty Controversies more difficult than this?
(And should it not be considered, whether the contrary has not far less
evidence and likelihood of Truth?)

3. If never so clear evidence of Truth be produced, will it not still be dark
to them that are incapable of discerning it? And is not this the case of many,
even of the godly, that are v. p. 6.
but children in knowledge?

4. When the case is so difficult that we cannot attain to a clearness and
certainty, must we not follow the more probable way? And though there should be
far more said against Infant Baptism than has been said; v. p. 125.
yet if far more may be said against your way of Baptism, should not this stop
you?

5. And is it not a spirit of rashness and headiness, that runs men presently
v. p. 2.
upon new untried ways, upon every doubting about the old? would not tender
Consciences, who know errors to be dangerous, wait, and pray, and v. p. 6.
enquire of those that are likely to inform them, etc. before they venture?

6. Is the overthrow of a man's former weak grounds, the overthrow of the Truth
which he held? Or is the v. p. 7.
overthrow of other men's weak arguments a weakening of the Truth which they
maintain?

7. Is not one found Argument enough to prove any thing true? what if all the
Texts that are brought were put by, save one, is not that enough?

8. Should not the former and present customs of the holiest Saints and
Churches, be of great weight with humble moderate Christians in cases
controverted, and beyond their reach?

9. Are not evident consequences, or v. p. 8.
Arguments drawn by reason from Scripture, as true proof, as the very express
words of a Text? If it be proved, [that all Church Members must be admitted by
Baptism.] And then proved, [That Infants are Church Members:] is not this as
much, as to prove, They must be Baptized? Will you allow of such an Argument
for Infant Baptism as Christ brought for the Resurrection? (Mat. 22. 31, 32.)
or will you call that weak arguing, which is like his?

10. Is this Controversy in it self v. p. 9, 10.
considered, of so great moment, as some make it? Is it a fundamental point,
and duty, of absolute necessity to salvation, (why then was not Baptism in the
Creed called the Apostles?] Mark. 16. 16. says only, He that believes v. p.
244. v. p. 11.
not is condemned; not, He that is not Baptized. Does not the Apostle speak of
Baptizing, as a small part of his work, in comparison of Preaching, 1 Cor. 1.
14, 17. Though all Christ's commands, both great and small, must be obeyed, so
far as we know them; yet if Christians make that which is comparatively so
small a point, a chief part of their study and conference, and lay out at least
one half of their zeal about it, are not such deluded? And if they were in the
Truth here, yet is not that Truth a snare to them?

11. Tho the point of Infant Baptism v. p. 12.
be comparatively of less moment; yet whether the grounds on which it stands
and which are usually denied with it, be not of great moment?

Now to the Question, [whether some Infants ought not to be Baptized?]

(1.) Ought not all Christ's Disciples v. p. 15.
ordinarily to be Baptized? (Mat. 28. 19. (...), make ye Disciples, Baptizing
them,) And are not some Infants Christ's Disciples? May not the word [Disciple]
be taken in a larger v. p. 14.
sense, Relatively; for one that is of the number of those that belong to
Christ, as Master and King of the Church, and devoted to his oversight and
rule, and teaching for the future: as well as in a narrower sense, for those
who are actual Learners? And

(1.) Does not the Holy Ghost call v. p. 15
them Disciples? Acts 15. 10. Is it not evident, that those on whose necks the
false Teachers would have laid the yoke, were Disciples? If you say, not All,
but some of them are here called Disciples, v. p. 16.
that is, only them at Age; then will it not follow, that it is but some only,
whose Circumcision the Apostle and the Synod does conclude against, that is,
those of age? Then for any thing the Apostle says, or this Synod, all Infants
might be circumcised still: and is not this absurd?

2. If no Infants are Disciples, what v. p. 18.
is the cause? Is it because they are not capable? or because God will not show
them such mercy? Can you find out a third cause, which is not reducible to one
of these? And 1. If Infants are capable of being servants of God, how can they
be thought incapable of being Disciples? If you will make a difference, is not
more required to a Servant, than to a Disciple? v. p. 19.
Yet is it not plain, that Infants are capable of being Gods Servants? Lev. 25.
41, 42. If God call Infants his Servants, though they are incapable at present
of doing him Service, what forbids, but that we may call them Disciples, tho at
present they are incapable of learning? Were not the Jews and their Infants
called Gods servants in a sense peculiar, as chosen v. p. 20.
and separated from all others; that the Gentiles at age were not so Gods
servants, as the Jews Infants were? Otherwise how could it be a reason for
releasing them in the year of Jubilee, any more than for releasing any other?

2. Are not Infants capable of being v. p. 21.
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom? And is not Christ's Church both his Kingdom and
his School, and every Member of it under him, both as King and Prophet? Are not
all Subjects of Christ in his visible Kingdom or (Church) Christians? And are
not Disciples and Christians all one in the Language of the Holy Ghost, Act.
11. 26.

Again, can it be, that Infants are not Disciples, because God will not show
them such Mercy? Were not Infants in the Jewish Church Servants and Disciples
of Christ, (tho not so fully, v. p. 22.
and explicitly as now?) was not Christ then the King of the Church, as
Mediator, upon undertaking to pay our debt? And if Infants in the Jews Church
were Servants, and Disciples, does not God show as great and greater mercy to
his Church now under the Gospel?

And to your common objection, that Infants cannot learn. (1.) Yet can they not
partake of the protection and provision of their Master, and enjoy the
Privileges of the Family and School, v. p. 23.
and be under Christ's charge and Dominion? (2.) And be devoted to Learning, if
they live, and consecrated to him as their Master? (3.) And why should any be
more vigorous with Christ in this case, than with Men? Is it not common to call
the whole Nation of the Turks, both old and young, by the name of Mahometans,
or Disciples of Mahomet? And what if Infants cannot at first learn to know
Christ? Is that the first Lesson? Is it not somewhat, if they can be taught any
of the duty of a rational creature? And does not Scripture require to teach
Children the trade of their life in the time of their youth; (as early, no
doubt, as they are able to understand) and to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord? And does not this nurture belong to them, as Scholars
of Christ?

(2.) Ought not all ordinarily to be Baptized, that ought to be admitted
visible Church Members? Since Baptism was instituted, have we any Precept v. p.
24.
or Example of admitting visible Members any other way? Will you not grant,
that all visible Church Members v. p. 26.
must be admitted by Baptism? Now what plentiful proof may be brought, that
some Infants ought to be admitted visible Church Members? And does there need
any more to prove, that they ought to be Baptized?

(1.) Whether were not some Infants once to be admitted Members of the visible
Church, by the merciful gift and appointment of God, not yet repealed?

Were not Infants part of them that entered into Covenant with the Lord, that
he might stablish them for a people to himself, and might be to them a God?
Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. And v. p. 27.
were not Infants engaged to God by the Seal of his Covenant, [Circumcision?]
If you say, That this merciful gift of God to Infants, and ordinance for their
Church Membership is repealed, does it not lie on you to prove it? yet how will
you fail herein; whereas it is easy to prove the contrary?

(1.) If this Ordinance and merciful Gift be repealed and revoked, whether v.
p. 38.
is it in Mercy, or in Justice? whether is it for their good, or for their hurt?

Dare you say, that God has repealed Infants Church Membership to their hurt,
in justice? Did he ever revoke his Mercies in Justice to the parties hurt, till
they first brake Covenant with him, and so procured it by their own desert?
Now, were there not many Jews that believed, and did not forsake the Covenant
of God? How then could these or their Infants, be put out of the Church in
justice to their hurt?

Or can you say, that it is in Mercy for their good? How can it be a mercy to
take away a mercy, except it be to give a greater mercy instead of it? Now, is
there any greater mercy given to Infants than Church Membership? Those Infants
which were in the Church v. p. 99.
before Christ, had they not God engaged in Covenant to be their God, and to
take them for his peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. And those that were
aliens to the Commonwealth of v. p. 40.
Israel, were they not strangers to the covenant of Promise, and without hope,
and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2. 12. And is there any Scripture that
speaks of delivering any from this sad estate, but Church Members? And when
God adds to the Church such as shall be saved, can it be any known way of
mercy, to be cast, or put out of the Church? Did Christ come in tho flesh to
put Infants out of his Church in mercy? Will you say, he could more fitly save
them out of his Church, than in it? And if it be no benefit to the Catholic
Church to have Infants v. p. 42.
kept out of Heaven, nor any hurt to the Church to see them there; why should
it be a benefit to the whole Church to have them kept out on Earth? or any hurt
to the Church to see them Members here? And whatsoever it may be to strangers,
yet how can it seem such a mercy to Parents, to have their Children put out of
the Church? why then has God made such promises to Parents for their Seed; as
if much of the Parents comfort lay in their Childrens Welfare? And has God no
mercy for Infants? or can he not show mercy to the whole Church (v. epistle to
Bewdly, p. 7.)
in an easier way, than by casting out all their Infants? What great comfort
would follow this conclusion, That all your Infants are out of Christ's visible
Church? Can you prove, that Christ will save those that are no Christians? not
so much as visibly or seemingly Subjects of his Kingdom? If some privileges v.
p. 43.
were taken away, as the Release of the Jews servants, etc. yet are there not
far greater given in their stead?

(2.) Is it not evident from Romans 11. 17. That only some of the Branches were
broken off from the Church: Therefore to the rest that remained in, the gift
was not repealed. Does not the Apostle say it of that Church, whereof Infants
v. p. 44.
were Members with their Parents, that but some were broken off from this
Church? (and how far is the whole Church from being dissolved?) And who can
imagine, that God should cast out the Infant, (that came in for the Parents
sake) while the Parents remain in the same Church?

3. Is it not evident from Romans 11. 20. That none of the Jews were broken off
but for unbelief? And consequently, that Believers and their seed were not
broken off? Will you say, that the Apostle speaks there of the Invisible
Church? Does he not speak of that v. p. 45.
Church, whereof the Jews were natural Branches, (v. 24.) and was not that the
Visible Church? And if the breaking off was visible, (such wherein v. p. 46.
Gods severity was to be beheld by the Gentiles, as v. 22.) was it not from the
Visible Church directly? Could there be a visible breaking off, or removal from
an invisible term?

(4.) If it be into their own Olive, v. p. 48.
(which they were broke off from, and of which they were natural branches) that
the Jews shall be re-ingraffed at their recovery; (as Romans 11. 24.) then how is
Gods Ordinance for their Infant Church Membership repealed? Is not their own
Olive their own Church? v. p. 49.
And did not their own Church ever contain Infants, as Members? As it will,
when it is but part of the Catholic Church; tho they be not restored to the
Mosaical Law, or Covenant of peculiarity: but taken into the Catholic Church.

(5.) Is it not the same Olive, or v. p. 50.
Church, which the Jews were broken off from, that we Gentiles are graffed
into, as Romans 11. 17, 19, 24? And if their Church admitted Infant-Members, and
ours be the same, must not ours admit of Infant-Members also? Is it not plain
from the Text, that the Olive, or Church it self remained still, only some
Branches were broken off, and others of the Gentiles ingraffed in their stead?
Then how is it taken down any further than as to ceremonial accidentals?

(6.) Would not Christ have gathered v. p. 51.
Jerusalem, (which is usually put for all Judea, and the Jewish Nation?) Mat.
23. 37, 38, 39. And is it likely that he would have unchurched all their
Infants, when he would have gathered to him whole Jerusalem, or the whole
Nation?

(7.) Can ye suppose the believing v. p. 52.
Jews children (and so the Parents in point of comfort) to be in a worse
condition since Christ, than they were before? Did Christ come to make
Believers or their children miserable, or bring them into a worse condition?
And is it not a far worse condition to v. p. 53.
be out of the visible Church, than in it? Has not Christ made larger promises
to his Church Visible, than to any in the world that are not of the Church?
what promise is there to others, except the conditional upon their coming in?

8. If the Church of Christ be not in v. p. 55.
a worse state now (in regard of the Childrens happiness, and the Parents
comfort) than it was before Christ's coming, then will it not follow, that our
children ought to be admitted Church Members, and consequently that Ordinance
and merciful Gift is not repealed?

(9.) If the Children of Believers now be put out of the Church, then are v. p.
56.
they not in a worse condition than the very children of the Gentiles were
before the coming of Christ? Is it not the express Letter of Gods Law, that any
stranger that would come in, might bring his children, and all be Circumcised,
and admitted Members of the Jews Church?

(10.) Was not the Covenant, Deur. v. p. 57.
29. 10, 11, 12. (which all the Jews, with all their little ones, were entered
into with God) a Covenant of Grace, (as distinct from the Laws which was
repealed?) How then is it, or their Church Membership grounded on it repealed?
Is not that a Covenant of Grace, wherein God takes them to v. p. 251.
be his people, and engages to be their God? Has God entered into such a
Covenant with any since the Fall, but in Christ, and upon terms of Grace? Is
not that a Covenant of Grace, wherein the Lord promises to Circumcise their
hearts, and the hearts of their Seed, etc. See Heb. 10. 16, 17. And does not
the Apostle Paul cite those words of faith, Romans 10. 5, 6, 7, 8. out of this
very Covenant? Compare Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. with the Text last cited.

(11.) If Infants then were entered v. p. 58.
and engaged Church Members, by that Circumcision, which was a Seal of the
Rightcousness of Faith, and was not given on Legal grounds, (as Romans 4. 11.)
how comes that Church Membership of Infants to be repealed? Is it any other
than a shift, to say, that it was only such a Seal of Abraham's righteousness of
Faith? Is not the nature, end, and use of Sacraments, or holy v. p. 59.
engaging Signs and Seals, the same to all, though the fruit be not always the
same?

(12.) If the Law of Infants Church Membership was no part of the Ceremonial,
or merely Judicial Law, nor yet of the Law of Works, (as such) how can you say,
that it is repealed, seeing no other Laws are repealed? Will you say, it was
part of the Law of Works, which knows no mercy to those who have once offended?
Was not Church Membership a mercy? And if it was part of the Ceremonial Law,
what was it a type of? What is the Antitype that has succeeded it? And how
could this be part of the merely Judicial Law, seeing Infants were
Church Members long before the time of Moses, when the Jews were formed into a
Commonwealth, and the Judicial Laws given them? And can you say, that this was
proper to the Jews? Was v. p. 60.
it given to them only; that is, only to Isaac and his Seed, on whom the Jewish
privileges were entailed? Were not many hundreds circumcised as Church Members
(and among them many Infants) in Abraham's family before Isaac was born; and so
all the Proselites (with their Infants) afterward that would come in?

(13.) Is it not clear, that there is an Universal Church visible? And that v.
p. 61.
every one that is a Member of a particular Church, is also a Member of the
Universal? And that the Jews Infants were Members of the Universal? And that
this Universal Church is not dissolved? Now, must not he that will affirm, the
whole species of Infants are cast out of the Universal visible Church, prove it
well? And since we find that they were once in it, what need we any more proof,
that they remain in, till it can be shown where it is revoked? And is it any
good consequence, that is fetched from the removal of a particular Church, or of
the Jews particular Church to breaking off from the Universal? If a Jew had
been forced into a strange Country, yet had not both he and his children there
been Members of the Universal Church?

(14.) Is not that false Doctrine, which makes the children of the Faithful v.
p. 70.
to be in as bad, or a worse condition, than the Curse [Deut. 28. 32, 41.] does
make the children of Covenant-breakers to be in? Is it not said, (v. 4.) that
those that keep the Covenant are blessed in the fruit of their Body? And of
Covenant-breakers, (v. 18. 32, 41.) Cursed shall thou be in the Fruit of thy
Body: Thy Sons and thy Daughters shall be given to another people: They shall
go into Captivity?] Now, is it not a sorer curse to be put out of the whole
Visible Church of Christ, than to go into Captivity? To be in Captivity is but
a Bodily judgment directly, but is it not directly a Spiritual judgment to be
out of the Church?

(15.) Does not the Doctrine, which v. p. 71.
puts Infants out of the visible Church of Christ, leave them in the visible
Kingdom of the Devil? Does not the World and the Church contain all mankind,
according to the ordinary Scripture-distribution? If you say, Infants v. p. 72.
may be of the invisible Church, is not the visible Church wider than the
invisible; That ordinarily we may not judge any to be of the invisible Church,
who are not of the visible?

(16.) And will you leave us no sound grounded hope of the justification, or
salvation of any dying Infants in the world? Can we have any true ground v. p.
74.
of Christian hope that they shall be saved, who are not so much as seemingly
(or visibly) in a state of Salvation, and so die? To judge a thing to be what
it does not any way seem, or appear to be, is it not likely actually, but always
virtually, and interpretatively, a false judgment. And if they that are not of
the true Church are not in a state of Salvation, then will it not follow, that
they that seem not to be of that Church, do not so much as seem to be in a
state of Salvation?

(17.) What a full plain Text is that, v. p. 82.
1 Cor. 7. 14. Are the children of Believers holy in state? then ought they not
to be admitted visible Church Members? Are not all Divines agreed in the
definition of the Church, That it is a Society of persons separated from the
world to God? Will not this Text prove children holy, by a stated separation to
God? Is not the constant sense of the word [holy] a separation to God? And were
not the Infants of the faithful v. p. 83.
Church Members, and so holy, before Christ's time? And is it not most probable
that the Apostle speaks of the same kind of holiness, which was the ordinary
privilege of the faithful before? But utterly improbable that he should speak
of no other holiness here but legitimation, (which is common to the children of
Pagans?) And if to be holy in the Apostles sense here, be no v. p. 84.
more than to be lawfully begotten, then may we not call all persons holy, that
are not Bastards? Then is not almost all the world holy? Because Bastards are
called clean, will it therefore follow, that the legitimate may be called holy?
The Beasts that chewed the Cud, and had cloven feet, were clean, will you
therefore say, they were holy?

(18.) When it is said, Mark. 10. 14. v. p. 105.
Of such is the Kingdom of God,] whether this be not more, than they may be
visible Church Members? And whether v. p. 106.
these which Christ took up in his Arms, and Blessed, were not Members of his
visible Church? Are any visibly Blessed without the visible Church? And is it not
considerable, that all the three former Evangelists make full mention of these
passages of Christ? Is it not evident, that they were taken for Doctrines of
moment for the Churches information? And whether those words of Christ so
plain, and earnest, [suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them
not] be not a better Plea at Judgment for our admitting Infants, than any that
ever yet you have brought for refusing them? Turn over your Bible, and see if
you can find Epistle to Bewdley
where Christ or his Apostles have said as much against our admitting Infants
Church Members, and then consider, page 7.
which way is safest.

Now to the Common Objections.
(1.) If these Texts be objected, Romans v. p. 110.
9. 8. They that are the Children of the flesh, these are not the Children of
God, but the Children of the Promise are accounted for the Seed, Ephesians. 2. 3. We
are by Nature the Children of Wrath.] To the first Text, what is it the Apostle
mainly drives at, but that Men are not therefore saved, because they are
Abraham's carnal seed, (and consequently, not because they are the carnal seed
of any other?) And is it their certain Salvation, or their Church Membership,
that we dispute for (in regard of Individuals?) And further, does the Apostle
speak one word against the privilege of those Infants, whose Parents violated
not Gods Covenant, nor fell away? If a man should affirm, That all the Infants
of the faithful (so dying) are certainly saved, is there a syllable in the Text
against him? Were they not aged unbelievers that the Apostle excludes here?

And to Ephesians. 2. 3. What though we are by nature the children of wrath; Does it
follow, that we may not be otherwise by grace? Again, may not v. p. III.
children be visible Church Members, and yet perhaps children of wrath too?
Were not all the children of Church Members among both Jews and Proselites
Church Members? And yet were they not children of wrath by nature, as we are?

2. If you object, that Infants are not capable of the ends of Baptism: To
this, though Infants are not capable of v. Preface. p. 2, 3.
every benefit by Baptism, as the Aged are; yet are they not capable of the
principal ends? May it not be a listing sign to enter them Church Members, and
solemnize their Dedication to Christ, and engage them to be his people, and to
take him for their Lord and Savior, and so to confer on them remission of sin,
and what Christ by the Covenant promises to the Baptized; (though yet
themselves understand not this; even as we put the names of Infants in Bonds
and Leases, which they can neither read nor know of?)

And may it not be operative by its v. p. III.
signification as soon as the Child comes to the use of Reason, (which will not
be so long as you use to defer Baptism?) And in the mean time, as his interest
is upon the ^^dition of the Parents faith, and as he is received as it were a
v. p. 112.
Member of them, so may not the Parents have the present actual comfort of it,
(as the Parent has the actual comfort of a Lease that assures an Estate to
his Child?) And was not Christ himself Baptized, when yet he was not capable of
many of the great ends of Baptism? Was Baptism to Christ a sign of the washing
away of sin, or of purifying his Soul, (which was perfect before,) or of being
buried with Christ, etc. And how incapable were the Infants that Christ laid
his hands on, and took up in his Arms, of understanding the meaning of what he
did? Shall we therefore say, that Christ should have let it alone till
afterward? And will you tell us, what operation Circumcision had on the
Infants of Church Members formerly? Was it not a Seal of the righteousness of
Faith? And yet, had they any more Faith or knowledge of the significancy, than
ours have now? Was it not an engaging sign? And yet, were not they as incapable
of understanding either the significancy, or engagement, as ours are? So,

(3.) If you object, How can an Infant Covenant with God, or be engaged by this
Sign? And where does God require the Parent to engage his children, etc. To
this, if only the Aged v. p. 253.
are capable of engagement, may you not thence straitway conclude, that no
Infant was ever circumcised? But may not that be the Child's Action Morally, and
in Law-sence, which is v. p. 178, 179.
only the Fathers Action Physically? When a man puts his Child's name in a
Lease, and binds himself and his heirs, is not the Child thus entered into
Covenant and Bond? And does not the Law take it as his Act? And is it not a
plain v. p. 113.
natural duty of Parents to covenant for their children, when it is for their
good? And does not the Scripture fully show, that all the people of Israel did
(by Gods appointment) enter their children into the Covenant of God? Were they
not to circumcise them, which God calls [his Covenant] and [the sign of the
Covenant?] And is it not as plainly spoken, as the mouth of man can speak it,
in Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. Did not the Parents there v. p. 250.
enter their children into the Covenant, and not the Infants themselves? And
does not that show, God has given Parents their interest and authority?

4. Another common objection is, if Infants must be Baptized, why may they not
as well receive the Lords v. p. 115.
Supper? To which, may not the very external nature of the several Sacraments
satisfy you? Has not Christ appointed the first to be such, as Infants are
capable of? May not they be washed as well as the Aged? But is not the other
such as they are, naturally incapable of in their first Infancy? And is not the
former instituted plainly for all disciples? But what Scripture says, that all
Disciples as such, should presently receive the Lords Supper? Is it not
restrained to those, that can first examine themselves, and can discern the
Lords Body, and keep in remembrance v. p. 243.
his Death? And if every Burgess at Age, as such, has power to Trade, etc. in
the City; will it therefore follow, that every Infant may do so, that is born a
Burgess?

(5.) It has been objected, that if it be the Will of Christ that Infants v.
p. 115.
should be Baptized, it is strange, that he has left it so dark. To which,
will you not grant, that all Church Members must be admitted by Baptism? Is
this dark or doubtful? And how many Scriptures are there that prove Infants
must be admitted Church Members? Can we say, the Scripture is dark, or sparing
in that? Again, The Scripture speaks most fully in the Controversies, which in
those times were agitated: but was it any Controversy then, whether Infants
were to be Members of the visible Church? Did not the Jews take it for
unquestionable, all v. p. 116.
their Infants having actual possession, and that upon Gods own grant and
Ordination? Now, if Christ would have dispossessed them, should he not
somewhere have discovered it? And would it not have occasioned great disputes
and debates? [v. Epistle to Bewdley, p. 5, 6.]

Further, what if it were more obscure than it is? Is not the New Testament as
silent about Christian Kings, or any Christian Magistrates, or about an Oath
before a Magistrate, and about War, and about the prohibited degrees of
Marriage, and about the Sabbath, etc. Will you therefore say, these are not
revealed? It it not enough that they are revealed in the Old Testament? And was
not Infants Church Membership revealed clearly there?

(6.) Another objection is, The evil v. p. 117.
consequences of Infant Baptism, as gross Ignorance much occasioned by it, etc.
To which, 1. Is not the Lord Jesus himself the occasion of the ruin and
damnation of multitudes, (Luke 2. 34.) Had it been better therefore, the World
had been without him? And is not the Gospel to many, The Savor of Death unto
Death, and to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness? And
must the Gospel be blamed for this? What is it that Wicked men will not take
hurt by, and make an occasion of their destruction? And have not many said so
about the religious Education of children, that it is but the way to make them
Hypocrites? point blank against the Will and Word of God, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Prove. 22.
6. And do not many make v. p. 117, 118.
their belief of the Scripture, and believing that Christ died and rose again,
and that he is the Savior of the World, and the profession of his Name, to be
the ground of their hopes of Salvation, and thousands more, than that trust to
their mere Baptism? And what if many amongst you think to be saved, because
they are Baptized again? 2. Can you show (any of you) what there is in the
nature of the thing, that v. p. 118.
should be hurtful to any? If a Child that cannot read, be entered into the
School, that he may learn to read, is there any thing in this that tends to
delusion? If a Child's name be put into a Lease, is there any thing in this to
do him hurt? 3. Was that the reason of the delusion, and gross ignorance of the
Jews, that they did not stay till they were at Age? Shall we thus make God the
deluder, and blinder of the Jews, and accuse his Sacred Laws and Institutions
of Error? If it was an high favor to them to be entered in Infancy into the
Church and Covenant, how comes it to be an hurt or wrong to us now? 4. Was the
case of the Proselites among the Jews (being entered at age) so much better than
the case of their own children, and of all the Jews and their children? And had
the Jews, Gods own people, less mercy v. p. 119.
than those that were thus adjoined to them? 5. If all should profess their
Faith in Christ before they were entered, how quickly might the multitude learn
such a profession, as none of you could reject upon any Scripture-ground? And
might it not become customary, formal, and consistent with great ignorance? And
they that will make no conscience of the solemn Promise which their Parents
made in their names, is it likely that they will make ever the more Conscience
of it, if they had made it first in their own names; seeing the violation of
either will alike forfeit their Salvation? 6. Do not Ministers endeavor to
take men off from such formality and self-delusions? And let them know, that
their mere Baptism (whether in Infancy, or at Age) is not sufficient? 7. What
if this were done, that when children come to Age, they must all solemnly, in
the face of the Congregation personally own, and renew their Covenant? Why may
not this engage them, as well as if they were Baptized then? Was every man that
was Baptized at Age in the Apostles v. p. 124.
times, necessarily to profess, that he believed in Christ with all his heart,
(which indeed contains the sum of the Covenant) yet may we not be bound to
these disjunctively, (who by Gods Law are to be Baptized in Infancy) that each
duty should be performed, as we are capable of it? 8. Would your way of
Baptizing be likely to engage men half so solemnly, as such a course; it being
ordinarily in a manner private, and done in such manner, that persons of
modesty will be so taken up with shame, that they will be less serious in the
business.

9. If God would have Infants to be Church Members, and so entered by Baptism,
are not all these objections against God, and a carping at his way?

Now (having enquired about the grounds and proofs, and defense of the v. p.
125.
Church Membership, and Baptism of Infants,) next let us see, whether your
practice of delaying Baptism have as much warrant in Gods word.

(1.) Where do you find one word of Precept or Example in all the Bible for
deferring the Baptism of the Child of any one Christian till years of
discretion? Should not you bring some Scripture v. p. 126.
for your way, who require such express proof from us? Now can you show one
word of command or example here? If you cannot, how can you say that yours is
the Scripture-way?

(2.) Is not your way inconsistent with obedience to the Rule? Is it not
Christ's Rule, that persons shall be Baptized without delay, when they are first
made Disciples? Does not this appear in the Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. where
Christ adjoyneth Baptizing immediately to Discipling? And from constant example
in Scripture, explaining the Commission? Where do we find mention of any one
person, that was Baptized long after being discipled? And from the end and use
of Baptism? v. p. 127.
Is not this the use of Baptism, to be the sign of their first Covenant with
Christ, and solemn admission into the Church? Then is it not to be used at
their first Admission? (If any reason of necessity or convenience, cause it to
be put off a few days; yet this is not delaying it months and years, (as you
do) though indeed there is no warrant in Scripture for any delay at all, but as
necessity may excuse it.) Now, though you yield the use of the sign to v. p.
341.
them when they come to Age, yet what is it but an empty sign, quite beside
Christ's Institution, and void of the true end of Baptism? for how can it then
be the initiating sign to those that have been long in the Church before? I the
children of Christians are disciples v. p. 128.
in their Infancy, then how can you that Baptize them not till they come to
Age, (in so doing) Baptize them when they are first Disciples? And further,
suppose this were not proved, that Infants are Disciples, yet if you cannot
know when such children are first discipled (except it be in their Infancy) how
can you Baptize them when they are first discipled? Taking discipleship at
present in your own sense, and setting aside the consideration of mere Relative
Infant-discipleship, how can you know it, since God uses to work such as are
born and brought up of Christian Parents to the acknowledgment of Christ by
such insensible degrees, that the beginning of their true acknowledgment is
ordinarily unperceivable? Again, seeing such do not usually know themselves
when they were first disciples (in this sense) how much less can others know it?

(3.) Would not this practice (of v. p. 130.
yours) necessarily fill the Church with perpetual contentions, as being about
a matter, that cannot be determined by any known Rule? And can that be
according to the mind and will of Christ? If the Gospel occasioneth
contentions, does it any more than occasion them? But would not this naturally,
and necessarily produce them? And that in the Churches, and amongst v. p. 131.
the best Ministers and Christians? When would the Churches or Ministers ever
agree upon it, when their understanding, or seeming seriousness is arrived at
that degree, which must satisfy? Whereas it is easily known to all, and can be
no controversy, when a man begins to profess himself v. p. 132.
a Disciple, who was before a Pagan; yet when one is born in the Bosom of the
Church, and brought up in the profession of Christianity, and so comes to it by
insensible degrees, is not the case far different?

(4.) When you pretend to ground your practice on Mat. 28. 19, 20. from whence
you would infer, that none are to be Baptized, but those that are first made
Disciples by teaching, (though the truth is, that indirectly, and remotely, the
discipling of the Parent, is a discipling of his seed also) would not your
Doctrine turn Baptism, (for the most part) out of the Churches of the Saints?
According to you, only they that are made disciples by Ministerial teaching
directly, should by this Rule be Baptized, and in a well-ordered godly Church
would not these be few, or none? Taking [Disciple] in your sense for a
Professor of Christianity, has not God appointed another primary, more
ordinary way of making Disciples of the children of the Godly, viz. godly
education? Has not God commanded the use of this means to all Parents, that
they teach them the Law of God, and bring them up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord from their childhood? And may we not conclude, that God appoints no
means to be used, from which he will ordinarily withdraw his Grace, or to which
he will deny his Blessing, if it be used aright? (though the Word convert many
that have neglected their v. p. 290.
Parents, or have been neglected by them.) And further, does not experience
confirm it, that God frequently v. p. 133.
blesses this means? Now, according to you, how many thousands are there that
should never be Baptized, because they were not first made Disciples by
Teaching, according to the sense of Mat. 28. 19. which is Ministerial Teaching?

(5) Your ordinary practice of Baptizing v. p. 134.
by Dipping over head in cold water, (which you use as necessary) is it not a
breach of the Sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill. Being ordinarily and
generally used, does it not tend directly to overthrow peoples health and
lives? How vain is it to say, that many are appointed the use of Bathing, as a
Remedy against Diseases? Is it an Universal Remedy? yea, how few Diseases have
cold Baths appointed them? And how many that have been tenderly brought up, and
take but little of the cold Air, that dipping in cold weather in cold water in
the course of nature would kill, either presently, or by casting them into some
Chronical Disease? Will you say, if it be Gods way, he will prevent the v. p.
136.
danger, how great soever? But has God appointed any Ordinance contradictory
to his great Moral Commands? Has he appointed any Ordinance in his Church,
which will destroy men, except they be preserved by Miracle? Will you say, he
has tied himself to a constant working of Miracles, (which he has not done,
except the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be true?) May we tempt God? And have
you duly considered what our Savior says, Mat. 12. 7. If you had learned what
this means, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, ye would not have condemned
the guiltless? -- If in case of v. p. 135.
danger, you should have, and allow of a warm Bath, should not you that are
wont to call for express Scripture for Infant Baptism, be required to bring
express Scripture for this warm Bath? -- If you say, they may stay till the
heat of Summer, where have you any Scripture for that?

Farther, is it yet proved by any of you, that Dipping was constantly used in
the Scripture-times. Is it plain, or so much as probable, that the Jailer was
dipped over head, who was Baptized in the night in his house? And does not the
Greek word signify to Wash, as well as to Dip? Is it not so taken, when
applied to other things, as Mar. 7. 4, 8, etc. And is not the thing signified
set forth by the phrase of Washing or Sprinkling? and need the Sign exceed the
thing signified? (See Isa. 44. 3. Ezekiel. 36. 25. Joel 2. 28. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit.
3. 5. Heb. 10. 22. and 12. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 2.) And if it was otherwise, might it
not be only occasional, from a Reason proper to those hot Countries? Where has
Christ appointed the measure of water, or the manner of washing, any more than
he has appointed in the Lords Supper what quantity of Bread and Wine each must
take? May not a little signify as well as much; as a clod of Earth does in
giving possession of much Lands, etc.

(6.) Is it not a breach of the seventh v. p. 136.
Commandment, [Thou shall not commit Adultery] to Dip persons naked, or next to
naked? Does not the seventh Commandment forbid all incitements to uncleanness,
and all immodest actions? And is it not such, to Baptize Women naked, or next
to naked? v. p. 137.
Can that practice be of God, which would turn Gods worship into contempt, and
make it ridiculous, and bring a general reproach upon the Christian profession
among all the Enemies of it, yea, among the most sober and discreet, and that
upon so probable grounds? And to Dip persons clothed, will it not overthrow v.
p. 138.
the Argument usually brought for the necessity of washing the whole Body?
Though the garment be washed, yet may it not hinder the washing of some parts
of the Body?

(7.) (What fruit of these things?) How many of you, that instead of v. p. 144.
laboring after the winning of Souls from sin to God, make it the main scope
of your endeavors in public and private, to propagate your opinions? How many
of you make a great v. p. 146.
stir, till you have brought poor Souls (which is too easily done) to place
their Religion, in being of your opinion here, and being rebaptized? How many
of you are great hinderers of the Gospel, and of the work of converting v. p.
144.
Souls, making it your business to bring the Ministers of the Gospel into
contempt? Whether may not this be one thing that greatly confirms men in
their enmity to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Preachers thereof, when
they hear those despise the Ministry, that once were constant hearors? yea,
hear them persuading people, that Ministers are Seducers, false Prophets, etc.
(As if the first thing they had to learn, was to sco^n their Teachers.) What
way could be found out more effectual to make people disregard and despise the
Gospel, and so to ruin their own Souls, than thus to teach them to vilify the
Messengers of the Gospel, and persuade them that it is a virtue to reproach and
forsake their Guides? And whether the most of you do well, that have made your
Doctrine a ground of separation? And that persuade people, that it is a sin to
hear our pretended Ministers, (as they have been called) because they were
never Baptized? If you can make them believe, that the Ministers are Seducers,
and that it is a Sin to v. p. 145.
hear them, what good are they likely to receive by that Ministry? And what a
case was the Land in, if all did believe, as some of you teach? And where the
Gospel before prospered, v. p. 146.
and Christians spent their time and conference in the edifying of each others
Souls, and in heavenly duties, and lived together in unity and love, (according
to the great command of Christ) have not many of you (when you have come)
turned this to vain janglings, and unprofitable disputes, and turned their
Unity into Factions and Divisions, and their Amity into Jealousies and
Contentions? yea, how v. p. 149.
many a distracted family is there in England (upon this account) where one
will pray, and the other will not pray with him, because he is unbaptized, who
were wont to Worship God in unity?

And here I would have ended. Only there are two or three Queries more which
offer themselves, that I commend to your serious consideration.

Q. 1. Whether it be at all credible v. p. 177.
that Satan would be so charitable to Believers Infants, as to plead for their
privileges; or would be a propagater of Christ's Kingdom, and forward to engage
and bring in Subjects and Disciples to him?

Q. 2. Whereas we tell sinners of the v. p. 174.
heinous aggravation of their sins, as being committed after Baptism, and after
their solemn Vow and Covenant made to God; whether you that make Infant Baptism
a nullity, dare undertake to bear the burden of this Aggravation for them? And
whether you may tell sinners (that we do but serve them, as some serve foolish
children, Fright them with Bug-bears) that there is no such matter, they were
never Baptized, and therefore never sinned against their Baptism: they were
never so engaged to God, and therefore never sinned against that engagement?
Will you warrant them, that they never need to repent for their sinning against
their Baptism, and the Covenant then made? Or will you bear the blame for them?

Q. 3. Whether it should not lie heavy on any tender conscience to add v. p.
160.
to Gods Word, holding the repeal of the Ordinance of Infants
Church Membership, which no Scripture affirms; to be guilty of the Churches
doleful Divisions, and the great grief that hereby oppresses the hearts of so
many of Gods people; to censure (if not unchurch) all the Churches of Christ
since the Apostles times, or almost all --? And all this in contending, that
your own children are out of Christ's visible Church? How doleful v. p. 161.
is it, that any Christians should be so zealous to dispute their own children
out of Christ's Church; and to plead that they have no right to be admitted
Members, that they are no Disciples of Christ, no Christians?

And whether they that are zealous v. p. 177.
in soliciting men not to engage their Children in Covenant with God, may not
have as many thanks from Christ, as the Disciples had for keeping such from him?

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three
Crowns in Cheapside.
SErmons on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. I.
Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Thomas Goodwins, and Dr. John
Owens Epistles Recommendatory. An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4.
and Peter's Sermon to Cornelius, and circumspect walking. By Dr. Tho. Tailor.
Books 4to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism, by Steph. Scandret. An Exposition on the
five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations thereupon, by William
Greenhil. The Gospel Covenant opened, by Peter Bulkley. Gods holy-Mind touching
matters Moral, which he uttered in Ten Commandments: Also, an Exposition on the
Lords Prayer, by Edward Eston, B. D. The Fiery Jesuit, or an
Historical-Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines and deeds of the
Jesuits. Horologiographia optica, Dyaling, universal and particular,
speculative and practical; together with a description of the Court of Arts, by
a new Method, by Silvanus Morgan. The Practical Divinity of the Papist
discovered to be destructive to true Religion, and Men's Souls, by J. Clarkson.
The Creatures goodness, as they came out of Gods hand, and the good Man's mercy
to the Bruit-creatures, in two Sermons, by Tho. Hodges, B. D. Certain
considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst Protestants.
Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the Scripture
offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion: of Election,
Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection. The
Morning-Lectures against Popery, or the principal Errors of the Church of Rome
detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture; Preached by several Ministers of
the Gospel in or near London. Four useful Discourses: (1.) The Art of improving
a full and prosperous condition for the glory of God; being an (...) the Art of
Contentment, in three Sermons, on Philip. 4. 12. (2.) Christian submission, on
1 Samuel 3. 18. (3.) Christ a Christians life and death is gain, on Philip. 1.
21. (4.) The Gospel of Peace sent to the Sons of Peace, in six Sermons, on Luke
10. 5, 6. By Jeremiah Buroughs. A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands.
The Saints Privilege by dying, by Mr. Soot. The Unity and Essence of the
Catholic Church-visible, by Mr. Hudson. The intercourse of Divine Love between
Christ and the Church, or the particular Believing Soul: in several Lectures on
the whole second Chapter of Cant. by John Collins, D. D.
Large 8 vo.
Heart-Treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the Head and Heart
of every Christian with Soul - enriching - treasure of truths, graces,
experiences, and comforts. The sure mercies of David; or a second part of
Heart-treasure, by Oliver Heywood. Heaven or Hell here in a Good or Bad
Conscience, by Nath. Vincent. Aesop's Fables, with Morals thereupon in
English-Verse. The Young-Mans Instructor, and the Old-Mans Remembrancer; being
an Explanation of the Assemblies Catechism. Captives bound in Chains, made free
by Christ their Surety; both by Tho. Doolittle. Eighteen Sermons Preached upon
several Texts of Scripture, by William Whitaker. Sin the Plague of plagues, or
sinful sin the worst of Evils; by Ralph Venning, M. A. Speculum Sherlockianum,
or a Looking-glass in which the admirers of Mr. Sherlock may behold the Man, as
to his Acuracy, Judgment, Orthodoxy.
Small 8 vo.
A defense against the fear of Death; by Zach. Crofton. Gods Sovereignty
displayed; by W. Gearing. The godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the day of
his distress, in five Sermons; with Mr. Moors evidences for Heaven; by Ed.
Calamy. The Almost-Christian discovered, or the false-Professor tried and cast,
by M. Mead.
In small 12 s.
The Duty of Parents toward their Children. A little Book for little Children.
A method and Instruction for the Art of Divine Meditation. All three by Tho.
White. The Prisoners Prayers.
FINIS.

