THE NATURE AND IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL PROVED. In Answer to one who professed
perplexing Doubtfulness.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON: Printed for B. Simons, at the Three Golden Cocks, at the West End of
St. Paul's. 1682.

SIR,
I Have Reason to judge you no Stranger to such Addresses as these: and
therefore have adventured more boldly to apply my self to you. Others would, it
may be, rigedly censure this Attempt; but your more Christian Temper will
induce you, I hope, to judge more charitably, did you but understand with what
reluctance I undertook this task.

I have had many Disputes with my self, whether or no I should stifle these
Doubts, or seek Satisfaction. Shame to own such Principles bid me do the first;
but the weight of the Concern obliged me to the last. For I could not with any
cheerfulness, or with that vigor I thought did become me, pursue those unseen
Substances, those Objects of Faith Religion holds forth, except I did really
believe their existence, and my own capacity of enjoining them.

I thought at first to satisfy my self in the certainty of the things I did
believe, to confirm and establish my Faith by these Studies, that I might be
able to render a Reason of the hope that is in me: but instead of building up,
I am shaken; and instead of a clearer evidence, I am environed with
uncertainties.

Unhappy that I am! I had better have taken all upon Trust, could I so have
satisfied my Reason, than thus to have involved my self in an endless Study.
For such I am afraid it will prove without help: for that I may not in this
Concern rest without satisfaction; and yet the more I consider, and weigh
things, the more are my doubts multiplied. I call them only doubts, not to
palliate any opinions; for I have not yet espoused any; but because they have
not yet attained so much maturity or strength, as to take me off those things,
my doubts being satisfied, I should conclude of indispensable necessity; they
are but yet in the Womb: assist to make them Abortives.

I have not been wanting to my self, but in the use of all means to me known,
have sought satisfaction, both by Prayer, Reading, and Meditation. I have
weighed and consulted things according to my Capacity. I have been as faithful
to my self in all my reasonings, as I could, and void of prejudice, have passed
impartial Censures on the things in debate, so far as that light I have would
enable me; and what to do more, I know not, except this course I now take,
prove effectual, you inclining to assist me, that I know have studied these
things.

My request to you therefore is, If your more public Studies will permit you,
That you would condescend to satisfy me in the Particulars I shall mention. I
assure you, I have no other design, but to know the Truth: which in things of
such moment, certainly cannot be difficult, tho to my unfurnished Head they
have proved so: I hope my shaking may prove my establishment.

That I may therefore put you to as little trouble as I can, I will first tell
you what I do believe, and then what I stick at.

First, therefore, I do really believe, and am very well satisfied, That there
is a God, or a first Cause that has created all things, and given to every
thing its Being. For I am not acquainted with any independent Being. I know not
any thing that is able to subsist without the Contribution of its
Fellow Creatures. I am conscious to my self, when sickness invades me, and
death summons my Compound to a dissolution, I can do nothing to the
preservation of the Being I enjoy. And if I cannot preserve my self as I am,
much less could I make my self what I am: For when I was nothing, I could do
nothing. And Experience and Sense tells me, As it is with me, so it is with
others; as there is none can preserve their Beings, so there is none could
acquire to themselves the Being they have; and if none, then not the first man.
And indeed that was it I enquired after, from whence every species had at first
their Beings; the way, how, and means by which they are continued. I know not
any Cause of the Being of any thing, of which again I may not enquire the
Cause: and so from Cause to Cause, till through a multitude of Causes, I
necessarily arrive at the first Cause of all Causes, a Being wholly uncaused,
and without Cause, except what it was unto it self.

My next Enquiry was into my self; and my next business, to find what Concern I
have with my Creator: which I knew no better way to attain, than by searching
the bounds of humane Capacity. For I concluded it reasonable to judge those
seize I was capable of in my Creation, I was designed for. Now if man is
nothing more than what is visible, or may be made so by Anatomy or Pharmacy, he
is no Subject capable of enjoying, or loving God, nor consequently of a life of
Retrobution.

In this Enquiry I found Man consisted of something visible and invisible; the
Body which is visible, and something else that invisibly actuates the same. For
I have seen the Body, the visible part of man; when the invisible, either
through indisposition of its Orgains, or its self, or being expelled its
Mansion, has ceased to act (I speak as one in doubt): the Body has been left
to outward appearance the same; it was yet really void of Sense, and wholly
debilitated of all power to act: But then what this invisible is, what to
conclude of it, I know not: Here I am at a stand, and in a Labyrinth, without a
Clue: For I find no help any where. Many have, I acknowledge, defended the Souls
Immortality; but none have proved the existence of such a Being, and a life of
Retrobution, Here (...)what (...) want (...) the A^ Copy.
and that copiously enough; but none have proved a Subject capable of it. I
know all our Superior Faculties and Actings, are usually attributed to the
Soul; but what it is in man they call so, they tell us not. To say it is that
by which I reason, or that now dictates to me what I write, is not
satisfactory: For I look for a definition, and such an one, as may not to ought
else be appropriated. Is it therefore a real Being, really different from the
Body, and able to be without it? or is it not? If not, whatever it be, I matter
not. If it be, is it a pure Spirit, or merely material? If merely material, and
different only from the Body gradually, and in some few degrees of subtilty, it
is then a question, whether or not that we call Death, and suppose a separation
of the Compound, be not rather a Concentration of this active Principle in its
own Body, which through some indisposition of the whole, or stoppage in its
Orgains, through gross Corporeity, has suffocated its actings. If it be a pure
Spirit, I would then know, what is meant by Spirit? and whether or no all
things invisible, and imperceptable to Sense, are accounted such? If so, it is
then only a term to distinguish between things evident to Sense, and things
not. If other wise, how shall I distinguish between the highest degree of
material, and the lowest degree of spiritual Beings, or know how they are
diversified, or be certain the Being of the Soul is rightly appropriated. For
to me, an immaterial and spiritual Being, seems but a kind of Hocus, and a
Substance stripped of all materiality, a substantial nothing. For all things at
first had their Origin from the deep dark Waters: witness Moses Philosophy, in
the 1 st of Genesis, on which the Spirit of God is said to move. I am far from
believing those Waters such as that Element we daily make use of; but that they
were material, appears by those multitudes of material Productions they brought
forth. And if those Waters were material, such were all things they d^d
produce, among which was Man, of whom the Text asserts nothing more plain; for
it says, God created man of the dust of the earth; the most gross part and
sedement of those Waters, after all things else were created. Now the Body only
is not Man; for Man is a living Creature: it is that therefore by which the
Body lives and acts, that constitutes the Man. Now the Apostle mentions Man
to consist of Body, Soul and Spirit. My Argument then is this, God created man
of the dust of the earth.

But Man consists of a Body Soul and Spirit:

Therefore Body, Soul and Spirit are made of the dust, etc. and are material.

The major and minor are undeniable; and therefore the conclusion. Yet do I not
therefore conclude its annihilation: for I know all matter is eternal; but am
rather persuaded of its concentration (as before) in its own body.

But of its real Being, purely spiritual, and stripped of all materiality, really
distinct from its body, I doubt.

Because that by several accidents happening to the body, the man is
incapacited from acting rationally, as before; as in those we call Idiots,
there is not in some of them so much a sign of a reasonable Soul, as to
distinguish them from Bruits: Whereas were the Soul such as represented, it
would rather cease to act, than act at a rate below it self. Did it know its
Excellencies, such as we make them, it would as soon desert its being, as
degrade its self by such brutish acts: It is not any defect in its Organs
could rob the Soul of its Reason, its Essential Faculty. Tho the Workman breaks
his Tools, his hands do not lose their skill, but cease to act, rather than
to do ought irregularly: so likewise would the Soul then act contrary to its
own nature.

Secondly, Because all the species both of the Mineral, Vegitable, and Animal
Kingdoms, appear to me, but as the more eminent Works of a most excellent
Operator, as Engines of the most accurate Engineer; they all live, and have a
Principle of Life manifest in their growth and augmentation, and so far as they
are living weights, as I can perceive from the same source. But then comes in
those Natures and Faculties whereby each is distinguished from other, even like
several pieces of Clock, or Watch-work: the one shows the hour of the day, and
no more; the next shows the hour and minutes, another shows both the former,
and likewise the Age of the Moon; another has not only the three former
motions, but an addition of the rise and fall of Tides; yet all this, and many
more that in that way are performed, are several distinct motions, arising all
from the same Cause, the Spring or Weight, the Principle of motion in them. So
among living Weights, the first do only grow and augment their bulk, and have
no possibility in nature to augment their kind; the next, to wit, Vegitables,
do not only grow and increase their bulk, but likewise have a power of
propagating their like: the third Family, I mean the Animal Kingdom, do not
only live and increase their kind, but likewise are made sensative. And lastly,
we our selves that are not only possessed of all the former, but of something, I
know not what, we think more excellent, and call Reason, and all this from the
same source; namely* that we live; which if we did not, we could not perform
any of these acts. For life in us is the same as the Spring or Weight in the
Watch or Clock, which ceasing, all other motion cease, as in a Watch or
Clock, the Spring or Weight being down.

As Life therefore is the Cause of all Motion, and all natural Operation and
Faculties; yet those multifarious Operations and Faculties, manifest in, and
proper to the particular species of the Three Kingdoms, requires not diverse
Principles of Life, no more than diverse motions specified in a Watch or Clock,
requires diverse Weights or Springs. And as the diversity of motion in Watch or
Clock, arises not from diversity of Weights or Springs, but rather from other
means: so those diversities of Natures and Faculties, manifest throughout the
Three Kingdoms, arise not from diverse Principles of Life, but from one
Principle of Life, manifesting its power in Bodies diversely organized. So that
a Tree or Herb that only vegitates and propagates its kind, has no other
Principle of Life than an Animal that has Sense, and more eminent Faculties.
The difference only, as I conceive, is, this Principle of Life in the
vegitable, is bound up in a Body organized to no other end, by which Life is
hindered exerting any other power: but in the Animal it is kindled in a purer
matter, by which it is capacitated to frame more excellent Orgains, in order to
the exerting more eminent Acts. For the Principle of Life can no more act
rationally in matter capable of naught but vegitation (for it acts in matter
according to the nature thereof, advancing it to its utmost excellency), than a
man can saw with a Coult-Staff, or file with an Hatchet, or make a Watch with a
Betle and Wedges.

I am apt to believe those rare Endowments, and eminent Faculties, wherewith
men seem to excel mere Sensatives, are only the improvement of Speech, wherein
we have the advantage of them, and the result of reiterated Acts, until they
become habits. For by the first we are able to communicate our Conceptions and
Experiments each to other; and by the other we do gradually ascend to the
knowledge of things. For is all the knowledge either in the acts, Liberal or
Mechanical, any more than this acts reiterated, until they become habits; which
when they are, we are said to know them? And what is all our reasoning, but an
Argument in Discourse tossed from one to another, till the Truth be found, like
a Ball between two Rackets, till at last a lucky blow puts an end to the sport?
We come into the World hardly men; and many whose natures want cultivation,
live, having nothing to distinguish them from Brutes, but the outward form,
speech, and some little dexterity, such as in Apes or Monkeys, in the things
they have been taught, and the Affairs they have been bred to. And could we
imagine any man to have lived Twenty or Thirty years in the World, without the
benefit of Humane Converse, What would appear then, think you, of a rational
Soul? which the wise man well saw when he asserted the Condition of Men and
Beasts to be the same what a mere Ignorant has, Moses himself made of Adam,
that in his supposed best state, knew not that he was naked: but I believe the
Nine Hundred and Thirty years Experience of his own, and the continual
Experiments of Posterity, in that time communicated to him, might quicken his
Intellect. So that he died with more Reason than he was created, and humane
nature in his posterity. The next Generation was imbellished with his
seize, to which their own Experiences still made a new addition. The next
Generation built on their Foundation, and the next on their; and so on: and we
are got on the shoulders of them all. So that it is rather a wonder, that we
know no more, than that we know so much. So that what we have, seems rather
times product, through the means aforesaid, than what our Natures were at first
enricht with.

The which appears likewise in those whose memory fails, and in whom the
vestigia of things is wore out; the habits they had contracted, and manner of
working in their several acts being forgotten, what silly Animals are they?
Whereas were the Soul such as repesented, who could rob it of its Endowments?
It Is true the debilitating of a hand, may impead a manual labor; but raze what
has formerly been done out of the Memory, and you render Man a perfect Bruit,
or worse: for he knows not how to give a signification of his own mind.

And indeed, I know not any thing wherein Man excels the Beasts, but may be
referred to the benefit of Speech and Hands, capable of effecting its
Conceptions; nor find any better way to attain a right knowledge of our selves,
but by beholding our selves in Adam, and enquiring, what Nature had endued him
with, which will fall far short of what we now admire in our selves.

But now supposing all this answered, what will it avail us to a Life of
Retrobution, if all return to one Element, and be there immerged as Brooks and
Rivers in the Sea? If we lose our Individuation; and all the Souls that have
existed, be swallowed up of one, where are the Rewards and Punishments of each
individual. And we have reason to judge it will be thus, rather than otherwise,
because we see every thing tends to its own Center, the Water to the Sea, and
all that was of the Earth to the Earth, from whence they were taken. And
Solomon says, The spirit returns to God that gave it. Every thing then
returning to its own Element, loses its Individuation. For we see all bodies
returning to the earth, are no more individual bodies, but earth: Have we not
reason then to judge the same of Spirits returning to their own Element? And
what happiness then can we hope for, more than a deliverance from the present
calamity? or what misery are we eapable of, more than what is common to all?

The same is more evident in the body with which we converse, and are more
sensibly acquainted with, seems wholly incapable of either, etc. For all bodies
are material, and matter it self is not capable of multiplication, but of being
changed. Therefore Nature cannot multiply bodies, but changes them; as some
bodies arise* others perish. Natures expense in continual Productions being
constantly supplied by the dissolution of other Compounds: were it otherwise,
her Storehouse would be exhausted; for its by continual Circulations, Heaven
and Earth is maintained; and by her even Circular motion, she keeps her self
employed on the same stock of matter, and maintains every species. There is no
body the same to day it was yesterday, matter being in a continual flux;
neither immediately on the dissolution of a Compound, and Corruption of the
body, does the earth thereof retain any specific difference of that body it
once was, but is immediately bestowed by Nature, and ordered to the new
production of other things. That part of matter therefore which constituteth a
humane body, in a short time is putrified, and made earth, which again
produces either other inferior Animals, or Grass, or Corn, for the nourishment
of Beasts and Fowl, which again are the nourishment of men. Thus circularly
innumerable times round, Nature continually impressing new forms of the same
matter. So that that matter that now constitutes my body, it may be a thousand
years ago was the matter of some other man's, or it may be of diverse men's, then
putrified; which in this time has suffered infinite changes, as it may be
sometime Grass, or Corn, or an Herb, or Bird, or Beast, or diverse of them, or
all, and that diverse times over, before my body was framed; who then can say,
why this matter so changeable, should at last be restored, my body rather than
his, whose formerly it was, or the body of a Bird, or other Animal? For by the
same Reasons that the body of man is proved to arise again, may, I think, be
proved the Restoration of all other bodies, which is equally incredible to me
(if understood at one time). For Natures stock of matter being all at first
exhausted, she could not employ her self in new Productions, without destroying
some of the old; much less can she at once fabricate out of the same quantity
of matter, all the bodies that ever were, are, or shall be; which yet,
notwithstanding could she, they could not be said to be the same bodies,
because all bodies suffer such alteration daily, that they cannot be said to be
the same to day they were yesterday; how then can they be capable of Reward or
Punishment?

These are now my doubts; but are they the fruits of Diligence? and am I thus
rewarded for not believing at a common rate? A great deal cheaper could I have
sat down, and believed as the Church believes; without a why, or a wherefore,
have been ignorant of these Disputes, and never have emerged my self in this
gulf, than thus by Reflection to create my own disturbance. Had I been made a
mere Animal, I had had none of these Doubts nor Fears that thus torment my
mind; for doubting, happy Bruits happy, far more happy than my self! With you
is none of this; with you only is serenity of mind, and you only void of
Anxieties; you only enjoy what this world is able to accommodate with, and it
may be too have those Caresses we know not of, while we, your poor purveyors,
go drooping and disponding, doubting, fearing, and caring about, and our whole
lives only a preying on one another, and tormenting our selves. You have the
carnal content and satisfaction; we nothing but the shell, a vain glorious
boast of our Lordship over you, with which we seek to satisfy our selves, as
Prodigals, with husks, while the truth is, we are afraid to confront our
Vassals, except we first by craft and treachery beguile them from whom likewise
we flee, if once enraged: and what a poor comfort is this? Is this a Privilege
to boast of? Is this all Reason advances to, only a Purveyor to Beasts, and to
make my life more miserable, by how much more sensible of misery! Well might
Solomon prefer the dead before the living; and those that had not been, before
both; intimating thereby, that being best, least capable of misery; that is, of
Trees, of Herbs, of Stones, and all inanimates, which wanting sense, are
insensible of misery. Better any thing than man therefore, since that every
brute and inanimate stock or stone, are more happy in that measure: they are
less capable of misery. What the advantage then, what the benefit that occurs
to us from them, or what pre-eminence have we above them, seeing as dies the
one, so dies the other, and that they have all one breath?

Pardon this Degression; the real sense and apprehension I have of things,
extort it from me. For I, as Job, cannot refrain my mouth, but speak in the
bitterness of my Spirit, and complain in the anguish of my Soul, Why died I not
from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly?
Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts, that I should suck? I had
then been among Solomon 's happy ones: I should now have lain still and been
quiet; I should have slept, and been at rest: whereas now I am weary of life.
For tho I speak, my grief is not assuaged; and tho I forbear, I am not eased;
but now he has made me weary, and made desolate all my company: he has filled
me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me; and my leanness rising up in
me, bears witness to my face, God has delivered me to the ungodly, and
turned me cver into the hand of the wicked, and my familiar friends have
forgotten me. I said, I shall die in my nest, and shall multiply my days as the
sand, when my root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night on
my branch; when my glory was fresh, and my bow was renewed in my hand: but I
find while my flesh is upon me, I shall bave pain, and while my soul is in me,
it shall mourn. Have pity upon me, O my friend! for the hand of God has
touched me. The wicked live, and become old; yea, they are mighty in power,
their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before
their eyes; their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon
them, etc. they are planted, and take root, they grow; yea, they bring forth
fruit, yet God is never in their mouth, and far from their reins. In vain then
do I wash my hands in innocence, seeing all things come alike to all. There is
one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good, to the clean, and to
the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is
the good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an oath.

I have now done (tho I hardly know how), lest I too far trouble you; and only
beg your perusal of these lines, and two or three in answer of them by this
Bearer, who shall at your appointment wait on you for the same. Let me farther
beg these two things of you: first, That you would consider you have not to do
with a Sophistick Wrangler, or with one that would willingly err, but with one
that desires to know the Truth. Let therefore your Answer be, as much as you
can, void of Scholastic Terms, or Notions that may lead me more into the dark.
And then, as Job did beg, That God would withdraw his hand far from him, and
that his dread might not make him afraid; so I. And further, That you would not
awe me with his greatness, nor suppress my Arguments with his Omnipotence. Then
call thou, and I will answer; or let me speak, and answer thou me. Thus begging
the Divine Influence to direct you, and enlighten me, I subscribe myself,

SIR,
. 1. IT is your wisdom in Cases of so great moment, to use all just endeavors
for satisfaction; and I think you did but your duty, to study this as hard as
you say you have done. But 1. I wish you had studied it better; for then you
would not have been a stranger to many Books which afford a just solution of
your Doubts, as I must suppose you are, by your taking no notice of what they
have said. 2. And I wish you had known, that between the solving of all your
Objections, and taking all on Trust from men, or believing as the Church
believes, there are Two other ways to satisfaction (which must be conjunct):
1. Discerning the unanswerable evidences in Nature and Providence, of the Souls
future Life. 2. And taking it on trust from Divine Revelation; which is
otherwise to be proved, than by believing as the Church by Authority requires
you.

I have written on this Subject so much already, that I had rather you had told
me, why you think it unsatisfactory, than desire me to transcribe it, while
Print is as legible as Manuscript. If you have not read it, I humbly offer it
to your consideration. It is most in two Books: The first which I entreat you
to read, is called, The Reasons of the Christian Religion: the other is called,
The Unreasonableness of Infidelity. If you think this too much labor, you are
not so hard or faithful a Student of this weighty Case, as it deserves, and
you pretend to be. If you will read them (or the first at least), and after
come to me, that we may fairly debate your remaining Doubts, it will be a
likelier way for us to be useful to each other, than my going over all the
mistakes of your Paper will be. And I suppose you know, that we have full
assurance of a multitude of Verities, against which many Objections may be
raised, which no mortal man can fully solve, especially from Modes and
Accidents. Nay, perhaps there is nothing in the World which is not liable to
some such Objections. And yet I will not neglect your writing.

. 2. When you were convinced, That there is a first Cause, it would have been
an orderly progress to think what that Cause is; and whether his Works do not
prove his Infinite Perfection, having all that eminently which he gives
formally to the whole World, as far as it belongs to perfection to have it.
For none can give more than he has. And then you should have thought what this
God is to man, as manifest in his Works: and you should have considered what of
man is past doubt, and thence in what relation he stands to God, and to his
fellow creatures: And this would have led you to know man's certain duty: and
that would have assured you of a future life of Retribution. Is not this a just
progress?

. 3. But you would know a Definition of the Soul. But do you know nothing but
by Definitions? Are all men that cannot define, therefore void of all knowledge?
You know not at all what seeing is, or what light is, or what feeling,
smelling, tasting, hearing is, what sound or odor is, what sweet or bitter, nor
what thinking, or knowing, or willing, or loving is, if you know it not before
defining tell you, and better than bare defining can ever tell you. Every vital
faculty has a self-perception in its acting; which is an eminent sense:
Intuition also of outward sensible Objects, or immediate perception of them, as
sensata and imaginata, is before all Argument and Definition, or reasoning
action. By seeing, we perceive that we see; and by understanding; we perceive
that we understand. I dare say, That you know the Acts of your own Soul by
acting, tho when you come to reasoning or defining, you say you know not what
they are. You can give no definition what substance is, or Ens at least, much
less what God is. And yet what is more certain than that there is Substance,
Entity, and God?

. 4. But I Will tell you what the Soul of man is: It is a Vital, Intellectual,
Volitive Spirit, animating a humane organized Body. When it is separated, it is
not formally a Soul, but a Spirit still.

. 5. Qu. But what is such a mental Spirit? It is a most pure Substance, whose
form is a Power or Virtue of Vital Action, Intellection, and Volition (three in
one).

. 6. I. Are you not certain of all these Acts, viz. That you Act vitally,
understand and will? If not, you are not sure that you see, that you doubt,
that you wrote to me, or that you are any thing.

II. If you act these, it is certain that you have the power of so acting. For
nothing does that which it cannot do.

III. It is certain, that it is a Substance which has this power: For nothing
can do nothing.

IV. It is evident, that it is not the visible Body, as composed of Earth,
Water and Air, which is this mental Substance. Neither any one of them, nor all
together have Life, Understand^^g, or Will. They are passive Beings, and act
not at all of themselves, but as acted by invisible Powers. They have an
aggregative inclination to Union, and no other. Were it not for the Igneous
Nature which is active, or for Spirits, they would be cessant. Therefore you
are thus far past the dark, That there is in man an Invisible Substance, which
has, yea, which is a Power or Virtue of Vital Action, Intellection, and
Volition.

V. And that this Active Power is a distinct thing from mere Passive Power, or
mobilitie per aliud, Experience puts past doubt. There is in every living thing
a Power, or Virtue of self-moving, else Life were not Life.

VI. And that this is not a mere accident of the Soul, but its essential form,
I have proved so fully in my Methodus Theologiae, in a peculiar Disputation,
that I will not here repeat it. It Is evident, That even in the igneous
Substance, the Vis Motiva, Illuminativa, Calefactiva, is more than an accident,
even its essential form: But were it otherwise, it would but follow, That if
the very accidental Acts or qualities of a Soul be so noble, its essential must
be greater.

VII. But it is certain, That neither Souls, nor any thing, have either Being,
Power, or Action, but in constant receptive dependence on the continued
emanation of the prime Cause; and so no Inviduation is a total separation from
him, or an Independence, or a self-sufficiency. Thus far natural light tells
you what Souls are.

. 7. You add your self, That those seize which you were made capable of
you were designed to. Very right. God makes not such noble Faculties or
Capacities in vain; much less to engage all men to a life of duty, which shall
prove* deceit and misery. But you have Faculties capable of thinking of God, as
your Beginning, Guide, and End, as your Maker, Ruler, and Benefactor; and of
studying your duty to him, in hope of Reward, and of thinking what will become
of you after Death, and of hoping for future Blessedness, and fearing future
Misery: all which no Bruit was ever capable of. Therefore God designed you to
such ends which you are thus capable of.

. 8. You say ( p. 3.) Many have defended the Souls Immortality; but none have
proved a Subject capable of a life of Retribution. It Is a Contradiction to be
immortal, or rewarded, and not to be a Subject capable* For nothing has no
accidents. Nothing has that which it is not capable of haing.

. 9. You say, None tell us what it is. How many Score Volumes have told it us?
I have now briefly told you what it is. You say, [ To say it is that by which I
reason, is not satisfactory. I look for a Definition]. But on Condition you
look not to see or feel it, as you do Trees or Stones, you may be satisfied. I
have given you a Definition. The Genus is Substantia purissima; the Differentia
is Virtus Vitalis, Activa, Intellectiva, Volitiva (trinum a Imago Creatoris).
What Is here wanting to a Definition?

I have told you, That there is an antecedent more certain Perception, than by
Definition; by which I know that I see, hear, taste, am, and by which the Soul,
in act, is conscious of it self.

. 10. You ask, 1. Is it a real Being? Answ. I told you, Nothing can do nothing.

2. Is it really different from the Body? Answ. A Substance which has in it
self an Essential Principle of Life, Intellection, and Volition, and that which
has not, are really different. Try whether you can make a Body feel, or
understand without a Soul. 2. Those that are seperable, are really different.

3. You ask, Is it able to be without it? Answ. What should hinder it? The Body
made not the Soul: A viler Substance gives not being to a nobler. 2. Nothing
at all can be without continued Divine sustentation. But we see, Juxta naturam,
God annihilateth no Substance: Changes are but by composition, and separation,
and action, but not by annihilation. An Atome of Earth or Water, is not
annihilated; and why should we suspect, that a Spiritual Substance is? Yea, the
contrary is fully evident, tho God is able to annihilate all things.

. 11. You say, If it be merely material, and differ from the Body but
gradually, Death may be but its concentration of this active Principle in its
own Body.

Answ. If you understand your own words, it is well. 1. Do you know what
material signifies? See Crakenthorp's Metaphysics, and he will tell you in
part, it is an ambiguous word. Sometime it signifies the same as substantia;
and so Souls are material. Sometime it signifies only that sort of Substance
which is called corporeal. Dr. More tells you, That Penetrability, and
Indivisibility, difference them.

But what if fire* should differ from air materially, but in degree of subtilty
and purity, or sensitive Souls from igneous, and mental from sensitive, but in
higher degrees of purity of matter; Is it not the form that makes the
specific difference? Air has not the igneous Virtue of Motion, Illumination,
and Calefaction; nor ignis, the sensitive Virtues, nor mere sensitives the
rational Virtues aforesaid. Forma dat esse and nomen. This makes not a mere
gradual difference, but a specific.

There is in Compounds matter, and materiae dispositio receptiva, and forma.
There is somewhat answerable in spiritual uncompounded Beings. There is
substantia, and substantiae dispositio, and forma. These are but intellectually
distinct, and not divisible, and are but inadequate conceptions of one thing*
That substantia is conceptus fundamentalis, is confessed. Some make penetrability
and indivisibility, substantiae conceptus dispositicus. But the Virtus vitalis
activa, intellective, volitiva, in one, is the conceptus formalis.

2. But what mean you by [ the active Principles concentration in its own
body]? It is a strange Expression: 1. If you mean, that it is annihilated, then
it* remains not. 2. If you mean, that it remains an active Principle, you
mean a substance, or accident. If a substance, it seems you acknowledge it a
self-subsisting being, only not separate from its carcass. And if they be two,
why are they not separable? If separable, why not separated? When the dust of
the Carcass is scattered, is the Soul concentred in every atome, or but in one?
And is it many, or one concentred Soul? If you mean, That it is but an accident,
that is disproved before; what accident is it? If concentred in the body, the
body, and every dust of it, is vital and intellectual. And if so, every clod
and stone is so; which I will not so much wrong you, as to imagine that you
think.

. 12. But you would know what is meant by a spirit, whether all that is not
evident to sense? Ans. It is a pure substance ( says Dr. More, penetrable and
indivisible) essentially vital, perceptive and appetitive.

. 13. You add, [How shall I know the difference between the highest degree of
materials, and lowest of immaterials? To me an immaterial, and spiritual being,
seems a kind of Hocus, a substantial nothing.

Ans. If you take matter for the same with substance, it is material. But not
if you take matter, as it is usually taken, for corporeal; or gross, and
impenetrable, and divisible substance, incapable of essential, vital,
self-moving perception and appetite. If this seems nothing to you, God seems
nothing to you, and true Nature, which is Principium motus, seems nothing to
you: And all that performs all the action which you see in the world; seems
nothing to you. It Is pity that you have converst so little with God and your
self, as to think both to be nothing.

. 14. What you say out of Genesis 1. is little else but mistake, when you say [
all was made out of the deep waters by the spirit of God]. The Text names what
was made of them. It says nothing of the Creation of Angels, or Spirits, out
of them (no, nor of the Light, or Earth, or Firmament.)

And whereas you say, [ God made man of the dust of the ground; but the body
only is not man, ergo. Ans: You use your self too unkindly, to leave out half
the words, Genesis 2. 7. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living
soul; when the Text tells us the two works by which God made man, will you
leave out one, and then argue exclusively against it? What if I said, [The
Chandler made a Candle of Tallow, and then by another kindled it]? or [a man
made an house of Bricks, and cemented them with Mortar, etc.]? will you thence
prove, That he made a Candle burning without fire, or the House without Mortar?
Words are useless to such Expositors.

. 15. Page 4. you say; You know all matter is eternal.

But you know no such thing. If it be Eternal, it has one Divine perfection:
and if so, it must have the rest, and so should be God. But what is your proof?

You again ( believe the Souls concentration in its body]. Ans. Words
insignificant. It Is Idem or Aliud. If Idem, then dust is Essentially Vital and
Intellectual. Deny not spiritual forms, if every clod or stone have them. If.
Aliud, how prove you it to be there, rather than elsewhere? And if you
considered well, you would not believe essential, substantial life and mind, to
lie dead and unactive, so long as the dust is so.

. 16. You come to the hardest Objecti- [The Souls defective acting in infants,
idiots, the sick, etc. and say, [It would rather not act, if it were as
represented.]

Ans. 1. It cannot be denied, but the Operations of the Soul here, are much of
them upon the organized body; and tho not organical, as if they acted by an
Organ, yet organical, as acting on an Organ; which is the material Spirits
primarily. And so there go various Causes to some Effects, called Acts.

2. And the Soul does nothing independently, but as dependent on God, in Being
and Operation: and therefore does what God knows, and uses it too, as his
Instrument, in the forming of the body; and in what it knows not it self. And
as God, as fons naturae* necessitateth the natural agency of the Soul* as he
does the Soul of Bruits. But as the wise and free Governor of the world, he
has to moral acts, given man's Soul free will, and therefore conducting Reason;
which it needs not to necessitated acts, as digestion, motion of the blood,
formation of the body, etc.

And as it is not made to do all its acts freely and rationally, so neither at
all times, as in Apoplexies, Infancy, Sleep, etc. It is essential to the Soul,
to have the active power or virtue of Intellection and Free Will, but not
always to use it. As it is essential to the substance of fire, tho latent in a
flint, to have the power of motion, lighe and heat.

And its considerable, that as a traveller in his journey, thinking and talking
only of other things, retains still a secret act of intending his end, (else
he would not go on) when he perceives and observes it not at all. He that
plays on the Lute or Harpsical, cease when his Instrument is out of tune;
because he acts by free will.

But the Soul of an Idiot or madman acts only per modum naturae, not by
free-acts, but necessitated by God by the order of nature. Only moral acts are
free; and that some other are but brutish* and some but vegitative, is no more
a wonder, than that it should understand in the head, and be sensible only in
the most of the body, and vegitative only in the hairs and nails. It operateth
in all the body by the Spirits, as valid; but about the eyes, and open
sensoria, by Spirits also as lucid, for that use.

. 14. But never forget this, That nothing at any time does what it cannot do:
but many can do that which they do not. Tho the Soul in the Womb, or Sleep,
remember not, or reason not; if ever it do it, that proves it had the power of
doing it. And that power is not a novel accident, tho the act may be so.

. 18. To your Explications p. 4. I say, 1. None doubts, but all the world is
the work of one prime operating Cause; Whom I hope you see in them, is of
perfect power, wisdom and goodness, the chief efficient dirigent and final
cause of all.

2. I doubt not, but the created universe is all one thing or frame; and no one
atome or part totally separated from, and independent on the rest.

3. But yet the parts are multitudes, and heterogeneous, and have their
Individuation, and are at once many and one in several respects. And the unity
of the Universe, or of inferior universal Causes (as the Sun, or an anima
telluris, etc.) are certainly consistent with the specific and individual
differences of the parts.

E. g. Many individual Apples grow on the same Tree; yea, Crabs and Apples by
diverse grafts, nourished on the same stock: One may rot, or be sower, and not
another. Millions of Trees, as also of Herbs and Flowers, good and poisonous,
all grow in the same earth. Here is Unity, and great Diversity. And tho
self-moving. Animals be not fixed on the earth, no doubr they have a
contiguity, or continuity, as parts with the Universe. But for all that, a Toad
is not a Man, nor a man in torment, undifferenced from another at ease, nor a
bad man all one with a good.

. 19. And if any should have a conceit, That there is nothing but God and
matter. I have fully confuted it in the Appendix to Reas. of Christian
Religion. Matter is no such omnipotent sapiential thing in it self, as to need
no cause or maker, any more than Compounds. And to think, that the infinite God
would make no nobler Creature than dead matter, no liker himself* to glorify
him, is antecedently absurd, but consequently notoriously false. For tho
nothing be acted without him, it is evident that he has made active Natures
with a principle of self-moving in themselves. The Sun differs from a clod, by
more than being matter variously moved by God, even by a self-moving power
also. Else there were no living creature, but bodies in themselves dead,
animated by God. But it would be too tedious to say all against this that is to
be said.

. 20* When you tell us of [ One life in all, differenced only by diversity of
Organs], you mean God, or a common created Soul. If God, I tell you where I
have confuted it. It Is pity to torment or punish God in a murderer, or call*
him wicked in a wicked man: or that one man should be hanged, and another
praised, because the Engines of their bodies are diverse. But the best
Anatomists say, That nothing is to be seen in the brain of other Animals, why
they might not be as rational as Men. And if it be an Anima creata communis
that you mean, either you think it is an universal Soul to the universal world,
or only to this Earth or Vortex. If to all the World, you feign it to have Gods
Prerogative. If to part of the world, if each Vortex, Sun, Star, etc. have a
distinct individuate superior Soul, why not men also inferiors? And why may not
millions of individual Spirits consist with more common or universal Spirits,
as well as the life of Worms in your belly with yours. That which has no Soul
or Spirit of its own, is not fit for such reception and communion with superior
Spirits, as that which has. Communion requires some similitude. We see God
uses not all things alike, because he makes them not like.

. 21. But if the difference between Beasts, Trees, Stones, and Men, be only the
organical contexture of the body; then 1. Either all these have put one Soul,
and so are but one, save corporeally. 2. Or else every Stone, Tree and Beast
has an Intellectual Soul: for it is evident that man has, by its Operations.

I. Had you made but Virtue and Vice to be only the effects of the bodies
contexture, sure you would only blame the maker of your body, and not your
sclf, for any of your Crimes: For yon did not make your own body, if you were
nothing.

Is the common light and sense of Nature no Evidence? Does not all the world
difference Virtue and Vice, moral good and evil? Is it only the difference of
an* Instrument in Tune, and out of Tune? Either then all called sin is good; or
God, or the universal Soul, only is to be blamed. Then to call you a Knave, or
a Liar, or Perjured, etc. is no more disgrace, than to say, that you are sick,
or blind. Then all Laws are made only to bind God, or the Amima mundi; and all
punishment is threatened to God, or this common Soul. And it is God, or the
common Soul only in a body, which sorroweth, fears, feels pain or pleasure.

II. And if you equal the Souls of Beasts, Trees, Stones and Men, you must make
them all to have an Intellectual Soul. If man had not, he could never
understand. And if they have so also, frustra fit potentia quae nunquam
producitur in actum. It is certain that it is not the body (Earth, Air or
Water) that feels, much less that understands or wills. If therefore all
men have but one Soul, why is it not you that are in pain or joy, when any, or
all others are so? Tour suffering and joys are as much theirs. You hurt your
self when you hurt a Malefactor. Why are you not answerable for the Crimes of
every Thief, if all b^^ one?

. 22. You vainly liken several Natures and Faculties to several pieces of
Clock-work. For Natures and Faculties are self-acting Principles under the
prime Agent: but a Clock is only passive, moved by another: Whether the motus
gravitationis in the poise, be by an intrinsic Principle, or by another unseen
active Nature, is all that is controvertible there. All that your similitude
will infer, is this, That as the gravitation of one poise, moves every wheel
according to its receptive aptitude; so God, the universal Spirit, moves all
that is moved, according to their several aptitudes, passives as passive,
actives as active, vitals as self-movers, intellectuals as
intellectual-free-self-movers under him. No Art can make a Clock feel, see or
understand.

But if the world have but one soul, what mean you by its concentring in the
Carcass? Is the universal Soul there fallen asleep, or imprisoned in a Grave,
or what is it?

. 23. Add page 5. You well say, That Life is the cause of all motion: Yea,
infinite Life, Wisdom and Love, is the cause of all: but there be second Causes
under it: Plurima ex uno. And it makes things various, which it moves
variously; and makes them vital, sensitive or mental, which he will move to
vital, sensitive and mental acts. Operari sequitur esse.

. 24. You are apt to believe, That those eminent Faculties wherewith men seem
mere Sensitives, are only the improvement of Speech, and reitorated Acts, till
they become Habits.

Ans. 1. I had a Parrot that spoke so very plainly, that no Man could discern
but he could have spoke as well as a Man, if he had but had the Intellect of a
Man; and quickly would learn new words, but showed no understanding of them.

2. Many men born deaf and dumb, are of a strong understanding (enquire of a
Brother of Sir Richard Dyett's, a Son of Mr. Peter Whalley of Northampton, a
Son in Law of the Lord Wharton's, etc.

3. The Faculty and the Habit are Two things. The Faculty is the Essential form
of the Substance. The Habit, or Act, is but an Accident. The Faculty is nothing
but the active Power. And the Power goes before the Act. Does acting, without
Power to act, cause the Power? What need you the Power, if you can act without
it? And What Is a Contradiction, if this be not, to say, I do that which I
cannot do, or I can do that which I have no power to do? You are not a man
without the Faculty, but you are without the Act; or else you are no man in
your sleep. The act then is but the Faculties act; and Habits are nothing but
the Faculties promptitude to act. And this indeed is caused sometime by very
strong acts, and sometime, and usually, by frequent acts; and sometime
suddenly, by a special Divine Operation. No doubt, but Oratory, and all Arts
and Sciences, are caused by frequent acts, and their Objects: But those acts
are caused by humane Faculties, under God, the first Cause. You can never cause
a Carcass, or a Parrot, or any Bruit, to think of God, and the glory to come,
nor to do any proper humane act.

Credible History assures us, That Devils, or separate Souls, have acted
Carcasses, and discoursed in them, and seemed to commit Fornication in them,
and left them dead behind them; and they were known to be the same that were
lately executed or dead, and were re-buried. Here the dead Organ was capable,
when a Spirit did but use it.

You too much confound Intellection and Ratiocination. The prime acts of
intellective Perception; are before Ratiocination. And there are a multitude of
Complex Verities, which all found men know without, Syllogisms. The disposition
to know them, is so strong, that some call it Actual Knowledge.

. 25. Add page 6. It Is well known, That the Natives in New England, the most
barbarous Abassines, Gallanes, etc. in Ethicpia, have as good natural
Capacities as the Europeans. So far are they from being but like Apes and
Monkeys; if they be not Idiots, or mad, they sometime shame learned men in
their words and deeds. I have known those that have been so coursly clad, and
so clownishly bred, even as to Speech, Looks and Carriages, that Gentlemen and
Scholars, at the first congress, have esteemed them much according to your
description, when in Discourse they have proved more ingenious than they, And
if improvement can bring them to Arts, the Faculty was there before. When will
you show us an Ape or a Monkey, that was ever brought to the Acts or Habits
before mentioned of Men? Yea, of those that were born deaf and dumb?

. 26. Your mistake of Adam's case, and Solomon's words, is so gross, that I
will not confute it, lest the description of it offend you.

. 17. The case of failing memories is answered before, in the case* of Infancy
and Apoplexies, etc. Out memory fails in our sleep* and yet when we awake, we
find that there remains the same knowledge of Arts and Sciences. They did not
end at night, and were not all new made the next morning. The Acts ceased,
because the receptivity of the passive Organ ceased: but the Habit and Faculty
continued. And when memory in old men fails about names, and words, and
little matters, their judgments about great things are usually stronger (by
better Habits) than young men's:

. 28. You say, You know nothing wherein Man excels Beasts, but may be referred
to the benefit of speech and hands, capable of effecting its Conceptions.

Ans. This is answered before. Those Conceptions are the cause of words and
actions: and is there no cause of those Conceptions? And if man's Conceptions
differ from the beasts, the causes differed. And if the first Conceptions did
not differ, the Subsequent would not differ neither, without a difference in
the causal Faculties. Why do not Beasts speak as well as Men? Parrots show,
That it is not in all for want of a speaking Organ. If one be born dumb, and
not deaf, he will know but little the less for his dumbness. If he be born dead
and dumb, and not blind, he will still be rational, as Dr. Wallis can tell you,
who has taught such to talk and converse intelligibly by their fingers, and
other signs, without words. I confess, if all the outward Senses were stopped
from the Birth, I see not how the Soul could know outward sensible things, as
being no Objects to it. And how it would work on it self alone, we know not;
but understand, and will, we are sure it does: and therefore can do it. And
it is one thing to prove Beasts to be men, or rational, and another thing to
prove Men to be Beasts, or irrational. If you could prove the former, viz. That
Beasts have Souls that can think of God, and the Life to come, if they could
but speak, this would rather prove them immortal, than prove man unreasonable,
or of a mortal Soul. Your whole speech makes more to advance bruits, than to
deny the reason of man.

. 29. You say, You know no better way to attain a right knowledge of our selves,
than by beholding our selves in Adam, and enquiring what Nature had endued him
with, which will fall far short of what we now admire in our selves.

Answ. 1. As a multitude of Objects, and Experiences, more tend to Wisdom than
one alone; so to know both what Adam was, and what all men are, and do, does
evidence more to our information, than to know Adam's first Case alone.

2. Adam's first Powers are to be known by his acts; and his acts were not to
be done at once, in a minute or a day: And we have not the History of his Life
much after his Fall. But we may be sure, that Adam's Nature in Innocence, was
no baser than ours corrupted. And therefore Adam had the Powers of doing
whatever other men since have done.

3. But let us come to your Test: 1. Adam was made a living Soul by the breath
of God, after the making of his body of the earth.

2. Adam and Eve were blessed with a generative multiplying Faculty: but they
did not generate God; nor did every bruit that had also that Faculty. Therefore
there is a Soul which is not God, in every Animal, (nor yet an Universal Soul).

3. Adam, no doubt, could not know external sensible Objects, till they were
brought within the reach of his sense: no more can we.

4. Adam knew the Creatures as soon as he saw them; and gave them Names
suitable. This is more than we could so soon do.

5. Adam had a Law given him; and therefore knew that God was his Ruler. He
knew that God was to be obeyed; he knew what was his Law: else it had been no
sin to break it. He knew that he ought to love, and believe, and trust God, and
cleave to him: else it bad been no sin to forsake him, and to believe the
Tempter, and to love the forbidden Fruit better than God. He knew that Death
was the threatened Wages of Sin. In a word, He was made in the Image of God: And
Paul tells us, it is that Image into which we are renewed by Christ: And he
describes it to consist in wisdom, righteousness, and true holiness.

6. And we have great reason to think, that it was Adam that taught Abel to
offer Sacrifice in Faith, and delivered to his Posterity the Traditions which
he had from God. Tho Adam did not do all this at once, he did not receive a new
Soul or Faculty for every new act. Can Apes and Monkeys do all this? Does God
give them Laws to know and keep as moral free-agents?

But you say, Adam knew not that he was naked. Ans. What! and yet knew God and
his Law, and how to name the Creatures, and how to dress and keep the Garden?
He knew not that nakedness was shameful; for he had newly made it shameful.

Perhaps you think of Adam's forbidden desire of knowledge, and his miserable
attainment of it. But that did not make him a new Soul, that had no such
Faculty before. Adam was the Son of God by Creation, Luke 3. and it was his
duty and interest to live as a Son, in absolute trust on his Fathers care and
love: and instead of this, he was tempte^ (...) self-dependance, and must needs
know more than his duty, and his fathers love and reward: He must know good and
evil f^^ himself: like a Child that must know what Food, and Raiment, and Work
is fittest for him, which he should know only by trusting his Fathers choice,
or as a Patient that must needs know every Ingredient in his Physic, and the
Nature and Reason of it, before he will take it, when he should implicitly
trust his Physician. Man should have waited on God for all his Notices, and
sought to know no more than he revealed. But a distrustful, and a selfish
knowledge, and busy enquiring into unrevealed things, is become our sin and
misery.

. 36. You say, Suppose all this answered: what will it avail, as to a life of
Retribution, if all return to one element, and be there immerged as Brooks and
Rivers in the Sea, and we lose our individuation.

Ans. I answered this in the Appendix to the Rea^ of the Christian Religion. I
add ^. Do you believe, that each one has now one individual Soul, or not? If
not, how can we lose that which we never had? If we have but all one universal
mover, which moves us as Engines, as the Wind and Water (...) Mills, how come
some motions to be (...) (as a Swallow), and others so slow, or none (...) all,
in as mobile a body ^? Yea, how comes (...) motion to be so much in our Power,
that we can sit still when we will, and rise, and go, and run* and speak when
we will, and cease, or change it when we will? A stone that falls, or an arrow
that is shot, cannot do so. Sure it is some inward formal Principle; and not a
material Mechanical mobility of the matter, which can cause this difference.

Indeed if we have all but one Soul, it is easy to love our Neighbors as our
selves, because our Neighbors are our selves. But it is as easy to hate our
selves as our Enemies, and the good as the bad, if all be one (for forma dat
nomen and esse). But it is strange, that either God, or the Soul of the World,
shall hate it self, and put it self to pain, and fight against it self, as in
Wars, etc.

But if you think still, That there is nothing but God and dead matter actuated
by him, I would beg your Answer to these few Questions.

1. Do you really believe, that there is a God? that is, an eternal infinite
self-being, who has all that power, knowledge, and goodness of will, in
transcendent ^^^^ey, which any Creature has formally, and is the efficient
Governor of all else that is. If not, all the world condemns you* for it is
not an uncaused Being, and can have nothing but from its Cause, who can give
nothing greater than it self.

2. Do you think this God can make a Creature that has a subordinate Soul, or
Spirit, to be the Principle of its own Vital Action, Intellection, and
Volition, or not? Cannot God make a Spirit? If not, it is either because it is
a Contradiction (which none can pretend), or because God is not Omnipotent;
that is, is not God; and so there is no God; and so you deny what you granted.
But if God can make a Spirit,

3. Why should you think he would not? Some of your mind say, That he does all
the good that he can; or else he were not perfectly good. Certainly his
goodness is equal to his greatness, and is commmunicative.

4. Has he not imprinted his Perfections in some measure, in his Works? Do
they not show his glory? Judge of his Greatness by the Sun, Stars, and Heavens;
and of his Wisdom, by the wonderful Order, Contexture, and Goverument of all
things. Even the Fabric of a Fly, or any Animal, poseth us. And do you think,
that his love and goodness has no answerable effect?

5. Do you think, that passive matter does as much manifest Gods Perfection,
and honor the Efficient, as vital and Intellectual Spirits? If it be a far
nobler Work for God to make a free, vital, mental Spirit, to act under him
freely, mentally, and vitally, than to make mere atoms, why should you think
that God will not do it?

6. And do you not dishonor, or blaspheme the prime Cause, by such
dishonouring of his Work, as to say, he never made any thing more noble than
Atoms, and Compositions of them.

7. Is there not in the Creature a communicative disposition to cause their
like? Animals generate their like: Fire kindles fire: Wise men would make
others wise: God is essential infinite Life, Wisdom and Love: and can he, or
would he make nothing liker to himself than dead Atoms? Yea, you feign him to
make nothing but by Composition, while you say, That matter it self is eternal.

8. But when the matter of Fact is evident, and we see by the actions, that
there is a difference between things moved by God, some having a created Life
and mind, and some none, what needs then any further proof?

. 31. But if you hold, That we have now distinct Spirits, which are individual,
Substances, why should you fear the loss of our individuation, any more than
our annihilation, or specific alteration? If God made as many substantial
individual Souls, as men, is there any thing in Nature or Scripture, which
threatens the loss of Individuation? I have showed you, and shall further show
you enough against it.

. 32. You say, page 7. Every thing returns to its element, and loses its
individuatiou: Earth to Earth, Water to the Sea, the Spirit to God that gave
it. What happiness then can we hope for more than deliverance from the present
calamity; or what misery are we capable of, more than is common to all?

Ans. 1. Bodies lose but their Composition, and Spiritual forms. Do you think,
that any Atome loses its individuation? If it be still divisible in parts
infinitas, it is infinite. And if every Atome be infinite, it is as much, or
more than all the world; and so is no part of the world; and so there would be
as many Worlds, or Infinites, as Atoms. It is but an aggregative motion which
you mention. Birds of a Feather will flock together, and yet are Individuals
still. Do you think any dust, or drop, any Atome of Earth or Water, loses any
thing of it self, by its union with the rest? Is any Substance lost? Is the
simple Nature changed? Is it not Earth and Water still? Is not the Haecceity,
as they call it, continued? Does not God know every dust, and every drop from
the rest? Can he not separate them when he will? And if Nature in all things
tend to aggregation, or union, it is then the Perfection of everything. And why
should we fear Perfection?

2. But Earth, and Water, and Air, are partible matter. Earth is easily
separable: The parts of Water more hardly, by the means of some terrene
Separaror. The parts of Air yet more hardly: and the Sunbeams, or substance of
fire, yet harder than that (tho it is contraction and effects are very
different): And Spirits either yet harder, or not at all. Some make it
essential to them to be indiscerptible; and all must say, That there is nothing
in the Nature of them, tending to division, or separation. And therefore tho
God, who can annihilate them, can divide them into parts, if it be no
Contradiction; yet it will never be, because he uses every thing according to
its nature, till he comes to miracles. Therefore their dissolu^ion of parts is
no more to be feared, than their annihilation.

3. But if you take Souls to be partible and unible, then you must suppose
every part to have still its own existence in the whole. And do you think, that
this does not more advance Souls than abase them? Yea, you seem to Deifie them,
while you make them all to return into God, as drops into the Sea. And if you
feign God to be partible, is it not more honor and joy to be a part of God,
who is joy it self, than to be a created Soul? If a thousand Candles were put
out, and their light turned into one Luminary, as great as they all, every part
would have its share in the enlightening of the place about it. Is it any loss
to a single Soldier, to become part of a victorious Army.

4. But indeed this is too high a Glory for the Soul of man to desire, or hope
for. It is enough to have a blessed union with Christ, and the holy Society,
consistent with our Individuation. Like will to like, and yet be it self.
Rivers go to the Sea, and not to the Earth. Earth turns to Earth, and not to
the Sun, or Fire. And the holy and blessed, go to the holy and blessed: And I
believe, that their union will be nearer than we can now well conceive, or than
this selfish state of man desires: But as every drop in the Sea, is the same
Water it was, so every Soul will be the same Soul.

2. And as to the incapacity of misery which you talk of, why should you think
it more hereafter than here? If you think all Souls now to be but one, does not
an aching Tooth, or a gouty Foot, or a calculous Bladder, suffer pain, tho it be
not the body that feels; but the same sensitive Soul is pained in one part,
and pleased in another. And if all Souls be now but God in diverse Bodies, or
the Anima mundi, try if you can comfort a man under the torment of the Stone,
or other Malady, or on the Rack, or in terror of Conscience, by telling him,
That his Soul is a part of God. Will this make a Captive bear his Captivity, or
a Malefactor his Death? If not here, why should you think that their misery
hereafter will be ever the less, or more tolerable for your conceit, that they
are parts of God? They will be no more parts of him then, than they were here.
But it is like, that they also will have an uniting inclination, even to such as
themselves; or that God, will separate them from all true unity, and say, Go
you cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, etc.

. 33. No doubt it is true, that you say, page 7, and 8. That matter is still the
same, and liable to all the changes which you mention. But it is an unchanged
God, who does all this by Spirits, as second Causes, who are not of such a
changeable, dissoluble, partible nature, as Bodies are: It is Spirits that do
all that is done in the world! And I conjecture, as well as you, That universal
Spirits are universal Causes. I suppose, That this Earth has a vegitative
form, which makes it as a matrix to receive the Seeds, and the more active
influx of the Sun. But Earth and Sun are but general Causes. Only God, and the
seminal Virtue, cause the species, as such. The Sun causes every Plant to
grow; but it causes not the difference between the Rose, and the Nettle. and
the Oak. The wonderful unsearchable Virtue of the Seed causes that. And if you
would know that Virtue, you must know it by the effects. You cannot tell by the
Seed only of a Rose; a Vine, an Oak, what is in it. But when you see the Plants
in ripeness, you may see that the Seeds had a specifying Virtue, by the influx
of the general Cause, to bring forth those Plants, Flowers, etc. Neither can
you know what is in the Egg, but by the ripe Bird; nor what the Soul of an
Infant is, but by Manhood and its Acts.

. 34. You here page 7. divert from the point of the Immortality or Nature of
the Soul, to that of the Resurrection of the Body: of which I will now say but
this; Christ rose, and has promised us a Resurrection, and nothing is
difficult to God. (...) Often signifies our living another life after this. The
Body has more parts than Earth and Water. The Spirits as we call them, which
are the igneous parts, lodged in the purest aereal in the blood, etc. are that
body in and by which the Soul does operate on the rest. How much of these
material Spirits the Soul may retain with it after Death, we know not: and if
it have such a body, it has partly the same; and God can make what Addition he
please, which shall not contradict identity: Paul says of Corn, God gives it
a body as pleases him* in some respect the same, etc. in some not the same
that was sown. We do not hold, That all the flesh that ever a man had, shall be
raised as that man's. If one man that was fat, grow lean in his sickness, we do
not say, that all the flesh that sickness wasted, shall rise: It shall rise a
spiritual body. God knows that which you and I know not.

. 35. You add, how easy it would have been to you to believe as the Church
believes* and not to have immerged your self in these difficulties?

Ans. 1. The Church is nothing but all individual Christians; and it is their
Belief which makes them capable of being of the Church: As we must be men in
order of Nature, before we are a Kingdom of men; so we are Believers before we
are a Church of Believers. A Kingdom or Policy makes us not men, but is made
of men; and Church-society or Policy makes us not Believers, but is made up of
Believers. Therefore Belief is first, and is not caused by that which follows
it? And why does the Church believe? Is it because they believe?

And whom do they believe? Is it themselves? I doubt you have fallen into
acquaintance with those whose Interest has made it their Trade to puzzle and
confound men about things as hard to themselves as others, that they may bring
them to trust the Church, and then tell them that it is they that are that
Church, as a necessary means to the quieting their minds. And they tell them,
You are never able by reason to comprehend the mysteries of Faith; the more you
search, the more you are confounded. But if you believe as the Church
believes, you shall speed as the Church speedeth, But it is one thing to
believe the same thing which the Church believes; and another to believe it
with the same faith, and upon the same Authority. If a man believe all the
Articles of the Creed only because men tell him that they are true, it is but a
human Faith, as resting only on man's Authority; but the true Members of the
Church believe all the same things, because God reveals and attesteth them;
and this is a Divine Faith: And so must you.

If you love light more than darkness and deceit, distinguish, 1. Believing men
for Authority. 2. Believing men for their Honesty, 3. Believing men for the
natural impossibility of their deceiving.

And the foundation of this difference is here: Man's Soul has two sorts of
acts, Necessary and Contingent, or mutably free*

To love our selves, to be unwilling to be miserable, and willing to be happy;
to love God as good, if known, etc. are acts of the Soul as necessary, as for
fire to burn combustible contiguous matter; or for a Bruit to eat; so that all
the Testimonies which is produced by these necessary acts by knowing men, has
a Physical certainty, the contrary being impossible. And this is infallible
historical knowledge of matter of fact. Thus we know there is such a City as
Rome, Paris, Venice, etc. and that there was such a man as K. James, Ed. 6.
Hen. 8. William the Conqueror, etc. And that the Statutes now ascribed to Ed.
3. and other Kings and their Parliaments are genuine. For Judges judge by them,
Lawyers plead them, Kings own them, all men hold their Estates and Lives by
them. Contrary men's Interest by Lawyers are daily pleaded by them against each
other; and if any one would deny, forge or corrupt a Statute, Interest would
engage the rest against him to detect his fraud.

1. The certain effect of natural necessary Causes has natural necessary
evidence of Truth.

But when all knowing men of contrary Dispositions and Interests* acknowledge a
thing true, this is the effect of natural necessary Causes.

Ergo it has natural necessary evidence of Truth.

2. It is impossible there should be an Effect without a sufficient Cause.

But that a thing should be false which all knowing men of contrary
Dispositions and Interests acknowledge to be true, would be an Effect without a
Cause* for there is no Cause in nature to effect it. It is impossible in nature
that all men in England should agree to say, There was a King James, K. Edward,
Q. Mary, or that these Statutes were made by them, if it were false. This is
infallible Historical Testimony. It were not so strong if it were only by one
Party, and not by Enemies also, or men of contrary Minds and Interests. And
thus we know the History of the Gospel; and this Tradition is naturally
infallible.

II. But all the Testimony which depends on humane Acts, not necessary, but
free, have but an uncertain moral humane Credibility. For so all men are Liars;
i. e. fallible, and not fully to be trusted.

And I. Those Testimonies which depend on men's Honesty, are no farther
credible, than we know the Honesty of the men: which in some is great, in some
is none, in most is mixed, and lubricous, and doubtful, Alas! what abundance of
false History is in the world! Who can trust the Honesty of such men, as
multitudes of Popes, Prelates, and Priests have been? Will they stick at a Lie,
that stick not at Blood, or any wickedness? Besides, the ignorance which
invalidates their Testimony.

II. And to pretend Authority to rule our Faith, is the most unsatisfactory way
of all. For before you can believe that Jesus is the Christ, and his Word true,
how many impossibilities have you to believe? 1. You must believe that Christ
has a Church. 2. And has authorized them to determine what is to be believed,
before you believe that he is Christ. 3. You must know who they be whom you
must believe; whether all, or some, or a major vote. Whether out of all* the
world, or a party. 4. And how far their Authority extends? Whether to judge
whether there be a God, or no God; a Christ, or no Christ; a Heaven, or none; a
Gospel, or none: or what. 5. And how their determinations out of all the world
may come with certainty to us: and where to find them. 6. And when Countries
and Councils contradict and condemn each other, which is to be believed. Many
such impossibilities in the Roman way, must be believed, before a man can
believe that Jesus is the Christ. In a word, you must not puzzle your head to
know what a man is, or whether he have an immortal soul; but you must, 1.
believe the Church of Believers, before you are a Believer in Christ. 2. And
you must believe, that Christ was God and Man, and came to save man, before you
believe that there is such a creature as man, or what he is, and whether he
have a soul capable of salvation. But I have often elsewhere opened these
Absurdities and Contradictions; where you may see them confuted, if you are
willing.

. 36. Your question about the souls nature, existence, and Individuation, may
be resolved by a surer and easier way as follows:

I. By your own certain experience.

1. You perceive that you see, feel, understand, will and execute. 2. You may
know, as is often said, that therefore you have an active power to do these. 3.
You may thence know, that it is a substance which has that power. Nothing can
do nothing. 4. You may perceive, that it is not the terrene substance, but an
invisible substance, actuating the body. 5. You may know, that there is no
probability, that so noble a substance should be annihilated. 6. Or that a pure
and simple substance should be dissolved by the separation of parts (or if that
were every part would be a spirit still). 7. You have no cause to suspect, that
this substance should lose those powers or faculties which are its essential
form, and be turned into some other species, or thing. 8. And you have as
little cause to suspect, that an essential vital intellective power, will not
be active, when active inclination is its Essence. 9. You have no cause to
suspect, that it will want Objects to action in a World of such variety of
Objects. 10. And you have as little cause to suspect, that it will be unactive,
for want of Organs, when God has made its Essence active; and either can make
new Organs; or that which can act on matter, can act without, or on other
matter. He that can play on a Lute, can do somewhat as good, if that be broken.
11. And experience might satisfy you, that several men have several souls, by
the several and contrary Operations. 12. And you have no reason to suspect,
that God will turn many, from being many, into one; or that unity should be any
of their loss. All this, Reason tells you, beginning at your own experience, as
I have (and elsewhere more fully) opened.

. 37. II. And you have at hand sensible proof of the individuation of spirits,
by Witches, Contracts, and Apparitions: of which the world has unquestionable
proof, tho there be very many Cheats. Read Mr. Glanvill's new Book, published
by Dr. Moore, Lavater de Spectris, Zanchy de Angilii, Manlii Collect. Bodin's
Daemonolog. Remigius of Witches, besides all the Mallei Malificorum, and doubt
if you can. If you do, I can give you yet more, with full proof.

. 38. III. But all that I have said to you, is but the least part, in
comparison of the assurance which you may have by the full revelatson of Jesus
Christ, who has brought life and immortality to light in the Gospel, where the
state, the doom, the rewards and punishment of souls is asserted.

And without dark and long Ambages, or Roman Juggles, we prove the truth of
this Gospel, briefly and infallibly thus:

I. The History of Christ's Life, Miracles, Doctrine, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, the Apostles Miracles, etc. is proved by such forementioned
evidence, as has physical certainty: Not such as depends only on men's
honesty, or moral argument, much less on a pretended determining authority; but
such as depends on necessary acts of man, even the consent of all sorts of
contrary minds and interests, as we know the Statutes of the Land, or other
certain History. But we are so far from needing to ask, which part of
Christians it is that is this Church, that is to be believed, that it tends
to the assertaining of us, that all the Christian World, Papists, Protestants,
Greeks, Moscovites, Armenians, Jacobites, Nestorians, etc. herein agree, even
while they oppose each other. To know whether there was a Julius, or Augustus
Caesar, a Virgil, Ovid Cicero, and which are their Works; yea, which are the
Acts of Councils, no man goes to an authorized determining Judge for the matter
of Fact, but to historiCal proof. And this we have most full.

II. And if the History be true, the Doctrine must needs be true, seeing it is
fully proved by the matters of Fact. Christ being proved to be Christ, all his
words must ^eeds be true.

. 39. The Gospel of Christ, has these four parts of its infallible evidence.

I. The antecedent and inhererent Prophecies fulfilled.

II. The inherent impress of Divinity on the Gospel it self, unimitable by man.
It has Gods Image and Superscription; and its Excellency, propria luce, is
discernible.

III. All the Miracles, and Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, the Gift of
his Spirit, and extraordinary Miracles of the Apostles, and first Churches.

IV. The sanctifying work of the Spirit by this Gospel, on all Believers in all
Ages of the World, by which they have the Witness in themselves. A full
constant unimitable Testimony.

. 40. And now how highly soever you think of Bruits, think not too basely of
Men, for whom Christ became a Savior: And yet think not so highly of Men,
Bruits and Stones, as to think that they are God. And think not that your true
diligence has confounded you, but either your negligence, or seducers, or the
unhappy stifling of obvious truth, by the ill ordering of your thoughts. And I
beseech you remember, that Gods Revelationt are suited to man's use* and our
true knowledge to his Revtlations. He has not told us all that man would know,
but what we must know. Nothing is more known to us than that of God which is
necessary for us: Yet nothing so incomprehensible as God. There is much of the
Nature of Spirits, and the world to come, unsearchable to us, which will pose
all our Wits: yet we have sufficient certainty of so much as tells us our duty
and our hopes. God has given us Souls to use, and to know only so far as is
useful. He that made your Watch, taught not you how it is made, but how to use
it* Instead therefore of your concluding complaints of your condition, thank
God, who has made man capable to seek him, serve him, love him, praise him,
and rejoice in hope of promised Perfection. Live not as a willful stranger to
your Soul and God. Use faithfully the Faculties which he has given you: sin
not wilfully against the truth revealed; and leave things secret to God, till
you come into the clearer light: and you shall have no cause to complain, that
God, whose goodness is equal to his greatness, has dealt hardly with mankind.
Instead of trusting fallible man, trust Christ, who has fully proved his
trustiness; and his Spirit will advance you to higher things than bruits are
capable of. God be merciful to us dark unthankful sinners.

Ri. Baxter.
Mar. 14. 1681.
ERRATA.
IN the Second Part, p. 12. l. 9. for primus r Prime. p. 16. l. 21. for is r.
are.

I have not leisure to gather the rest, if there be any.


